Nano-architecture and material designs for water splitting photoelectrodes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35019J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35019J
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654-5671Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNano-architecture and material designs for water splitting photoelectrodes

        
          
            Hao Ming 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chih Kai 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ru-Shi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            David P. 
            Wilkinson
          
          
        
      c
aDepartment of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: rsliu@ntu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886-2-33668671;   Tel: +886-2-33661169
bInstitute for Fuel Cell Innovation, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1W5. E-mail: jiujun.zhang@nrc.gc.ca;  Fax: +1 604 221 3001;   Tel: +1 604 221 3087
cDepartment of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3. E-mail: dwilkinson@chml.ubc.ca;  Fax: +1 604 221 3019;   Tel: +1 604 221 3019
Received 
      19th January 2012
    First published on 4th July 2012AbstractThis review concerns the efficient conversion of sunlight into chemical fuels through the photoelectrochemical splitting of water, which has the potential to generate sustainable hydrogen fuel. In this review, we discuss various photoelectrode materials and relative design strategies with their associated fabrication for solar water splitting. Factors affecting photoelectrochemical performance of these materials and designs are also described. The most recent progress in the research and development of new materials as well as their corresponding photoelectrodes is also summarized in this review. Finally, the research strategies and future directions for water splitting are discussed with recommendations to facilitate the further exploration of new photoelectrode materials and their associated technologies.
Hao Ming Chen
Hao Ming Chen is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at National Taiwan University. He received his MS degree in 2004 and his PhD in chemistry from National Taiwan University in 2008, where he worked on the synthesis of nanocrystals for particular applications. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, metallic nanocrystals and semiconductor nanomaterials for solar energy conversion.
Chih Kai Chen
Chih Kai Chen is currently a PhD student at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, supervised by Prof. Ru-Shi Liu. He received his BS degree in chemistry in 2009 from National Central University. He is working on the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials, quantum dots, and nanomaterials for solar energy conversion.
Ru-Shi Liu
Ru-Shi Liu is currently a professor at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University. He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Shoochow University (Taiwan) in 1981. He received his Master's degree in nuclear science from the National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 1983. He obtained two PhD degrees in chemistry – one from National Tsing Hua University in 1990 and one from the University of Cambridge in 1992. He worked at Materials Research Laboratories at the Industrial Technology Research Institute from 1983 to 1985. He was an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry of National Taiwan University from 1995 to 1999, when he was promoted to a professorship in 1999. His research concerns the field of Materials Chemistry. He is an author or coauthor of more than 400 publications in scientific international journals. He has also been granted more than 80 patents.
Lei Zhang
Lei Zhang is a Research Council Officer at National Research Council of Canada Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation. She received her first MSc, majoring in Materials Chemistry from Wuhan University, China, in 1993 and her second MSc in Materials/Physical Chemistry from Simon Fraser University, Canada, in 2000. Ms Zhang's main research interests include PEM fuel cell electrocatalysis, catalyst layer/electrode structure, metal-air batteries and supercapacitors. Ms Zhang has co-authored 50 refereed journal papers and holds 3 US patent applications. Ms Zhang is an adjunct Professor of Federal University of Maranhao, Brazil, and Zhengzhou University, China, respectively. She is also an active member of the Electrochemical Society and the International Society of Electrochemistry.
Jiujun Zhang
Jiujun Zhang received his BSc and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988, and he is now a Senior Research Officer and PEM Catalysis Core Competency Leader at the National Research Council of Canada Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation (NRC-IFCI). Dr Zhang holds several adjunct professorships, including one at the University of Waterloo and one at the University of British Columbia. His research is mainly based on fuel cell catalysis development.
David P. Wilkinson
David P. Wilkinson received his BASc degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of British Columbia (UBC) in 1978 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Ottawa in 1987 where his graduate work was done with Dr Brian Conway. He has over 20 years of industrial experience in the areas of fuel cells and advanced rechargeable lithium batteries. In 2004 Dr Wilkinson was awarded a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Clean Energy and Fuel Cells in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University of British Columbia. He is currently the Director of the Clean Energy Research Centre (CERC) at the university. He maintains a joint appointment with the University and the Canadian National Research Council Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation. Prior to his university appointment Dr Wilkinson was the Director, and then Vice President of Research and Development at Ballard Power Systems Inc., involved with the research, development and application of fuel cell technology. Dr Wilkinson is one of the leading all-time fuel cell inventors by issued US patents. Dr Wilkinson's main research interest is in electrochemical power sources and processes to create clean and sustainable energy.
1. Introduction
Sunlight is an inexpensive, non-polluting, abundant and endlessly renewable source of clean energy. The amount of energy that strikes the Earth yearly in the form of sunlight is approximately ten thousand times the total energy that is consumed on this planet, so converting solar energy into an easily usable form has attracted considerable interest in the last several decades.1 With respect to solar energy conversion, four major technologies are currently available for converting sunlight into useful forms of energy such as electricity and hydrogen, as discussed below.
1.1 Technologies for converting sunlight

Photovoltaics. 
Photovoltaic technology, used to directly convert sunlight into electricity, has been recognized as one of the most viable clean energy technologies for generating electrical power on a large scale. During the generation of electricity from solar energy using photovoltaics, the first process is the collection of sunlight and inducement of a charge-separated state for electron–hole pair generation. The photon absorption process that occurs in a silicon semiconductor film causes the migration of excitons to a p–n junction in which charge separation occurs, producing an electromotive force. When this p–n junction is electrically connected to an external load, a photo-current flows through the load, generating power, realizing the photo-to-electricity conversion process.2 In the present development, the energy conversion efficiency of commercially available silicon photovoltaics is around 18%. In addition to the improvement in efficiency of the photo-electricity conversion, close attention must be paid to the storage and distribution of solar energy for practical applications. The most feasible technology involves converting the electrical energy into some form of chemical fuel such as hydrogen or other small, low-carbon organics, which can be easily stored and transported.
However, the major challenge faced by the current technology in making photovoltaics that can be competitive with fossil fuels is its high cost, which is two to five times higher than that of conventional energy technologies.3 Photo-materials frequently used in photovoltaics are crystalline silicon wafers with thicknesses of 180–300 μm, but both the materials and their associated processing are expensive. To overcome this challenge of high material cost, various types of technologies with increasing absorbance of visible light have been explored, including dye-sensitized solar cells and organic photovoltaics.4,5 In contrast to silicon photovoltaics, these systems use relatively cheap materials and may be considerable for future utilization.


Thin-film photovoltaics. 
To reduce the cost of photovoltaics, thin-film photovoltaics have been explored due to the reduced use of expensive silicon-based photo-active materials. Some thin-film solar cells with photo-active films in the thickness range of 1–2 μm, fabricated on cheap substrates such as glass, stainless steel or plastic, have been investigated and validated. In terms of improving the photo-electricity conversion efficiency, the semiconductors that are used to harvest solar energy in these thin-film solar cells are typically made of GaAs, CdTe CuInSe2, as well as amorphous/polycrystalline silicon as a substitute for expensive conventional crystalline silicon.3


Wet-chemical photosynthesis. 
In order to explore new sunlight conversion technology by learning from nature, wet-chemical photosynthesis technology, sometimes called artificial photosynthesis, has been investigated. The goal is to achieve efficient and stable energy conversion, which utilizes only earth-abundant materials and operates under mild conditions. In the long-term, photosynthetic technology should be able to generate solar fuels by mimicking chemical reactions occurring in natural biological systems. Photosynthesis is a wet chemical process that transforms carbon dioxide into organic compounds, particularly sugars (chemical fuels) using the energy from sunlight. The harvesting and storing of solar energy via chemical methods, which occurs naturally in photosynthesis, is an attractive strategy for meeting the challenges of solar energy applications.


Photoelectrolysis. 
Combining the concepts of photovoltaics and wet-chemical photosynthesis, photoelectrolysis is the ability to split water through solar energy to produce hydrogen (a chemical fuel). In photoelectrolysis, a solid photoelectrode is adopted to convert the energy of sunlight into splitting water and generating chemical energy and the process can be assisted electrochemically. It has been recognized that hydrogen is playing a critical role in the development of green energy economy since it is an ultimate form of clean energy and can be used in fuel cells and other processes. However, currently hydrogen is primarily formed by steam reforming, in which fossil fuels are consumed and carbon dioxide is generated.6 Photoelectrolysis can be utilized to split water into hydrogen and oxygen without any emission of byproducts. Nevertheless, the conversion efficiency today remains lower than that of photovoltaics, and is limited mainly by the low performance of the photoelectrodes.
The earliest work on photoelectrolysis using a photoelectrochemical cell that contained a photoanode and a photocathode on which anodic/cathodic reactions occur in the splitting of water was carried out by Honda and Fujishima in 1970s, using TiO2 as the photoelectrode.7 In their work, both electrons and holes were generated when the semiconductor electrode (TiO2) was irradiated by UV illumination, and the photo-generated electrons reduced water to form hydrogen on a Pt counter-electrode as the holes oxidized water to form oxygen on the surface of the TiO2-based electrode, which was maintained at a certain electrode potential. However, most natural sunlight is visible light, and so the use of visible light to irradiate a photoelectrode and generate hydrogen (and oxygen) seems more practical than the use of UV light. Hence, research of visible-light effective photoelectrodes for water splitting using new materials for both anodic–cathodic processes should focus on the goal of realizing an efficient photoelectrochemical cell that can simultaneously drive both the hydrogen generation and water oxidation reaction under visible light radiation. Such a photoelectrochemical cell requires semiconductor materials that can provide rapid charge transfer at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface, long-term stability, and efficient harvesting of a wide range of the solar spectrum. Accordingly, a multi-junction configuration, which uses p- and n-type semiconductors with various band gaps, and surface-bound electrocatalysts, has dominated the development of efficient photoelectrochemical cells.8 Although substantial efforts have been made in the last several decades to develop photoelectrochemical cells and photocatalysts using various semiconductor materials,6,9–12 no breakthrough in either the material design of the photoelectrode or material stability has yet been achieved. With recent advances in nanotechnology, the research field has begun attracting much more attention for many applications. Over the past decade, nanomaterials have been used for catalysis, information storage, biomedicine, and electronics.9–11,13–15 Nanomaterials and their designs should be promising materials for constructing photoelectrodes because of their extremely small feature size and large surface area. It is believed that nano-structures of photo-materials can provide beneficial effects such as band structural modification, quantum dot sensitization, plasmonic association, as well as the domination of crystal facets.
Although several reviews for photocatalytic splitting of water based on electrolyte solutions have recently been published,1,6,9–12,16 a comprehensive review with focuses on photoelectrochemical cells using solid photoelectrodes for water splitting and their associated photoelectrode materials and corresponding photoelectrode design strategies is definitely required to facilitate research in this area.
In this tutorial review, we discuss the development of semiconductor materials and their effect on activity, strategies for improving the photoelectrochemical performance from the viewpoint of absorbance or carrier transportation, and the potential utilization and limitation of structure design. We provide several examples of practical improvement in photoactivity to highlight their concepts and reproducibility, and to emphasize how advanced nanotechnology has improved the development of photoelectrodes for solar water splitting.

1.2 Photoelectrodes and evaluation of photoelectrochemical activity
Under standard conditions, the change in free energy (ΔG) associated with the conversion of one molecule of H2O into H2 and 1/2 O2 is 237.2 kJ mol−1, which corresponds to an electrolysis cell voltage (ΔEo) of 1.23 V per electron transferred. The photoelectrochemical method for water splitting, as displayed in Fig. 1, involves two electrodes – the anode and the cathode. The anode is the photoactive material (or semiconducting material)-based electrode, which is irradiated by a light beam during water splitting. The cathode is the counter-electrode – also called a photocathode – although it is not irradiated by light. In order to drive this reaction, the photoactive material on the photoanode must absorb radiant light to make its electrode potential higher than 1.23 V, so the water molecule can be oxidized to form O2 and protons (H+) and protons can be simultaneously reduced to form H2 at the cathode. As a result of the sluggish kinetics for water splitting, energy is lost during the transfer of electrons at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. Accordingly, the energy that is required for photoelectrolysis is frequently given as 1.7–2.4 eV. On the photoanode, this photo-induced process must generate four electron–hole pairs for generating O2. If the photoanode is irradiated by light that has energy greater than the bandgap (EBG) of the photoactive material, then the electrons of the valence band will be excited into the conduction band while the holes remain in the valence band. These photo-generated electrons will then pass through the external wire and reach the surface of the cathode to react with protons, forming H2, and the holes at the photoanode will oxidize the H2O (O2−) to produce O2.
 Fig. 1  Diagram of the basic principles of water splitting for a photoelectrochemical cell with an n-type semiconductor photoanode where oxygen is evolved and a photocathode (Pt sheet) where hydrogen is evolved. 
In addition to the bandgap requirement, the band levels, another factor that commonly dominates the ability for water splitting, has to be considered. The splitting of water requires that the bottom level of the conduction band must be located at a more negative potential than the reduction potential of H+/H2, and that the top of the valence band is more positive than the oxidation potential of H2O/O2. With respect to the fundamental requirements of the conduction and valence bands, the band edge positions must straddle the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Some semiconductor materials are able to reduce, but not oxidize water. On the other hand, some metal-oxide materials such as Fe2O3 are able to oxidize, but not reduce the proton. For such materials, an external bias is essential for reduction of the proton and to assist photocurrent in the photoelectrochemical cell. In this case, the onset potential of the photoresponse from the I–V curve always shifts to a higher potential region.17 Based on electrochemical principles, the water splitting reaction can only be driven when the irradiation energy exceeds 1.23 eV (approximately wavelength of 1000 nm), indicating that the energy of the light must be larger than the bandgap to separate the electrons and holes. In practical operation, the minimum thermodynamic energy requirements plus the overpotential loss require at least 1.7–1.9 eV for the photoelectrochemical splitting of water, which corresponds to absorption at an onset wavelength of 730 nm.18,19 Furthermore, the intensity of the solar spectrum dramatically falls off below 350 nm, so the upper limit on the bandgap is about 3.5 eV. Towards this end, the optimum value of the semiconductor bandgap should ideally be between 1.9 and 3.5 eV, which is within the visible range of the solar spectrum. In practical cases, the flux of solar photons in the wavelength range from 680 nm to 280 nm (1.8 eV–4.4 eV) represents 27.5% of the total solar photon flux, which is the maximum efficiency that has been predicted in various investigations based on the bandgap of the semiconductor material, the solar spectrum, and various losses.20 However, this efficiency of energy conversion using a single bandgap material is too low to satisfy the requirements for an actual application, even if a perfect photocatalytic material can be developed. As a result, a more efficient configuration has to be developed using a system with multiple bandgaps (see Section 3). Most requirements of semiconductor materials for water splitting in a photoelectrochemical cell are similar to those of other photocatalysts, but various other factors must be considered here. For example, the modification of co-catalyst that commonly provides active sites on the surface of photoactive materials can effectively improve the kinetics of the carrier transportation in the photochemical cell. Regarding this, RuO2 and Pt nanoparticles have been identified to be effective oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution co-catalysts, respectively. Since the transfer of carriers across the n-type semiconductor/electrolyte interface must be sufficiently rapid to compete with the accumulation of electrons/holes at the surface, thereby this modification would maintain the bending of band and lead to a concomitant decrease in electron–hole recombination.
Another critical factor is resistance to photocorrosion or electrochemical stability, which may limit the usefulness of several photocatalytic materials. Most metal oxide semiconductor materials are thermodynamically unstable, meaning that the photogenerated holes may oxidize themselves rather than water (photocorrosion and/or anodic photodecomposition). These undesired photodecompositions in various photoactive materials commonly depend on the pH value of the electrolyte and frequently limit their utilization under certain conditions. TiO2 and SnO2 are highly stable over a wide range of pH values in aqueous environments upon illumination, while the stability of hematite strongly depends on the presence of dopants, pH values, and oxygen stoichiometry. Many non-oxide semiconductor materials may either dissolve or form a thin oxide film upon their surface, preventing the electron transfer through the interface between the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. Photocorrosion and/or anodic decomposition is expected to be markedly inhibited if the transfer of carriers for water oxidation through the interface is faster than any competing reaction. Therefore, the development of semiconductor materials with excellent stability against photocorrosion/anodic decomposition becomes a critical issue for future applications.
Some important factors other than bandgap energy must be considered for improving the water splitting reaction, including the charge separation, charge mobility and the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. These factors also critically affect the photoactivity of semiconductor materials. Structural and electronic properties of co-catalysts on the surface of the photoelectrodes also strongly affect both the generation and the separation of electron–hole pairs. In the general case, highly crystalline materials with a low density of defects are beneficial for the water splitting reaction, because defects serve as recombination centers for the photogenerated electrons/holes.
In terms of evaluating photo-active materials, the incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency (IPCE) of materials can be obtained experimentally, and is used to specify the photoresponse as a function of the wavelength of incident light. Eqn (1) shows yields of the IPCE at the desired bias voltage. (1)where J represents the photocurrent density (mA cm−2); λ is the wavelength of incident light (nm), and I is the intensity of the incident light (mW cm−2). However, the most important factor is the solar energy conversion efficiency. The overall efficiency of solar energy conversion can be determined from the following expression:21 (2)where η is the solar energy conversion efficiency, J is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), I is the incident light intensity (mW cm−2), E0rex is the potential required for water splitting, Emeans is the electrode potential of the working electrode under illumination, and Eaoc is the electrode potential of the working electrode at open circuit conditions under the same illumination. The term E0rex is usually taken to be 1.23 V for the water splitting reaction. It should be noted that the redox potential for water splitting is strongly dependent on the pH value of the electrolyte solution, because the band level of semiconductor material can shift with a change in pH value. In general, a higher pH value condition of photocurrent measurement can lead to a shift in voltage toward a lower region.22 In the case of practical measurement, the band edge position for many kinds of semiconductor materials cannot simultaneously straddle the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. Therefore, sacrificial reagents which act as electron donors or hole scavengers such as alcohol, sulfide ions, and silver ions are often employed to evaluate the photocatalytic activity for water splitting. It should be noted that the above formula cannot correctly evaluate energy conversion efficiency when sacrificial reagents are utilized to estimate the photoactivity, because photogenerated electrons/holes would react with electron donors or hole scavengers rather than water. Consequently, the evaluation of photoactivity in a photoelectrochemical cell commonly uses photocurrent instead of conversion efficiency in many cases.
2. Photoelectrode materials
Since photoelectrode materials are crucial to the water splitting process, chemists and other scientists are always seeking the best photo-active materials, which exhibit a smaller semiconductor bandgap, and so cover a large fraction of the sunlight spectrum, a conduction/valence band energy that straddles the water oxidization and reduction potentials, stability in an aqueous environment, and a high conversion efficiency for splitting of water, as well as low cost. Unfortunately, no single material has yet been found that satisfies all of these requirements, although combinatorial methods have been utilized to quickly search for and optimize materials.4,17 Transition metal oxides, including TiO2 and ZnO, exhibit good stability but only absorb a small fraction of incident sunlight because they have a large bandgap. However, the combination of either a photoanode and a photocathode or a photoelectrode and a photovoltaic device has also be investigated with a view to constructing a tandem cell that facilitates overall water splitting associated with multi-photon absorption events.23 A solar energy conversion efficiency over 12% has been achieved using III–V semiconductor materials, but their cost and stability remain major disadvantages.24 Even though the efficiency of either photocatalysts or a photoelectrochemical cell for solar energy conversion is still low, research on water splitting is always an important topic in solving problems associated with energy and the environment.
A wide range of semiconductor materials have been developed for usage in photoelectrodes for the water splitting reaction. Table 1 presents several representative photo-active materials. Since the medium for photoelectrochemical measurement has a significant effect on the stability of materials in terms of photocorrosion and photodecomposition,25Table 1 also lists the corresponding media in which the measurements were made. For example, the photoelectrode that was made of TiO2 can be operated under neutral or basic conditions while ZnO can be measured under neutral conditions. The properties of the medium strongly affect the performance of the photoelectrode. For instance, the pH value of the electrolyte clearly affects both the redox potential of the water and the position of the conduction band/valence band of the semiconductor materials.
Table 1 Semiconductor materials with nanostructures as photoelectrodes for water splitting




Materials
Structure
Bandgap
Electrolyte
Conditions
Performance
Ref.




TiO2 (nanotube)
—
—
1 M KOH

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 320–400 nm, 50 W metal hydride lamp

j = 13 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 6.8%

21



TiO2 (nanotube)
—
—
1 M KOH

I = 95 mW cm−2, λ = 320–400 nm, UV illumination

j = 26 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl η = 16.25%

28



TiO2 (nanorod)
Anatase
3.27 eV
0.5 M NaClO4, pH = 7.0

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–500 nm 1000 W Xe lamp

j = 0.018 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.1%

26



TiO2 (mesoporous)
Anatase
3.34 eV
0.1 M NaOH

I = 1000 mW cm−2, λ = 350–500 nm,150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 3.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.36%

29



TiO2 (nanowire)
Anatase/Rutile
3.00 eV
1.0 M NaOH, pH = 13.8

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–700 nm, AM 1.5 G simulated lamp

j = 2.6 mA cm−2 at 0.216 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 1.05%

27



TiO2 (branched)
Rutile
2.95 eV
1.0 M KOH, pH = 14

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, Xe lamp AAA solar simulated

j = 0.85 mA cm−2 at 0.65 V vs. Pt, η = 0.49%

48



ZnO (nanocoral)
Wurtzite
—
0.5 M Na2SO4, pH = 6.8

I = 125 mW cm−2, λ = 350–750 nm, Tungsten-halogen lamp

j = 0.25 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE

31



ZnO (thin film)
Wurtzite
3.3 eV
0.5 M NaClO4, pH = 7.4

I = 230 mW cm−2, λ = 350–800 nm, 1000W Xe lamp

j = 0.142 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

30



ZnO (branch)
Wurtzite
3.54 eV
0.5 M NaSO4, pH = 7.0

I = 100 mW cm−2, 350–800 nm, AM 1.5 G

j = 0.12 mA cm−2 at 0.31 V vs. Ag/AgCl

32



WO3 (mesoporous)
Monoclinic
2.5 eV
3 M H2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm AM 1.5 G simulated lamp

j = 2.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

36



WO3 (nanowire)
Orthorhombic
2.9 eV
0.5 M H2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, AM 1.5 G Xe lamp

j = 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0.82 V vs. SCE, η = 0.33%

35



WO3 (mesoporous)
Monoclinic
2.66 eV
1 M H2SO4

I = 370 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, 150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 9 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. SCE

41



WO3 (mesoporous)
Monoclinic
2.58 eV
1 M H2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, 150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 3.7 mA cm−2 at 1.3 V vs. Pt

42



WO3 (flaskers)
Monoclinic
2.51 eV
0.1 M Na2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, AM 1.5

j = 1.43 mA cm−2 at 1.3 V vs. Pt

43



BiVO4 (nanowire)
Monoclinic
—
0.5 M Na2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, AM 1.5

j = 0.4 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Pt

40



BiVO4 (nanostructure)
Monoclinic
2.45 eV
0.5 M Na2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, 100 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 0.91 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

33



BiVO4 (scheelite)
Monoclinic
2.5 eV
0.1 M K2SO4

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 420–700 nm, 300 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 1.2 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.0014%

34



Fe2O3 (mesoporous)
Hematite
2 eV
1 M NaOH

I = 130 mW cm−2, λ = 420–700 nm, AM 1.5 simulated lamp

j = 1.07 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE

46



Fe2O3 (nanotube)
Hematite
1.97 eV
1M KOH

I = 87 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, 300 W solar simulator (AM 1.5)

j = 1.41 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.84%

44



Fe2O3 (thin film)
Hematite
2.06 eV
1 M NaOH, pH=13.6

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–600 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 0.55 mA cm−2 at 1.43 V vs. RHE

38



Fe2O3 (mesoporous)
Hematite
2.15 eV
1M NaOH, pH = 13.6

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–600 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 0.56 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

37



Fe2O3 (porous)
Hematite
2.1 eV
1 M NaOH, pH = 13.6

I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–650 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 2.34 mA cm−2 at 1.43 V vs. RHE

45



Fe2O3 (nanorod)
Hematite
2.1 eV
1 M NaOH

I = 87 mW cm−2, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)

j = 0.52 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

39





TiO2 was the first reported photoelectrode for water splitting under UV irradiation.7 It was adopted to produce hydrogen and/or oxygen from aqueous solution. Since that first report, various studies have focused on reducing the probability of recombination, increasing the surface area, and enhancing the carrier mobility, to improve the photoconversion efficiency of the photoelectrochemical cell.26,27 In this regard, catalyst nanoarchitecture has been regarded as an important approach to deliver these demands. A mesoporous structure has been adopted to reduce the probability of charge-carrier recombination because such a structure is composed of smaller particle size. One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures (such as nanowires and nanotubes) can provide the advantages of a high surface area and rapid diffusion in a single direction, yielding a low recombination of electron–hole pairs. Mor et al.21 formed TiO2 nanotube arrays by anodizing a Ti sheet and measured an efficiency of 4% under UV irradiation (λ = 320–400 nm). Subsequently, Paulose et al.28 prepared TiO2 nanotubes with a length of 45 μm by an anodizing method, achieving a photocurrent of 26 mA cm−2 and a conversion efficiency of 16.25% under UV irradiation (λ = 320–400 nm). Hartmann et al.29 reported that mesoporous TiO2 films prepared by the sol–gel method were approximately ten times more efficient for the water splitting reaction than their counterparts obtained from crystalline TiO2 nanoparticles owing to their thick and continuous pore walls and lower recombination rate. ZnO may become an alternative to TiO2 for fabricating photoelectrodes, because of its various advantages, including higher carrier mobility, greater chemical and thermal stability, and lack of toxicity. Furthermore, the conduction band of ZnO is at a more negative position than that of TiO2, such that the photogenerated electrons are better able to reduce protons, resulting in greater solar energy conversion efficiency. In addition, it has been demonstrated that the morphology of ZnO can be easily controlled by adjusting the synthetic conditions resulting in various variously shaped ZnO nanostructures.30 Ahn et al.31 produced a ZnO nanocoral and measured a photocurrent of 0.25 mA cm−2 under a tungsten-halogen lamp (λ = 350–750 nm). Qiu et al.32 prepared ZnO nanotetrapods using a multi-step growth process, and measured a photocurrent of 0.12 mA cm−2 and a conversion efficiency of 0.045% under irradiation from a solar simulator (λ = 350–800 nm). Although both TiO2 and ZnO have a high performance in the UV region, their wide bandgap nature cannot capture solar light in the visible region, in which photons of sunlight are most abundant, so they result in a low energy utilization. Therefore, materials with a narrower bandgap are required.
With respect to narrow bandgap materials, BiVO4,33,34 WO3,35,36 and Fe2O337–39 are very attractive, although they do present some challenges. For example, BiVO4 thin films comprised of ordered arrays of pyramidal-shaped nanowires have been successfully fabricated by seed-mediated growth in an aqueous BiVO4 suspension, and a photocurrent of 0.4 mA cm−2 was measured under AM 1.5 irradiation (λ = 400–700 nm; 100 mW cm−2).40 Tungsten trioxide (WO3) and hematite (α-Fe2O3) are in effect semiconductor oxides which serve as oxygen-evolving anodes for absorbing photons from the blue regions of the solar spectrum, because they have band gaps of 2.2 and 2.6 eV, respectively. Cristino et al.41 prepared mesoporous WO3 films using an anodization method, and measured a photocurrent of 9 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 irradiation (λ = 300–700 nm; 370 mW cm−2). Kim et al.42 prepared a WO3 photoelectrode with a mesoporous nanostructure using polyethyleneglycol as a surfactant, and their photoelectrochemical properties revealed a photocurrent of 3.7 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 irradiation (λ = 300–700 nm). Su et al.43 successfully prepared vertically aligned WO3 nanoflakes using a solvothermal technique, and nanowires or nanoflakes could be fabricated by adjusting the composition of the solution. A photocurrent of 1.43 mA cm−2 and an IPCE (incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency) as high as 60% at λ = 400 nm were measured.
α-Fe2O3, which has a small bandgap, low cost, and high chemical stability, is one of the most promising metal oxide semiconductor materials for the splitting of water using solar energy. Mohapatra et al.44 reported an anodization method for growing an ultrathin wall of Fe2O3 nanotubes with a thickness of 5–7 nm and a length of 3–4 μm on Fe foil. A photocurrent density of 1.41 mA cm−2 was obtained using the hematite nanotube arrays, and a maximum solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 0.84% was reached under AM 1.5 conditions. Later, Brillet et al.45 elucidated a solution-based strategy and fabricated a porous electrode by encapsulation with an SiO2 confinement scaffold, yielding a high water oxidation photocurrent of 2.34 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 illumination. This high photocurrent density was attributed to the activation of the nanostructured hematite photoanode with control over wide range of particle sizes in the porous film. Generally, hematite has a relatively poor photoelectrochemical performance, which is attributable to its short charge carrier diffusion length as well as the slow kinetics for the oxidation of water by the valence band holes.46
In summary, a photoelectrode that is made of single-component photo-active materials cannot deliver the required performance in terms of either photocurrent or conversion efficiency to meet the demands of daily life. There are several limitations on their performance which include low absorbance in the visible region, poor charge-carrier transportation, poor collection of photogenerated electrons, and limited chemical stability in an electrolyte under illumination. Accordingly, the following section will review various strategies for improving photoelectrochemical performance. Extraneous materials can be adopted to increase the absorbance of solar light and/or to promote the collection and transportation of charge carriers.
3. Material designs and nanostructural architecture to improve photoelectrochemical activity
As discussed in the previous section, many semiconductor materials can be used as photoelectrode materials for splitting water under UV or visible light irradiation.6,9 To design ideal photo-active materials for the efficient conversion of solar energy, increasing the light absorbance and improving the charge-carrier transportation are two of the main approaches in the recent development of solar water splitting. In this regard, nano-materials and their designs are particularly promising in achieving these goals. Nano-scale materials have unique properties that differ from those of corresponding bulk materials, and therefore, it is likely that nanostructural photoelectrode materials will attract considerable attention in the future development of the solar splitting of water. Scheme 1 shows various strategies for meeting the demands of the solar splitting of water using nanotechnology. A selection of these strategies will be described in detail below, and related concepts will be discussed.
 Scheme 1  Schematic of the different approaches to the improvement of photoactivity for water splitting. 
3.1 Single bandgap photo-active materials
Increasing the absorbance of sunlight should be the primary means of maximizing the spectral range of sunlight. This increase can be achieved by using a semiconductor with branched structure, which can absorb many photons because of its large absorption cross-section and its intrinsic properties. Modification of the band structure, such as by doping, has been found in many photo-active materials to increase the absorbance of the solar spectrum, in which a larger part of solar light can be absorbed owing to shifting of the absorption edge toward longer wavelengths. The band structural modification primarily involves introducing foreign ions (cations or anions) into the semiconducting material to change its electronic and optical properties, and the corresponding performance strongly depends on the modification of the band structure level.

3.1.1 Branched structure. 
Controlling the morphology of nanomaterials is a common strategy for tailoring their crystal facets and optimizing their performance in the case of various semiconductor photomaterials, because heterogeneous reactivity depends strongly on the surface atomic configuration and bonding environment that can be altered by controlling crystalline facets. Recently, Pan et al.47 explored a set of TiO2 anatase crystals with predominant {001}, {101}, or {010} facets. The {001} facet exhibited a lower reactivity than the {101} facet in photooxidation for generating OH radicals and evolving hydrogen. However, this observation does not support the conventional understanding that facets with a higher percentage of non-coordinated atoms are normally more reactive in heterogeneous reactions. The order of photoreactivity of the facets of TiO2 with the anatase structure in the photooxidation and reduction reactions for generating OH radicals and evolving hydrogen is {010} > {101} > {001}. Early studies tended to focus on semiconductor nanoparticle films owing to their large surface area to volume ratios. However, nanoparticle films suffer from a higher loss due to electron–hole recombination since the electron mobility in a nanoparticle film is around two orders of magnitude lower than that of a bulk single crystal because of electron trapping/scattering at grain boundaries.48 Defects and grain boundaries frequently become trapping and recombination centers, which increase the probability of electron–hole recombination. Hence, one-dimensional (1D) well-defined nanostructures, such as nanorods/wires and nanotubes, have attracted substantial attention since one-dimensional nanostructures exhibit excellent properties in terms of charge separation, charge transport, and light absorption. Nanorods and nanotubes have a lower defect density than nanoparticles, which can facilitate the charge transfer process. Some one-dimensional nanostructures are polycrystalline because they have a high growth rate, and post-annealing treatment may be able to convert such polycrystalline structures into crystalline ones.
Branched nanostructural semiconductor materials have been developed to simultaneously provide both a rapid charge transfer pathway for carrier collection and a large surface area, to improve photocatalytic performance. Recently, Cho et al.48 described a hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorod structure for use in photoelectrochemical devices, in which the material simultaneously offered a large contact area with the electrolyte, excellent light-trapping characteristics, as well as a highly conductive pathway for the collection of charge carriers. Fig. 2a presents the structure of a branched nanorod, and Fig. 2b displays a typical scanning electron microscopic (SEM) image of a branched-nanorod sample, whose short needle-shaped branches were grown uniformly over the whole surface of the nanorods. Fig. 2c presents a high-resolution transmission electron microscopic (HRTEM) image of the morphology of branched TiO2 nanorods. The image demonstrates that the branches densely and uniformly cover the surface of the nanorods. Plots of current density as a function of applied bias under simulated solar illumination are generally plotted to examine the photocatalytic performance of photoelectrochemical cells. Fig. 2d displays chopped linear-sweep voltammograms that were obtained from three types of TiO2 film that were supported on SnO2:F glass (FTO) substrates, measured in 1 M KOH using a standard three-electrode configuration under illumination from a Xe arc lamp. The current densities of the nanoparticles, nanorods, and branched-nanorods were 0.01, 0.31, and 0.83 (mA cm−2), respectively, at 0.8 V with respect to a reversible hydrogen electrode. The fact that a single crystalline branched nanostructure lacks defects can significantly improve its efficiency by promoting charge separation/transportation and its high surface areas facilitate the reaction of electrons/holes with the electrolyte. Other photo-active materials with various nanostructures have been shown to markedly improve photoactivity, such as tube or coral nanostructures of ZnO.31
 Fig. 2  (a) Branched nanorods and (b) the corresponding SEM image and (c) TEM image. (d) Chopped I–V curves of TiO2 branched nanorods, nanorods, and nanoparticles under a xenon lamp. Reproduced from ref. 48 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society). 


3.1.2 Modification of band structure by inhomogeneous doping. 
Although branched nanostructures or other nanostructures can simultaneously provide both a rapid charge transfer pathway for carrier collection and a large surface area, their wide bandgaps make them active only in the ultraviolet (UV) region, which is associated with less than 5% of the total energy of the solar spectrum. Narrowing the bandgap of semiconductor materials and shifting their absorption to the visible region is a potential strategy for increasing the efficiency of solar energy conversion, since visible light represents a large fraction of the solar spectrum. Non-metal doping, such as nitrogen or carbon, into wide bandgap materials, such as TiO2 and ZnO, has been extensively studied with a view to narrowing the bandgap.49 Calculations from first principles demonstrate that the narrowing of the bandgap in TiO2 can be attributed to the mixing of O 2p states with the N 2p states of the substituted nitrogen atoms in the newly formed valence band, which increases absorption in the visible light region. Some studies have proposed a different explanation concerning the narrowing of the bandgap of TiO2, and have stated that the narrowing of the bandgap may be caused by the formation of isolated N 2p states above the top of the valence band of TiO2. Liu et al.49 suggested that the absorption of visible light by nitrogen-doped TiO2 resulted from the formation of localized states in the oxygen deficiencies that are formed by nitrogen doping, rather than from the nitrogen dopant. Although the exact mechanism for the narrowing of the bandgap is still unclear, non-metal doping is clearly observed to reduce the bandgap of semiconductor materials. Importantly, the resulting absorption band for visible light in both transition-metal and non-metal-doped TiO2 can have either a steep and parallel absorption edge (band-to-band) or a small shoulder tail. This phenomenon is attributable to either the homogeneous doping or surface doping (“inhomogeneous doping”) of the TiO2 semiconductor material, and depends strongly on the doping conditions. Surface doping of TiO2 is easier to carry out than homogeneous doping in most cases, since homogeneous doping involves some structural reconstruction within the semiconducting material.

Fig. 3 displays the IPCE of nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanowires, recorded in 1 M KOH at 1.4 V (vs. the RHE).50 Notably, in this investigation, the IPCE spectra for the nitrogen-doped TiO2 photoanodes have a low energy threshold at a wavelength of ∼470 nm, because only the surface is doped. Generally, the resulting sample exhibited surface doping rather than homogeneous doping, and the efficiency for conversion of visible light was limited by the depth of doping. The transmittance spectrum with a threshold that was similar to the IPCE spectrum from 420 to 460 nm further demonstrated surface doping. Additionally, cobalt treatment as a co-catalyst was conducted to demonstrate the effect of a co-catalyst on the IPCE spectrum. The IPCE spectrum of co-catalyst-treated TiO1.957N0.043 in the visible light region (with an efficiency plateau of ∼19% from 420 to 460 nm) is significantly higher than that of the co-catalyst-treated TiO1.988N0.012 (with an efficiency plateau of ∼10% from 420 to 460 nm), revealing that nitrogen doping can practically narrow the bandgap to improve absorbance in the visible light region as well as photocatalytic activity. However, co-catalyst treatment cannot strengthen the photoresponse in a region in which the semiconductor material does not absorb. This can be seen in the IPCE spectra of the nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanowires with/without co-catalyst treatment which are all similar, except in the UV region, as a result of TiO2 absorption (Fig. 3). Unfortunately, more nitrogen doping does not always improve photocatalytic activity in the visible light region, even though nitrogen doping does improve the absorbance of visible light, because increasing the concentration of the dopant can worsen the crystallinity, increasing the density of the defects, reducing carrier mobility and thus increasing the probability of recombination of electrons and holes. Homogeneous doping may be a better means of simultaneously providing both high visible light absorbance and improving the mobility of charge carriers, although this process is difficult to implement in most semiconductor materials.
 Fig. 3  IPCE (incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency) spectra of a TiO1.957N0.043 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment, an unmodified TiO2 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment, and a TiO1.988N0.012 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment. Reproduced from ref. 32 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society). 


3.1.3 Modification of band structure by homogeneous doping. 
To simultaneously solve the problems of both the low absorbance of visible light and the mobility of charge carriers, another homogeneous doping-solid solution approach has been investigated. The homogeneous doping of a semiconductor material must overcome the challenge that the diffusion length of the dopant is too short to reach the core region of the material. Hence, homogeneous doping commonly requires the use of a semiconductor material with small dimensions. A homogeneous distribution of the dopant can be easily realized if the dimensions of the semiconductor are smaller than the diffusion length of the dopant. Fortunately, nanomaterials generally have a high surface area and small dimensions, so homogeneous doping of nanomaterials is easier than in bulk materials. Solid solution is regarded as one kind of homogeneous doping. Fig. 4a schematically depicts the steps in the fabrication of a photoanode from an array of nanowires of a solid solution of ZnO–ZnS.51 ZnO nanowire arrays were synthesized over the entire surface of an SnO2:F glass (FTO) substrate by the hydrothermal method. ZnS quantum dots (QDs) were deposited in a chemical bath on each ZnO nanowire array, and then thermally treated to generate a ZnO–ZnS solid solution. The formation of a solid solution is normally identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the shifting of the diffraction peak with the composition of the solid solution. In X-ray diffraction studies, all of the samples yielded similar diffraction patterns. Indexing indicates that all of the diffraction peaks are consistent with the wurtzite ZnO structure, revealing that reflections from the (002) plane in ZnO nanowires are stronger than those from other planes, because of the [002]-oriented growth of nanowires (Fig. 4b). Following the formation of the ZnO–ZnS solid solution, a clear shift toward a lower diffraction angle was observed, revealing lattice modification. This is a result of replacement of the oxygen in the ZnO nanowire by the sulfur, leading to a lattice expansion due to the larger radius of sulfur atom. The UV-Vis absorption spectra revealed the optical properties and formation of a solid solution. The Kubelka–Munk function F(R) relates the reflectivity R (Rsample/Rstandard: unitless) of a sample to an absorption coefficient α (1 cm−1) and a scattering coefficient S (1 cm−1): (3)Based on the assumption of a constant scattering coefficient S, F(R) is proportional to α and represents the absorbance of the sample. The absorption spectra of the samples were calculated using the Kubelka–Munk function, as displayed in Fig. 4c. The bandgap of the samples was also calculated by fitting the absorption band edge of the spectra using the remission equation, hνα ∼ (hν-EBG)1/2(4)Since F(R) is equivalent to absorbance in the spectrum, the linear portion of a plot [F(R) hν]2 (for a direct bandgap material) against hν (eV) has an intercept at hν = EBG (eV). Such a plot is frequently utilized to estimate the bandgap energy of semiconductors. As presented in Fig. 4c, the formation of the ZnO–ZnS solid solution shifts the bandgap to a lower energy (∼3.10 eV) by the bowing effect. When an S atom is incorporated into the ZnO lattice, the potential energy of the top valence band formed by the O2p atomic orbitals (O2p–S3p repulsion) raises and leads to a narrowing in bandgap for the ZnO–ZnS solid solution. This fact indicates sensitization of the ZnO–ZnS solid solution by significantly reducing the bandgap and increasing the absorbance of visible sunlight. It was also found that the optical spectra of the formed solid solution shifted monotonically with the composition of ions owing to the homogeneous doping.6 As a result of orbital coupling, the array of ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires had a characteristic “hetero-coordination zinc” nanostructure, which could modify the conduction band that results from the O2p and Zn4p orbitals. It can be concluded that the orbital coupling of S3p with O2p and Zn4p is able to increase the number of unoccupied states in the conduction band and increase the probability of a transition from the valence band to the conduction band. This increase in transition probability may contribute to the photoelectrochemical response. The IPCE curve of the ZnO–ZnS solid solution sample, plotted in Fig. 4d, reveals substantial photoactivity in the visible light region from 400 to 450 nm as well as a strong photoresponse in the near-UV region, implying that the formation of the solid solution by homogenous doping can significantly reduce the bandgap and strengthen the photocatalytic activity at longer wavelengths.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for the fabrication of a photoanode that is composed of ZnS solid solution nanowires, (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of ZnO, ZnO nanowires that are sensitized with ZnS QDs, and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires, (c) bandgap plots of (F(R)hν)2versus energy for ZnO and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires, and (d) IPCE spectra of ZnO, ZnO nanowires that are sensitized with ZnS QDs, and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 51 with copyright permission (Wiley). 

3.2. Multi bandgap photo-active materials
Although both the formation of branched nanostructures or band modification can increase the light absorbance of materials, the small wavelength shift toward visible light that is achieved by doping does not sufficiently improve conversion efficiency. The absorbance over a wide solar spectral region can be further increased using multi-bandgap materials. With respect to this, the sensitization of either semiconductor quantum dots or dye can practically lead to a greater increase in photoactivity than that of band modification. In this approach, commonly extra materials are used which absorb complementary light to that of the primary semiconductor.

3.2.1 Dye sensitization. 
The dye-sensitized solar cell is currently the most efficient and stable excitonic cell, in which light-absorbing dye molecules decorate films of an inorganic, electron-conducting phase with a large surface area.52 A similar concept can be applied to photoelectrochemical cells for the solar splitting of water. The absorption of light by a photoelectrochemical cell is limited to the dye monolayer, which subsequently oxidizes water and transfers electrons to the semiconductor phase. Semiconductor materials (photoanodes) normally comprise films of nanoparticles with thicknesses of several micrometers or more. TiO2, SnO2, or ZnO serves as the substrate with a high surface area to which the dye molecules are attached. The higher concentration of dye yields optically active photoanodes that absorb much visible light. The films have to be sufficiently thick to maximize the path length of the incident light and the adsorption of the dye. However, if the film is too thick, some negative effects such as a higher density of grain boundaries, inefficient electron transport, and a high probability of electron–hole pair recombination may result.
For example, a dye-hydrated iridium oxide (IrO2·nH2O) colloid was used in place of some visible light-absorbing sensitizer dye, and it served as both a sensitizer component and a molecular bridge that connected hydrated iridium oxide nanoparticles to a metal oxide semiconductor.53 When the photoanode with the dye-hydrated iridium oxide (IrO2·nH2O) colloid-sensitized TiO2 nanostructure absorbs radiation, electrons can be injected rapidly into the conduction band of the semiconductor, and then back electron transfer occurs (∼0.37 ms). This back transfer from the conduction band of the semiconductor (TiO2) to the oxidized dye is an order of magnitude faster than the forward electron transfer from IrO2·nH2O to the oxidized dye.53 This phenomenon suggests that the formation of dye-oxide colloid can modify the carrier transfer and affect relevant kinetics. Fig. 5a shows a typical dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell for driving a water splitting reaction, in which the dye-sensitized nanostructured TiO2 functions as a photoanode and Pt as a photocathode in this cell.54 [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy)]2+ (RuP) is used as the sensitizer owing to its absorption in the visible region and its favorable oxidation potential. A Nafion membrane, which has a good ionic conductivity and high stability, is used to immobilize the hydrophobic catalyst for water oxidation.55 In the schematic Complex 1+ is RuL(pic)2 (H2L = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylic acid; pic = 4-picoline). It should be noted that the oxidation potential E1/2 (RuIII/II) of RuP is more positive than the onset potential of complex 1+ for water oxidation at a pH value of 7, meaning that photoinducing Ru(III) in RuP can drive complex 1+ to oxidize water in this photoelectrochemical cell. Fig. 5b displays the short-circuit current response to on–off cycles of illumination. A photoanode without dye (RuP) generates a negligible current, in spite of the presence of complex 1+. In the presence of dye (RuP) without complex 1+, a small current flows because of the photocatalytic process on both the semiconductor (TiO2) and dye (RuP). In the presence of both the dye-sensitized semiconductor nanostructure (TiO2–RuP) and the catalyst (complex 1+), the photocurrent can be significantly increased, suggesting that photogenerated electrons can be practically transferred from the catalyst to the semiconductor nanostructure through the photogenerated oxidized dye and generate a detectable current. Although an organic dye can significantly improve the conversion efficiency in splitting water, the stability of the photoinduced dye in a photoelectrochemical cell will be a critical issue for future development. Degradation of the dye with respect to the accumulation of photogenerated holes from the semiconductor material is an issue.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram for a photoelectrochemical cell with a RuP-sensitized TiO2 photoanode that is coated with a Nafion® film that has been penetrated by complex 1 and a photocathode (Pt sheet). (b) Corresponding short-circuit current responses to on–off cycles of illumination. Reproduced from ref. 54 with copyright permission (The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


3.2.2 Quantum dots sensitization. 
Another means of increasing the absorbance of the photoanode for the visible light region is the use of semiconductor nanocrystals, known as quantum dots (QDs), in place of photosensitive dyes (Fig. 6a). QDs have various important advantages over dyes. Their absorption spectrum can be matched to the solar spectrum by changing the size of the material particles. Additionally, QDs were recently shown to be able to generate multiple electron–hole pairs per photon, which could improve the efficiency of the device.56 Some methods for increasing the harvesting of visible light in quantum dot-sensitized photochemical cells have also been demonstrated, including the combination of a nitrogen doped-semiconductor and sensitization of it with QDs, multi-bandgap sensitization of QDs with different sizes and types.57,58
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the QD sensitization of ZnO nanorods, (b) photoelectrochemical performance of bare ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods that are decorated with a monolayer of CdTe QDs, (c) HRTEM image of monolayer decoration of CdTe QDs on ZnO nanorods, and (d) thick decoration of an individual ZnO nanowire with CdTe QDs. Reproduced from ref. 59 with copyright permission (Wiley). 
With respect to the stability of the photoelectrode, Chen et al.59 deposited a monolayer of QDs on the surface of ZnO nanowires, to improve their stability in the electrochemical reaction, suppressing the anodic decomposition/corrosion of QDs; the overall efficiency (∼1.8%) of the water splitting reaction was exactly measured in a neutral aqueous system rather than with sacrificial reagents.59 The measured long-term photocurrent response was almost constant over 50 cycles, indicating favorable chemical stability of this structurally sensitized monolayer against photo-oxidation in aqueous solution. The photocurrent density of ZnO nanowires with an optimal loading of the QDs was around three times greater (e.g., 1.5 mA cm−2vs. 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V) than that for pristine ZnO nanowires with a similar thickness (Fig. 6b), and yielded a maximum photoconversion efficiency of 1.83%. Fig. 6c displays the HRTEM image obtained under the optimum loading conditions. When QDs are attached to the surface of the nanowire, an abrupt transition is observed between the (0002) lattice planes of the ZnO nanowires and the (111) lattice planes of the CdTe QD, revealing the successful deposition of QDs. Notably, QDs do not aggregate on the surface of the ZnO nanowires. Fig. 6d shows an individual ZnO nanowire that is covered by a layer of QD nanoparticle aggregates with a thickness of approximately 15–30 nm. The film aggregates comprise many QDs with an average diameter of 3–8 nm. This particular nanostructure can lead to degradation in photoactivity as a result of photodecomposition and photocorrosion. This occurs because the photogenerated charge carriers may be transferred and react with neighboring QDs rather than water when the incident photons have been absorbed by the QDs, substantially increasing the probability of anodic decomposition and corrosion.

3.3 Carrier transportation improvement
An alternative method of enhancing photocatalytic activity is to improve both the separation of charges and the transportation of carriers, since an improvement in the transportation of charge-carriers can significantly inhibit the recombination of charges. Numerous strategies, such as heterostructure formation, plasmonic material coupling, and co-catalyst modification have been explored to facilitate the photoinducing process and reduce the probability of charge-recombination. Furthermore, graphene and its derived materials that can facilitate photoactivity have been demonstrated to perform excellently in several application fields owing to their unique properties. For example, graphene/graphene oxide derivatives can increase photoactivity because of their excellent carrier mobility. In this section, we will introduce several strategies to facilitate both the separation of charges and/or transportation of carriers.

3.3.1 Hetero-structures. 
Light absorption and charge generation/separation are the two most important steps in photoconversion of solar energy for water splitting. In addition to increasing the absorbance of light, improving the transportation of charge carriers after the charges are generated and separated is the second critical step in increasing photocatalytic activity. Since electron–hole recombination competes with the photoinduction of charge-separation when the photoelectrode absorbs radiation, the promotion of photoinducing charge-separation can reduce the probability of charge-recombination and increase photocatalytic activity. Semiconductors with a wide bandgap, such as hematite (α-Fe2O3), have potential in the solar water splitting because such a bandgap (2.0–2.2 eV) suits single-junction systems.60 However, the carrier-diffusion length in Fe2O3 is shorter than those in other commonly used semiconductors, making the collection of photogenerated carriers difficult. Many ongoing efforts are focused on addressing this challenge by either doping with foreign ions to increase the carrier-diffusion distance or altering the morphology to reduce its dimension for improving the collection of carriers.17
Promising solutions for converting solar energy include preventing the trapping of carriers on semiconductor surfaces, and improving the capability for instantaneous charge collection, separation, and transportation. High-quality nanostructures, such as one-dimensional nanorods/wires or a framework of conducting channels, can promote rapid electron–hole separation and charge transportation. The n-type Si nanowire arrays have been demonstrated to act as effective charge collection frameworks for photogenerated carriers. After photoactive materials are coated on the surfaces of Si nanowires, the water splitting efficiency of this architectural nanomaterial is significantly improved since the photogenerated electrons can be rapidly transported through an array of Si nanowires and reach the electrode with minimal loss owing to its highly conductivity. Recently, Lin et al.60 utilized a TiSi2 nanostructure as a charge collecting framework that exhibited high conductivity and a high surface area. In their work, when an Fe2O3 layer was coated on the surface of a TiSi2 nanonet, the transportation of photogenerated electrons was shorter than the charge-diffusion distance through the TiSi2 nanonet and photogenerated holes on semiconductor. The photogenerated electrons rapidly reacted with water in the solution, resulting in effective charge collection (as displayed in Fig. 7a). Accordingly, the synthesis of high-quality hematite seems very important for generating a structure that favors effective carrier transportation. Furthermore, the hematite should be thin and uniformly cover the TiSi2 nanonet. With respect to this, atomic layer deposition was used in this approach to generate a uniform and defect-free coating of hematite around the TiSi2 nanonet (Fig. 7b and c). In this way, the charge transfer from hematite to TiSi2 cannot provide significant impedance. When the hematite–TiSi2 heterostructure with a thickness of 25 nm was formed into a photoelectrode, a large current was observed when the electrode was irradiated (Fig. 7d), while no significant current was observed up to 1.60 V in dark conditions. This finding suggests that band bending occurred at the Fe2O3/electrolyte interface, which induces a field that can prevent charge transfer from the solution to the semiconductor. This strategy can also be applied to other systems, such as tungsten oxide/TiSi2 heterostructure, to improve charge collection.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a heterostructure with a highly conductive TiSi2 nanonet as an effective charge collector, (b) a corresponding TEM, (c) HRTEM images, and (d) the photoelectrochemical properties of a TiSi2/Fe2O3 heteronanostructures and a planar hematite film. Reproduced from ref. 60 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society). 


3.3.2 Co-catalyst modification. 
Platinum nanoparticles are extensively used in various photocatalytic systems as co-catalysts for hydrogen evolution, where they act as photoelectron traps to collect electrons from the semiconductor, which react with protons to generate hydrogen. In the case of photoelectrochemical cell, the commonly used photocathode is a platinum sheet or wire. In this section, we will discuss the use of co-catalysts for oxygen evolution. Recently, Kanan et al.61 demonstrated an anodic electrochemical deposition-based method for fabricating oxygen-evolving catalysts. It involved the oxidation of Co(II) to Co(III) ions and the precipitation of Co(III) ions as Co oxide or hydroxide on the surface of the conducting substrate electrode. When a Co-based co-catalyst is deposited on an n-type semiconductor photoanode, photogenerated holes react with water to generate oxygen without the application of any external bias. In this case, the valence band edge of the photoanode is located at a more positive potential than the oxygen evolution potential. Furthermore, such a photoelectrochemical cell can combine a solar cell and an electrolyzer in a single device, with the potential to reduce the production cost significantly. This deposition method for oxygen-evolving catalyst can also provide several attractive characteristics, including simplicity of the synthesis procedure, low cost, and a self-repair mechanism.61 Recently, Steinmiller et al.62 demonstrated the application of a similar photochemical approach to place a Co-based co-catalyst on a photoanode to promote oxygen evolution. They utilized photochemical deposition to oxidize Co(II) to Co(III) for preparing a Co-based co-catalyst on a semiconductor surface rather than the application of an external bias, in which photogenerated holes involved the oxidization of cobalt ions. When a semiconductor is irradiated to form electron–hole pairs in its conduction band and valance band, and the valence band edge is at a more positive potential than the oxidation potential of Co(II) ions, the photogenerated holes oxidize Co(II) to Co(III), resulting in a Co-based co-catalyst.
It should be emphasized that photoinducing electrochemical deposition has a unique advantage over conventional electrochemical deposition in the preparation of oxygen-evolving catalysts on a photoanode. The photogenerated holes can react with the Co ions at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface, where they are most readily available for both the oxidization of Co and oxygen evolution. Photoelectrochemically Co-based co-catalysts were used to facilitate the production of oxygen by photogenerated holes and photooxidation reactions. This method results in the effective utilization of the co-catalyst for oxygen evolution without blocking the semiconductor surface. This approach may also be used as a general method for depositing co-catalysts on many kinds of semiconductor materials which have a valence band edge and conduction band edge at a potential that is suitable to the redox reactions of metal ions. In this photoinduced electrochemical deposition, a ZnO electrode can act as a photoactive semiconductor to photogenerate holes that oxidize Co(II) ions; in such an electrode, ZnO rods have an average diameter of 100 nm and length of 600 nm (Fig. 8a). Fig. 8b shows a SEM image of the photoelectrochemically induced Co-based co-catalyst on the surface of ZnO rods after 30 minutes of UV light irradiation, revealing that the co-catalyst was deposited as 10–30 nm nanoparticles which were uniformly distributed on the surface of ZnO. This rough nature of the deposition layer effectively increased the surface area of the co-catalyst per unit mass and minimized the obstruction of the ZnO surface. The pH value was selected based on where the ZnO photoanode was most chemically and photochemically stable. Additionally, the onset potential of the ZnO photoelectrode that was coated with the Co-based catalyst was approximately 0.2 V lower than that of the bare ZnO photoelectrode. This significant shift in the photocurrent onset potential can be attributed to the decrease in the electron–hole recombination rate close to the flat band potential, which is a result of the modification with the Co-based co-catalyst. Furthermore, the ZnO nanorod photoelectrode that was modified by the Co-catalyst also exhibited an enhanced anodic photocurrent over the entire potential region.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of bare ZnO nanorods, and (b) ZnO nanorods with modification of Co-based co-catalyst. (c) Chopped I–V curves of bare ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods with modification of Co-based co-catalyst photoelectrode. Reproduced from ref. 62 with copyright permission (National Academy of Sciences). 
Recent work has established that a cobalt phosphate amorphous co-catalyst deposited onto the surface of hematite has a catalytic effect.61 Tilley et al.63 modified the surface of hematite using IrO2 nanoparticles (∼2 nm in diameter) by the photoelectronic deposition of the nanoparticles onto the hematite. The electrode thus obtained exhibited a dramatic shift in onset potential of ∼0.2 V and also an increase in the plateau photocurrent from 3.45 mA cm−2 to 3.75 mA cm−2.


3.3.3 Plasmonic assistance. 
Plasmonics recently have emerged as a rapidly expanding new field. Various plasmonic materials have appeared in a number of applications and devices such as plasmonic lasers, surface-plasmon-enhanced light-emitting diodes, metamaterials, plasmon focusing devices, and plasmon waveguides.64,65 Some investigations have reported that plasmonic materials can be introduced into photochemical reactions, significantly enhancing the photo response to solar water splitting by either the transfer of charge between metal/oxide (so-called “hot” electron–hole pairs) or by plasmonically induced heating and an induced electromagnetic field. Several competing processes for damping plasmon resonance have been considered. One of the important behaviors of plasmon damping is non-radiative decay by the generation of electron–hole pairs that result from either intraband excitation within the conduction band or interband transition from a lower-lying d band to an sp conduction band.66 Some results suggest that plasmonic enhancement can be attributed to a charge transfer mechanism in which the plasmon-induced charges in a metal nanoparticle deliver an electron into the conduction band of a semiconductor, leaving behind a hole that is filled by a donor ion from the solution (hot electron–hole pairs). This model implies that non-radiative decay of a surface plasmon is similar to the electron–hole pair generation in semiconductors. Silva et al.67 established that gold nanoparticles can not only act as centers of gas evolution but also as harvesters of light. Gold nanoparticles can inject electrons into the conduction band of a semiconductor when they absorb irradiation. Apart from the charge transfer process between metal and semiconductor, localized surface plasmon resonance may be able to induce an electromagnetic field close to the surface of metal materials, leading to an enhancement in the solar energy conversion efficiency of water splitting. With respect to this, Liu et al.68 have elucidated an enhancement mechanism that involved a plasmonically induced electromagnetic field. For bare TiO2 without gold nanoparticles, a small photocurrent of 4.5 nA can be seen just above the noise signal (Fig. 9a). The presence of gold nanoparticles markedly increases the photocurrent to 0.3 μA even when the energy of the irradiation (633 nm–1.96 eV) is significantly below the bandgap of TiO2 (3.2 eV), suggesting a plasmonically induced effect on the water splitting reaction. Fig. 9b plots the photocurrent response as a function of wavelength for TiO2 with and without gold nanoparticles. A distinct band located at approximately 560 nm can be seen, which corresponds to the surface plasmon resonance band of gold nanoparticles. For the bare TiO2 sample, there is no significant photocurrent in this region but it exhibits a stronger photoresponse in the UV region due to presence of TiO2 with its large bandgap. Fig. 9c presents the results of a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation of the gold nanoparticle/TiO2 composite film, which can be used to evaluate the electromagnetic response of the sample. The light gray regions represent the gold nanoparticles and the dark regions represent the underlying substrate. Local “hot spots” that are observed at the interface between the gold nanoparticles and the semiconductor dominate the plasmonically induced electromagnetic field of this composite film. The intensity of the electromagnetic field at the semiconductor surface in a region of hot spots can be 1000 times the incident electromagnetic field intensity, revealing that the rate of absorption of photons substantially exceeds that of the incident electromagnetic radiation.68 Consequently, the plasmonic nanoparticles can effectively couple with visible light from the far field to the near-field at the surface of the semiconductor, suggesting that the region close to the interface between the semiconductor and plasmonic nanostructure can effectively absorb solar light and exhibit an increase in photoinduced generation of carriers. Most of the electron-holes that are photogenerated by plasmonic excitation can effectively contribute to the photocatalytic reaction. Therefore, electromagnetic simulations of plasmonic metal–semiconductor composites may support a quantitative determination of the underlying photocatalytic enhancement mechanism, which is based on the near-field optical enhancement of the plasmon metal nanostructures. Although many mechanisms have been proposed, further understanding of the excitation plasmons and the factor that dominates in the photovoltaic devices for solar water splitting is required.
 Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent of TiO2 with/without gold nanoparticles under irradiation (633 nm). (b) Photocurrent versus wavelength for TiO2 with/without gold nanoparticles. (c) SEM image of 5 nm gold island film on TiO2, and corresponding electric field intensity, calculated using FDTD simulation. Reproduced from ref. 68 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society). 


3.3.4 Graphene-based assistance. 
The transportation of photogenerated carriers across a particle network can randomly expose them to many grain boundaries and recombination centers before they are collected at the surface of the electrode, significantly reducing the extent of solar energy conversion. In a search for new materials to enhance photoactivity of semiconductors, recent studies have developed the graphene-based nanocomposite system. Novoselov et al.69 discovered the unique properties of graphene, and noted its range of potential physical, chemical, biological, photoelectric, and catalytic applications. The excellent electronic conductivity of graphene that is provided by the two-dimensional planar π-conjugation structure may be able to effectively inhibit the recombination of the electron–hole pairs in the photoelectrochemical reaction and therefore increase photoconversion efficiency. Usually, graphene-based metal or semiconductor nanocomposites are synthesized by chemical reduction of graphene oxide as the precursor. An easy photocatalytic reduction method for converting graphene oxide to reduced graphene oxide at room temperature using a semiconductor such as TiO2 and/or ZnO has been developed. Graphene oxide can receive electrons from the conduction band of a semiconductor when the semiconductor absorbs radiation. This process is similar to the photoinduced electrochemical deposition of co-catalysts, which is described previously. Since both TiO2 and ZnO have a highly negative conduction band energy, photogenerated electrons can easily be transferred from their conduction bands to graphene oxide. Moreover, the two-dimensional platform structure of graphene can act as an excellent support matrix for photocatalyst particles, in a manner similar to that in which a layer-structured matrix can support the effective transportation of photoelectrons (carriers). As well as having extremely favorable electronic properties, graphene oxide and its derivative (e.g., reduced graphene oxide) can increase the absorption of visible light and increase the efficiency of the photochemical reaction.70 Recently, Li et al.71 reported on a photocatalyst that operated under visible light and was formed from graphene nanosheets that were decorated by CdS clusters for producing hydrogen. They synthesized the graphene–CdS photocatalyst using a solvothermal method. Graphene nanosheets in this composite improved the crystallinity of the CdS clusters and their surface area as well. Notably, a small amount of graphene can dramatically improve the photocatalytic activity of the water splitting reaction, and the optimal weight percentage of graphene was found to be 1.0 wt% with 0.5 wt% of Pt nanoparticles as a co-catalyst. Under this optimal condition, visible-light photocatalysis yielded a hydrogen evolution rate of 1.12 mmol per hour, demonstrating that the unique characteristics of graphene make it an excellent support material for semiconductor nanoparticles and also an effective electron collector and/or transporter for separating photogenerated electron–hole pairs. In the case of a photoelectrochemical cell, reduced graphene oxide can help to increase the water splitting efficiency of a photoelectrode.72 The combination of the physical and optical properties of reduced graphene oxide allows it to be used to improve the transport of electrons in a bismuth vanadate photoanode, in which photoinduced charge-separation occurs within the bismuth vanadate particles after irradiation with visible light, followed by the transfer of photo electrons to reduced graphene oxide sheets and then migration to the collecting electrodes. Bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) is an ideal visible light-driven semiconductor with a small bandgap of 2.4 eV, and exhibits sufficient intrinsic absorption in the solar spectrum as well as stability against photocorrosion. Additionally, the reduced graphene oxide nanosheets can also facilitate the dispersion of BiVO4 particles over a high surface area and improve the contact with the photoelectrode surface. The photogenerated electrons can thus be injected from BiVO4 into the collecting electrode through the presence of graphene-based materials owing to the π–π graphitic carbon network. Contact between the surface of the reduced graphene oxide nanosheets and the conductive transparent substrate allows the photogenerated electrons to shuttle from the excited semiconductor material to the external circuit. When a BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide film is irradiated, causing charge separation, the electrons can flow through the circuit, generating a photocurrent. Fig. 10b displays a SEM image of a BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide photoelectrode, and reveals that the reduced graphene oxide flakes are well-decorated with BiVO4 particles. Fig. 10c plots the voltage–current functions of the BiVO4 photoelectrode and a BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide composite photoelectrode during on–off cycles of illumination. Both BiVO4 and BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide composite photoelectrodes exhibit reproducible photocurrents, whereas the reduced graphene oxide film does not exhibit any photoresponse. The photocurrent of the BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide photoelectrode is clearly higher than that of the pure BiVO4 photoelectrode. For comparison, Fig. 10c also plots the photocurrent response of a UV-excited TiO2 (Degussa P25) photoelectrode with the same surface density and prepared under similar conditions; the photocurrent response is weaker than that of the visible light-triggered BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide. This significant improvement associated with the BiVO4-reduced graphene oxide composite photoelectrode reveals that the unique properties of graphene-based materials can facilitate the water splitting reaction.
 Fig. 10  (a) Concept of reduced graphene oxide promotes carrier transportation, (b) corresponding SEM image, and (c) I–V curves compared to those of BiVO4 (under visible light) and TiO2 (under UV light). Reproduced from ref. 72 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society). 

4. Conclusions and perspectives
In this tutorial review, we have discussed the most recent progress in harvesting solar energy using novel photoelectrode materials and the material designs for splitting water to generate hydrogen fuel. Various nanomaterials, such as nanoparticles, including nanotubes, nanowire, nanofibers and nanorods, as well as nanosheets, were reviewed with reference to their use in constructing photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical electrolysis. Various methods for effectively converting solar energy into hydrogen were also reviewed and examined. These methods include the formation of branched structures, band structure modification, dye/quantum dot sensitization, the formation of hetero-structures, plasmon assistance, graphene-based assistance and co-catalyst modification. Table 2 presents the main strategies for efficiently harvesting solar energy that were considered in this review. Strategies for forming a branched structure, modifying a band structure, and dye/quantum dot sensitization are used to harness solar light by increasing absorbance in both the UV and visible light regions, while other strategies improve the transportation of carriers by utilizing assistant materials, such as highly conducting Si nanowires, graphene derivatives, plasmonic metal and co-catalysts. The modification of the band structure of a photoelectrode (by inhomogeneous or homogeneous doping) is a powerful strategy not only for modifying the electronic structure but also for tailoring the surface structure. The proper configuration and distribution of foreign dopants in semiconductor materials can optimize their electronic structures for efficiently harvesting sunlight. Dye and quantum dots can effectively capture the visible region of the solar spectrum to compensate for the lack of solar spectrum capture in wide bandgap semiconductor materials. The hetero-structural approach commonly uses a second material with high conductivity to form a hetero-nanostructure consisting of a combined semiconductor/conducting material to improve the collection of photogenerated electrons from the excited semiconductor. Graphene-based materials can assist in the transportation of photoinduced carriers from the surface of a semiconductor to a conducting electrode, since a graphene-based material commonly has a two-dimensional structure, such as a nanosheet, which can form an interface with the surface of the semiconductor. Plasmonic materials may have a plasmon-induced electromagnetic field on their surface, leading to effective photogeneration close to the interface between the plasmon material(s) and the semiconductor. Some metals and metal oxides have been demonstrated to act as co-catalysts for the evolution of either hydrogen or oxygen. A co-catalyst may provide an energetically favorable location for charge carriers such as electrons/holes, and active sites for the evolution of gas.
Table 2 Different strategies for improving the efficiency of water splitting











However, the efficiency of the overall water splitting photoelectrochemical cell based on visible light-driven systems is still quite low, with neither photocatalysts nor photoelectrochemical cells able to meet the requirements of practical applications. Therefore, further research is necessary to improve the efficiency and practicality of the photo-water splitting system particularly the development of high-efficiency and cost-effective materials.
The following are some suggestions for future research directions along with their challenges that will improve photo-water splitting and possibly lead to breakthrough.
(1) Development of sensitization materials with multi absorption regions in visible light.
Many studies of various photoactive materials with a single bandgap have been carried out, but few materials can provide suitable efficiency in practice. The improper band edge position makes their use unviable and their wide bandgap nature limits the utilization of the solar spectrum. Consequently, sensitization with foreign materials becomes an important strategy for further improving their conversion efficiency. Organic dyes or inorganic semiconductor have drawn numerous attentions in past decades. With respect to organic dyes, it is important to note that their chemical stability and reproducibility are critical issues for their practical application. If semiconductor quantum dots are used in the future for hydrogen generation, there are concerns about the cost, reproducibility, and the toxicity of Cd. Use of environmental friendly quantum dots such as indium phosphide and similar derivatives may be an important approach to be investigated.
(2) Development of infra-red active materials to harvest a great part of the solar spectrum.
A bandgap above 1.7 eV (about 730 nm) is commonly required for driving the water splitting reaction, indicating that the larger part of solar irradiation is useless. Infra-red active materials such as up-conversion materials may be a potential solution for utilizing the infra-red region of sunlight, but the conversion efficiency from infra-red to visible light is still too low to demonstrate any reasonable performance. In summary, the limitation in utilization of the near infra-red or infra-red regions means that approaches have not been developed until now. With the development of promising alternative materials this may lead to wider coverage of the solar spectrum in the near future.
(3) Increase in the absorption coefficient of photoactive materials and the yield of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
In addition to the increased coverage of the solar spectrum, an increase in the absorption coefficient or yield of photogenerated carriers is another approach to improve the capture of sunlight. Towards this end, increasing the thickness of photoactive materials is a common method. However, an increase of thickness frequently leads to an increase in other undesired effects such as boundary defects that usually serve as recombination centers for electron–hole pairs and suppress the yield of photogenerated electron–holes. With respect to material design and fabrication, metal anodizing technology has been developed to such a degree that the dimensions and distribution of pores in a film can be artificially controlled by pre-indentation in various materials. In terms of titanium oxide-based materials, titanium foil can produce a highly ordered and high surface area film with a porous nature by using an anodizing approach. This not only increases the thickness of the photoactive material that is defect-free in nature to improve its absorption coefficient but also provides high surface area for further loading of a sensitizer such as dyes or quantum dots.
(4) Development of defect-free photoactive materials for the visible region.
It is well known that photoactive materials commonly require higher crystallinity to facilitate the transportation of charge carriers and a smaller particle size to increase the reaction area, but it is difficult to satisfy these two requirements simultaneously, because materials with smaller size usually exhibit a defect-rich nature. Regarding the particle size and crystalline effects, nanotechnology can be a potential strategy for solving these two challenges. Nanomaterials with a specific morphology commonly show highly crystalline properties that can exhibit simultaneously good carrier transportation and larger surface area, since morphologically designed nanomaterials have to be fabricated under well-controlled conditions. Therefore, faceted nanomaterials can easily produce many active sites on their surface for chemical reaction, which allows one to more easily design a material with desired properties.
(5) Improvement of the generation and separation of electrons–holes by assisting with additional materials.
Several materials such as plasmonics and graphene can facilitate the carrier transportation or sunlight harnessing while not being involved directly in the water splitting reaction. Plasmonic materials may induce additional effects such as hot electron injection and/or an electromagnetic field than can directly/indirectly improve the chemical reaction. Graphene and its derivatives such as graphene oxide that are able to absorb visible light can rapidly collect photogenerated electron–hole pairs owing to their excellent electrical nature. In summary, additional additive materials are still in the initial stages of development, but preliminary results show a significant improvement. These useful concepts provide promise for the future design of novel and efficient photoactive materials for the water splitting reaction.
Although this review focuses mainly on the water splitting system, similar concepts can be used in other solar photovoltaic devices such as solar cells, photodegradation, and photo-conversion of carbon dioxide. For carbon dioxide reduction, alternative photoactive materials with high selectivity have to be designed that are specific for the application. It is our hope that this review will spur new researchers to design and develop new potential materials for solar water splitting and other photocatalytic environmental applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of Taiwan (Contracts Nos. NSC 97-2113-M-002-012-MY3 and NSC 100-2120-M-002-008), the National Research Council of Canada and the University of British Columbia for financially supporting this research.
References
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
R. van de Krol, Y. Q. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, K. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4166–4171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Science, 1984, 223, 1141–1148 CAS .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. D. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, G. F. Moore, D. M. Kramer, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 25–35 RSC .
K. Rajeshwar and N. R. de Tacconi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1984–1998 RSC .
H. M. Chen and R. S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3513–3527 CAS .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 649–662 RSC .

          E. L. Miller, in On Solar Hydrogen & Nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2010, pp. 1–35 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Graetzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 1493–1493 CrossRef .
I. Rodriguez, F. Ramiro-Manzano, P. Atienzar, J. M. Martinez, F. Meseguer, H. Garcia and A. Corma, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3205–3209 RSC .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 191–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duehnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Minggu, W. R. W. Daud and M. B. Kassim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5233–5244 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. P. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Small, 2009, 5, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, N. de Leon Snapp and H. Park, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 80 RSC .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16179–16184 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hartmann, D.-K. Lee, B. M. Smarsly and J. Janek, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3147–3154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, W. A. Smith, T. R. Kuykendall, Y. Zhao and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1849–1856 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ahn, Y. Yan, S. Shet, K. Jones, T. Deutsch, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 163117 CrossRef .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, H. Deng and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, D. W. Flaherty, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3794–3802 CAS .
A. Iwase and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7536–7542 RSC .
V. Chakrapani, J. Thangala and M. K. Sunkara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9050–9059 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, L. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298–2303 RSC .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS .
R. Morrish, M. Rahman, J. M. D. MacElroy and C. A. Wolden, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 474–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Guo, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 856–861 CAS .
V. Cristino, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, L. Meda, G. L. Marra and C. A. Bignozzi, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7276–7284 CAS .
J. K. Kim, K. Shin, S. M. Cho, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1465–1470 CAS .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duret and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17184–17191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int Ed., 2011, 50, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, C.-C. Wu, W.-S. Chang, K.-H. Chen, T.-S. Chan, J.-F. Lee and D. P. Tsai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 742–747 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, V. Aranyos, A. Hagfeldt, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1806–1811 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Younpblood, S. H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolcott, T. R. Kuykendall, W. Chen, S. Chen and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25288–25296 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wang, X. Y. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C. C. Lin, R. S. Liu, H. Yang, W.-S. Chang, K.-H. Chen, T.-S. Chan, J.-F. Lee and D. P. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21971–21980 CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, Y. C. Chang, C. W. Tsai, R. S. Liu, S. F. Hu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5966–5969 CAS .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okamoto, I. Niki, A. Shvartser, Y. Narukawa, T. Mukai and A. Scherer, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 601–605 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luk'yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef CAS .

Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, ed. S. A. Maier, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .
C. Gomes Silva, R. Juarez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Hao Ming Chen
	Hao Ming Chen is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at National Taiwan University. He received his MS degree in 2004 and his PhD in chemistry from National Taiwan University in 2008, where he worked on the synthesis of nanocrystals for particular applications. His current research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials, metallic nanocrystals and semiconductor nanomaterials for solar energy conversion.

Chih Kai Chen
	Chih Kai Chen is currently a PhD student at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, supervised by Prof. Ru-Shi Liu. He received his BS degree in chemistry in 2009 from National Central University. He is working on the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials, quantum dots, and nanomaterials for solar energy conversion.

Ru-Shi Liu
	Ru-Shi Liu is currently a professor at the Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University. He received his Bachelor's degree in Chemistry from Shoochow University (Taiwan) in 1981. He received his Master's degree in nuclear science from the National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) in 1983. He obtained two PhD degrees in chemistry – one from National Tsing Hua University in 1990 and one from the University of Cambridge in 1992. He worked at Materials Research Laboratories at the Industrial Technology Research Institute from 1983 to 1985. He was an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry of National Taiwan University from 1995 to 1999, when he was promoted to a professorship in 1999. His research concerns the field of Materials Chemistry. He is an author or coauthor of more than 400 publications in scientific international journals. He has also been granted more than 80 patents.

Lei Zhang
	Lei Zhang is a Research Council Officer at National Research Council of Canada Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation. She received her first MSc, majoring in Materials Chemistry from Wuhan University, China, in 1993 and her second MSc in Materials/Physical Chemistry from Simon Fraser University, Canada, in 2000. Ms Zhang's main research interests include PEM fuel cell electrocatalysis, catalyst layer/electrode structure, metal-air batteries and supercapacitors. Ms Zhang has co-authored 50 refereed journal papers and holds 3 US patent applications. Ms Zhang is an adjunct Professor of Federal University of Maranhao, Brazil, and Zhengzhou University, China, respectively. She is also an active member of the Electrochemical Society and the International Society of Electrochemistry.

Jiujun Zhang
	Jiujun Zhang received his BSc and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988, and he is now a Senior Research Officer and PEM Catalysis Core Competency Leader at the National Research Council of Canada Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation (NRC-IFCI). Dr Zhang holds several adjunct professorships, including one at the University of Waterloo and one at the University of British Columbia. His research is mainly based on fuel cell catalysis development.

David P. Wilkinson
	David P. Wilkinson received his BASc degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of British Columbia (UBC) in 1978 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Ottawa in 1987 where his graduate work was done with Dr Brian Conway. He has over 20 years of industrial experience in the areas of fuel cells and advanced rechargeable lithium batteries. In 2004 Dr Wilkinson was awarded a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Clean Energy and Fuel Cells in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University of British Columbia. He is currently the Director of the Clean Energy Research Centre (CERC) at the university. He maintains a joint appointment with the University and the Canadian National Research Council Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation. Prior to his university appointment Dr Wilkinson was the Director, and then Vice President of Research and Development at Ballard Power Systems Inc., involved with the research, development and application of fuel cell technology. Dr Wilkinson is one of the leading all-time fuel cell inventors by issued US patents. Dr Wilkinson's main research interest is in electrochemical power sources and processes to create clean and sustainable energy.

 	Fig. 1  Diagram of the basic principles of water splitting for a photoelectrochemical cell with an n-type semiconductor photoanode where oxygen is evolved and a photocathode (Pt sheet) where hydrogen is evolved.	 
	(1)
	(2)

TiO2 (nanotube)	—	—	1 M KOH	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 320–400 nm, 50 W metal hydride lamp	
j = 13 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 6.8%	
21

TiO2 (nanotube)	—	—	1 M KOH	
I = 95 mW cm−2, λ = 320–400 nm, UV illumination	
j = 26 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl η = 16.25%	
28

TiO2 (nanorod)	Anatase	3.27 eV	0.5 M NaClO4, pH = 7.0	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–500 nm 1000 W Xe lamp	
j = 0.018 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.1%	
26

TiO2 (mesoporous)	Anatase	3.34 eV	0.1 M NaOH	
I = 1000 mW cm−2, λ = 350–500 nm,150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 3.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.36%	
29

TiO2 (nanowire)	Anatase/Rutile	3.00 eV	1.0 M NaOH, pH = 13.8	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–700 nm, AM 1.5 G simulated lamp	
j = 2.6 mA cm−2 at 0.216 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 1.05%	
27

TiO2 (branched)	Rutile	2.95 eV	1.0 M KOH, pH = 14	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, Xe lamp AAA solar simulated	
j = 0.85 mA cm−2 at 0.65 V vs. Pt, η = 0.49%	
48

ZnO (nanocoral)	Wurtzite	—	0.5 M Na2SO4, pH = 6.8	
I = 125 mW cm−2, λ = 350–750 nm, Tungsten-halogen lamp	
j = 0.25 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE	
31

ZnO (thin film)	Wurtzite	3.3 eV	0.5 M NaClO4, pH = 7.4	
I = 230 mW cm−2, λ = 350–800 nm, 1000W Xe lamp	
j = 0.142 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
30

ZnO (branch)	Wurtzite	3.54 eV	0.5 M NaSO4, pH = 7.0	
I = 100 mW cm−2, 350–800 nm, AM 1.5 G	
j = 0.12 mA cm−2 at 0.31 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
32

WO3 (mesoporous)	Monoclinic	2.5 eV	3 M H2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm AM 1.5 G simulated lamp	
j = 2.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
36

WO3 (nanowire)	Orthorhombic	2.9 eV	0.5 M H2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, AM 1.5 G Xe lamp	
j = 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0.82 V vs. SCE, η = 0.33%	
35

WO3 (mesoporous)	Monoclinic	2.66 eV	1 M H2SO4	
I = 370 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, 150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 9 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. SCE	
41

WO3 (mesoporous)	Monoclinic	2.58 eV	1 M H2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–700 nm, 150 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 3.7 mA cm−2 at 1.3 V vs. Pt	
42

WO3 (flaskers)	Monoclinic	2.51 eV	0.1 M Na2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, AM 1.5	
j = 1.43 mA cm−2 at 1.3 V vs. Pt	
43

BiVO4 (nanowire)	Monoclinic	—	0.5 M Na2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, AM 1.5	
j = 0.4 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Pt	
40

BiVO4 (nanostructure)	Monoclinic	2.45 eV	0.5 M Na2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, 100 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 0.91 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
33

BiVO4 (scheelite)	Monoclinic	2.5 eV	0.1 M K2SO4	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 420–700 nm, 300 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 1.2 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.0014%	
34

Fe2O3 (mesoporous)	Hematite	2 eV	1 M NaOH	
I = 130 mW cm−2, λ = 420–700 nm, AM 1.5 simulated lamp	
j = 1.07 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE	
46

Fe2O3 (nanotube)	Hematite	1.97 eV	1M KOH	
I = 87 mW cm−2, λ = 400–700 nm, 300 W solar simulator (AM 1.5)	
j = 1.41 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl, η = 0.84%	
44

Fe2O3 (thin film)	Hematite	2.06 eV	1 M NaOH, pH=13.6	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–600 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 0.55 mA cm−2 at 1.43 V vs. RHE	
38

Fe2O3 (mesoporous)	Hematite	2.15 eV	1M NaOH, pH = 13.6	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 300–600 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 0.56 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
37

Fe2O3 (porous)	Hematite	2.1 eV	1 M NaOH, pH = 13.6	
I = 100 mW cm−2, λ = 350–650 nm, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 2.34 mA cm−2 at 1.43 V vs. RHE	
45

Fe2O3 (nanorod)	Hematite	2.1 eV	1 M NaOH	
I = 87 mW cm−2, 450 W Xe lamp (AM 1.5)	
j = 0.52 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
39


 	Scheme 1  Schematic of the different approaches to the improvement of photoactivity for water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Branched nanorods and (b) the corresponding SEM image and (c) TEM image. (d) Chopped I–V curves of TiO2 branched nanorods, nanorods, and nanoparticles under a xenon lamp. Reproduced from ref. 48 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  IPCE (incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency) spectra of a TiO1.957N0.043 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment, an unmodified TiO2 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment, and a TiO1.988N0.012 photoelectrode with cobalt treatment. Reproduced from ref. 32 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society).	 
	(3)
hνα ∼ (hν-EBG)1/2	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic for the fabrication of a photoanode that is composed of ZnS solid solution nanowires, (b) X-ray diffraction patterns of ZnO, ZnO nanowires that are sensitized with ZnS QDs, and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires, (c) bandgap plots of (F(R)hν)2versus energy for ZnO and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires, and (d) IPCE spectra of ZnO, ZnO nanowires that are sensitized with ZnS QDs, and ZnO–ZnS solid solution nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 51 with copyright permission (Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram for a photoelectrochemical cell with a RuP-sensitized TiO2 photoanode that is coated with a Nafion® film that has been penetrated by complex 1 and a photocathode (Pt sheet). (b) Corresponding short-circuit current responses to on–off cycles of illumination. Reproduced from ref. 54 with copyright permission (The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the QD sensitization of ZnO nanorods, (b) photoelectrochemical performance of bare ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods that are decorated with a monolayer of CdTe QDs, (c) HRTEM image of monolayer decoration of CdTe QDs on ZnO nanorods, and (d) thick decoration of an individual ZnO nanowire with CdTe QDs. Reproduced from ref. 59 with copyright permission (Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a heterostructure with a highly conductive TiSi2 nanonet as an effective charge collector, (b) a corresponding TEM, (c) HRTEM images, and (d) the photoelectrochemical properties of a TiSi2/Fe2O3 heteronanostructures and a planar hematite film. Reproduced from ref. 60 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of bare ZnO nanorods, and (b) ZnO nanorods with modification of Co-based co-catalyst. (c) Chopped I–V curves of bare ZnO nanorods and ZnO nanorods with modification of Co-based co-catalyst photoelectrode. Reproduced from ref. 62 with copyright permission (National Academy of Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photocurrent of TiO2 with/without gold nanoparticles under irradiation (633 nm). (b) Photocurrent versus wavelength for TiO2 with/without gold nanoparticles. (c) SEM image of 5 nm gold island film on TiO2, and corresponding electric field intensity, calculated using FDTD simulation. Reproduced from ref. 68 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Concept of reduced graphene oxide promotes carrier transportation, (b) corresponding SEM image, and (c) I–V curves compared to those of BiVO4 (under visible light) and TiO2 (under UV light). Reproduced from ref. 72 with copyright permission (American Chemical Society).	 




This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
