Pushing commercialization of perovskite solar cells by improving their intrinsic stability  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00493J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00493J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3233-3255Pushing commercialization of perovskite solar cells by improving their intrinsic stability

        
          
            Yuanhang 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Liming 
            Ding
          
          
        
      *b
aSolar Energy Research Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574, Singapore. E-mail: serchy@nus.edu.sg
bCenter for Excellence in Nanoscience (CAS), Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication (CAS), National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: ding@nanoctr.cn
Received 
      16th February 2021
    , Accepted 23rd April 2021First published on 27th April 2021AbstractDespite the rapid progress in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 3.8% to 25.5% with ten years of effort, the real outdoor applications of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are still significantly limited by their poor device stability. The factors determining the stability of PSCs can be divided into extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Advanced encapsulation techniques can be applied to only exclude the effect from extrinsic environmental factors such as moisture and oxygen in ambient air. The intrinsic stability issues of PSCs are difficult to thoroughly resolve by device engineering, determining the short life span of devices. Therefore, in this review, we only focus on the intrinsic stability of PSCs, especially the stability related to the properties of the perovskite active materials. Several degradation mechanisms of perovskite materials resulting from (1) ion dissociation and migration, (2) metal–perovskite reactions, and (3) residual strain are thoroughly analyzed and the corresponding possible strategies to improve the device stability are summarized. Finally, the perspective of research directions in the perovskite photovoltaic field for future large-scale deployment has been discussed. This review will draw tremendous attention from worldwide researchers to the intrinsic stability study of perovskites and provide useful guidance to further improve the operational stability of PSCs.
Yuanhang Cheng
Yuanhang Cheng received his PhD degree from the Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, in October 2017. He is currently working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore (SERIS), National University of Singapore. His research focuses on perovskite solar cells.
Liming Ding
Liming Ding got his PhD from University of Science and Technology of China (was a joint student at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS). He started his research on OSCs and PLEDs in the Olle Inganäs lab in 1998. Later on, he worked at the National Center for Polymer Research, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and Argonne National Lab (USA). He joined Konarka as a Senior Scientist in 2008. In 2010, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology as a full professor. His research focuses on functional materials and devices. He is an RSC Fellow, the nominator for the Xplorer Prize, and an Associate Editor for Science Bulletin and Journal of Semiconductors.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered to be an emerging superstar in the photovoltaic (PV) field because of their unprecedented progress in the power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, 95% of the global PV market is still accounted for by Si technology. The major obstacle for commercializing PSCs is their poor operational stability, which is related to the intrinsic degradation of perovskites induced by ion migration, metal–perovskite reactions, and residual strain in perovskite lattices. After investigating the degradation mechanisms induced by the above-mentioned factors, we expect to develop high-performance transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) to push PSC technology moving forward. A robust TCO not only can eliminate the use of metal electrodes, solving the electrode corrosion issues, but also is suitable for bifacial or tandem devices, improving solar energy harvesting. For future renewable energy deployment, a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system that combines PSCs with flow batteries is proposed. The batteries will buffer the variability of PSCs to the grid, while the electrolyte cools down the PSCs for high efficiency and stability. Such a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system will push the commercialization of perovskite PV technology.

1. Introduction
Organometal halide perovskites (such as CH3NH3PbI3) have emerged as one of the leading photovoltaic (PV) materials for achieving efficient, cheap, and solution-processed solar cells.1 Thanks to their appealing electro-optical properties such as a superior light absorption coefficient,2 long carrier diffusion length and high carrier mobility,3,4 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown remarkable progress in recent years with rapid increases in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) from 3.8% in 2009 to 25.5% in 2020, surpassing that of conventional polycrystalline silicon (Si) solar cells.5 However, currently, the global PV market is still dominated by Si PV technology. As shown in Fig. 1a, the golden triangle including cost, device efficiency and device lifetime (stability) should be considered to evaluate the technical feasibility of PV technologies for commercialization.6Fig. 1b compares the device efficiencies of different PV technologies as a function of device area. Although the world-record efficiency of PSCs is comparable to crystalline Si solar cells and much higher than thin-film solar cells such as copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) and cadmium telluride (CdTe), the device area of the champion PSCs is less than 0.1 cm2 while the Si counterpart has a much larger device area over 100 cm2. Furthermore, for PV modules, the record module efficiency for Si (>10000 cm2), CIGS (>10000 cm2), and CdTe (>10000 cm2) is 24.4%, 18.6%, and 19.0%, respectively. The record efficiency of a perovskite module is 17.9% with a much smaller active area of ∼1000 cm2.7 Among these, the perovskite PV technology shows the largest cell-to-module efficiency gap, which must be reconciled before it is able to enter the PV market. To compare the cost of perovskite PV with current commercial PV technologies, the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) of perovskite PV as a function of the lifetime has been calculated using the “bottom-up” method assuming a module efficiency of 19% and major materials usage ratio of 80%. The “red star” in Fig. 1c shows a rough estimation of the current situation of perovskite PV with a relatively high LCOE around 15 US cents kW−1 h−1 and a lifetime of about 5 years, which still lags far behind the competitor Si, CIGS and CdTe PV technologies with a lifetime of over 25 years.6 As indicated by the blue curve in Fig. 1c, perovskite PV exhibits great potential to be a low-cost technology compared to its counterparts once its lifetime increases to over 20 years. Furthermore, most recently, an overview of current PV technologies predicted that the PV market share of the emerging PV technologies will sharply reach 44.1% in 2030 from a base of 1% in 2014 as shown in Fig. 1d.8 As the most promising PV technology within the emerging PVs, PSCs have already shown their strong strength in device efficiency to compete with Si PV. However, this PV market share prediction is based on the assumption that the emerging PV panels have a lifetime of 25 years. Therefore, to realize such a prediction, research efforts in the perovskite PV field have to gradually move from pushing the device efficiency to enhancing the device lifetime.
 Fig. 1  (a) Golden triangle of solar cell performance including cost, efficiency, and lifetime. Reprinted with permission.6 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Certified efficiencies of Si, CIGS, CdTe and perovskite PV technologies as a function of device area. Reprinted with permission.7 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) LCOE of perovskite and competitor Si, CdTe and CIGS PV technologies as a function of lifetime. The “red star” shows a rough estimation of the current situation. Reprinted with permission.6 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Global PV market share of different PV technologies (2014–2030). Reprinted with permission.8 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. 
In the first report of PSCs, Miyasaka et al. employed CH3NH3PbI3 as a light absorber in liquid-electrolyte-based dye-sensitized solar cells. Although the device exhibited a PCE of 3.8%, the device degraded quickly due to the corrosion of ionic perovskite materials in the liquid electrolyte.9 To solve such stability concerns, Park et al.10 and Snaith et al.11 simultaneously introduced a solid-state-structured PSC in 2012 by using 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) as a solid hole transport layer (HTL) to substitute the liquid electrolyte and achieved a stable PSC with a PCE of 9.7% and 10.9%, respectively. After that, tremendous efforts from the PV community have been made to promote both the device efficiency and stability. The initial device stability studies of PSCs were focused on the effects from charge transport layers (CTLs) and environmental factors such as moisture and oxygen. For example, the use of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS) as an HTL was found to be the cause of the low device stability of PSCs due to the strong hygroscopic nature and acid chemistry of PEDOT:PSS.12 Therefore, various hydrophobic and chemically robust semiconducting materials such as poly [N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine] (poly-TPD),13,14 poly(triarylamine) (PTAA),15,16 NiOx,17,18 CuSCN,19etc. have been used as CTLs for PSCs and the corresponding device stability has been improved to a certain extent.20 Afterwards, research directions have moved to investigate the extrinsic and intrinsic stability of PSCs. Generally, the extrinsic stability of PSCs is mainly related to external environmental factors such as moisture and oxygen, while the intrinsic stability of PSCs is mainly determined by the properties of perovskite active materials under stresses of operational conditions. As for environmental effects, it has been demonstrated that perovskite crystalline materials such as MAPbI3 tend to decompose to PbI2 with exposure to moisture due to the bonding interactions between MA+ and H2O molecules, which breaks down the bonding between MA+ and PbI networks.21,22 Small amounts of foreign molecules with hydrophobic groups have been introduced into perovskite layers to prevent the ingress of moisture and improve the device stability.23 Furthermore, it has been evidenced that the oxygen molecules diffused into MAPbI3 crystals can trap the photogenerated electrons to form active superoxide O2− which induces deprotonation of MA+ and decomposition of MAPbI3.24 Fortunately, the detrimental effect from moisture and oxygen on the stability of PSCs can be easily excluded by various advanced encapsulation technologies.25 For example, Shi et al. have recently shown that PSCs with glass-to-glass encapsulation can pass International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61215:2016 Damp Heat and Humidity Freeze tests retaining 95% of their initial PCE.26 In addition, with tremendous efforts made by global research scientists, other factors have been successively identified to affect the device stability of PSCs including the device architecture, electrode materials, encapsulation materials, and intrinsic properties of the perovskite active materials. Previously, several reviews have summarized the progress in stability studies of PSCs regarding perovskite material development, defects passivation, interface engineering and device encapsulation.27–29 However, to the best of our knowledge, the intrinsic properties of perovskites, especially their behavior under device operational conditions such as light illumination, heat stress, and electric fields, are regarded as the most important factors determining the device stability of PSCs.
To gain deep insight on the intrinsic stability of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, fundamental understanding of the lattice structure and chemical bonding between perovskite components is highly required. Fig. 2a presents the ABX3 perovskite lattice structure, where the A-site can be occupied by a monovalent organic or inorganic cation such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), and Cs+, the B-site can be occupied by a divalent metal ion such as Pb2+ and Sn2+, and the X-site can be occupied by halide anions such as I−, Br−, and Cl−.30 Since the organic and inorganic components in the perovskite lattice structure are bonded via weak ionic bonds and van der Waals interactions, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are not chemically robust and tend to decompose under various stimuli.31–33Fig. 2b summarizes the key degradation pathways of PSCs under both environmental and operational conditions. Since the detrimental effect from moisture and oxygen on the device stability of PSCs can be eliminated by advanced encapsulation technology, in this review, we will only focus on the intrinsic stability of PSCs related to the chemical stability of perovskite materials under operational conditions. For example, in a real outdoor application, PSCs are used under a strong electric field and light illumination with a high operational temperature of 55–65 °C. Such harsh conditions might break the weak ionic bonding between organic and inorganic ions in the perovskite, and then the dissociated charged ions in perovskites tend to undergo migration under the electric field due to their low ionic migration activation energy. It should be noted that in this review the term “ion migration” includes the migration of dissociated ions and charged defects in perovskite films. In addition, outdoor thermal cycling will magnify the effect of residual strain in the perovskite lattice on the device stability. Since the perovskite film has a higher thermal expansion coefficient than the other layers, the tensile and compressive stress transition in the perovskite film under thermal cycling during device operation will trigger fatigue and gradual degradation of the device photovoltaic performance. Therefore, in this review, we will discuss the degradation mechanisms and corresponding effective approaches to improve the stability of PSCs including (1) ion dissociation and migration induced perovskite degradation; (2) metal–perovskite reaction induced perovskite degradation; and (3) residual strain induced perovskite degradation. Finally, we provide our perspective on the development of PSCs. It is believed that developing high-performance transparent conductive oxides (TCO) electrodes will have a big impact on the future perovskite PV field, since robust TCOs will not only promote the operational stability of PSCs but also can be used in bifacial and tandem devices for energy efficiency improvement. For future global renewable energy deployment, we call on experts in the fields of both PV and energy storage to cooperate in the development of a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system combining solar panels and flow batteries, which has great potential to overcome the challenge of solar intermittency and simultaneously improve the operational stability of solar cells.
 Fig. 2  (a) Unit cell of the ABX3 perovskite lattice structure. (b) Illustration of the extrinsic and intrinsic stability of PSCs under environmental and operational conditions. 
2. Fundamental challenges from ion migration
2.1 Discovery of ion migration in perovskites
The ion migration phenomenon (Fig. 3a) in organometal halide perovskites was first observed by Mizusaki et al. in 1983 and the authors proposed the migration of halide-ion vacancies in the perovskite lattice to be the origin of ionic conduction of halide perovskites.34,35 In 2014, this research topic started to attract strong interest after Snaith et al. speculated ion migration in perovskites under an electric field to be one possible cause of photocurrent hysteresis in PSCs as shown in Fig. 3b.36 The hysteresis is also considered as a hindrance for developing stable PSCs since it strongly affects the reliability of the device photovoltaic performance under practical conditions.37 McGehee et al. further observed that the hysteresis in PSCs was strongly dependent on the current–voltage (IV) measurement conditions such as pre-bias, and the scan rate and direction. As shown in Fig. 3c, the photovoltaic performance of PSCs was improved when the device was used under 1.2 V forward bias with continuous light illumination, while light soaking under reverse bias at −1.2 V exhibited a detrimental effect on the device performance. The strong influence of the pre-bias conditions on IV measurements was ascribed to the photo-induced ion migration in perovskite driven by the applied electric field. This work pointed out that any ion migration in perovskites will not only affect the reliability of the IV measurements, but also be detrimental for the long-term stability of PSCs.38 The first direct evidence of ion migration in perovskites was reported by Huang et al. in 2014. The device with a structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite MAPbI3/Au exhibited a totally flipped photocurrent direction under opposite IV scanning. Such a switchable photovoltaic effect was ascribed to the opposite ion migration direction in the perovskite under positive poling and negative poling. Based on their proposed scenario, the ion migration in the perovskite would induce n- or p-doping of the perovskite at the perovskite/Au interface under positive and negative electric fields, respectively. Then Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was conducted to determine the change of the perovskite work function at the perovskite/Au interface after positive and negative poling, confirming the ion migration in perovskites.39 These results have boosted the research interest in ion migration in perovskites. Since then, ion migration has been widely used to explain various anomalous behavior of organometallic halide perovskites such as a giant dielectric constant,40 poor field-effect transistor behavior at room temperature,41 light-enhanced ionic conductance,42,43 and light-induced halide phase segregation.44,45
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of ion migration in the perovskite lattice. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Photocurrent hysteresis phenomenon observed in PSCs with opposite scanning direction. Reprinted with permission.36 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) The effect of pre-bias under light soaking on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Quantification of ion migration in perovskites
Once ion migration occurs in perovskite materials, the loss of perovskite ions would induce collapse of the perovskite lattice, and composition and morphology changes of perovskite films. Such a dynamic ion migration process will lead to decomposition of perovskite materials and thus degradation of PSCs. Therefore, quantification of the mobile species in perovskites is crucial for designing device engineering for highly stable PSCs.
As shown in Fig. 4a, He et al.46 proposed a hole-only device with the perovskite film being sandwiched between ITO/PEDOT:PSS and MoO3/Al electrodes. In the virgin state, the hole-only device exhibits a flat band diagram under equilibrium (dark and short circuit) conditions due to the similar work functions of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS (5.0 eV) and MoO3/Al electrodes (5.3 eV). The band bending would be changed if a voltage bias is applied to the hole-only device. For example, the authors defined ITO/PEDOT:PSS as ground and, after applying a +2 V bias on the device for 10 s, positively charged ions would be accumulated near the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode while negatively charged ions would be accumulated near the MoO3/Al electrode, forming a diode with ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the cathode and MoO3/Al as the anode. Similarly, when a −2 V bias was applied to the device, the resulting diode will switch its polarity with ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the anode and MoO3/Al as the cathode (Fig. 4b). In this way, on removing the applied voltage, the accumulated ions at interfaces would be released and contribute to the relaxation current as shown in Fig. 4c. Integration of the relaxation current provides the charge density of mobile ions (D) accumulated at the interfaces. As shown in Fig. 4d, the calculated charge density reached its peak value of D = 284 mC cm−2 at a voltage of 3.6 V. Then the mobile ion density (N) can be estimated as N = D/qL = 3.7 × 1019 cm−3, where q is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the perovskite film.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure of a polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic device with hole-injection only electrodes. (b) Schematic energy band diagrams of the polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic device under equilibrium (dark and short circuit) conditions. (c) Relaxation of the interface charge after pre-bias poling, and (d) interface charge density measured under various pre-bias conditions. (a)–(d) Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The device structure of PSCs fabricated using different MAI loading times, and (f) transient ionic current measurements to determine the mobile ion concentration in PSCs. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To investigate the impact of mobile ions on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, Tsang et al.47 employed transient ionic current measurements to extract the mobile ion concentration. They fabricated PSCs with a p–i–n structure (Fig. 4e) using a two-step spin coating method with different MAI loading times on the PbI2 layer. Fig. 4f illustrates the principle of the transient ionic current measurement based on ion-drift under the device built-in potential (Vbi). (i) Firstly, the PSC was set at short-circuit under dark conditions, under which the mobile ions in the device would be accumulated at the interfaces driven by Vbi; (ii) secondly, an external voltage bias was applied to the PSC to neutralize Vbi so that the accumulated ions would diffuse to the opposite side; and, (iii) thirdly, Vbi would drive the mobile ions to device interfaces and generate a transient current once the external voltage bias was removed. Since the measured transient current was contributed by the movement of mobile ions, the density of mobile ions can be extracted by integration of the ionic current. It is found that the mobile ion concentration in PSCs ranges from 1016 to 1017 cm−3, which is strongly dependent on the device fabrication conditions. Furthermore, their results also indicated that the mobile ions in PSCs not only hinder the transport of charge carriers, but also trigger the decomposition of the perovskite to PbI2 due to the loss of organic cations.
In addition, Ehrler et al. introduced a transient capacitance measurement method based on the same ion-drift concept under Vbi. The measured concentration of mobile ions in the MAPbI3 perovskite falls in the range of 1015–1016 cm−3.48 Most recently, McGehee et al. firstly employed a simulated band diagram of PSCs to reproduce the device electric field feature. Then they combined the results with current transient measurements to obtain the distribution and concentration of mobile ions within the perovskite layer. To verify the validity of their method, PSCs based on six different perovskite compositions have been measured and all the devices have mobile ion concentrations in the range of 7 × 1016 cm−3 to 5 × 1017 cm−3.49 There are several other studies reporting mobile ion (or ionic defect) concentrations in PSCs of around 1015–1018 cm−3 based on both experimental and computational techniques.50–54 Although it has been demonstrated that perovskites have high defect tolerance and the device efficiency can reach >20% even with a mobile ion concentration of 1017 cm−3, a lack of controlling and reducing the concentration of mobile ions within the perovskite layer would further introduce unwanted ionic defects and trigger fast degradation of PSCs.55
2.3 Identification of mobile ions and their effect on the device stability
After confirming the ion migration phenomenon in PSCs, the next step is to identify the migrating species and how they affect the stability of PSCs. Since the organic MA groups occupy the A sites of the perovskite lattice structure and bond with Pb–I inorganic cages via relatively weak and nondirectional ionic bonding, it is understandable that the MA groups tend to move within the perovskite layer under the driving force induced by an external electric field. Based on this hypothesis, Huang et al.56 firstly employed photothermal induced resonance (PTIR) microscopy to map the distribution of ions in perovskite films. The PTIR measurements have demonstrated the movement of MA+ under an external electric field. They found a depletion of MA+ ions from the anode to the center region and an accumulation of MA+ around the cathode region within 100–200 s after applying an electric field of 1.6 V μm−1, indicating a fast response of MA+ ion migration under an electric field. However, the possibility of other mobile ions cannot be excluded by such PTIR due to its limited detectivity. To further confirm the migration of MA+, the authors applied an in situ KPFM setup to monitor the change of the perovskite surface potential induced by applying a voltage bias on a lateral structure device as shown in Fig. 5a. It is shown that the MA+ ions drift to the cathode side, while the MA-related vacancies move to the anode side. The redistribution of MA+ and vacancies changes the neutral perovskite film to a p–i–n structured junction as revealed by KPFM measurements.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the KPFM measurements of lateral structure devices, KPFM potential images and corresponding energy diagram of the MAPbI3 thin films before and after electrical poling, respectively. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cross-sectional illustrations of lateral MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells with PbI2 threads forming under electrical stress, and mechanism of the reversible conversion between MAPbI3 and PbI2 under an electric field. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Δs − EQE spectra and Gaussian fitting results of Ag- and ITO-based PSCs upon light soaking, and (d) schematic illustration of the effect of ion dissociation and ion migration on the degradation process in Ag- and ITO-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.61 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. 
On the other hand, some theoretical calculations indicate that the migration of I− ions in perovskite films is also reasonable since it has comparable activation energy to the migration of MA+ ions.53,57 To experimentally verify the movement of I− ions, Huang et al.58 combined energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) measurements on a lateral device poled by an external electric field of 3 V μm−1 for 1 min as shown in Fig. 5b. The EDX results indicated the movement of I− ions in perovskite films and the XRD results showed that MAPbI3 would decompose to PbI2 due to the loss of MA+ and I− ions at 330 K. The decomposition of MAPbI3 to PbI2 due to ion migration is much slower at room temperature. Interestingly, it is found that the conversion between the MAPbI3 and the PbI2 phase under a small electric field is fully reversible at 330 K. One possible reason for the recovery of the perovskite is the redistribution of the mobile ions within the film after removing the electric field. It is believed that the mobile ions will not return to their original positions in the lattice. Compare to the original perovskite structure, the redistributed one should have more residual stresses within the lattice and thus poorer stability. However, it should be noted that, if the loss of I− ions through I2 vapor formation occurs, MAPbI3 will decompose to PbI2 permanently. Considering real outdoor operational conditions such as a high electric field and high temperature, the impact of ion migration on the device stability is one of the most important issues and deserves tremendous research efforts.
Once the ions are dissociated from the perovskite lattice and driven to move under external stimuli, there will be various defect states formed in perovskite films. The defect states, especially in-gap states with energy levels near the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB), strongly impact the electronic properties and long-term stability of perovskites.59,60 To have a fundamental understanding of the effect of mobile ions and defect states, Cheng et al. recently developed highly-sensitive sub-bandgap external quantum efficiency (s-EQE) spectroscopy to monitor the ion dissociation and migration process in MAPbI3-based PSCs during degradation.61 The s-EQE spectroscopy system has been optimized with a sensitivity of up to 10−7%, which is able to probe sub-picoampere photocurrents generated by the photoexcitation of defect states in PSCs. To exclude the notorious effect from ambient air and the metal electrode on the device stability, the authors fabricated PSCs using chemically robust room-temperature processed ITO as the top electrode with encapsulation. As shown in Fig. 5c, the s-EQE results were firstly fitted by a Gaussian model to describe the defect states in PSCs after degradation.62–64 The results indicated that the defect states are spatially distributed within the perovskite bandgap with different energy levels. The ITO-based device only generated shallow defect states with average transition energies of 1.40 eV and 1.22 eV, while the Ag-based device has four defect states with transition energies of 1.40 eV, 1.22 eV, 1.08 eV, and 0.95 eV. Compared to the energy levels of different defect states reported in several theoretical calculation studies,65–67 the defect states observed both in the Ag- and ITO-based devices at 1.40 eV and 1.22 eV can be assigned to vacancies and interstitial defects with low formation energy. The defect states only observed in the Ag-based device at 1.08 eV and 0.95 eV can be assigned to interstitial defects and antisites with high formation energy. Finally, the authors proposed a degradation mechanism for both Ag- and ITO-based PSCs as shown in Fig. 5d. The perovskite undergoes the same ion dissociation and migration processes in an operational PSC regardless of the device structure. Then, if the electrode is reactive, it would consume the mobile ions and provide a driving force to trigger further ion dissociation and migration processes and finally induce permanent degradation of PSCs. On the other hand, the ITO-based device accumulated the mobile ions at device interfaces without consumption due to its robust property and suppressed further ion migration. In addition, once the ITO-device was stored in dark conditions, the dissociated ions have the possibility to restore the corresponding vacancies and self-heal the device performance. This work reveals the intrinsic stability of perovskite materials and provides a clear research direction that stabilizing the ion coordination in the perovskite lattice would be the ultimate strategy to achieve long-term stable PSCs.
2.4 Strategies to manage ion migration for stability improvement
Based on the above overview about the impact of mobile ions in perovskites on the device stability of PSCs, it is known that the ion dissociation and ion migration in perovskite films under external stimuli stem from the weak chemical bonding between the components, and mobile ion consumption leads to permanent degradation of PSCs. Therefore, there are three main strategies to mitigate the detrimental effect of mobile ions including (i) enhancing the chemical bonding; (ii) immobilizing the mobile ions; and (iii) suppressing the mobile ion consumption.
Solution-processed engineering has been applied to enhance the chemical bonds at the perovskite surface by forming a Pb-rich layer.68 Han et al. firstly spin-coated Pb(SCN)2 solution on the surface of the FAMAPbI3 perovskite, and then further deposited a chlorinated graphene oxide (Cl-GO) layer on the top. Strong Pb–Cl and Pb–O bonds are formed between the Pb(SCN)2 and Cl-GO layers to impede the loss of the underneath perovskite components. Such a method results in a stable PSC maintaining 90% of its initial efficiency of 21% after maximum power point (MPP) tracking under continuous one-sun illumination at 60 °C for 1000 hours. Similarly, Huang et al. proposed an I-rich layer to enhance perovskite surface chemical bonds by using cadmium iodide (CdI2) treatment. As shown in Fig. 6a, CdI2 can not only fill in the I vacancies at the perovskite surface, but also immobilize the I− ions due to the stronger Cd–I ionic bonds than Pb–I bonds. Therefore, the authors demonstrated that the CdI2 treated PSCs exhibit 21.9% device efficiency and retain 92% efficiency under continuous one-sun illumination for 1000 h.69
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a blade-coated perovskite film with CdI2 surface treatment. Reprinted with permission.69 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of di-hydrogen bond formation between super-halogen BH4− groups and MA+ ions. Reprinted with permission.71 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration to show a mechanism diagram of cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 by reacting with the added Eu3+–Eu2+ redox pair. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 
Another possible strategy to enhance the intrinsic stability of perovskite semiconductors is immobilizing both the dissociated ions and point defects (such as I− vacancies, and MA+/FA+ vacancies) at the right position of the perovskite lattice. Zhou et al. found that adding a small amount of NaF alkali halide into perovskite films can significantly improve the device operational stability under MPP tracking with 85 °C thermal stress under one-sun illumination. In addition, the NaF treated PSCs exhibit a 6000 hours shelf lifetime in ambient air. Various characterizations and density functional theory calculations revealed that added F− ions can strongly bond with organic cations by forming hydrogen bonds (N–H⋯F), and bond with Pb2+ by forming Pb–F ionic bonds. Both the hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds prevent the migration of the ions within perovskite films under external stimuli, improving the long-term device stability under operation conditions.70 Recently, Pan et al. reported that super-halogen BH4− groups are an effective substitution for I− ions in the perovskite lattice due to their similar ionic radius.71 Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 6b, the added BH4− groups can form strong di-hydrogen bonds with MA+ organic anions to stabilize the perovskite lattice structure and thus enhance the intrinsic stability of PSCs. Beside small molecule additives, polymers have been also employed to mix with perovskite films and suppress ion migration within perovskite grains. It has been demonstrated that polymer additives are prone to accumulate at perovskite grain boundaries due to phase separation, setting up a barrier for ion migration and thus improving the device life span.72,73
Although chemical engineering has been employed to suppress ion migration in perovskite films and thus improve the perovskite device stability as discussed above, the chemically reactive nature of I− and Pb2+ under external stresses tends to initiate the decomposition of perovskite films. For example, I− ions are easily oxidized to I0 and Pb2+ ions are easily reduced to Pb0. To solve such an issue, Yan et al. employed an elegant strategy to eliminate the formation of I0 and Pb0 in perovskite films by adding the Eu3+–Eu2+ ion redox pair.74 As shown in Fig. 6c, the added Eu3+ ion in the perovskite layer can selectively oxidize Pb0 to Pb2+, and it is reduced to Eu2+. Simultaneously, the Eu2+ ion can reduce I0 to I−, and itself is oxidized back to Eu3+. With such a method, the Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pair works as a “redox shuttle” to oxidize Pb0 and reduce I0 independently, preventing the consumption of the perovskite component. The corresponding PSCs exhibit excellent device stability under one-sun illumination and thermal stress. As redox targeting reactions reported in the energy storage field, only additives with a suitable redox potential can be used to selectively oxidize Pb0 and reduce I0 defects in perovskite films simultaneously.75,76 Most recently, Han et al. have demonstrated that added 5-ammoniumvaleric acid (5-AVA) organic molecules at perovskite grain boundaries have functions of localizing perovskite crystals in a confined small space and limiting long-distance ion migration in perovskite films.77 Therefore, the 5-AVA additive can successfully inhibit MAI loss and thus recover the perovskite crystals. The authors have shown that the resultant devices exhibit high stability for more than 9000 hours under MPP tracking at 55 °C ± 5 °C without obvious decay. The above studies provide a clear direction that suppressing ion migration and inhibiting ion consumption in perovskite films during device operation are one of the promising strategies to improve the long-term stability of PSCs.
3. Degradation caused by metal–perovskite reactions
Under light illumination, perovskite films firstly absorb photons to generate electron and hole charge carriers, which will be selectively separated and collected by the cathode and anode, respectively. To obtain efficient charge carrier collection, an ohmic contact between the semiconductor and metal electrode is preferred to reduce the interfacial energy barriers for charge transfer at the contact. Therefore, p–i–n structured PSCs commonly employ a metal electrode with a low work function such as Al and Ag, while n–i–p structured PSCs prefer a metal electrode with a high work function such as Au.78,79 Despite the high conductivity of the metal electrodes, the fast diffusion of metal particles into the perovskite layer and their reaction with perovskite components have been found to strongly affect the long-term device stability of PSCs. Such metal–perovskite reaction induced perovskite degradation is considered to be the intrinsic stability issue of PSCs because it cannot be eliminated by encapsulation technology.80,81 To block the perovskite degradation caused by the metal contact, tremendous efforts have been made to understand the underlying mechanisms and seek potential effective strategies.
3.1 Mechanisms of metal–perovskite reactions
It is well known that the corrosion of metal electrodes is one of the degradation pathways in the organic solar cell field.82 Therefore, it is straightforward to investigate the effect of metal electrodes on the device stability of PSCs. In 2013, Snaith et al. reported that the Ag electrode can be corroded due to the formation of AgI when it contacts perovskite materials.83 However, there is no direct evidence to confirm such an Ag–perovskite reaction in their work. In the following years, different research groups have observed similar electrode corrosion due to metal–perovskite reactions.
As discussed in the above content, it is difficult to totally block the ion migration in the perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. 7a, Ma et al.84 fabricated PSCs with Al electrodes in a p–i–n device structure. The authors have found that both the CH3NH3+ and I− ions can migrate to the device interfaces and pass through the charge transport layers. With various characterizations, including secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), they confirmed the redox reactions between Al and perovskite materials following the equation 6CH3NH3PbI3 + 2Al → 6PbI2 + 2AlI3 + 6CH3NH3↑ + 3H2↑.
 Fig. 7  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a p–i–n structured PSC with an Al electrode and the corresponding device degradation mechanism induced by the Al–perovskite reactions. Reprinted with permission.84 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Photograph and XRD patterns to show the degradation of Ag-contact PSCs due to the Ag–perovskite reactions. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Proposed Ag–perovskite reaction pathways involving ion migration, Ag diffusion and AgI formation. (d) TOF-SIMS profiles to show the elemental distribution across the devices in both MAPbI3- and FAPbI3-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.87 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD patterns to show the reactions between Au and MAPbI3 under UV-illumination. Reprinted with permission.91 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, Cheng et al. observed that the Ag electrode become discolored and the perovskite turned yellowish due to decomposition as shown in Fig. 7b.85 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results of various samples are strong evidence to confirm the formation of AgI. It is proposed that, in the first step, the MAPbI3 perovskite is prone to react with moisture in the surrounding atmosphere and formed hydroiodic acid (HI). In the second step, the reaction between HI and the Ag electrode acts as a driving force to accelerate the first reaction, causing continuous decomposition of the perovskite layer. In addition, Qi et al. employed the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique to detect the change of the chemical composition of perovskite samples with different structures and under various conditions. It is confirmed that iodine cannot react with the Ag electrode directly. The observed formation of AgI in PSCs is facilitated by the migration of MAI to Ag electrodes. Fig. 7c clearly shows the Ag–perovskite reactions, where (1) the moisture in ambient air enters into the perovskite layer through the pinholes in the spiro-MeOTAD layer; (2) the perovskite decomposes to MAI, PbI2 and HI with the presence of moisture; (3) the MAI and HI iodine-containing compounds migrate to the electrodes through the pinholes in the spiro-MeOTAD layer; (4) surface diffusion of iodine-containing compounds occurs; and (5) the formation of AgI compounds occurs. In addition to the above-mentioned mechanism, the electrochemical redox reactions between Ag electrodes and hole transporting materials such as highly conductive PEDOT:PSS (PH1000) have been found to be a trigger for electrode corrosion.86
To further understand the metal–perovskite reactions, Yang et al. employed a highly-sensitive time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) technique to study the effect of the organic cations (MA+ and FA+) of perovskite films on the PSC device degradation. As shown in Fig. 7d, not only can the I− ions from the perovskite layer diffuse to the electrode, but also the Ag ions from the electrode are reactive to diffuse into the perovskite layer. In addition, the authors found that the PSC based on the FAPbI3 composition is more stable than the MAPbI3 based device and they provided several possible reasons. (1) First, it is due to the different size of MA+ and FA+ organic cations. Since the organic cations will occupy the central hollow site of the cage structure of [PbI6]4−, a relative larger organic cation such as FA+ will stabilize the lattice structure and thus hinder the migration of I− species. (2) Furthermore, the molecular dipole moment of FA+ (0.21 D) is lower than that of MA+ (2.29 D), so the energy barrier for rotating FA+ is much higher than that of MA+. (3) Last, theoretical calculation results indicate that the activation energy for I− ion migration in MAPbI3 (0.32 eV) is much smaller than that in FAPbI3 (0.55 eV).87
The noble metal Au is one of the candidates to replace Al or Ag as an electrode for PSCs. Although several studies have demonstrated that PSCs using Au as an electrode exhibit a much longer life span compared to devices using Ag electrodes, Au is also not a totally robust electrode material for PSCs. It has been demonstrated that Au atoms/ions can also diffuse through organic hole transport layers into the perovskite layer and react with the perovskite.88,89 In addition, such Au–perovskite reactions can be promoted by continuous light illumination and high thermal stress.90 For example, Tarasov et al. reported a systematical study regarding the degradation mechanism of the Au electrode due to its reaction with iodine-based perovskites.91 As shown in Fig. 7e, the authors employed XRD to characterize the chemical reactions between Au and the perovskite under different conditions. They found that intensive ultraviolet (UV) irradiance induced the formation of reactive polyiodide melts with the formula of MAI-nI2 by the release of volatile I2 and MAI components of perovskites. Then the Au electrodes tend to be oxidized by the reactive MAI-nI2 even at room temperature, forming a new (MA)2Au2I6 phase at the perovskite/Au interface. In another study, Rand et al.92 identified the formation of Pb0 species at MAPbI3/Au interfaces but not for the PbI2/Au interface, suggesting the involvement of the organic methylammonium/methylamine molecules in the Au–perovskite reactions. The above literature suggested that both MA and I species are possible triggers for the degradation of Au electrodes, and thus other more stable and low-cost conductive materials are required as electrodes for future large-scale deployment of perovskite photovoltaic technology.
3.2 Preventing metal-induced degradation
In order to mitigate the degradation of PSCs induced by the notorious metal–perovskite reactions, various strategies have been employed in the field, including (1) inserting blocking layers between the metal contact and perovskite layers; (2) finding more robust metal materials to replace Al, Ag and Au; and (3) developing non-metal conductive materials as electrodes for PSCs.
To prevent the direct contact of the metal electrode and perovskites, it is straightforward to propose inserting other layers between them without affecting the device photovoltaic performance. Firstly, the inserted layer should be robust to both the metal and perovskite. Secondly, it should be able to effectively block perovskite ion migration or metal atom/ion diffusion. Thirdly, it requires the thin layer to be a charge transport layer or to be thin enough for tunneling charge carriers. Various polymers, small molecules, and inorganic materials have been proposed as a protective layer between the perovskite and metal electrode to improve the device stability.93–98 For example, Park et al. inserted a poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) polymer interlayer between spiro-OMeTAD and the Ag electrode. The hydrophobic P3HT not only prevents the Ag–perovskite reaction, but also reduces the ingression of moisture into the perovskite layer, improving the lifetime of the PSCs.99
Grätzel et al. have demonstrated that copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) is a promising candidate to replace organic spiro-OMeTAD as a hole transport layer for PSCs. Fig. 8a shows the device structure of PSCs with a CuSCN/Au contact. It is shown that CuSCN has efficient hole extraction and collection properties, yielding over 20% PCE of the device. However, such efficient PSCs exhibited poor stability due to the reaction between Au and thiocyanate anions under an external electric field. By inserting a thin reduced graphene oxide (rGO) spacer layer between CuSCN and Au, the corresponding device exhibits excellent operational stability under full-sun illumination at 60 °C. As shown in Fig. 8a, the device retained over 95% of its initial PCE after MPP tracking for 1000 hours.19
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC displaying the device structure with a CuSCN hole transport layer, and the operational stability of unencapsulated CuSCN-based PSCs with and without an rGO interlayer. Reprinted with permission.19 Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Calculated diffusion barriers (in eV) of various metal impurities as interstitial defects in the MAPbI3 perovskite lattice structure. (c) Energy band diagram of PSCs with various metals as electrodes. Reprinted with permission.101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) Device structure of PSCs with Cu as an electrode and the lifetime of Cu metals in contact with the MAPbI3 perovskite layer predicted based on the results at laboratory time scales. Reprinted with permission.103 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration showing the device structure and fabrication process of carbon-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (f) Comparison of the device lifetime of PSCs with Ag and room-temperature sputtered ITO as electrodes. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2020 Science China Press. 
Another approach to mitigate electrode-induced device degradation is finding an alternative robust metal material for PSCs. In addition to Al, Ag and Au, many other metal materials have been used as electrodes for PSCs. To screen a more stable metal material for PSCs, Du et al. have conducted first-principles calculations to study the formation energetics and diffusion dynamics of different metal atoms into the MAPbI3 perovskite lattice structure as interstitial defects. Fig. 8b shows the calculated diffusion energy barrier of different metals (Cu, Ag, Au, Cr, Mo, W, Ni, Pd, and Co) in MAPbI3 perovskites. The calculation results show that the Cr, Mo and W metals have larger diffusion barriers in the MAPbI3 perovskite, indicating their potential as an electrode for perovskite applications.100 However, in the real case, besides the stability, the resistivity and work function of the metal are also important factors to be considered for an optimal device electrode.
Gao et al. prepared Cu, Ni, W and Mo metal films by magnetron sputtering as electrodes for n–i–p structured PSCs. As shown in Fig. 8c, although the sputtered Cu, Ni, W and Mo electrodes have a lower work function than Ag for better hole extraction from the spiro-OMeTAD transport layer, the corresponding PSCs show much lower efficiency than the device based on the Ag electrode.101 It is also reported that the internal resistance between spiro-OMeTAD and the electrode is relatively large with the Ni, Cu and Cr metals, resulting in poor device photovoltaic performance.102 On the other hand, Huang et al. have demonstrated that Cu is a quite stable metal for perovskites. It is found that Cu atom/ions show no diffusion in the MAPbI3 layer even after thermal annealing at 80 °C for over 100 hours. Based on the results obtained at laboratory time scales, it is predicted that Cu is stable for 170 years at room temperature and 22 years at 40 °C as shown in Fig. 8d. Besides the high stability, they also obtained PSCs with over 20% efficiency with Cu as an electrode, indicating that Cu is a promising electrode material for developing highly stable and efficient PSCs.103
In order to completely eliminate the device degradation caused by metal–perovskite reactions, developing non-metal electrode materials is one of the most effective approaches. To the best of our knowledge, various non-metal electrodes including carbon-based materials and TCOs have been developed for PSCs to promote the device stability.104–113 For example, Han et al. have developed a hole transport layer free PSC with a carbon material as an electrode. The device structure is shown in Fig. 8e. A porous carbon film was firstly deposited as a counter electrode on a double electron transport layer of mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 as a scaffold for the perovskite. Then the perovskite precursor solution was dropped on the top to fill in the pores in both the carbon electrode and TiO2 and ZrO2 scaffold. With such a device structure, the cell obtained a certified efficiency of 12.8% which was stable for over 1000 hours in ambient air under one-sun illumination.114 Most recently, the same group has further optimized the above PSCs with a carbon electrode and the device has been operating for more than 9000 hours at 55 °C ± 5 °C under MPP tracking without obvious decay.77 Another good choice for stable non-metal contacts for PSCs is developing high quality TCO materials. Currently, the most common used TCO is ITO film prepared by magnetron sputtering, which is a high energy and high temperature process. The perovskite layer and charge transport layers tend to be damaged during the sputtering process. For the perovskite layer to survive during sputtering, some robust metal oxide-based transport layers have been used as a protective layer and relatively gentle room-temperature processed sputtering has been developed in the perovskite photovoltaic field. Fig. 8f shows the stability performance of PSCs based on ITO and Ag electrodes, which clearly shows that Ag-contact PSCs failed suddenly due to the degradation of the Ag electrode while the ITO-contact PSCs retained the efficiency for over 2000 hours.81 McGehee et al. also used aluminum doped zinc oxide (AZO) nanoparticles as a buffer layer to protect the perovskite layer during sputtering the ITO electrode on the top. The results indicated that the encapsulated PSCs with the ITO electrode eliminated the metal–perovskite reaction induced device degradation, providing a promising approach to achieve highly stable PSCs with over 25 years lifetime.111Table 1 summarizes the stability of PSCs fabricated with different perovskite compositions and different device structures under various lifetime testing conditions. It should be noted that all the listed PSCs with ITO electrodes exhibit superior device stability even when the perovskite active material is the less thermally stable MAPbI3. Therefore, we recommend developing high-performance ITO or other robust TCO electrodes to achieve highly stable PSCs for future real applications under outdoor operational conditions. Although PSCs with TCO electrodes have lagged behind their counterparts with opaque metal electrodes in device efficiency due to optical absorption loss caused by the semitransparent TCO top electrode, we still call on researchers in the perovskite PV field to continuously make much more efforts on this topic. To improve the solar energy conversion efficiency of PSCs with semitransparent TCO electrodes, developing bifacial and tandem devices is a promising pathway, which will be discussed in detail in the Perspective section.
Table 1 Summary of stability results of PSCs with different perovskite compositions and different device structures under various lifetime testing conditions




Device structure
PCE (%)
Testing condition
% of initial PCE
Ref.




FTO/NiMgLiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ti(Nb)Ox/Ag
16.2
AM 1.5G, MPP, 45–50 °C
>90%, 1000 h

20



FTO/TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/CuSCN/rGO/Au
20.4
AM 1.5G, MPP, 60 °C in an N2 atmosphere
>95%, 1000 h

19



FTO/TiO2/Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
21.1
AM 1.5G, MPP, room temperature
85%, 250 h

115



FTO/TiO2/Rb5(Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
21.6
AM 1.5G, MPP, 85 °C
95%, 500 h

116



FTO/N-DPBI-C60/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
18.3
AM 1.5G, at Voc conditions in air with humidity around 55%
80%, 3420 h

117



ITO/C60-SAM/SnOx/PC60BM/FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1Br0.5I2.8/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au
21.2
AM 1.5G, in a home-built chamber filled with N2
95%, 1000 h

118



FTO/SnO2/PMMA/Rb5Cs10FAPbI3/PMMA/spiro-MeOTAD/Au
18.7
AM 1.5G, MPP, in an N2 atmosphere at room temperature
93%, 1000 h

119



FTO/NiO/(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PCBM/BCP/Cr/Cr2O3/Au
19.8
AM 1.5G, 70–75 °C
95%, 1885 h

120



ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Cu
21.1
AM 1.5G, MPP, 65 °C, RH 60 ± 10%
96.8%, 1200 h

121



ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM:C60/ZrAcac/Cu
20.1
AM 1.5G, MPP, 25 °C, RH 50 ± 10%
70%, 500 h

122



ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/AZO/ITO
12.5
AM 1.5G, MPP, 30 °C
100%, 4000 h

123



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PC60BM/AZO/ITO
12.3
AM 1.5G, MPP, 100 °C
80%, 124 h

111



ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeTAD/ITO
16.7
Stored in an N2-filled glovebox
No decay, 2000 h

81



ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/C60/PCBM/SnO2/ITO
10.1–13.1
On a hot plate at 85 °C in the dark in an N2-filled glovebox
No decay, 1000 h

109



ITO/NiO/Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3/LiF/PC61BM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO
13
One-sun illumination, MPP, 35 °C
No decay, 1000 h

124





4. Effect of residual strain on the perovskite stability
Lattice strain in various semiconducting crystal materials such as germanium and GaAs has been reported to affect their optoelectronic properties and long-term stability.125,126 Organometal perovskites also suffer from the influence of lattice strain due to their polycrystalline nature. It has been demonstrated that residual strain can be generated in the perovskite lattice during film formation upon thermal annealing since the perovskite material has a thermal expansion coefficient of 1.57 × 10−4 K−1, more than 6 times higher than the soda lime glass substrate (2.6 × 10−5 K−1).127 Specifically, when the perovskite film is cooled down after thermal annealing, the substrate would constrain the perovskite from shrinking, forming lattice strain. In addition, during device operation under natural day/night cycling, the device undergoes compressive stress/tensile stress cycling upon the change of the device temperature. The change of residual strain in the perovskite lattice has a strong impact on the chemical bonding strength of the PbI6-corner sharing octahedral frame.128 Therefore, such lattice strain within the perovskite film would induce chemical degradation of the perovskite and thus fractures in PSCs gradually.
4.1 Origin and determination of strain in perovskites
As shown in Fig. 9a, during perovskite film formation by the spin coating method, strong residual tensile strain stems from the mismatch of the thermal expansion coefficient between the perovskite layer and glass substrate. The glass substrate significantly constrains the expansion of the perovskite lattice at the perovskite/glass interface under high temperature. As reported by Dauskardt et al., such lattice tensile strain in perovskite films induced by thermal annealing can reach as high as 50 MPa, which is high enough to deform Cu metal material.129 On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 9b, if the substrate has a larger thermal expansion coefficient than the perovskite, the perovskite lattice would suffer from compressive strain after thermal annealing since the substrate would expand more than the perovskite film.130
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the formation of residual strain during the perovskite film deposition process with thermal annealing. Reprinted with permission.129 Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustration showing the formation of tensile and compressive strain in perovskite films on different substrates. (c) Schematic architecture of the out-of-plane and in-plane XRD measurement. (d) XRD patterns of MAPbI3 perovskites. AF: annealed film; SP: scraped powder; SCP: single-crystal powder; NAF: non-annealed film. 
Since the residual strain has a direct influence on the unit cell parameters of the perovskite lattice, the XRD technique is chosen to characterize the lattice strain by comparing the peak shift. Fig. 9c and d show the diagram of both out-of-plane and in-plane XRD measurements and the corresponding results, respectively. Huang et al. synthesized MAPbI3 single-crystal powder (SCP) as a control sample to obtain the XRD patterns of a strain-free crystal. The results indicate that thermal annealing is the driving force for the formation of residual strain because the non-annealed film (NAF) has identical peak positions to the SCP sample, while the annealed film (AF) has a slight XRD peak shift. Furthermore, the results indicate that scratching the annealed perovskite film from the substrate cannot remove the residual stress since the scraped powder (SP) sample also exhibits an XRD peak shift compared to the SCP sample. The out-of-plane diffraction mainly reflects the plane distance perpendicular to the substrate, while the in-plane diffraction provides information on the plane spacing parallel to the substrate. Therefore, the shift of the out-of-plane XRD peak to a higher angle suggests smaller plane spacing caused by compressive strain in the vertical direction, while the in-plane peak shifting to a lower angle indicates tensile strain in the horizontal direction.131 In another study, Chen et al. have demonstrated that grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) is a powerful technique to probe the residual strain gradient in organometal perovskite films. The in-plane lattice change can be effectively reflected by measuring the XRD pattern of the same film with a different instrument tilt angle.132 Besides XRD measurements, photoluminescence and time-resolved photoluminescence measurements were also employed to investigate the lattice strain in perovskite films.133,134
4.2 Strain management for improving the device stability
Based on the above discussion, it is known that thermal annealing is one of the main causes of tensile strain in perovskite films. The perovskite lattice expansion under tensile strain has a strong effect on the unit cell parameters and will weaken the bond strength between perovskite components, leading to defect formation, ion dissociation and migration, and thus the collapse of the perovskite lattice structure.135 The residual lattice strain in perovskite films upon a change of temperature can be predicted by the equation  where Ep is the Young's modulus of the perovskite (∼10–15 GPa),136,137νp is the Poisson's ratio in the perovskite, αs and αp are the thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate and perovskite, respectively, and ΔT is the temperature change in the perovskite film. Therefore, developing low temperature processed perovskite films with small ΔT is a straightforward method to reduce residual strain during perovskite formation and crystallization. Although a bath conversion method has been reported to fabricate perovskite films at low temperature,129 to obtain a high-quality perovskite film for high-efficiency PSCs, high temperature thermal annealing is always required.
Sargent et al.130 have proposed another effective method to reduce the residual strain in perovskites by introducing a hole transport layer with high thermal expansion coefficient between glass substrate and perovskite layer to reduce thermal expansion mismatch. As shown in Fig. 10a, the thermal expansion coefficient of the perovskite layer (3.3–8.4 × 10−5 K−1) is approximately an order of magnitude higher than that of glass substrates or electron transport layers of 0.37–1.0 × 10−5 K−1. In contrast, organic hole transport layers have much higher thermal expansion coefficients in the range of 30–50 × 10−5 K−1. Furthermore, Fig. 10a shows the typical thermal annealing temperatures of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite films and inorganic perovskite films, which are over 100 °C and over 180 °C, respectively, to obtain high crystallinity films with less defect formation.138–141 Since such high temperature changes (ΔT) cannot be eliminated during perovskite formation, a strain-management approach using two layers with either a lower or higher thermal expansion coefficient to sandwich the perovskite layer can be employed. Therefore, during the large temperature change process, the adjacent layers can compensate the residual strain in perovskites. It is shown that a perovskite with compressive strain exhibits a much longer lifetime than non-strained devices, and a perovskite with tensile strain failed within only 10 hours of operation under MPP tracking under one-sun illumination. The same group further proposed perovskite composition engineering to release local lattice strain by incorporating cadmium (Cd) as B-site dopants into a mixed perovskite lattice due to its smaller atomic size than that of Pb.142
 Fig. 10  (a) Thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate, perovskite layer and charge transport layers, and commonly used annealing temperatures for different hybrid and inorganic perovskite films. MPP tracking performance of PSCs without strain, and under compressive and tensile strain, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration showing the residual stress relaxation with a “bone-joint” concept. Reprinted with permission.143 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Strain relaxation process with pyridine derivatives. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. (d) An s-PU additive within the perovskite layer to protect the perovskite grains from forming cracks during the bending process by releasing some of the mechanical stresses. Reprinted with permission.145 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
A “bone-joint” concept of residual stress relaxation in the perovskite film has been proposed by Chen et al. via a post treatment process on (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 mixed perovskites.143 As shown in Fig. 10b, octylammonium iodide (OAI) and phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) with long chain groups have been used as perovskite A-site incorporation components. It is found that the A-site alloying with OA and PEA at the perovskite surface lattice can provide a cushioning effect on external stresses during device operation under thermal cycling tests. The “bone-joint” concept with A-site incorporation has been demonstrated to effectively release 50% residual strain and the corresponding unencapsulated devices can retain 95% of the initial efficiency after 1000 h under ambient conditions. A similar approach using a series of pyridine derivatives such as 4-methylpyridine (4-mPy), 4-ethylpyridine (4-ePy) and 4-phenylpyridine (4-pPy) as additives within perovskite films has been employed to improve the device photovoltaic performance and stability. As shown in Fig. 10c, such a conjugated ligand of pyridine derivatives can not only passivate the defect states, but also induce stress relaxation in the perovskite lattice structure, yielding a champion device with 21.12% PCE and maintaining long-term stability under different harsh environments for over 1000 hours.144
The stress relaxation process has been further applied in flexible devices to improve the perovskite stability during the bending test process. For example, self-healing polyurethane (s-PU) has been proposed to be mixed in the perovskite precursor as a scaffold for perovskite crystallization on a stretchable polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate. It is shown in Fig. 10d that the s-PU elastomer fully fills the grain boundaries of the perovskite film. During the bending process, s-PU can first absorb some of the external mechanical strain, and it tends to break its dynamic oxime–carbamate bonds with increased stresses to further release the strain on perovskite grains. In addition, it is found that the fractured s-PU at perovskite grain boundaries can be self-healed upon a thermal annealing treatment at 100 °C and thus the device performance can be recovered accordingly. On the other hand, the accumulated s-PU at perovskite grain boundaries increases the barriers for ion migration from one grain to another grain, improving the stability of perovskites.145
5. Strategies for stability improvement
There are a number of stressors influencing the stability of PSCs such as the ambient environment, device operational conditions, device architecture and perovskite composition. The fast degradation of PSCs is generally determined by a combination of various factors via a complicated mechanism. Therefore, it is certainly too early to conclude which pathway will be effective for achieving sufficiently stable perovskite PV technology. In this section, we have summarized various triggers inducing device degradation and suggested possible strategies to improve the lifetime of PSCs as shown in Table 2, which is believed to provide effective guidance for device engineers towards future commercialization processes.
Table 2 Summary of various origins of the degradation of PSCs and some corresponding strategies for improving their device stability




Triggers
Degradation mechanism
Strategies for stability improvement




Moisture
• Form monohydrate and dihydrate perovskites146
• Encapsulation technologies148




• Water-resistant interlayer149


• Form hydrogen bonds with organic cations147
• Water-resistant low-dimensional perovskites150


Oxygen
• Oxidation of the interlayer and perovskite active layer151
• Encapsulation technologies152


Light illumination
• Light-induced degradation of organic charge transport layers153
• Chemically robust charge transport layers155




• Additive engineering or


• Light-induced ion dissociation and migration of perovskites61
low-dimensional perovskites to suppress ion migration73,156


• Light-induced halide segregation154
• Composition engineering to improve the crystallinity of mixed perovskites45


Electrical bias
• Electric field-induced ion dissociation and migration157
• Mixed 2D/3D perovskite structures to suppress ion migration158


• Electric field-induced phase segregation44
• Mixed perovskites ensure structural stability159




• Polymer additives suppress ion migration under an electric field73


Heat
• Volatility of organic cations160
• Encapsulation to reduce material volatility26


• Heat-induced degradation of organic transport layers161
• Stabilize organic cations or using inorganic perovskites160


• Heat-induced reactions between the perovskite and ZnO electron transport layer79
• Developing robust inorganic charge transport layers20


• Heat-induced stress on the perovskite lattice130
• Additive engineering or interface engineering to reduce stress upon temperature changes130,162


Residual stresses
• Fatigue of the perovskite structure152
• Stress management during perovskite growth129


• Residual stresses weaken chemical bonds of perovskites and accelerate ion migration130
• Additive engineering or interface engineering to reduce stresses upon temperature change130,162


Metal electrode
• Metal–perovskite reaction92
• Developing non-metal electrodes such as carbon electrodes and ITO106,111




• Interface engineering to prevent metal–perovskite contact61


Perovskite composition
• Volatility of organic cations160
• Encapsulation to reduce material volatility26


• Defect state induced degradation of the perovskite29
• Defect passivation163


Interlayer materials
• Degradation of organic charge transporting materials such as PC61BM, BCP, PEDOT:PSS, and spiro-MeOTAD161,164
• Developing robust inorganic charge transporting materials such as SnO2, NiOx, and CuSCN19,165




6. Summary and perspective
The rapid development of PSCs has attracted tremendous attention in the photovoltaic field on this hot technology during the last decade. The device efficiency of PSCs has reached a word-record value of 25.5%, exceeding that of polycrystalline Si cells and approaching that of single crystal Si cells. However, the photovoltaic market is still dominated by conventional Si technology which has been demonstrated to be stable for over 25 years.6 The poor operational stability of PSCs is one of the main obstacles for their entry into the photovoltaic market. Normally, the device stability of PSCs is strongly affected by both extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Extrinsic environmental factors such as moisture and oxygen in ambient air can be completely avoided by advanced encapsulation techniques. Therefore, in this review, we give an in-depth overview of the factors related to the intrinsic stability of perovskite materials including ion dissociation and migration, metal–perovskite reactions, and residual strain induced perovskite degradation. Finally, we briefly provide several future research opportunities to further improve the device operational stability and bring the perovskite PV technology into commercialization.
(1) Perovskite composition engineering. It has been demonstrated that chemical management of cations and anions in perovskites is an effective approach to enhance the perovskite stability to some extent. For example, in the most extensively studied MAPbI3-based perovskite, the MA+ cation tends to be sublimated under high temperature, and thus a more thermally stable FAPbI3-based perovskite has been developed by replacing MA+ cations with FA+ cations.166 However, FAPbI3 has been verified to present two different phases, the black perovskite phase (α-FAPbI3) and the yellow non-perovskite phase (δ-FAPbI3). It is found that only the α-FAPbI3 phase is photoactive and suitable for PV devices, but pure α-FAPbI3 tends to transform into δ-FAPbI3 under ambient conditions.167 Another alternative substitution for MA+ cations is inorganic cesium (Cs+). It is found that the ion migration barrier of CsPbI2Br-based perovskites (0.43 eV) is much higher than that of MAPbI3 (0.07 eV) under light illumination. Although both FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 are more thermally stable than MAPbI3, they present a yellow non-perovskite phase as the most stable phase at room temperature.168 To solve such a problem, the most popular multicomponent perovskite with a formulation of Cs0.05MA0.16FA0.79Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 has been developed for high-efficiency PSCs.115 Most recently, an inorganic perovskite with a composition of Cs2AgBiBr6 has been reported with enhanced device stability, but more work is required to improve the device efficiency based on such inorganic perovskites.169 In addition, developing low-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites is another pathway to stabilize perovskites.170 For example, large aliphatic or aromatic alkylammonium cations such as 2-phenylethylammonium (PEA+) and n-butylammonium (n-BA+) have been reported as space cations for developing 2D perovskites.171 Since the hydrophobic organic space cations not only can prevent the ingress of moisture into perovskites, but also form strong van der Waals forces with adjacent layers, the 2D RP perovskites show superior stability. However, PSCs based on low-dimensional RP perovskites have limited device photovoltaic performance due to the large exciton binding energy. To achieve both high stability and device photovoltaic performance, various 2D/3D hybrid perovskites have been synthesized and investigated.172 For future research, it is believed that extensive work should focus on engineering control to boost the device efficiency of PSCs based on inorganic perovskites and low-dimensional RP perovskites.
(2) Robust TCO development. As discussed above, chemical bonding engineering, additive engineering, and defect passivation engineering are all effective approaches to suppress ion dissociation and migration in perovskite films. However, due to the ionic nature of organometal perovskites, it is difficult to totally eliminate chemical bond breaking and ion movement especially under strong stressors such as light soaking, thermal cycling, and electric fields. Once the dissociated ions migrate through the charge transport layer to the metal electrode, continuous decomposition of the perovskite would happen immediately. Although inorganic metal oxide layers have been used to replace organic charge transport layers in perovskites, the diffusion rate of perovskite ions and metal ions can be only slowed down without being totally suppressed.17 It also has been demonstrated that Ag atoms can diffuse through a 500 nm thick ITO electrode into the perovskite layer, inducing the fast decomposition of perovskite materials.109 Moving forward, developing non-metal electrodes is a promising approach to avoid the notorious metal-induced perovskite degradation. High-performance TCOs are one of the candidates since they are normally fabricated by an industrial-scale sputtering technique. On one hand, developing TCO electrodes for PSCs can remove the effect of metal–perovskite reactions, improving the device operational stability. On the other hand, such semitransparent PSCs based on TCO electrodes can be further designed for bifacial application to increase the output power by absorbing reflected irradiance as shown in Fig. 11a.173 In addition, a transparent TCO electrode is also required for developing perovskite based tandem solar cells to overcome the theoretical Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit of a perovskite single-junction cell.174–177 As shown in Fig. 11b, a bifacial tandem cell is proposed to further outperform a traditional tandem cell with a metal electrode by allowing the absorption of sunlight reflected from the ground.173 Therefore, it can be foreseen that PSCs with robust semitransparent TCO electrodes with long-term stability for bifacial and tandem applications should be large-scale deployed in the near future.178
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of a bifacial solar panel utilizing sunlight both directly illuminating the panel and scattering from the ground. (b) Device structure of a traditional tandem cell with a metal electrode and a bifacial tandem cell with an ITO semitransparent electrode. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 AIP Publishing. (c) Schematic of an integrated system combining a solar panel and flow battery. Reprinted with permission from Zhang et al.182 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
(3) Perovskite module development. On the other hand, the upscaling of PSCs is also a hot research topic in the perovskite PV field. Perovskite modules fabricated using various methods have progressed steadily and their device efficiencies have increased to over 15%.7,179–181 However, to realize the application of perovskite modules outdoors, more work is required to examine the reliability of perovskite modules including determining the impact of weather on perovskite modules, potential-induced degradation testing and partial-shade stress testing of perovskite modules.
(4) Development of a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system. The residual strains in the perovskite lattice structure are another main cause inducing the poor intrinsic stability of perovskite materials. Such lattice strain induced degradation becomes a big concern when a perovskite-based device is operated outdoors in field tests. For example, during the natural day/night cycling, the solar cells used outdoors would undergo a huge change of temperature. The thermal cycling will enlarge the effect of residual strain and trigger fatigue of PSCs. Most recently, Wang et al. have demonstrated a novel redox-targeting flow battery for absorbing low-grade-heat through a thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle (TREC).182 They expected that the TREC-based flow battery has great potential for integrating with PV panels as shown in Fig. 11c. During the daytime, the PV panels charge the flow battery, allowing the storage of solar energy in the battery. Simultaneously, the electrolyte of the flow battery collects heat from cooling the PV panels and converts the heat to electricity through a TREC function. At night, the flow battery will release the heat using the PV panels as a radiator to the sky and discharge electricity to the electrical grid.182 Inspired by this work, we call on experts in the field of both PV and energy storage to have a close collaboration in the development of a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system combining bifacial perovskite-based tandem solar cells and TREC-based flow batteries. Such an integrated system has great potential to overcome the challenge of solar intermittency and simultaneously improve the operational stability of solar cells under thermal cycling. With all of the progress made in the perovskite photovoltaic field in both device efficiency and lifetime improvement, we are optimistic that PSCs will soon show their potential to realize real outdoor application with further development of large-area PSCs, perovskite solar modules, and perovskite-based tandem applications. The large-scale deployment of the proposed integrated systems marrying PV panels and energy storage flow batteries will accelerate the world's transition from a fossil fuel economy to a renewable energy economy.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
L. Ding thanks the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51773045, 21772030, 51922032, 21961160720) for financial support. SERIS is a research institute at the National University of Singapore (NUS). SERIS is supported by NUS, the National Research Foundation Singapore (NRF), the Energy Market Authority of Singapore (EMA) and the Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB).
References
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20200925.pdf accessed 12.26, 2020.
L. Meng, J. You and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Werner, C. C. Boyd, T. Moot, E. J. Wolf, R. M. France, S. A. Johnson, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3393–3403 RSC .
M. S. Chowdhury, K. S. Rahman, T. Chowdhury, N. Nuthammachot, K. Techato, M. Akhtaruzzaman, S. K. Tiong, K. Sopian and N. Amin, Energy Strategy Rev., 2020, 27, 100431 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, M. Sexton, H.-Y. Park, G. Baure, J. C. Nino and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401855 CrossRef .
X. Xu, C. Ma, Y. Cheng, Y.-M. Xie, X. Yi, B. Gautam, S. Chen, H.-W. Li, C.-S. Lee, F. So and S.-W. Tsang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y.-M. Xie, X. Xu, Y. Huo, S.-W. Tsang, Q.-D. Yang and Y. Cheng, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Yu, T. Wang, K. L. Chiu, F. Lin, H. Gong, L. Ding and Y. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001958 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Cheng, C. Liu, T. Zhang, N. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Xu, J. Ouyang and H. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1622–1633 RSC .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, X. Xu, Y. Xie, H.-W. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Cheng and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9578–9586 RSC .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salado, L. Contreras-Bernal, L. Caliò, A. Todinova, C. López-Santos, S. Ahmad, A. Borras, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10917–10927 RSC .
Y.-B. Lu, W.-Y. Cong, C. Guan, H. Sun, Y. Xin, K. Wang and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27469–27474 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Yang, P. Liu, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000621 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
Y. Cheng, Q.-D. Yang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 100–102 CrossRef .
L. Shi, M. P. Bucknall, T. L. Young, M. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Bing, D. S. Lee, J. Kim, T. Wu, N. Takamure, D. R. McKenzie, S. Huang, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Science, 2020, 368, eaba2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, P. Liu, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 127599,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2020.127599 .
Z. Wan, H. Lai, S. Ren, R. He, Y. Jiang, J. Luo, Q. Chen, X. Hao, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Wu and D. Zhao, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 57, 147–168 CrossRef .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
Z. Yang, B. H. Babu, S. Wu, T. Liu, S. Fang, Z. Xiong, L. Han and W. Chen, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900257 CrossRef .
W. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1971–1996 RSC .
S. Yuan, Y. Cai, S. Yang, H. Zhao, F. Qian, Y. Han, J. Sun, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900220 CrossRef .
J. Kim, A. Ho-Baillie and S. Huang, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1800302 CrossRef .
J. Mizusaki, K. Arai and K. Fueki, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, W. Wang, S. Liu, H. Yang and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803017 CrossRef .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumüller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 528–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500721 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, X. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, D.-P. Yu and Q. Zhao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Fu, Y. Tang, H. Wang, C. Zhang, W. W. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 204–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Liang, H. Zhang, D. Li, D. Tian, G. Li, X. Jing, W. Zhang, W. Xiao, Q. Liu, F. Zhang and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1256–1260 RSC .
Y. Cheng, H.-W. Li, J. Qing, Q.-D. Yang, Z. Guan, C. Liu, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12748–12755 RSC .
M. H. Futscher, J. M. Lee, L. McGovern, L. A. Muscarella, T. Wang, M. I. Haider, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende and B. Ehrler, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1497–1503 RSC .
L. Bertoluzzi, C. C. Boyd, N. Rolston, J. Xu, R. Prasanna, B. C. O’Regan and M. D. McGehee, Joule, 2020, 4, 109–127 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, P. Calado, X. Li, S. J. C. Irvine, M. D. McGehee, P. R. F. Barnes and B. C. O'Regan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 192–204 RSC .
D. Moia, I. Gelmetti, P. Calado, W. Fisher, M. Stringer, O. Game, Y. Hu, P. Docampo, D. Lidzey, E. Palomares, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1296–1308 RSC .
S. Draguta, S. Thakur, Y. V. Morozov, Y. Wang, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 715–721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fischer, K. Tvingstedt, A. Baumann and V. Dyakonov, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5129–5134 CAS .
A. Walsh and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1983–1990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
Y. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Lu, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501803 CrossRef .
V. Adinolfi, M. Yuan, R. Comin, E. S. Thibau, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. Hoogland, Z.-H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3406–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, X. Liu, Z. Guan, M. Li, Z. Zeng, H.-W. Li, S.-W. Tsang, A. G. Aberle and F. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guan, H.-W. Li, Y. Cheng, Q. Yang, M.-F. Lo, T.-W. Ng, S.-W. Tsang and C.-S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14059–14068 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sutter-Fella, D. W. Miller, Q. P. Ngo, E. T. Roe, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, M. C. Lonergan and A. Javey, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 709–715 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Miller, G. E. Eperon, E. T. Roe, C. W. Warren, H. J. Snaith and M. C. Lonergan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 153902 CrossRef .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, E. Debroye, M. Keshavarz, I. G. Scheblykin, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Hofkens and J. A. Steele, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 397–410 RSC .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702–713 RSC .
Y. Wang, T. Wu, J. Barbaud, W. Kong, D. Cui, H. Chen, X. Yang and L. Han, Science, 2019, 365, 687–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Ni, C. H. Van Brackle, H. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3989–3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, G. Liu, H. Zheng, X. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Xu, L. Zhu, F. Kong, Y. Li and X. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8249–8259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Yin, X. Zuo, L. Wang, T.-D. Li, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, Z. Yang, Y. Guo, Y. Xue, K. Kisslinger, M. Cotlet, C.-Y. Nam and M. H. Rafailovich, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 5104–5117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Cheng, X. Xu, M. Li, C. Zhang, S. H. Cheung, Z. Zeng, D. Shen, Y.-M. Xie, K. L. Chiu, F. Lin, S. K. So, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006802 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Wang, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8197–8200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, X. Wang, S. Huang, W. Samarakoon, S. Xi, Y. Ji, H. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. Du, Z. Feng, S. Adams and Q. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 3028–3035 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mei, Y. Sheng, Y. Ming, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, W. Zhang, S. Luo, G. Na, C. Tian, X. Hou, Y. Xiong, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, S. Uchida, T.-W. Kim, Y. Yuan, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou and H. Han, Joule, 2020, 4, 2646–2660 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Xiao, C. Shi, C. Zhou, D. Zhang, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Solar RRL, 2017, 1, 1700082 CrossRef .
Y. Cheng, Q.-D. Yang, J. Xiao, Q. Xue, H.-W. Li, Z. Guan, H.-L. Yip and S.-W. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19986–19993 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Saris, V. Niemann, V. Mantella, A. Loiudice and R. Buonsanti, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19543–19550 RSC .
Y. Cheng, C. Xie, X. Liu, G. Zhu, H.-W. Li, S. Venkataraj, Z.-K. Tan, L. Ding, A. G. Aberle and F. Lin, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 607–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Guo, X. Sun, C. Ding, R. Huang, M. Tan, L. Zhang, Q. Luo, F. Li, J. Jin and C.-Q. Ma, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 2000250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
J. Wang, X. Chen, F. Jiang, Q. Luo, L. Zhang, M. Tan, M. Xie, Y.-Q. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Su, Y. Li and C.-Q. Ma, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800118 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103–1111 RSC .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cacovich, L. Ciná, F. Matteocci, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4700–4706 RSC .
L. Liang, Y. Cai, X. Li, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 211–238 CrossRef CAS .
Natalia N. Shlenskaya, N. A. Belich, M. Grätzel, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1780–1786 RSC .
R. A. Kerner, P. Schulz, J. A. Christians, S. P. Dunfield, B. Dou, L. Zhao, G. Teeter, J. J. Berry and B. P. Rand, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041103 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Wu, Z. Yang, P. N. Rudd, Y. Shao, X. Dai, H. Wei, J. Zhao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Y. Feng and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, S. G. Motti, R. Sorrentino and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2609–2619 RSC .
S. Shao, Z. Chen, H. H. Fang, G. H. ten Brink, D. Bartesaghi, S. Adjokatse, L. J. A. Koster, B. J. Kooi, A. Facchetti and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2419–2426 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang and C.-C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8593–8604 RSC .
E. Nouri, M. R. Mohammadi and P. Lianos, Carbon, 2018, 126, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Lei, L. Xiong, B. Li and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2157–2165 RSC .
G.-W. Kim, G. Kang, M. Malekshahi Byranvand, G.-Y. Lee and T. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27720–27726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ming, D. Yang, T. Li, L. Zhang and M.-H. Du, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700662 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, G.-R. Li, Q. Zhao and X.-P. Gao, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 40–47 CrossRef .
F. Behrouznejad, S. Shahbazi, N. Taghavinia, H.-P. Wu and E. Wei-Guang Diau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13488–13498 RSC .
J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, T. Li, Y. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
V. Babu, R. Fuentes Pineda, T. Ahmad, A. O. Alvarez, L. A. Castriotta, A. Di Carlo, F. Fabregat-Santiago and K. Wojciechowski, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5126–5134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bogachuk, S. Zouhair, K. Wojciechowski, B. Yang, V. Babu, L. Wagner, B. Xu, J. Lim, S. Mastroianni, H. Pettersson, A. Hagfeldt and A. Hinsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3880–3916 RSC .
C. Zhou and S. Lin, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 1900190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pitchaiya, N. Eswaramoorthy, M. Natarajan, A. Santhanam, V. Asokan, V. Madurai Ramakrishnan, B. Rangasamy, S. Sundaram, P. Ravirajan and D. Velauthapillai, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 6835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, T. W. Jones, N. W. Duffy, K. F. Anderson, R. Bennett, M. Grigore, P. Marvig, Y. Xiong, T. Liu, Y. Sheng, L. Hong, X. Hou, M. Duan, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, G. J. Wilson and H. Han, Carbon, 2018, 129, 830–836 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1772–1778 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Park, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2021, 17, 18–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wahl, J. Hanisch, S. Meier, M. Schultes and E. Ahlswede, Org. Electron., 2018, 54, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bett, K. M. Winkler, M. Bivour, L. Cojocaru, Ö. Ş. Kabakli, P. S. C. Schulze, G. Siefer, L. Tutsch, M. Hermle, S. W. Glunz and J. C. Goldschmidt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45796–45804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, N. Sakai, S. van Reenen, K. Wojciechowski, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604186 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H.-P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192–1197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T.-W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, S. Chen, E. Mosconi, Y. Fang, X. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yu, J. Zhao, Y. Gao, F. De Angelis and J. Huang, Science, 2019, 365, 473–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Ren, X. Chen, J. Mao, J. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Milic, W.-J. Yin, M. Grätzel and W. C. H. Choy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2253–2262 RSC .
M. B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani and K. Miyano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Kurdi, H. Bertin, E. Martincic, M. D. Kersauson, G. Fishman, S. Sauvage, A. Bosseboeuf and P. Boucaud, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 041909 CrossRef .
S. M. Hubbard, C. D. Cress, C. G. Bailey, R. P. Raffaelle, S. G. Bailey and D. M. Wilt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 123512 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, L. J. Schwan, M. Ottosson, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10678–10685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 RSC .
N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, A. D. Printz, A. Gold-Parker, Y. Ding, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802139 CrossRef .
D.-J. Xue, Y. Hou, S.-C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J.-S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Deng, H. Wei, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, J. E. Shield and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5616 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, K. Lu, C. Han, Y. Yang, K. Wang, X. Wang, M. Wang, J. Zhang and B. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5446–5450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Jones, A. Osherov, M. Alsari, M. Sponseller, B. C. Duck, Y.-K. Jung, C. Settens, F. Niroui, R. Brenes, C. V. Stan, Y. Li, M. Abdi-Jalebi, N. Tamura, J. E. Macdonald, M. Burghammer, R. H. Friend, V. Bulović, A. Walsh, G. J. Wilson, S. Lilliu and S. D. Stranks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 596–606 RSC .
K. A. Bush, N. Rolston, A. Gold-Parker, S. Manzoor, J. Hausele, Z. J. Yu, J. A. Raiford, R. Cheacharoen, Z. C. Holman, M. F. Toney, R. H. Dauskardt and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, Y. Fang, G. Kieslich, T. J. White and A. K. Cheetham, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18450–18455 RSC .
Y. Rakita, S. R. Cohen, N. K. Kedem, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Chen, C.-S. Tan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, H. Tan, O. Voznyy, B. Scheffel, G. Walters, A. P. T. Kam, B. Sun, M.-J. Choi, S. Hoogland, A. Amassian, S. O. Kelley, F. P. García de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2019, 570, 96–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, H.-W. Li, J. Zhang, Q.-D. Yang, T. Liu, Z. Guan, J. Qing, C.-S. Lee and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 561–567 RSC .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Zhu, L. Liu, S. Ma, P. Liu, J. Wu, C. Shi, Q. Du, Y. Hao, S. Xiang, H. Chen, P. Chen, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H. Dong, J. Xi, Y. Yang, Y. Yu, L. Ma, J. Chen, B. Jiao, X. Hou, J. Li and Z. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104940 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Z. Xing, X. Hu, Z. Huang, T. Hu, L. Tan, F. Li and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16602–16608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U.-G. Jong, C.-J. Yu, G.-C. Ri, A. P. McMahon, Nicholas M. Harrison, P. R. F. Barnes and A. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1067–1074 RSC .
Y. Cheng, F. So and S.-W. Tsang, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1611–1624 RSC .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Idígoras, F. J. Aparicio, L. Contreras-Bernal, S. Ramos-Terrón, M. Alcaire, J. R. Sánchez-Valencia, A. Borras, Á. Barranco and J. A. Anta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11587–11594 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Thrithamarassery Gangadharan and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2860–2889 RSC .
A. Senocrate, T. Acartürk, G. Y. Kim, R. Merkle, U. Starke, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10847–10855 RSC .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Mateker and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603940 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, R. Chen, S. Zhang, B. H. Babu, Y. Yue, H. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Huang, S. Fang, T. Liu, L. Han and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1161 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Seo, J. H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Chung and S.-I. Na, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105164 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Bailie, E. L. Unger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4864–4870 RSC .
W. Yang, D. Zhong, M. Shi, S. Qu and H. Chen, iScience, 2019, 22, 534–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Lin, F. De Rossi, J. Kim, J. Baker, J. Ngiam, B. Xu, S. Pont, N. Aristidou, S. A. Haque, T. Watson, M. A. McLachlan and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3006–3011 RSC .
G. Tumen-Ulzii, C. Qin, T. Matsushima, M. R. Leyden, U. Balijipalli, D. Klotz and C. Adachi, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000305 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, T. W. Jones, T. C.-J. Yang, N. W. Duffy, J. Li, L. Zhao, B. Chi, X. Wang and G. J. Wilson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008300 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tan, A. R. Bowring, A. C. Meng, M. D. McGehee and P. C. McIntyre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5485–5491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, Y. Zhang, S. Paek, X.-X. Gao, X. A. Li and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8058–8064 RSC .
S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1974–1985 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Chen, P. Liu, H. Xiang, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001557 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, N. Han, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2002582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Jin, Y. Wu and M. Shao, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 101102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Teale, A. H. Proppe, E. H. Jung, A. Johnston, D. H. Parmar, B. Chen, Y. Hou, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5115–5119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asadpour, R. V. K. Chavali, M. R. Khan and M. A. Alam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 243902 CrossRef .
W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen and W. C. H. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 221104 CrossRef .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, Y. Amir, A. Paulke, L. Perdigón-Toro, P. Caprioglio and D. Neher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1530–1539 RSC .
K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, R. M. I. Bandara, M. Monti, E. Butler-Caddle, T. Pichler, H. Shiozawa, Z. Wang, S. Jenatsch, S. J. Hinder, M. G. Masteghin, M. Patel, H. M. Thirimanne, W. Zhang, R. A. Sporea, J. Lloyd-Hughes and S. R. P. Silva, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 693–705 RSC .
Z. Fang, Q. Zeng, C. Zuo, L. Zhang, H. Xiao, M. Cheng, F. Hao, Q. Bao, L. Zhang, Y. Yuan, W.-Q. Wu, D. Zhao, Y. Cheng, H. Tan, Z. Xiao, S. Yang, F. Liu, Z. Jin, J. Yan and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 621–636 CrossRef .
D. Zhao and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1144–1146 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Qiu, L. K. Ono, S. He, Z. Hu, M. Jiang, G. Tong, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, D.-Y. Son, Y. Dang, S. Kazaoui and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 596–604 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Wang, X. Y. Chin, H. A. Dewi, K. Vergeer, T. W. Goh, J. W. M. Lim, J. H. Lew, K. P. Loh, C. Soci, T. C. Sum, H. J. Bolink, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and A. Bruno, Joule, 2020, 4, 1035–1053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ren, H. Lai, X. Hao, Z. Tang, H. Xu, B. M. F. Yu Jeco, K. Watanabe, L. Wu, J. Zhang, M. Sugiyama, J. Wu and D. Zhao, Joule, 2020, 4, 1263–1277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, F. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Zhou, W. Luo, Y. M. Lee, M. Si and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yuanhang Cheng
	Yuanhang Cheng received his PhD degree from the Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, in October 2017. He is currently working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore (SERIS), National University of Singapore. His research focuses on perovskite solar cells.

Liming Ding
	Liming Ding got his PhD from University of Science and Technology of China (was a joint student at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, CAS). He started his research on OSCs and PLEDs in the Olle Inganäs lab in 1998. Later on, he worked at the National Center for Polymer Research, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and Argonne National Lab (USA). He joined Konarka as a Senior Scientist in 2008. In 2010, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology as a full professor. His research focuses on functional materials and devices. He is an RSC Fellow, the nominator for the Xplorer Prize, and an Associate Editor for Science Bulletin and Journal of Semiconductors.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are considered to be an emerging superstar in the photovoltaic (PV) field because of their unprecedented progress in the power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, 95% of the global PV market is still accounted for by Si technology. The major obstacle for commercializing PSCs is their poor operational stability, which is related to the intrinsic degradation of perovskites induced by ion migration, metal–perovskite reactions, and residual strain in perovskite lattices. After investigating the degradation mechanisms induced by the above-mentioned factors, we expect to develop high-performance transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) to push PSC technology moving forward. A robust TCO not only can eliminate the use of metal electrodes, solving the electrode corrosion issues, but also is suitable for bifacial or tandem devices, improving solar energy harvesting. For future renewable energy deployment, a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system that combines PSCs with flow batteries is proposed. The batteries will buffer the variability of PSCs to the grid, while the electrolyte cools down the PSCs for high efficiency and stability. Such a “solar energy harvesting and storage” system will push the commercialization of perovskite PV technology.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Golden triangle of solar cell performance including cost, efficiency, and lifetime. Reprinted with permission.6 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Certified efficiencies of Si, CIGS, CdTe and perovskite PV technologies as a function of device area. Reprinted with permission.7 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) LCOE of perovskite and competitor Si, CdTe and CIGS PV technologies as a function of lifetime. The “red star” shows a rough estimation of the current situation. Reprinted with permission.6 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Global PV market share of different PV technologies (2014–2030). Reprinted with permission.8 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Unit cell of the ABX3 perovskite lattice structure. (b) Illustration of the extrinsic and intrinsic stability of PSCs under environmental and operational conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of ion migration in the perovskite lattice. Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Photocurrent hysteresis phenomenon observed in PSCs with opposite scanning direction. Reprinted with permission.36 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) The effect of pre-bias under light soaking on the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure of a polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic device with hole-injection only electrodes. (b) Schematic energy band diagrams of the polarity-switchable perovskite photovoltaic device under equilibrium (dark and short circuit) conditions. (c) Relaxation of the interface charge after pre-bias poling, and (d) interface charge density measured under various pre-bias conditions. (a)–(d) Reprinted with permission.46 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The device structure of PSCs fabricated using different MAI loading times, and (f) transient ionic current measurements to determine the mobile ion concentration in PSCs. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the KPFM measurements of lateral structure devices, KPFM potential images and corresponding energy diagram of the MAPbI3 thin films before and after electrical poling, respectively. Reprinted with permission.56 Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Cross-sectional illustrations of lateral MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells with PbI2 threads forming under electrical stress, and mechanism of the reversible conversion between MAPbI3 and PbI2 under an electric field. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Δs − EQE spectra and Gaussian fitting results of Ag- and ITO-based PSCs upon light soaking, and (d) schematic illustration of the effect of ion dissociation and ion migration on the degradation process in Ag- and ITO-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.61 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a blade-coated perovskite film with CdI2 surface treatment. Reprinted with permission.69 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of di-hydrogen bond formation between super-halogen BH4− groups and MA+ ions. Reprinted with permission.71 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration to show a mechanism diagram of cyclic elimination of Pb0 and I0 by reacting with the added Eu3+–Eu2+ redox pair. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a p–i–n structured PSC with an Al electrode and the corresponding device degradation mechanism induced by the Al–perovskite reactions. Reprinted with permission.84 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Photograph and XRD patterns to show the degradation of Ag-contact PSCs due to the Ag–perovskite reactions. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Proposed Ag–perovskite reaction pathways involving ion migration, Ag diffusion and AgI formation. (d) TOF-SIMS profiles to show the elemental distribution across the devices in both MAPbI3- and FAPbI3-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.87 Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD patterns to show the reactions between Au and MAPbI3 under UV-illumination. Reprinted with permission.91 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC displaying the device structure with a CuSCN hole transport layer, and the operational stability of unencapsulated CuSCN-based PSCs with and without an rGO interlayer. Reprinted with permission.19 Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Calculated diffusion barriers (in eV) of various metal impurities as interstitial defects in the MAPbI3 perovskite lattice structure. (c) Energy band diagram of PSCs with various metals as electrodes. Reprinted with permission.101 Copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V. (d) Device structure of PSCs with Cu as an electrode and the lifetime of Cu metals in contact with the MAPbI3 perovskite layer predicted based on the results at laboratory time scales. Reprinted with permission.103 Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration showing the device structure and fabrication process of carbon-based PSCs. Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (f) Comparison of the device lifetime of PSCs with Ag and room-temperature sputtered ITO as electrodes. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2020 Science China Press.	 

FTO/NiMgLiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ti(Nb)Ox/Ag	16.2	AM 1.5G, MPP, 45–50 °C	>90%, 1000 h	
20

FTO/TiO2/CsFAMAPbI3−xBrx/CuSCN/rGO/Au	20.4	AM 1.5G, MPP, 60 °C in an N2 atmosphere	>95%, 1000 h	
19

FTO/TiO2/Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	21.1	AM 1.5G, MPP, room temperature	85%, 250 h	
115

FTO/TiO2/Rb5(Cs5(MA0.17FA0.83)95)95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	21.6	AM 1.5G, MPP, 85 °C	95%, 500 h	
116

FTO/N-DPBI-C60/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	18.3	AM 1.5G, at Voc conditions in air with humidity around 55%	80%, 3420 h	
117

ITO/C60-SAM/SnOx/PC60BM/FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1Br0.5I2.8/PDCBT/Ta-WOx/Au	21.2	AM 1.5G, in a home-built chamber filled with N2	95%, 1000 h	
118

FTO/SnO2/PMMA/Rb5Cs10FAPbI3/PMMA/spiro-MeOTAD/Au	18.7	AM 1.5G, MPP, in an N2 atmosphere at room temperature	93%, 1000 h	
119

FTO/NiO/(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3/PCBM/BCP/Cr/Cr2O3/Au	19.8	AM 1.5G, 70–75 °C	95%, 1885 h	
120

ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Cu	21.1	AM 1.5G, MPP, 65 °C, RH 60 ± 10%	96.8%, 1200 h	
121

ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM:C60/ZrAcac/Cu	20.1	AM 1.5G, MPP, 25 °C, RH 50 ± 10%	70%, 500 h	
122

ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/AZO/ITO	12.5	AM 1.5G, MPP, 30 °C	100%, 4000 h	
123

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PC60BM/AZO/ITO	12.3	AM 1.5G, MPP, 100 °C	80%, 124 h	
111

ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeTAD/ITO	16.7	Stored in an N2-filled glovebox	No decay, 2000 h	
81

ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/C60/PCBM/SnO2/ITO	10.1–13.1	On a hot plate at 85 °C in the dark in an N2-filled glovebox	No decay, 1000 h	
109

ITO/NiO/Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3/LiF/PC61BM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO	13	One-sun illumination, MPP, 35 °C	No decay, 1000 h	
124


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the formation of residual strain during the perovskite film deposition process with thermal annealing. Reprinted with permission.129 Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustration showing the formation of tensile and compressive strain in perovskite films on different substrates. (c) Schematic architecture of the out-of-plane and in-plane XRD measurement. (d) XRD patterns of MAPbI3 perovskites. AF: annealed film; SP: scraped powder; SCP: single-crystal powder; NAF: non-annealed film.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate, perovskite layer and charge transport layers, and commonly used annealing temperatures for different hybrid and inorganic perovskite films. MPP tracking performance of PSCs without strain, and under compressive and tensile strain, respectively. (b) Schematic illustration showing the residual stress relaxation with a “bone-joint” concept. Reprinted with permission.143 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Strain relaxation process with pyridine derivatives. Reprinted with permission.144 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Ltd. (d) An s-PU additive within the perovskite layer to protect the perovskite grains from forming cracks during the bending process by releasing some of the mechanical stresses. Reprinted with permission.145 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Moisture	• Form monohydrate and dihydrate perovskites146	• Encapsulation technologies148

	• Water-resistant interlayer149
• Form hydrogen bonds with organic cations147	• Water-resistant low-dimensional perovskites150
Oxygen	• Oxidation of the interlayer and perovskite active layer151	• Encapsulation technologies152
Light illumination	• Light-induced degradation of organic charge transport layers153	• Chemically robust charge transport layers155

	• Additive engineering or
• Light-induced ion dissociation and migration of perovskites61	low-dimensional perovskites to suppress ion migration73,156
• Light-induced halide segregation154	• Composition engineering to improve the crystallinity of mixed perovskites45
Electrical bias	• Electric field-induced ion dissociation and migration157	• Mixed 2D/3D perovskite structures to suppress ion migration158
• Electric field-induced phase segregation44	• Mixed perovskites ensure structural stability159

	• Polymer additives suppress ion migration under an electric field73
Heat	• Volatility of organic cations160	• Encapsulation to reduce material volatility26
• Heat-induced degradation of organic transport layers161	• Stabilize organic cations or using inorganic perovskites160
• Heat-induced reactions between the perovskite and ZnO electron transport layer79	• Developing robust inorganic charge transport layers20
• Heat-induced stress on the perovskite lattice130	• Additive engineering or interface engineering to reduce stress upon temperature changes130,162
Residual stresses	• Fatigue of the perovskite structure152	• Stress management during perovskite growth129
• Residual stresses weaken chemical bonds of perovskites and accelerate ion migration130	• Additive engineering or interface engineering to reduce stresses upon temperature change130,162
Metal electrode	• Metal–perovskite reaction92	• Developing non-metal electrodes such as carbon electrodes and ITO106,111

	• Interface engineering to prevent metal–perovskite contact61
Perovskite composition	• Volatility of organic cations160	• Encapsulation to reduce material volatility26
• Defect state induced degradation of the perovskite29	• Defect passivation163
Interlayer materials	• Degradation of organic charge transporting materials such as PC61BM, BCP, PEDOT:PSS, and spiro-MeOTAD161,164	• Developing robust inorganic charge transporting materials such as SnO2, NiOx, and CuSCN19,165

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of a bifacial solar panel utilizing sunlight both directly illuminating the panel and scattering from the ground. (b) Device structure of a traditional tandem cell with a metal electrode and a bifacial tandem cell with an ITO semitransparent electrode. (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 AIP Publishing. (c) Schematic of an integrated system combining a solar panel and flow battery. Reprinted with permission from Zhang et al.182 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
