Perovskite nanogels: synthesis, properties, and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC02354J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02354J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12355-12379Perovskite nanogels: synthesis, properties, and applications

        
          
            Hui 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Luo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mei-Li 
            Sun
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiong 
            Yin
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Leyu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, College of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: yinxiong@mail.buct.edu.cn; lywang@mail.buct.edu.cn
Received 
      16th May 2020
    , Accepted 23rd June 2020First published on 25th June 2020AbstractMetal halide perovskite nanogels have recently arisen as a new Frontier in materials science and have drawn worldwide attention for various promising applications, such as photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, lasing, photodetectors, sensing, and imaging. Their optical, excitonic, optoelectronic, and charge transport properties can be finely tuned by changing the crystal composition and structure, doping with other metal ions, and employing diverse synthesis approaches for obtaining different morphologies. In this review, we focus on the recent progresses in the wet-chemistry synthesis of perovskite nanogels with typical morphologies. In particular, the synthesis of nanocubes, nanowires, nanoplatelets, and microdisks are discussed in detail. Moreover, lead-free perovskite nanogels are also summarized. Furthermore, the latest progresses made in promising applications of perovskite nanogels are also described. Finally, based on the comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of perovskite-related devices, the outlook for future research and main challenges faced by perovskite nanogels are further addressed.
Hui Wang
Hui Wang is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Leyu Wang at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He obtained his BSc from the BUCT in 2016. His research projects focus on the design and fabrication of nanostructures for photoelectrical catalysis, sensing, and bioimaging.
Qing Luo
Qing Luo is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Leyu Wang at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She obtained her BSc from the BUCT in 2017. Her research interest focuses on exploring functional nanomaterials for biochemical sensing and imaging.
Mei-Li Sun
Mei-Li Sun is currently a Master's candidate in Chemical Engineering at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She obtained her BSc from Xi'an University of Science and Technology in 2018. Her research interests are focused on functional nanomaterials for photovoltaics and catalytic applications.
Xiong Yin
Xiong Yin is a Professor in the College of Chemistry, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He obtained his BSc in 2003 from the Shaanxi Normal University and PhD in 2008 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2009, he became a Postdoctoral Researcher at the National University of Singapore and then a Staff Scientist at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, in 2010. He joined the faculty at the College of Chemistry, BUCT, in 2016. His research interests include perovskite-based devices, biochemical sensing, and low-cost catalysts for energy conversion applications.
Leyu Wang
Leyu Wang is a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He has been awarded the “National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholar.” He received his PhD in Chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2007. Then, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) as a Postdoctoral Researcher from 2007 to 2009. He moved to BUCT's Department of Chemistry in October 2009. His research interests span from the controlled synthesis of luminescent nanoparticles, LSPR semiconductor nanomaterials, magnetic nanomaterials, metal–semiconductor heteronanostructures, and multifunctional nanoprobes for applications such as electrocatalysis, artificial photosynthesis, biochemical sensing, multimodal imaging, drug/gene delivery, and photothermo-/chemotherapy. Prof. Wang has published over 140 research papers in journals and holds over 27 patents.
1. Introduction
Metal halide perovskites have rapidly emerged as fantastic semiconductor materials for optoelectronic applications.1–7 They have been extensively explored because of their several outstanding and unique properties, such as direct and tunable bandgaps, low trap-state density, high carrier mobilities, long diffusion lengths, large light-absorption coefficients, and extremely easy fabrication.8–13 Remarkably, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells based on perovskites has skyrocketed from 3.9% to more than 25% during the past decade.14–31 Their unprecedented success in photovoltaics has rekindled the research activity in metal halide perovskites.
Generally, metal halide perovskites can be expressed using the universal formula ABX3, where the A atom can be a monovalent ion, Cs+, or organic cations, namely, methylammonium (MA) or formamidinium (FA); the B atom is usually a divalent metal cation or mixed cation; and the X atom could be a halogen anion (Cl, Br, or I).32,33 A perovskite contains the BX6 octahedra in the unit cell, while the A atoms exist in the interstitial void of the neighboring octahedra. More importantly, the various compositions enrich the perovskite materials with versatile properties and wider applicability. Their optical merits have been explored for sensing, lasing, and imaging applications.4,34–39 Meanwhile, their electrical properties have been extensively exploited in the fields of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, and photovoltaics.26,29,30,40–48 With the aim to satisfy practical applications with typical specific needs, perovskite materials need to be accurately synthesized to ensure the purity of nanocrystals. Researchers have developed various approaches to synthesize a variety of metal halide perovskites with both typical morphologies and special functions.49–56 For instance, the narrow-band photoluminescence (PL) of metal halide perovskite nanogels can be changed from ultraviolet (UV) to near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths by simply tuning either the composition or the particle size.57,58 The PCE of solar cells based on perovskites are primarily dependent upon the quality of the light-absorbing layer, which can be attributed to the nucleation process and crystal growth of halide perovskites.10,20,28,59,60 Different types of lasers, such as nanolaser, nanocrystal laser, distributed feedback laser (DFL), and distributed Bragg reflector laser (DBRL), can be fabricated by tuning the compositions and changing the synthesis methods.4,61–63 Definitely, the properties and resultant performance of metal halide perovskite nanogels are largely dependent on the fabrication approaches using which they are processed.
However, as-prepared perovskites possess certain inherent shortcomings, i.e., bad stability against water, heat, and light, which may hinder their future commercialization.64–67 The formed grain boundaries and defects work as nonradiative recombination sites in the carrier transport pathway.68–75 Both doping and component adjustment have been employed to eliminate the defect density.34,49,76–79 Moreover, the main drawbacks induced by the migration of grain boundaries and inherent ionic defects are related to the solution-processed fabrication processes at lower temperatures.80,81 In this regard, there has been extensive research on low-dimensional halide perovskites and single-crystalline bulk halide perovskites with high crystalline quality.82–84 Furthermore, considering the hazard of elemental lead (Pb) in the perovskites, the replacement of Pb with other metal ions has considerable fundamental and application significance.79,85–89 Therefore, it is highly desirable to systematically summarize the recent advances made in perovskite nanogels for typical applications.
In this aspect, we have reviewed the recent progresses made in perovskite nanogels, particularly focusing on the synthesis approaches and related applications. In particular, different synthesis routes for perovskite nanogels with various morphologies will be first introduced. Then, versatile optoelectronic applications, such as perovskite solar cells (PSCs), LEDs, photodetectors, lasing, sensing, and imaging, are discussed in detail. Finally, an outlook for research in the future and the main challenges faced by perovskite nanogels are also provided.
2. Synthesis and structure control
It is well known that perovskites are a big crystallographic family with typical ABX3 (X = Cl, Br, I, or their mixture) stoichiometry. Different morphologies and compositions of perovskite crystals result in different electron structures, followed by various optical and electronic properties. Therefore, different optical and electronic properties of perovskite materials can be realized by controllable synthesis. Until now, teams of researchers have devoted their efforts to develop many different synthesis routes toward obtaining diverse morphologies and components of perovskites crystals, and a series of universal strategies have been designed. In light of the morphologies of the as-prepared nanocrystals, they can be divided into amorphous nanoparticles (NPs), nanocubes (NCs), nanoplatelets (NPLs),49 nanowires (NWs),55,90,91 and microdisks (MDs).92 Further, according to the compositions, they can be generally divided into all-inorganic perovskites, organic–inorganic perovskites, ion-doped perovskites, and Pb-free perovskites. Accurately, the development of synthesis technology is the foundation of research on properties and applications.
2.1 Synthesis of NCs and amorphous NPs

2.1.1 Synthesis of all-inorganic perovskite NCs. 
Perovskite NCs are the most common and popular members from the family of perovskite materials. Generally, approaches for synthesizing all-inorganic perovskite NCs can be divided into two categories: direct synthesis5,93–95 and post-synthesis.77,94,96,97 As mentioned earlier, all-inorganic perovskite NCs, i.e., CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I), were firstly reported by Kovalenko et al. under the conditions of both nitrogen protection and high temperature.5 The corresponding CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs were prepared by a direct hot-injection method. In brief, PbX2 salts were added into a mixture of oleic acid (OA), oleylamine (OAm), and octadecene (ODE). Subsequently, the Cs+ precursor was added into this reaction system at the desirable (high) temperature under a nitrogen atmosphere. After that, the reaction system was subjected to rapid cooling in water at 0 °C. The as-obtained perovskite nanogels were purified via precipitation/redispersion. As shown in Fig. 1, perovskite NCs with different emission colors could be easily obtained by altering the X atom in PbX2 as well as the synthesis temperature. OAm and OA acted as surfactants in this method, and they were adsorbed on the surfaces of NCs. The function of these surfactants was to control the morphology and size of perovskite NCs. In some cases, the stability of the as-obtained NCs was improved mainly due to the existence of surfactants.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of a cubic perovskite crystal. (b and c) TEM images of as-prepared CsPbBr3 NCs. (d and e) Images and PL spectra of the all-inorganic perovskite nanogels with different emission colors under the excitation of UV light. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.5 
Besides the direct synthesis approach, CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels could also be prepared via an anion-exchange reaction. The post-synthesis method was based on the fast anion-exchange reaction between CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) and multifarious halide precursors at room temperature. For instance, the chemical composition and corresponding emission peaks for colloidal CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels can be tuned by the anion-exchange process.96 More importantly, research has also demonstrated that the inter-nanocrystal anion-exchange step was fast by mixing different kinds of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels at appropriate ratios at room temperature.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 2a and b) revealed that the perovskite NCs obtained via the anion-exchange step effectively maintained their morphologies, while the emission lights were different under UV-light illumination. Besides, the in situ PL measurement of the Br-to-I exchange in CsPbBr3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanocrystals (Fig. 2c) revealed that the anion-exchange step occurred easily and rapidly. Moreover, the dominant shift in the PL peak occurred within the first few seconds. Fig. 2d and e show that the rapid anion-exchange step could also occur between different CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanocrystals within 2 min. Interestingly, the anion-exchange process could also happen in one-dimensional NWs, as reported by Yang et al. The exchange process occurred from the ends of the NWs to the middle of the nanostructures.91,98 It should be pointed out that the anion-exchange process was also dependent upon the degree of lattice match between the different nanocrystals. For example, the anion-exchange process between Cl and I ions in the case of CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 NPs was usually not easy to happen due to lattice mismatch.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of CsPbX3 nanogels after reactions with (a) Cl− and (b) I−. (c) Time-dependent PL spectra for CsPbBr3 changing to CsPbI3 nanogels. (d and e) PL spectra and time-dependent PL spectra of the samples obtained by mixing CsPbBr3 nanogels with CsPbCl3 or CsPbI3 nanogels, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.96 
In addition, the ratios of A:B:X could be adjusted to modify the electronic and optical properties of perovskite nanogels. Perovskite nanogels with the ratio of 4:1:6 rather than that of 1:1:3 could be synthesized by using excess cesium oleate at low reaction temperatures.99 Furthermore, Cs4PbBr6 nanogels could be transformed into CsPbBr3 nanogels via reacting with excess PbBr2. More importantly, the size and size distributions of the as-prepared nanogels could be effectively maintained. The insertion of PbX2 into Cs4PbX6 nanogels provides a methodology to obtain CsPbX3 nanogels in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, and compositions, which is also an important strategy to precisely tune perovskite nanogel inks.
Cs4PbBr6 nanogels were also reported by Liu's group via the ligand-mediated transformation of presynthesized CsPbBr3 nanogels.100 This transformation was initiated by the addition of amines, and alkyl–thiol ligands significantly improved the chemical stability and size uniformity of the nanogels. The thermodynamically driven transformation, in situ monitored by an optical method, was governed by a two-step dissolution–recrystallization mechanism. The results not only revealed the decomposition pathway of CsPbBr3 nanogels but also provided an approach for the synthesis of homogeneous colloidal Cs4PbBr6 nanogels.
The counterpart of the hot-injection approach is the room-temperature synthesis method, as developed by Zeng's group.93 The principle of the low-temperature approach is based on the difference in solubility of inorganic salts between good and poor solvents. The room-temperature method is more convenient and facile because there are no exact requirements, such as the temperature and atmosphere of the reaction system, when compared with those in the hot-injection method. For example, CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs, capped with OAm and OA, could be easily obtained by simply mixing CsX in DMSO or DMF solution and PbX2 in toluene solution at room temperature. The detailed mechanism is shown in Fig. 3. In this procedure, CsX and PbX2 (X = Cl, Br, or I) were chosen as the salt sources for CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I). These inorganic salts were completely dispersed in DMSO or DMF, which are good solvents for CsX and PbX2 salts, while toluene is a poor solvent for CsX and PbX2. OA and OAm were selected as the ligands of nanocrystals during the synthesis process.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs at room temperature. (b–f) Photographs of toluene and four typical samples after the addition of various precursor solutions for 3 s: blue (c, Cl: Br = 1), green (d, pure Br), yellow (e, I: Br = 1), and red (f, I: Br = 1.5). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.93 
As shown in Fig. 3a, using a one-pot method, inorganic salts were completely dispersed in DMF/DMSO without any crystallization. Then, a solution of CsX and PbX2 was dropped into toluene, a poor solvent for those salts. DMF and toluene are mutually soluble, but the concentrations of salts in the mixed solvents were far beyond this solubility. Therefore, a highly supersaturated state was immediately formed after the salts were transferred from the good solvent to poor solvent, because of which perovskite nanocrystals rapidly recrystallized in the toluene solution. During the formation of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs, the ligands (OA and OAm) facilitate in exercising control over the morphology and size of the nanocrystals. With suitable surface functionalization by the ligands, these perovskite nanocrystals could be easily dispersed in various nonpolar solvents. Typically, as shown in Fig. 3b–f, various perovskite NCs with different emission peaks could be obtained by changing the types of ligands or the ratio of halide ions in CsX and PbX2. It should be mentioned that the products synthesized using this simple procedure could be up to the gram level and even more.93 Additionally, with regard to the surface ligands, Wei et al. developed a simple approach to prepare perovskite nanocrystals with different surface ligands at room temperature.101 Various fatty acids with different chain lengths were applied as the ligands to synthesize monodispersed CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels. Evidently, the photoluminescence quantum efficiencies (PLQEs) of the as-obtained nanogels increased with an increase in the alkyl chain length. Interestingly, the shape and size of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanogels could be controlled with a suitable (small) amount of water.102 This result broke the commonplace notion that lead halide perovskite nanocrystals decompose completely once they are exposed to polar solvents. These results verified that the controllable preparation of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskite NCs could be accomplished at room temperature and that the formation of perovskite nanocrystals could be finished within a few seconds even under an air atmosphere. The as-developed fabrication methods could afford high-yield industrial productions with low energy consumption for future commercial applications.
More recently, Zhu et al. reported that perovskite NCs could be directly prepared by the one-step grinding of only CsX and PbX2 solids at room temperature without any solvent.103 This method could avoid high reaction temperatures, toxic organic solvents, and inert gas protection. Furthermore, Koolyk et al. reported that narrow size distribution could be obtained by selecting a suitable growth time for CsPbBr3, while a higher monomer concentration was conducive to achieve a narrow size distribution for CsPbI3.104 Here, they studied the different growth processes of CsPbI3 and CsPbBr3 NCs by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and size distribution analysis. Then, they structured a model of growth dynamics. This research provided an important reference for how to realize the narrow size distribution of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs when producing a mass of these promising, highly luminescent NCs.


2.1.2 Synthesis of organic–inorganic perovskite NCs and amorphous NPs. 
When compared with all-inorganic metal halide perovskites, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites usually exhibit relatively higher efficiency in photovoltaic devices due to the more favorable bandgaps. Therefore, hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites are the most encouraging and promising candidates for fabricating next-generation energy conversion materials.105 However, excellent performance is met with instability, which undoubtedly demands stricter synthesis and storage conditions.106 Until now, hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites mainly include methylammonium lead halides (CH3NH3PbX3; X = Cl, Br, or I) and formamidinium lead halides (FAPbX3; X = Cl, Br, or I). CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) with a cubic structure was prepared for the first time by Weber et al. in 1978.107 In 2006, Miyasaka et al. reported the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) with CH3NH3PbBr3 as the light harvester, affording efficiency of 2.2%. In 2009, when bromine was changed to iodine, the efficiency increased to 3.8%.14 Various hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites have been developed, which have stunning applications in solar cells,9,46,108,109 LEDs,40,110–113 and photodetectors.114–116 Usually, hybrid perovskites are amorphous NPs.117,118 Further, 6 nm-sized CH3NH3PbBr3 NPs could be obtained via the reaction of CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 at 80 °C.57 Ammonium bromide with a medium-sized chain can be used as the surface ligand. Ligands not only limit the growth of nanocrystals in three dimensions but promote their dispersion in a wide range of organic solvents. Furthermore, owing to the protection from surface ligands, the as-prepared perovskite NPs possessed stunning stability both in the solid-state and in concentrated solutions.119–121 Perovskite NPs have high isotacticity and crystallinity (Fig. 4a). The fluorescence spectral results confirmed that a thin film of CH3NH3PbBr3 exhibited narrow bandwidth emission, similar to those of CH3NH3PbBr3 NPs in a colloidal solution (Fig. 4b and c). L. Rogach et al. reported that the emission of CH3NH3PbBr3 NPs could be tuned by controlling the precipitation temperature.58 Firstly, PbBr2, OA, OAm, and CH3NH3Br were sequentially dissolved in DMF to get a uniform solution. After that, the precursor solution (0.5 mL) was quickly injected into relatively abundant toluene (5 mL) precooled or heated at a desirable temperature ranging from 0 to 60 °C under vigorous stirring. A bright supernatant solution was obtained after centrifugation. The as-obtained CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) exhibited good monodispersity, narrow size distribution, and high crystallinity (Fig. 4d–g). The photographs under UV-light illumination, PL spectra, and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay curves for the CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs prepared at various temperatures in toluene are shown in Fig. 4h–j, respectively. These results demonstrate that the emission peaks could be adjusted by altering the reaction temperature via a ligand-assisted reprecipitation process. Furthermore, remarkable advances in the field of tunable emissions across the entire visible spectrum have been achieved; however, it is a challenge to obtain highly efficient blue-emitting perovskite nanocrystals.122–124 Recently, Ma et al. developed novel, hollow NCs of cesium lead bromide perovskites with highly efficient blue-emitting properties. These hollow NCs were synthesized via a facile solution approach involving the CsPbBr3 precursor solution containing ethylene-diammonium bromide and sodium bromide.125 The fluorescence emission from this hollow nanostructures could be tuned from green to blue on the basis of the quantum confinement effect. More importantly, the PLQEs were as high as 81%.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram and HRTEM image of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanogels. (b) PL spectra of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite NPs in toluene. (c) Film prepared with CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanogels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.57 (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images. (f and g) Single selected particle and the FFT pattern of CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs, respectively. (h) Photograph of perovskite nanogels in toluene under UV-light illumination. (i) Tunability of the PL spectra. (j) TRPL decays for PQD samples prepared at 0–60 °C. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.58 
Monodispersed hybrid organic–inorganic (FAPbBr3) nanocrystals could be synthesized via the hot-injection method, similar to that of all-inorganic perovskite NCs. Briefly, oleylammonium bromide was added into the FA–Pb precursor solution at 130 °C, which was prepared by mixing Pb acetate and FA acetate in the solvents of OA and ODE. The reaction was stopped 10 s later and cooled to ambient temperature. The samples were purified by centrifugation and washed with toluene and acetonitrile. The as-prepared FAPbBr3 NCs had a uniform cubic shape and high monodispersity (TEM images, Fig. 5c) and afforded bright luminescence (Fig. 5a).126 Moreover, the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of FAPbBr3 NCs was about 85% with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) value of 22 nm. Its tunable emission could range from 470 to 535 nm (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of FAPbBr3 nanogels in toluene under UV-light illumination. (b and c) Absorption, PL spectra, and TEM images of FAPbBr3 nanogels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.126 (d) Schematic diagram for preparing FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels with PbX2–DMSO precursor. (e) TEM image of FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. (f) Photographs and PL spectra of FAPbX3 nanogels in toluene under UV-light irradiation. (g) Thermal stabilities of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.127 
Besides the hot-injection method mentioned above, ligand-assisted reprecipitation processes were also explored to prepare FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskite nanogels.127 The formation process of nanocrystals is shown in Fig. 5d. Briefly, PbX2 (X = Cl, Br, or I) salts were dissolved in DMSO at 70 °C for 12 h to form PbX2–DMSO complexes. Then, these complexes were precipitated in toluene and dried for 24 h before being redissolved in DMF. Interestingly, although the solubility of PbCl2 was very low in DMF, the PbCl2–DMSO complex could be easily dissolved in DMF. For the preparation of FAPbX3 nanogels, OAm, FAX, and PbX2–DMSO complex were mixed in DMF, affording a transparent solution. During this stage, DMSO in the PbX2–DMSO complex exchanged with FAX, which facilitated the transformation of PbX2–DMSO into FAPbX3. Finally, the product was precipitated by dropping the solution into a substantial amount of toluene. The as-prepared nanocrystals exhibited a well-defined cubic shape with a size of about 10 nm. The photographs and PL spectra of FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels are shown in Fig. 5f. More importantly, the PL peak could be accurately tuned between the blue and NIR regions (408–784 nm) by adjusting either the coverage rate of OAm or the composition of X. As shown in Fig. 5g, FAPbBr3 nanogels were more stable than MAPbBr3 nanogels under the high-temperature condition (100 °C). Perovskite nanocrystals could also be prepared via the cation-exchange process. MA cations in MAPbX3 nanogels were easily replaced by FA cations via an in situ solid–liquid–solid cation-exchange reaction to afford FAPbX3.128
It should be emphasized that CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskites suffer from poor stability due to their higher sensitivity toward heat and moisture.129–132 To address this problem, Huang et al. developed a strategy to enhance the stability of CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs by embedding them into silica spheres derived from tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) in “waterless” toluene.66 In this research, TMOS was used as the precursor instead of a conventional silicon source, i.e., tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), because the hydrolysis rate of TMOS was much faster than that of TEOS in analytical-grade toluene. This method avoids destroying the structure of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals inherent in the introduction of water and catalyst (ammonium hydroxide). The formation process of CH3NH3PbBr3 quantum dots (QDs) coated with SiO2 (typically denoted by MAPB-QDs/SiO2) is shown in Fig. 6a. MAPB-QDs/SiO2 grew into larger spheres from several smaller spheres under stirring. According to the TEM images of MAPB-QDs/SiO2 (different stirring times) shown in Fig. 6b–e, a coating reaction occurred within 1 h, and some larger SiO2 NPs were observed when stirring for 4 h. Subsequently, the size of MAPB-QDs/SiO2 spheres increased to 150 nm at 12 h and 470 nm at 36 h. As shown in Fig. 6f, two kinds of silica precursors, namely, TEOS and TMOS, were added to the MAPB-QDs solutions. By comparison, the TMOS-modified nanocrystal solution still retained its nondecreasing bright green emission after 4 days. This indicated that the introduction of TMOS could significantly improve the stability of MAPB-QDs. Further, the evaluation of photostability (Fig. 6g–i) also demonstrated this point.
 Fig. 6  (a) Formation process of SiO2 nanospheres. (b–e) TEM images for samples with different stirring times. (f) Photographs of various MAPB-QD solutions before and after 4 days. (g) Photographs for the photostability test. (h) PL intensity and (i) change in FWHMs of the QD nanogels at different illumination times. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.66 

2.2 Synthesis of perovskite NWs
CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs could be prepared by injecting cesium oleate into a lead halide solution, with OA and OAm as the surface ligands, at 150–250 °C in a N2 atmosphere.91 As shown in Fig. 7a–f, the TEM images of CsPbBr3 NWs at different reaction points revealed that the growth of the NWs was from the NCs. Both CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NWs were PL-active. To investigate the strong quantum confinement effects in a typical 1D halide perovskite system, ultrathin CsPbBr3 NWs were successfully prepared by standard air-free techniques.55 Extremely homogeneous single-crystal NWs (d = 2.2 ± 0.2 nm) with lengths up to several microns were obtained. During the fabrication process, ethyl acetate (EA) was used as the antisolvent and it was added into the supernatant to precipitate the product. A relatively pure ultrathin NW sample (>70% purity) could be obtained when 35 equiv. of EA was added into the supernatant (Fig. 7i).
 Fig. 7  (a–f) Morphological evolution of CsPbBr3 nanostructures. Scale bar: 100 nm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.91 (g–j) Purification of CsPbBr3 NWs. Scale bar: 50 nm. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.55 (k) Photographs of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs under UV-light irradiation. (l) TEM and (m) HAADF-STEM images of CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 NWs. (n) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.54 
Single-crystalline CsPbBr3 NWs could be synthesized via the ligand-assisted direct transformation from precursor powders under ultrasonication.54 The as-prepared colloidal solution of CsPbBr3 NWs exhibited pure green emission (520 nm) under UV-light excitation (Fig. 7k and n). However, the CsPbCl3 NWs with blue fluorescence and CsPbI3 NWs with red fluorescence could not be directly prepared using this method. Subsequently, CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 NWs could be obtained via the well-known halide-ion-exchange reaction. The resulting emission from the colloidal solution of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs could cover the visible range of 400–700 nm. Interestingly, the morphology of the perovskite NWs could be effectively preserved after the halide-ion-exchange reaction (Fig. 7i). However, the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 7m) revealed that the lattice parameters of the perovskite NWs were slightly enlarged when CsPbCl3 changed to CsPbBr3 or CsPbI3 NWs, which, in turn, indicated the occurrence of halide-ion exchange. When compared with the hot-injection method, this strategy exhibits certain significant advantages, such as shorter fabrication time, lower energy consumption, and higher yield. These advantages can facilitate mass production for commercialization. Additionally, the aligned NWs of CsPbX3 on a mica substrate could be prepared via a vapor-phase epitaxial growth method.133 Chen et al. reported the vapor-phase epitaxial growth of aligned NWs and microwires networks of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) on mica substrates, which exhibited promising potential toward the direct integration into practical optoelectronic devices. To improve the stability of perovskite NWs, the same group also reported a low-temperature solution growth of FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs. Further, these NWs exhibited red-shifted emissions and distinctly better thermal stability than that of MAPbX3. They further exhibited green lasing (∼560 nm) and NIR (∼820 nm) from FAPbBr3 and FAPbI3 NWs. Further, the materials had low lasing thresholds but high-quality factors (1500–2300).62 Furthermore, Song and co-workers reported that CsPbI3 NW clusters could be synthesized via a facile solution-phase method using poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as the surfactant.134 The intermolecular hydrogen bonds of the surfactant (PMMA) acted as the driving force for assembling the NWs. Additionally, they developed a method for synthesizing high-quality CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs with different morphologies in the nonpolar solvent, i.e., octane.135 The PLQY of the as-prepared CsPbX3 NCs was over 90%. More recently, Zhu et al. constructed an intelligent cloud lab that integrated artificial intelligence (AI) with lab automation to detect chirality in perovskites, which can efficiently accelerate the speed of discovering novel materials.136
In addition, Yang's group reported the solution-phase growth of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs at low temperatures with high stability and low-threshold lasing.39 The as-prepared NWs acted as high-quality laser cavities due to their single-crystalline structure with well-formed facets. Within several weeks, the NWs displayed excellent stability under ambient conditions. Based on optical excitation, a Fabry–Pérot laser fabricated with CsPbBr3 NWs afforded low onset (5 μJ cm−2) and maximum quality factor (1009 ± 5). Excellent stability and wavelength tunability made these NW lasers attractive for device fabrication.137
2.3 Synthesis of perovskite NPLs
NPLs or nanosheets have a very small thickness as compared to their bulk states. They can exhibit significant quantum confinement effects.52,138–140 Moreover, the absorption and emission spectra of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NPLs show obvious blue-shifts, which lead to PL from CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NPLs that covers the entire visible region.141 Furthermore, NPLs and NWs generally exhibit better stability toward desorption and moisture than their three-dimensional counterparts.142 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that the energy consumed to remove an organic molecule from perovskite NPLs was ∼0.36 eV, higher than that from three-dimensional perovskites. This effect markedly reduced the desorption rate of organic ligands.143 Meanwhile, several approaches have been employed to synthesize various perovskite NPLs.50,51,97,144–146
Large-sized, well-defined, and square-shaped hybrid 2D single-crystalline (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 with single- and few-unit-cell thicknesses were prepared by a solution-phase growth method.6 As shown in Fig. 8a, the structure of a monolayer 2D perovskite comprises a Pb atom surrounded by six Br atoms and four in-plane Br atoms shared by two octahedrons, forming a 2D sheet of PbBr42−. With the evaporation of solvents, namely, DMF and chlorobenzene (CB), uniform square sheets could be effectively grown on the substrate (optical image shown in Fig. 8b). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to further confirm the thickness of the 2D (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite NPLs. As shown in Fig. 8, a sheet of 2D (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite NPLs prepared by this method was monolayer (1.6 ± 0.2 nm; Fig. 8c and e) and double layer (3.4 nm ± 0.2 nm; Fig. 8d and f).3 In addition, the fluorescence properties of the bulk (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 crystal and 2D NPLs with different thicknesses (from 3 to 22 layers) were investigated. The PL spectra revealed that the emission peak blue-shifted marginally with an increase in thickness (Fig. 8g). This blue-shift may result from lattice expansion.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structural illustration of a single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (b) Optical image of 2D square sheets. (c and e) AFM image and height profile of a single layer of these sheets, respectively. (d and f) AFM image and height profile of a double layer of these sheets, respectively. (g) PL spectrum of bulk crystal and several 2D sheets: Inset shows the TEM image of a thin (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 sheet. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.6 (h) Relationship between the thickness of NPLs and OA content. TEM and SEM images of nanostructures obtained in the 20% (i and j) and 80% (k and i) OA sample. TEM images (m) and photographs (n) of the as-prepared suspensions under UV-light illumination. (o) PL and absorption spectra of perovskite-based films. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.138 
Sichert et al. developed a facile strategy to continuously manipulate the thickness and tune the PL emission of perovskite NPLs by controlling the ratio of the organic cations in the reaction.138 The bandgap energies decreased with the formation of minibands due to stacking of perovskite NPLs.138 The obtained results demonstrated that the chain length in organic cations could influence the formation of NPLs. Further, the effective introduction of organic cations could be attributed to the strong interaction between the organic cation and Pb in perovskite crystals. When compared with an organic cation with a short chain, such as MA, the long-chain organic molecule, like octylammonium, was relatively difficult to be incorporated into the lattice of perovskite crystals. The difference in the interactions between organic cations and Pb ions could effectively arrest the crystal growth direction and facilitate the formation of perovskite NPLs. The thicknesses of the as-prepared perovskite NPLs decreased with an increase in OA in the precursor (Fig. 8h). The TEM results also verified these changes in thickness (Fig. 8i–l). Morphological changes are shown in Fig. 8m with the OA content increasing from 0 to 100%. The corresponding photographs of perovskite NPLs under UV light are shown in Fig. 8n; the colors of the perovskite suspensions were violet (100% OA), blue (90% OA), blue-green (70% OA), and green (0% OA). These changes were also verified by the PL and UV-vis spectra (Fig. 8o). Apparently, the PL peak exhibited a blue-shift from 519 nm (0% OA sample) to 427 nm (100% OA sample), and the absorption of NPLs also changed obviously. The blue-shift in the PL peak originated from the changes in the thickness of the NPLs. Since the thickness was close to the value of the exciton Bohr radius, quantum size effects could be observed, which led to a consequent blue-shift in both their fluorescence and absorption onset.147,148
Furthermore, according to DFT calculations, the observed instabilities in the metal halide perovskite toward UV light, heat, and humidity were attributed to the low formation energy.143 The stabilities of perovskites could be further improved by enhancing the formation energy. Reduced-dimensionality (quasi-2D) perovskite films were successfully prepared by introducing the intercalation of phenylethyl ammonium among the perovskite layers. The formation energy was enhanced because of the existence of quantitatively appreciable van der Waals interactions. Quasi-2D perovskite films exhibited both high performance and improved stability.
To overcome the inherent toxicity in conventional Pb-based perovskites, Pb-free cesium tin iodide perovskite (CsSnI3) NPLs were prepared by Wong et al.68 The as-prepared CsSnI3 NPLs exhibited a thickness below 4 nm with strong quantum confinement for PL at 1.59 eV.
CsPbBr3 NPLs were also synthesized via a colloidal synthesis approach.149 The nucleation and growth processes of the platelets, which could occur at the ambient temperature, were facilely triggered by the addition of acetone. The thickness of the NPLs was controlled by the growth temperature, and the thickness could be precisely adjusted from 3 to 5 monolayers. Strong excitonic absorption, narrow PL, and blue-shift of the optical bandgap could be attributed to the strong two-dimensional confinement of the carriers. CsPbCl3 NPLs exhibit blue fluorescence, which can be potentially used as blue-emitting colloidal nanocrystals. Additionally, the composition of NPLs can be tuned via anion exchange, and the morphology and size could be effectively maintained in the as-obtained CsPbBr3 or CsPbI3.
In addition, lead halide perovskite NPLs with thicknesses ranging from several atomic layers to several hundred nanometers and lateral dimensions from 5 to 30 μm were also synthesized via a two-step method.150 First, lead halide NPLs were grown on muscovite mica in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) system. Then, the as-grown NPLs were further transformed into perovskites by a gas–solid heterophase reaction with MAI molecules. The electron diffusion length of the as-obtained CH3NH3PbI3 NPLs was more than 200 nm, which was 2 times higher than the previously reported value for the film prepared using the traditional spin-coating method.
2.4 Synthesis of perovskite MDs
Different from traditional CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskite materials, the PL from perovskite-related Cs4PbBr6 is debatable. Aiming to resolve this problem, Cs4PbBr6 MDs with different shapes were prepared by a surfactant-mediated antisolvent precipitation method under ambient conditions.151 Typically, in their procedure, phase-pure Cs4PbBr6 MDs were prepared. The size and shape of the MDs were manipulated by changing the concentration of the surfactant in the precursor solution. Toluene was added into a DMF solution containing CsBr/PbBr2 (1:1) and CTAB under vigorous stirring, where CTAB was used as the ligand to control the shape and size of the samples. Since toluene is as an antisolvent for perovskites, the addition of toluene can result in a sharp increase in solution saturation, which facilitated the crystallization of Cs4PbBr6 in the growth-directing template of CTAB micelles. CTAB preferentially bonded to the (110) plane of the crystals at a concentration of 0.05 mM and therefore affording spherical MDs (Fig. 9a and f). When the CTAB concentration increased to 0.075 mM, excess ligands began to get adsorbed on the (300) plane, facilitating the formation of polygonal disks (angle >6). At higher concentrations of CTAB (0.1 mM), a hexagonal structure with sharp edges capped by CTAB surfactants were formed (Fig. 9c and e). When the CTAB concentration was up to the saturation level (i.e., 1.5 mM), hexagonal MDs and microwires could be found (Fig. 9d). Unexpectedly, the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 (MDs) exhibited strong green PL (520 nm) in the solid state, and the quantum yield was up to 38%. The UV-vis absorption, PL, and excitation spectra of the as-prepared hexagonal MDs are shown in Fig. 9g. The PL of the Cs4PbBr6 MD sample could be effectively maintained even after the addition of PbI2 (Fig. 9h).
 Fig. 9  (a–d) Morphological evolution of Cs4PbBr6 perovskite MDs at various CTAB concentrations. Scale bar: 1 μm. (e and f) SEM images of hexagonal and spherical MDs, respectively. (g) Absorption, PL excitation, and PL spectra of Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (h) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6 and CsPbBr3 solutions after the addition of PbI2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.151 
The method mentioned above necessitates high volumes of organic solvents, which is unsuitable for high-yield industrial production in future commercial applications. To address this problem, we developed an economical, environment-friendly, and reliable one-pot green wet-chemistry strategy to prepare Cs4PbBr6 MDs with DMF as the recyclable solvent.37 As shown in Fig. 10a, briefly, CsBr, PbBr2 (1:4), and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, as a surfactant) were dissolved in DMF. Then, the solution was treated at 150 °C for 3 h in a Teflon-lined autoclave. After the temperature dropped back to room temperature, phase-pure Cs4PbBr6 MDs with strong green fluorescence were obtained. More importantly, new Cs4PbBr6 MDs could be continually produced just by replenishing CsBr, PbBr2, and PVP. According to the TEM and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images shown in Fig. 10b and c, respectively, the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 MDs exhibited uniform morphology and size. Further, the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping images of Cs, Pb, and Br (Fig. 10d–g) showed uniform distribution of elements through the MDs. More interestingly, when compared with the intrinsic instability of CsPbBr3 NCs, the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 MDs exhibited excellent stability toward heat. As shown in Fig. 10h, after heat treatment at 200 °C for 2 h and then naturally cooling to 30 °C, the PL of Cs4PbBr6 MD powders exhibited a negligible decrease, while the CsPbBr3 NC powders almost lost their PL after the same heating treatment. Further, Fig. 10i shows that the stability of PL originated from the stability of the structure at higher temperatures (200 °C). The stability of Cs4PbBr6 MDs was quantified by the temperature-dependent fluorescence spectra (Fig. 10j). The PL of the Cs4PbBr6 MD powder was effectively maintained after 20 heating–cooling cycles (Fig. 10k). Therefore, these results also confirmed that the temperature-dependent fluorescence performance of Cs4PbBr6 MD powders could be attributed to thermal quenching instead of structural degradation at higher temperatures.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process. (b) TEM, (c) SEM, and (d–g) elemental mapping images of the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (h) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6 MDs and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals before and after heating treatment. (i) Temperature-dependent XRD patterns of the Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (j) FL spectra and (k) fluorescence intensity evolution of the Cs4PbBr6 MDs during heating–cooling cycles. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.37 
2.5 Synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals doped with other elements
Perovskite nanocrystals possess excellent optical and photoelectric properties, while they also suffer from poor stability toward moisture and heat.129,130,152 Thermal stability is related to the inherently low formation energies of the perovskite lattices. Based on this point, it is promising to enhance the thermal stability of perovskite nanocrystals by modulating the formation energies of perovskite lattices by doping with other elements.
Zou et al. reported an effective strategy to enhance the thermal stability of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskite nanogels via Mn2+ substitution.153 CsPbX3 and CsMnX3 crystals have an identical octahedral structure of PbX6 and MnX6 (Fig. 11a), and the ionic radius of Mn2+ is smaller than that of Pb2+. Therefore, there is potential to substitute Pb2+ with Mn2+ in perovskite CsPbX3 lattices (Fig. 11b). More importantly, the formation energies of CsMnX3 (from −33.27 to −5.61 eV) are relatively higher than those of CsPbX3 crystals (from −13.2 to −5.2 eV). Therefore, the introduction of Mn2+ ions could effectively improve the formation energies (ΔEform) of CsPbX3 QDs, which can lead to improvements in thermal stability (Fig. 11k). The TEM (Fig. 11d) and XRD (Fig. 11e) data confirmed the replacement of Pb2+ ions by Mn2+ ions in the as-prepared CsPbCl3:Mn QDs, which possessed uniform cubic morphology. The PL spectra of CsPbCl3:Mn QDs showed 2 peaks at 404 and 600 nm, instead of a single peak at 404 nm for pure CsPbCl3 QDs (Fig. 11f). To investigate the stability of CsPbX3:Mn QDs, CsPbBr3 QDs doped with various amounts of Mn2+ were coated on the surface of a glass slide, followed by operating under ambient conditions. As shown in Fig. 11j, the green PL of pure CsPbBr3 QDs decayed within 30 days and almost disappeared within 120 days under ambient air conditions, while CsPbBr3:Mn QDs still retained about 60% of their PL intensity in 120 days. Moreover, the PL brightness (green) of CsPbBr3:Mn2+ QDs gradually increased with a higher exposure time when the Mn2+ doping concentration was more than 5.6 mol%. According to the intensity of the broad emission at ∼600 nm, the PL intensities exhibited progressive enhancement with increased Mn2+ doping concentration (Fig. 11g). This could be attributed to the 4T1 → 6A1 transition of Mn2+ in CsPbCl3 nanogels. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 11h, the emission of CsPbCl3:Mn QDs could be manipulated from violet to orange-red by controlling the nominal Mn2+ doping concentration. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 11i, the PL excitation spectrum of CsPbCl3:Mn QDs was almost the same as that of pure CsPbCl3, which indicated that the broad emission of Mn2+ (∼600 nm) depended on the energy transfer from the CsPbCl3 host to Mn2+. In other words, the CsPbCl3 host was an efficient light-harvesting agent in this system.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of CsPbX3 and CsMnX3 crystal structures. (b) Schematic diagram of the lattice contraction in CsPbX3:Mn crystal. TEM and HRTEM images of (c) pure and (d) CsPbCl3:Mn QDs. (e) Corresponding XRD patterns and (f) PL spectra of CsPbCl3 and CsPbCl3:Mn QDs. (g) PL intensities for excitonic or Mn2+-related emissions of CsPbCl3:Mn QDs for various doping concentrations of Mn2+ centered at 404 and 600 nm and (h) the corresponding photographs under UV-light irradiation. (i) PL spectra of CsPbCl3 and CsPbCl3:Mn QDs at 404 and 600 nm. (j) Photographs of CsPbBr3:Mn QDs coated on a glass slide for different Mn2+ contents. (k) Schematic illustration for improving the thermal stability. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.153 
Furthermore, Pan et al. developed a modified hot-injection method to prepare CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs doped with different lanthanide ions, such as Eu3+, Sm3+, Ce3+, Er3+, Dy3+, Tb3+, and Yb3+.146 The obtained results revealed that the addition of lanthanide ions could effectively enhance the PLQY of pristine CsPbCl3 NCs and therefore could be used to readily realize the emission in the entire visible region. In some cases, NIR emission could also be achieved. Ion co-doped CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs could also be prepared via the hot-injection approach.78 Single-component white-light emission using perovskite NCs was successfully obtained by tuning the concentrations of Bi3+ and Mn2+ ions.
Stam et al. developed a facile method to prepare cation-doped CsPbBr3 NCs by the cation-exchange method. CsPb1−xMxBr3 NCs (M = Zn2+, Cd2+, and Sn2+; 0 < x ≤ 0.1) maintained the original NC size and shape.77 The partial substitution of Pb2+ by M2+ induced a blue-shift in the optical spectra, while the narrow emission, sharp absorption features, and high PLQY values (>50%) of the parent CsPbBr3 NCs were effectively maintained.
Liu et al. presented a unique understanding of the chemical mechanism of doping and the primary interactions between the dopant and semiconductor host by introducing a new family of doped NCs.76 In particular, by demonstrating the importance of relative bond strengths between the host lattice and precursor, they developed an effective method to introduce Mn2+ into the nanogels of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I). In a key step (which is not possible in sulfur semiconductor nanocrystals), they tuned the nanocrystal bandgap reversibly and finely over a wide range of energies (1.8–3.1 eV) via anion exchange. Evidently, the halide identity significantly influenced the relative intensities of the intrinsic band edge and Mn emission bands, which could be ascribed to the energy difference between the corresponding transitions of energy transfer between Mn2+ and the host.
2.6 Synthesis of Pb-free perovskite nanocrystals
The main drawback of Pb-based perovskite NCs is toxicity, which can deter large-scale commercialization. Therefore, many metals ions, such as Bi, Ge, Sn, Cu, and Sb, have been investigated as alternatives for Pb2+ in perovskites so that environmentally friendly Pb-free perovskite materials can be fabricated.86,89,154–159 Zhao et al. developed a strategy based on cation transmutation to rationally design and synthesize a series of stable Pb-free halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications.85 To balance electrical neutrality, two divalent Pb2+ ions were substituted by a monovalent M+ ion and a trivalent M3+ ion (Fig. 12a). Further, first-principles calculations revealed that this class of materials possessed a wide range of tunable optoelectronic properties and excellent phase stability, which can provide a useful direction for the progress of Pb-free perovskite nanocrystals.
 Fig. 12  (a) Candidate of A2M+M3+XVII6 perovskites. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.85 (b) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of Cs2AgBiX6 nanocrystals. TEM images of (c) Cs2AgBiCl6 and (d) Cs2AgBiBr6 nanocrystals. (e) Absorption spectra of nanocrystals from Cs2AgBiCl6 to Cs2AgBiI6. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.155 Photographs of (f) CsPbBr3-, (g) CsPbIBr2-, (h) CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2-based films. (i) Absorption spectra and (j) (Ahν)2vs. hν curves for different perovskite nanocrystals. (k and l) Normalized PCE retentions of PSCs based on CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 (RT and 100 °C) and MAPbI3/carbon (100 °C). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.47 
R. Gamelin's group reported a method to synthesize nanogels of Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl or Br) via a hot-injection method. The synthesis process for nanocrystals is shown in Fig. 12b. Briefly, 0.5 mmol Ag(OA), 0.71 mmol Cs(OA), and 0.5 mmol of Bi(OA)3 were dispersed in a mixed solution of ODE (10 mL), OAm (0.5 g), and OA (2.5 g). After being degassed and dried, the precursor solution was heated to 110 °C under a vacuum and maintained for 45 min. TMSX (X = Br or Cl; 2.7 mmol; TMS = trimethylsilyl) was rapidly added into the reaction system at 140 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere. After 10–60 s, the mixture solution was promptly cooled to ambient temperature by cooling in 0 °C water. Monodispersed Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl or Br) nanocrystals with a cubic shape were obtained after separation and purification by centrifugation. The as-prepared Cs2AgBiCl6 and Cs2AgBiBr6 possessed uniform morphology with edge lengths of ∼8 nm (Fig. 12c and d). When the as-prepared Cs2AgBiCl6 NCs were treated with TMSBr or TMSI, the conversion of Cs2AgBiCl6 nanocrystals to Cs2AgBiBr6 or Cs2AgBiI6 nanocrystals was evident from the absorption spectra (Fig. 12e).
Jellicoe et al. reported CsSnX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I, and their mixture) nanocrystals via controls over both anionic composition and quantum confinement effect.86 PL from Sn-based perovskite nanogels occurred on the pico- to nanosecond time scales via two distinct radiative decay processes. Wang et al. synthesized stable Cs2SnI6 perovskite nanocrystals by using Sn4+ to replace Pb2+.87 The shapes of the as-prepared Cs2SnI6 nanogels could be adjusted from spherical QDs, nanorods, NWs, and nanobelts to NPLs via a facile hot-injection process. The as-obtained Cs2SnI6 nanocrystals exhibited a well-defined face-centered-cubic perovskite derivative structure, which was revealed by spherical-aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cs-corrected STEM) and simulation studies.
However, the efficiency of perovskite-based devices dramatically decreased with the complete substitution of Pb2+ by other ions. Therefore, partial substitution was employed to prepare mixed perovskite NCs. Liang et al. developed CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2-based PSCs with excellent efficiency and high stability.47 When compared with CsPbX3, CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 afforded a more superior bandgap (1.79 eV) and a more suitable level of valence band maximum. The colors of the samples gradually darkened with substitutions by I− and Sn2+ (Fig. 12f–h), indicating the fact that the samples could absorb more visible light, which was further confirmed by the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 12i). More importantly, when compared with typical MAPbI3-based solar cells, CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2-based solar cells exhibited improved endurance against heat and excellent long-term stability (Fig. 12k and l).
3. Properties and applications
It is well known that the properties of nanocrystals are dependent on the structures, and their properties determine the potential applications. Because of the diverse morphologies and tunable optical properties of perovskite nanogels, they have been explored for applications in various fields. The typical fields include photovoltaics and LEDs. In addition, photodetectors and lasing based on perovskite nanogels have also been recently realized. In particular, perovskite nanogels also have excellent performance as sensor and imaging in the field of biology.
3.1 Solar cells
The exploration of halide perovskite materials as light absorbers in photovoltaics was first reported by Miyasaka's group in 2009.14 Perovskite-sensitized solar cells presented PCE of less than 4%. In their groundbreaking work, hybrid perovskites (MAPbI3) were originally used as selective sensitizers to dye molecules in a traditional DSC configuration employing a liquid electrolyte.14 The efficiency of this configuration of perovskite-sensitized solar cells increased to about 6%, as reported by Park et al., via spin-coating the perovskite precursor solution containing a mixture of CH3NH3I and PbI2 in γ-butyrolactone and therefore forming CH3NH3PbI3 nanogels on a nanocrystalline TiO2 film.15 The low efficiency of this type of device was due to the poor stability of perovskite nanocrystals in the liquid electrolytes.160 Solid-state perovskite-sensitized solar cells with efficiency over 10% were reported in 2012. Since then, hybrid halide PSCs have attracted considerable attention. Some research efforts have been focused on new perovskite materials and device configurations along with the fundamental understanding of properties and device principles.65,161–164 Consequently, unprecedented rapid developments and breakthroughs have been achieved in the field of halide PSCs.8,109,165–167 More importantly, new photovoltaic materials have demonstrated their potential applications, which are comparable to those of traditional silicon solar cells. Moreover, perovskite-based devices could be easily fabricated with solution-processed techniques, which are suitable for large-scale commercialization.168–170 Obviously, solution-processed techniques have the merits of ease of fabrication, scalability, and low cost when compared with conventional vacuum-based deposition methods.
As shown in Fig. 13a, various techniques have been applied to fabricate uniform films with specific patterns.171–173 For example, spin-coating has been widely used for the deposition of a uniform thin film due to its simplicity and good reproducibility; however, one drawback is wastage of materials. The slot-casting technique forms films by flowing the solution through a slotted head above the substrate, and therefore, this approach is suitable for high-solid-loading solutions. Additionally, direct-writing methods, such as piezoelectric inkjet printing and aerosol jet, are noncontact and no-waste approaches. They are environment-friendly and cost-effective. However, colloidal or nanoparticulate inks can clog the nozzle. Therefore, Hwang et al. combined the slot-casting technique with a gas-quenching process to fabricate pinhole-free perovskite layers for the large-scale roll-to-roll production of fully printed PSCs (Fig. 13b).174 Furthermore, different methods could be selectively employed according to the features of both solutions and films. It is well known that the quality of perovskite films dramatically influences the final photovoltaic performance of the device. Tsai et al. reported that the ageing time of a precursor solution was one of the major factors that could immensely impact the formation and crystallinity of perovskite films, such as grain growth, surface uniformity, phase purity, and trap-state density.59 As shown in Fig. 13c, the progressive ageing of precursors with different times (1, 10, 24, and 48 h) can significantly affect the formation of large crystals. Consequently, the device that was assembled with a solution aged for a long time exhibited excellent performance. This could be attributed to the high-quality films with a reduced shunt current and efficient charge transport.
 Fig. 13  (a) Depiction of various methods for film fabrication. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry.171 (b) Roll-to-roll production of PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.174 (c) Optical microscope images of perovskite films based on precursors aged for different times. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.59 (d) SEM image and (e) EDS line scanning of the ZnO@C60-based PSCs. (f) Schematic diagram of different ETLs with bandgap alignment. (g) TRPL spectra of CsPbI2Br thin films with different ETLs. (h) Efficiency of three ETLs-based PSCs. (i) J–V curve and SPO as a function of time. (j) EQE spectrum and integrated current density. (k) Normalized PCEs of CsPbI2Br and Cs0.04FA0.8MA0.16PbI0.85Br0.15 PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.48 
Generally speaking, the stability toward heat and humidity of all-inorganic perovskite nanogels is significantly higher than those of organic–inorganic perovskite nanogels. Liu et al. reported an all-inorganic PSCs with very high long-term thermal stability (Fig. 13k).48 Besides, the component and structure of the device dramatically affected its photovoltaic performance. A rational structure distribution is desirable for fabricating highly efficient PSCs (Fig. 13d and e). For example, when compared with a single ZnO electron extraction layer, ZnO@C60 bilayer exhibited high electron extraction efficiency. This improvement could be attributed to the reduced trap-state density and various multiple injection pathways (Fig. 13f). Moreover, this result was confirmed from the TRPL spectra (Fig. 13g). Therefore, the device exhibited higher PCE than the device containing single ZnO ETL (Fig. 13h–j).
The certified efficiency of organic–inorganic hybrid halide PSCs has reached 25.2%.175 Generally, most high-efficiency PSCs contain volatile MA cations, which can considerably affect the stability of devices (Fig. 14a). Therefore, Turren-Cruz et al. fabricated high-quality methylamine-free formamidine-based perovskites using the doping of inorganic cations (Rb+ and Cs+) at lower temperatures (<100 °C).176 The doping of inorganic cations not only accordingly tuned the bandgap, which contributed to the high efficiency, but also enhanced the device stability (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of MA molecule. (b) J–V curves for a Rb5Cs10FAI-based PSC device. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.176 (c) Schematic diagram of the passivation of Pb0 and I0 defects by Eu3+–Eu2+. (d) Stability of PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.177 (e) Theoretical model for the passivation of PbI defects in perovskites. (f) J–V curves of PSCs with reverse and forward scanning. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.178 
Moreover, there are many defects in the MA-cation-based hybrid halide perovskites formed using various fabrication processes. These defects act as the centers of nonradiative recombinations and therefore reduce the efficiency and stability of cells. Aiming to eliminate Pb0 and I0 defects, Zhou et al. introduced rare-earth europium redox pairs (Eu3+–Eu2+) in the perovskite precursors.177 Due to the appropriate redox potential, Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pairs could selectively oxidize Pb0 defects and reduce I0 defects, and they could be regenerated throughout the cycle, as shown in Fig. 14c. More importantly, with the introduction of rare-earth ion pairs, the optical and thermal stabilities of the devices were considerably improved (Fig. 14d). The optimized efficiency of the corresponding device was 21.52%, with certified efficiency of 20.73%.
Furthermore, the as-formed defects could react with some functional groups contained in certain small molecules, such as N–H and CO. Yang et al. demonstrated that these reactions could facilitate defect passivation. They investigated the effect of a different configuration of small molecules with the same functional groups, such as theophylline, caffeine, and theobromine, on the passivation of the surface PbI antisite defects.178 The carbonyl group in theophylline strongly reacted with the PbI antisite defects. Meanwhile, N–H on the imidazole ring could also interact with I via the hydrogen bond, which enhanced the interaction between the defect and molecules (Fig. 14e). However, in theobromine and caffeine, the passivation effect was not as good as that of theophylline due to the presence of functional groups and molecular configurations, which play a significant role in defect passivation.179 The corresponding theophylline-modified perovskite devices afforded the highest efficiency of 23.48% (Fig. 14f).
To improve the stability of all-inorganic perovskite nanogels, Yin et al. developed PVP-induced surface passivation engineering to prepare cubic CsPbI3 with extra-long-term stability.60 The as-obtained cubic-phase CsPbI3 PSCs exhibited extra-long carrier diffusion length (over 1.5 μm), high PCE of 10.74%, and prominent thermal/moisture stability. Furthermore, You et al. synthesized α-phase CsPbI3 films with high quality and excellent stability performance via a solvent-controlled growth approach. Perovskite nanocrystals were prepared in the precursor solution under a dry environment.60 Pristine α-phase CsPbI3 was ultrastable and also suitable for the optimization of device performance. The as-fabricated CsPbI3 PSCs showed PCE of 15.7% and good long-term stability. Even after more than 500 h, the PCE was only slightly changed. More recently, Sargent et al. reported a trace amount of surface-anchoring alkylamine ligands (AALs) with different chain lengths to improve the efficiency, which was used as grain and interface modifiers.180 Under simulated AM1.5 illumination, the devices operated at the maximum power point for over 1000 h without any loss of efficiency (22.3%).
Additionally, the single-junction Shockley–Queisser limit could be easily overcome by forming tandem solar cells.181,182 Sargent et al. reported that tandem solar cells combined solution-processed perovskite top cells with fully textured silicon heterojunction bottom cells.181 Perovskite–silicon tandem solar cells afforded PCE of 25.7%. More importantly, these devices exhibited negligible performance loss under the maximum power point tracking at 40 °C after 400 h. Furthermore, McGehee et al. reported a 1.67 eV-wide-bandgap perovskite top cells employing triple-halide alloys to tailor the bandgap of perovskites and stabilize the perovskite under light illumination.182 They assembled the two-terminal monolithic tandems with PCE of 27% by integrating the perovskite top cells with silicon bottom cells. There was only less than 4% degradation in the top cells under the maximum power point operation at 60 °C after 1000 h.
3.2 LEDs
With the emergence of metal halide perovskite materials, perovskite-nanogels-based light-emitting diodes (PeLEDs) have received increasing attention owing to their low fabrication cost and good device performance.183 As shown in Fig. 15a, the key components of conventional PeLEDs are electron injection layer (EIL), perovskite layer, and hole injection layer (HIL).184 The electrons and holes are injected and transported into the perovskite layer from the EIL and HIL, respectively. Then, the recombination of electrons and holes can occur in the center of the thin perovskite film, resulting in the release of a photon (Fig. 15b).184 For instance, Shi et al. reported a solution-processed all-inorganic heterostructure perovskite LEDs with high emission efficiency and excellent operational stability.185 As shown in Fig. 15c, the solutions of C10H14NiO4 in acetonitrile, CsPbBr3 perovskite nanogels in hexane, and ZnO NPs in chlorobenzene were spin-coated seriatim on indium tin oxide (ITO) to form the HIL, perovskite layer, and EIL, respectively. Fig. 15d shows a well-defined multilayered configuration with regular element distribution. To assess the PeLED performance, a series of parameters were sequentially measured. As shown in Fig. 15e, the as-fabricated PeLEDs exhibited that the current density (dotted red line) and luminescence (dotted blue line) were highly dependent on the applied voltages. More importantly, the turn-on voltage of the device was ∼2.8 V, which is less than those of previously reported perovskite QD-based LEDs.186–188 Moreover, the resultant device exhibited green emission (∼519 nm) with different electroluminescence (EL) intensities at different bias voltages from 3.0 to 8.0 V (Fig. 15f).
 Fig. 15  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the LED device. (b) Schematic diagram of the charge injection/recombination process. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.184 (c) Photographs of C10H14NiO4 QD, CsPbBr3 QD, and ZnO NP solutions. (d) SEM image and elemental mapping images of the device. (e) Dependence of the current density and luminance on the applied voltage. (f) EL spectra measured at various voltages. (g) EQE, current efficiency, and power efficiency of the LED. (h) Peak EQE of 30 devices. (i) Emission intensity of a perovskite LED. (j) EL spectra of the LED. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.185 (k–m) Diagram, EL spectrum, and optical images of the WLED device, respectively. (n) Color temperatures of the devices. (o) CIE color coordinates. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.93 
As shown in Fig. 15g and h, the as-fabricated PeLED device showed relatively high external quantum efficiency (EQE), power efficiency, and current efficiency at a low injection current density as compared to the devices discussed in earlier reports.188–190 This improved performance could be ascribed to the lower energy loss during the charge injection and transport processes. Furthermore, this all-inorganic perovskite-based QD LEDs exhibited prominent operational stability under continuous bias voltages (4.0, 6.0, and 8.0 V; Fig. 15i). The heating effect could lead to nonradiative recombinations and therefore emission decay. However, after a short period of nonoperation (∼20 min), the emission intensity could be restored, as shown in Fig. 15j.
The excellent photoelectric characteristics ensure their broad application prospects in white LEDs with adjustable color temperatures and wide color gamut. For example, Li et al. successfully fabricated white LEDs consisting of blue LED chips and IPQDs/PMMA composites (Fig. 15k).93 Red-white, white, and green-white lights were obtained from the three typical devices assembled with all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskite nanogels, respectively (Fig. 15l and m). The color temperature of the resulting LEDs could be adjusted from 2500 to 11500 K (Fig. 15n) by regulating the component ratio of green and red PQDs. More importantly, pure colors (Fig. 15o) could cover areas that were much larger than that of the color space promulgated by the National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) color standard.5
Until now, two kinds of excitonic recombination mechanisms have been reported, i.e., first-order excitonic radiation and second-order excitonic radiation. Generally, the latter, which is a slow bimolecular recombination, mainly occurred in bulk perovskites. Recently, the first-order excitonic radiation has been observed in low-dimensional perovskite materials. Huang et al. revealed the fast bimolecular recombination in lead halide perovskite nanogels for EL applications.191 Next, Demir's group developed high-efficiency PeLEDs based on this type of excitonic recombination mechanism.192 Consequently, at luminance levels above 1000 cd m−2, the resultant devices could achieve EQE of 12.9% and power efficiency of 30.3 lm W−1. You et al. reported an efficient green LED based on quasi-2D perovskite nanogels. Its composition and phase were engineered via surface passivation to decrease the defects and increase the phase purity.193 Accordingly, green LEDs based on perovskite nanogels reached high current efficiency (62.4 cd A−1) and excellent EQE (14.36%). More recently, Yao et al. reported an efficient and stable pure red (637 nm) perovskite LED based on CsPbI3−xBrx nanogels passivated with potassium bromide.194 Due to the fact that the potassium ions present on the surface of CsPbI3−xBrx nanogels bind with the bromide ions, the LED device afforded good EL stability and excellent performance (maximum brightness of 2671 cd m−2 and maximum EQE of 3.55%).
3.3 Photodetectors
Photodetectors are devices that can convert optical signals, such as UV, visible, and NIR light, into electrical signals, i.e., photocurrent. Therefore, photodetectors have been extensively employed as fundamental devices in defense, automatic control, optical communications, and biomedical sensing.53,137,195–197
Huang's group designed solution-processed CH3NH3PbI3 photodetectors with high photoconductive gain and broad spectral response.43,44 The formulated photodetector was an inverted structure with an ITO cathode, CH3NH3PbI3 active layer, 4,4′-bis[(p-trichlorosilylpropylphenyl)phenylamino]-biphenyl (TPD–Si2) hole transport layer, and molybdenum trioxide (MoO3)/Ag anode (Fig. 16a). According to the temporary response of the photocurrent, the device had a short rise time and biexponential photocurrent decay. The fast- and slow-component time constants were 5.7 ± 1.0 and 41 ± 3.2 μs, respectively (Fig. 16b).
 Fig. 16  (a) Device structure of the photodetector. (b) Transient photocurrent of the photodetector. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.43 (c) Schematic diagram of the photodetectors based on nanorods. (d) SEM image of CsPbI3 nanorods. (e) SEM image of the device with nanorods and Au electrode. (f) Typical logarithmic I–V characteristics of the photodetectors under irradiation and in the dark. (g) Reproducible on/off switching under 405 nm illumination. (h) Transient response under illumination (405 nm). (i) Time-response curves of a CsPbI3 nanorod photodetector. (j) Relationship between the photocurrents and light intensities. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.41 
Recently, Yang et al. reported a superior photodetector based on CsPbI3 nanorods with rapid response and excellent stability.41 CsPbI3 nanorods were synthesized with a uniform size distribution in both diameter and length. The schematic of the photodetector device assembled with CsPbI3 nanorods is shown in Fig. 16c. The SEM image (Fig. 16e) revealed that both the ends of a single nanorod in the nanodevice were covered by a 30 nm Au layer with a separation distance of 1 μm. The typical current–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured under light (405 nm, 10.69 mW cm−2) and dark conditions. The typical photocurrent under light illumination was 3 orders of magnitude higher than those under dark at a bias voltage of 2 V (Fig. 16f). The photodetector device induced a quick response under light illumination (Fig. 16g), and it displayed two distinct photocurrents when the irradiation was turned on and off. The photocurrent increased dramatically when the light was turned on. The response and recovery times for the photodetector were measured to be ∼0.05 and 0.15 ms, respectively. Moreover, the photocurrent of the photodetector device increased with an increase in the light intensity (Fig. 16i). These results demonstrated that the photocurrent was highly dependent on the intensity of illumination light (Fig. 16j). Ma et al. reported a high-performance photodetector based on a single-crystalline perovskite thin film, which has excellent performance with gain of 50 million, gain bandwidth of 70 GHz, and 100-photon-level detection limit under 180 Hz modulation bandwidth.114 The superior device performance could be attributed to the replacement of the polycrystalline film with a thickness-optimized single-crystalline film, which possessed high mobility (60 cm2 V−1 s−1) and long recombination time revealed by the lifetime (242 ns) measurement.
At the same time, Tang's group reported highly sensitive and fast-response UV photodetectors using Pb-free double perovskite single crystals (Cs2AgInCl6).42 Highly sensitive (detectivity of ∼1012 Jones), fast (3 dB bandwidth of 1035 Hz), and stable UV photodetectors (device performance could still maintain 90%) of the initial value after storage for 60 days in the environment (∼25 °C, 55% relative humidity) were constructed with Cs2AgInCl6 single crystals, demonstrating their potential for a stable and environmentally friendly alternative to lead halide perovskites.
3.4 Lasers
The successful fabrication of high-performance lasers based on various perovskite nanogels can be attributed to the low nonradiative recombination rate and long carrier lifetime in the perovskite layer, which are the ideal physical properties for semiconductor lasers.4 For example, Yakunin et al. developed low-threshold amplified spontaneous emission and lasing from monodispersed colloidal perovskite nanogels (size: 10 nm).38 Two types of lasing modes were successfully observed using CsPbX3 nanocrystals. The as-synthesized CsPbX3 NCs had tunable emission and uniform size and morphology (Fig. 17a–c). In the absorption spectra, an excitonic peak was observed for the CsPbBr3-NC-based film (Fig. 17d). The amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from CsPbX3 NCs could be observed from the film with a thickness of about 400 nm. The ASE was distinctly different from its PL emission under the excitation at 400 nm with 100 fs pulses (Fig. 17e). In particular, the ASE had a narrow FWHM of about 4–9 nm with red-shifting of about 10 nm when compared with its PL peak. More importantly, similar to its PL spectra, the peak of the ASE could be easily regulated within the entire visible region by changing the composition of CsPbX3 NCs (Fig. 17f). As shown in Fig. 17g, the threshold of the as-fabricated ASE was about 5.3 ± 1 μJ cm−2 for CsPbBr3-based films. The net modal gain has been considered as one of the figures of merit to evaluate the efficiency of light amplification and quality of the resonator material for lasing applications. Optical gain could be estimated using the adjustable stripe length method (shown in Fig. 17h). The emission intensity can be measured as a function of stripe length (L). This experiment revealed that the ASE threshold was 450 μJ cm−2. Due to the excellent optical performance, whispering gallery mode (WGM) and random lasing from CsPbX3 NCs were successfully observed (Fig. 17i and j).
 Fig. 17  (a and b) Photographs and PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively. (c) TEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs. (d) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPbBr3 NC films. (e) Pump-fluence dependence of the emission from a CsPbBr3 NC film. (f) Spectral tunability of ASE. (g) Threshold behavior for the intensity of the ASE band of the CsPbBr3 NC film. (h) Variable stripe length experiment for the estimation of modal net gain for CsPbBr3 NC films. (i) Evolution from PL to WGM lasing. (j) Single-pump laser shot mode structure of random lasing from CsPb(Br/Cl)3 NC films. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.38 
Zhu et al. reported that the lead halide perovskite NW laser has low lasing threshold (220 nJ cm−2) and high quality factor (Q: ∼3600).4 These good performances could be ascribed to the long carrier lifetime and low nonradiative recombination rate. Xiao et al. found high-efficiency two-photon absorption at 800 nm (cross-section: 2.7 × 106 GM) when CsPbBr3 nanogels were dispersed in toluene.63 Further, they successfully developed two-photon-pumped perovskite lasers with a remarkably low threshold value (∼0.8 mJ cm−2). To overcome the instability of all-inorganic perovskite QDs-based nanolasers, Qu et al. constructed plasmonic nanolasers, where perovskite QDs were embedded in dual-mesoporous silica.198 Organic–inorganic hybrid silica shells of the nanocomposites protected the perovskite QDs from water and endowed the nanocomposites with super hydrophobicity.
3.5 Sensors
Until now, perovskite nanogels have been extensively applied for gas sensing,34,35,199,200 temperature sensing,37,61,201 humidity sensing,88,202,203 ion sensing,79,204 and visual UV-light sensing.205 It is well known that the temperature, humidity, and polarity of solvents can influence the structure, luminescence property, or chemical resistance of perovskite nanogels, respectively. Therefore, any changes can be used to develop reliable and recoverable sensing systems. Most of these sensors can be classified as chemical-resistance-type and optical-type devices.
Chi et al. developed a new fluorescent gas sensor using CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs. These PQDs were embedded in superhydrophobic silica aerogels to protect them from being degraded by water.36 The fluorescence intensity of the compound was quickly quenched when it reacted with gaseous SO2 (sections a–e in Fig. 18A). Moreover, the fluorescence intensity could recover when exposed to a N2 atmosphere (sections f–j in Fig. 18A). The obtained results demonstrated that CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs could detect SO2 gas. The corresponding mechanism is shown in Fig. 18B. In general, CH3NH3PbBr3 PQDs could absorb blue light and emit green light according to the absorption spectra. When the PQDs were exposed to SO2 gas, the S atom in SO2 coordinated with the Pb atom in PQDs. This coordination could lead to non-emission energy transfer and therefore the quenching of fluorescence.
 Fig. 18  (A) Photographs taken every 2 s for PQDs@AGs-based gas sensor by initially passing pure SO2 through the cell (a–e) and subsequently passing pure N2 through the cell (f–j). (B) Proposed mechanism for the quenching of PQDs@AGs fluorescence by SO2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.36 
Additionally, McNeill's group reported functionalized optical fiber probes, which comprised MAPbBr3 crystals and PMMA polymer to detect ammonia gas.206 Moreover, Saraf et al. reported that MAPbBr3 could act as a pressure-sensitive material. The as-prepared sensor device presented a linear response of 76 kPa and sensitivity of 0.57 kPa−1.207 Meanwhile, Chen et al. fabricated a humidity sensor based on CH3NH3PbBr3 nanogels prepared by a grinding method.202 Pristine hybrid perovskites showed an emission peak at 530 nm (Fig. 19a). When the ambient humidity increased from 7% to 98%, linear fluorescence quenching was observed (Fig. 19b). The results of the fluorescence lifetime and recyclability time revealed that CH3NH3PbBr3 nanogels showed potential applications in real-time humidity sensing (Fig. 19c and d).
 Fig. 19  (a) Humidity-dependent PL spectra. (b) Calibration curve of the humidity sensor. (c) Fluorescence decay in the dry and humid states. (d) Reversible conversion of a perovskite humidity sensor. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.202 (e) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6/PDMS. (f) FL spectra and (g) peak intensity of Cs4PbBr6/PDMS composite under different temperatures. (h) Calibration curve of the temperature sensor. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.37 
We developed a temperature sensor based on Cs4PbBr6 NPs encapsulated in a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film. Cs4PbBr6 perovskites possessed bright green fluorescence synthesized via an environmentally friendly approach.37 The composite disk displayed both excellent recovery ability and temperature sensitivity between 30 and 200 °C (Fig. 19e and f). Furthermore, the natural logarithm of fluorescence intensity (log(I)) had a linear relationship with temperature (T), which also indicated the feasibility of the composited material for temperature sensing (Fig. 19h). Meantime, Pb-free halide perovskite nanogels have also been developed for sensing applications. Zhan et al. reported a Pb-free double perovskite material (Cs2BiAgBr6) with extraordinary humidity sensitivity and outstanding stability.88 The typical response speed and recovery speed were about 1.78 and 0.45 s, respectively. The excellent humidity sensitivity could be attributed to the adsorption of water molecules on the surface of Pb-free double perovskites.
3.6 X-ray imaging and bioimaging
Due to the high absorption coefficient for X-ray radiation, halide lead perovskite nanogels have also been explored for bioimaging applications. Halide lead perovskite nanogels could be used as high-resolution, low-radiation, and low-cost X-ray imaging reagents.45 Yakunin et al. reported an X-ray detector based on MAPbI3 perovskites, exhibiting X-ray sensitivity of 25 μC mGyair−1 cm−3 and responsivity of 1.9 × 104 carriers per photon.208 Kovalenko et al. investigated the potential applications of such inexpensive perovskite nanogels to sensitively detect X-ray photons by direct photon-to-current conversion.208 Park's group fabricated an X-ray detector employing large-area, amorphous MAPbI3 perovskite films synthesized by a two-step solvothermal process.209 The as-fabricated X-ray detector is shown in Fig. 20a. Aiming to reduce the dark current, a two-layer polyimide (PI)–perovskite compound was implanted into the device. The photoconductor layer, i.e., polycrystalline MAPbI3 (MPC), was then printed on the PI–MAPbI3. The hole-blocking layer and hole-transporting layer were consequently deposited on the top and bottom of the (PI)–perovskite, respectively (Fig. 20b). ITO was biased toward a positive voltage source. The measured pixel current and bias voltage (10–200 V) fell into the Hecht equation, affording a sensitivity range of 0.3–3.8 μC mGyair−1 cm−2 (Fig. 20c). Fig. 20d shows an X-ray image of a hand obtained with the detector that afforded lower cost and higher sensitivity (11 μC mGyair−1 cm−3, 100 kV) than commercial medical CsI and α-Se materials. It is a breakthrough to build them on thin-film transistor arrays for the first time. Moreover, Zeng et al. reported a stable and sensitive scintillator for X-ray imaging based on CsPbBr3@Cs4PbBr6 halide perovskites. Consequently, to show the formidable potential for practical applications, high-quality images of the interior structures for the target material (a capsule containing a spring inside) were obtained.210
 Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of the X-ray detector. (b) Photograph of spin-cast PI-MAPbI3 on the TFT backplane and MPCs printed on PI–MAPbI3. (c) Charge collection and sensitivity of the X-ray detector. (d) A hand phantom X-ray image from the MPC detector. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.209 
Meanwhile, halide perovskite nanogels have been widely applied as bioimaging probes. Fu et al. synthesized CsPbX3 NCs encapsulated in polystyrene (PS) microhemispheres (MHSs) to form water-fast NCs@MHSs composites and used them as multicolor luminescence probes in bio-cellular imaging.211 Three typical NCs@MHSs with blue, green, and red colors were implanted in RAW 264.7 macrophages via endocytosis (Fig. 21a-2, b-2, and c-2), and the corresponding confocal fluorescence images are shown in Fig. 21. Interestingly, the PL spectra of NCs@MHSs in the macrophages were similar to those for NCs@MHSs in solutions. More importantly, the intensity could be effectively maintained for several hours (Fig. 21d–f). Furthermore, the absorption of CsPbX3 NCs could be adjusted to cover the entire UV-vis-NIR region by regulating the composition of halogens in the perovskite NCs (Fig. 21g). Because of the high quantum yield, narrow emission linewidths (12–34 nm), and good water stability in the nutshell, the CsPbX3 NCs@MHSs showed potential applications in the field of bioimaging.
 Fig. 21  (a-1, b-1 and c-1) Bright-field, (a-2, b-2 and c-2) fluorescence images and (a-3, b-3 and c-3) overlaid pictures of RAW 264.7 cells incubated with CsPbX3 NCs@MHSs. Scale bars in (a–c) are 15 μm. (d–f) PL spectra of intracellular CsPbX3 NCs@MHSs. (g) Fluorescence image of a mixture of neat and mixed-halide NCs-tagged beads. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.211 
To enhance the water-resistance ability of PQDs, Lin's group used PS to coat PQDs to form PQD/PS microspheres.67 The fluorescence of PQDs was not quenched, and the fluorescence intensity was positively correlated with the number of PQDs encapsulated by the PS microspheres. The merits of excellent water stability, high quantum yield, and low cytotoxicity ensured that PQDs@PS could be applied as cellular-labeling agents. Stimulated emission depletion (STED) nanoscopy is one of the most promising super-resolution imaging techniques for microstructure imaging. Qu et al. proposed that perovskite CsPbBr3 NPs may be a more effective probe for use in STED nanoscopy owing to its high PLQY and large absorption cross-section. They formulated CsPbBr3-assisted STED nanoscopy, which showed excellent photobleaching resistance and ultrahigh lateral resolution of 20.6 nm under 27.5 mW STED laser irradiation.212
4. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, lead halide perovskite nanogels have demonstrated tremendous progress in both synthesis methodologies and typical applications over the past few years. Numerous investigations have focused on the material engineering of lead halide perovskite nanogels, aiming to achieve highly efficient devices. The size, morphology, electronic structure, carrier transport, and recombination depend on the controllable synthesis methods and processing techniques.8,9,11,13,57 This review summarizes the recent research progress made in lead halide perovskite nanogels by focusing on their compositions, synthesis approaches, properties, and applications. Both solution-phase and vapor-phase methods have been successfully employed to prepare high-quality perovskite nanocrystals and subsequent perovskite films. The key step during the synthesis process is to controllably adjust or balance the nucleation and growth processes with various typical morphologies. The expected perovskite samples are free of defects, voids, and pinholes. Various posttreatment steps, such as thermal, optical, and chemical methods, have been applied to induce grain growth to eliminate grain boundaries or defects, which can serve as recombination sites within the carrier transport path. High-performance PSCs with efficiency of over 20% have been reported from many research groups employing different device configurations and deposition methods. Nonetheless, some issues still need to be resolved in the future for real industrial applications.
First, the long-term stabilities of perovskite nanogels and their devices remain challenging. Poor stability against environmental factors, such as heat, light, oxygen, and humidity, originates from the soft nature of perovskites. Although several strategies, such as doping with other metal ions, coating with a thin layer, changing the surface ligands, and incorporating some additives, have induced positive effects on the stability and performance, new approaches are needed to be further explored to determine stable perovskite nanogels. Chemical passivation and surface-ligand termination have shown hopeful applications in devices for better long-term stability. Alkali metal or anion doping has proven to be an effective way to improve the long-term operability of perovskite-based devices. Until now, the reported data about stability are up to several months, even under sunlight irradiation.65,177,195,213
Moreover, the design and synthesis of new metal halide perovskites have been considered as the next research hotspots. Varieties in both composition and structure of perovskites could create several chances for exploring high-performance analogs. More importantly, the replacement of Pb ions with other metal ions is urgently needed, considering the toxicity problem of Pb-contained materials. There are many metal ions that have the potential to replace Pb and afford Pb-free perovskites, such as Sn2+, Sn4+, Pd4+, Ag+, and Bi3+. Additionally, rare-earth elements have demonstrated their potential functions in perovskite materials and devices. The incorporation of typical rare-earth elements could be used to adjust the valence band and light-harvesting range of perovskite materials. The ionic radius and chemical valence can influence the perovskite structure. The variable compositions, valence states, and electronic structures of perovskites can enable the formation of new perovskites and broaden their applications, such as “perovskite neural trees” and “biomimetic eye” based on perovskite NW arrays.214,215 Furthermore, the stability of Pb-free perovskites can be largely enhanced by changing the compositions or forming composite materials. Additionally, more fundamental investigations, such as theoretical calculations and new characterization techniques, are needed to fully understand the material properties and charge-carrier dynamics associated with lead halide perovskites. For instance, the details of how metal doping enhances the performance of perovskites are still lacking in this field. More theoretical interpretations are needed to better explain the nature of nonradiative recombination processes and PL quenching in perovskite nanogels. Effectively understanding such detailed mechanisms can contribute toward improving the device performance.7,31,169
Finally, more studies are also needed to resolve the following problems, such as mass production of perovskite nanogels, improving the reproducibility of perovskite-based devices, large-area devices, large-scale batch production of flexible devices, and related encapsulation technologies. Controllable synthesis in mass production, with uniform morphologies and good dispersion, is a formidable challenge. Although there are several shortcomings of metal halide perovskite nanogels, the problems can be gradually resolved by the efforts of scientists from different backgrounds, including theoretical physics, chemistry, materials science, etc. In the near future, commercial perovskite-based products can be available in markets.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21675009 and 21771019), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (XK1901, buctrc202023 and buctrc201812).
Notes and references
C. K. Moller, Nature, 1958, 182, 1436 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 344, 458 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Letian, A. B. Wong, Y. Yi, L. Minliang, K. Nikolay, S. W. Eaton, F. Anthony, C. G. Bischak, M. Jie and D. Tina, Science, 2016, 349, 1518–1521 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, J. Y. Zhengshan, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey and E. J. Wolf, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bi, H. Chen, F. Xie, Y. Wu, W. Chen, Y. Su, A. Islam, M. Grätzel, X. Yang and L. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4090–4092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–5 Search PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, H. J. Jung, I. J. Park, B. W. Larson, S. P. Dunfield, C. Xiao, J. Kim, J. Tong, P. Boonmongkolras and S. G. Ji, Science, 2020, 368, 155–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, F. Li, Z. Lai, Z. Cai, Y. Wang, O. S. Wolfbeis and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23335–23343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kakavelakis, E. Gagaoudakis, K. Petridis, V. Petromichelaki, V. Binas, G. Kiriakidis and E. Kymakis, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 135–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. You, J. Wu and Y. Chi, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 5058–5066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, H. Wang, X. Yin and L. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 1065–1070 CrossRef .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. D. Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Eaton, M. Lai, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, L. Dou, J. Ma, L. W. Wang, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Xin, A. Perumal, A. Bruno, N. Yantara and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1770–1778 RSC .
T. Yang, Y. Zheng, Z. Du, W. Liu, Z. Yang, F. Gao, L. Wang, K. C. Chou, X. Hou and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Li, F. Yi and G. Niu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1912–1918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rui, F. Yanjun, C. Jungseok, D. Jun, X. Zhengguo, D. Qingfeng, Y. Yongbo, C. Andrea, Z. X. Cheng and H. Jinsong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1912–1918 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Büchele, M. Richter, S. F. Tedde, G. J. Matt, G. N. Ankah, R. Fischer, M. Biele, W. Metzger, S. Lilliu and O. Bikondoa, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 843–848 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, P. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, L. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14009–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Fan and Y. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3825–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Weidman, M. Seitz, S. D. Stranks and W. A. Tisdale, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7830–7839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Bohn, Y. Tong, M. Gramlich, M. L. Lai, M. Döblinger, K. Wang, R. L. Z. Hoye, P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. D. Stranks, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5231–5238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Weidman, A. J. Goodman and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5019–5030 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Waleed, Y. Xiao, K. H. Tsui, Y. Lin, L. Liao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9657 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, B. J. Bohn, E. Bladt, K. Wang, P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Bekenstein, A. B. Wong, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13155–13158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kong, H. Hu, K. Egbo, B. Dong, L. Wan and S. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 1325–1328 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Schmidt, P. Antonio, G. C. Soranyel, M. Olga, A. Said, M. E. Guillermo, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and P. P. Julia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, A. S. Susha, S. V. Kershaw, T. F. Hung and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 581–583 Search PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, Y. H. Lin, J. C. Blancon, S. Tretiak, J. Even, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602159 CrossRef .
P. Wang, Z. Xingwang, Z. Yuqin, J. Qi, Y. Qiufeng, C. Zema, L. Xingxing, Y. Xiaolei, Y. Zhigang and Y. Jingbi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xing, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, Y. W. Yuan, C. Shen, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4571–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Wu, X. Zhang, G. Xing, W. W. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3761–3768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 6, 17135 CrossRef .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, Z. Li, L. Kong, N. Zhu, A. Shan and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5749–5752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yi, X. Deng, Z. Xie, X. Cai, S. Liang, P. A. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703535 CrossRef .
A. B. Wong, Y. Bekenstein, J. Kang, C. S. Kley, D. Kim, N. A. Gibson, D. Zhang, Y. Yu, S. R. Leone and L. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2060–2066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. n. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. H. Woo, Y. Heo, J. Seidel, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi and D. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Z. Chu, M. Yang, P. Schulz, D. Wu, X. Ma, E. Seifert, L. Sun, X. Li, K. Zhu and K. Lai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Li, J.-Y. Ma, Q.-Q. Ge, J.-S. Hu, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28518–28523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
Z.-G. Zhou, Z.-L. Tang and Z.-T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 356–361 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Q. Lin, H. Li, K. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954–14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. W. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shao, X. Bai, H. Cui, G. Pan, P. Jing, S. Qu, J. Zhu, Y. Zhai, B. Dong and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1023–1029 RSC .
N. Ding, D. Zhou, G. Pan, W. Xu, X. Chen, D. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Ji and H. Song, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8397–8404 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop and J. B. Macdonald, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 581–582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15718–15719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang and Y. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
X.-G. Zhao, J.-H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S.-H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. F. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, D. Credgington and N. C. Greenham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, X. Yan, M. Zhang, S. Sun, M. Yang, W. Shen, X. Pan, P. Wang and Z. Deng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8132–8140 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Weng, J. Qin, A. A. Umar, J. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Cui, X. Li, L. Zheng and Y. Zhan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902234 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y.-F. Xu, B.-X. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, 1703762 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, M. Siron, M. Gao, D. Lu, Y. Bekenstein, D. Zhang, L. Dou, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1453–1458 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, Y. Shu, Y. Tian, Y. Xin and B. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16385–16388 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, D. I. Valerio, A. Sara, S. Alice, P. Annamaria, P. Mirko and M. Liberato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wang, W. Xue, W. Wang, W. Zhu and L. Zhao, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 785–789 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Wang, L. Wu, L. Li, H.-B. Yao, H.-S. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8328–8332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lai, A. Obliger, D. Lu, C. S. Kley, C. G. Bischak, Q. Kong, T. Lei, L. Dou, N. S. Ginsberg, D. T. Limmer and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 11929–11934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. Park, E. Radicchi, F. Nunzi, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis, R. Brescia, P. Rastogi, M. Prato and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1924–1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Bekenstein, X. Ye, S. C. Nguyen, J. Swabeck, D. Zhang, S. T. Lee, P. Yang, W. Ma and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5309–5312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, Y. Yang, X. Kang, W. Lan, L. Huang and D. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7265–7268 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Bai, H. Wu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3337–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhu, Q. Q. Yang, L. F. Gao, L. Zhang, A. Y. Shi, C. L. Sun, Q. Wang and H. L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1610–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koolyk, D. Amgar, S. Aharon and L. Etgar, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6403–6409 RSC .
S. Ma, M. Cai, T. Cheng, X. Ding, X. Shi, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, Y. Ding, Z. a. Tan and S. Dai, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 1257–1277 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, H. Dong and W. Hu, Sci. China Mater., 2015, 58, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O’Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. Eisayed and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad and X. Guo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 657–663 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdijalebi, Z. Andajigarmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter and A. J. Pearson, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Yang, J. Qi, P. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Tan, Y. Yang, M. Wei and B. R. Sutherland, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, F. Yan, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, R. Zeng, H. V. Demir, X. Sun and A. Huan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Wong, M. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. Dou, A. Fu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519–5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, J. Khurgin, N. X. Fang, X. Zhang and R. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704333 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, D. H. Lim, B. Kim, S. H. Lee, M. S. Lee and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 52, 2067–2070 RSC .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. D. Ren, J. K. Sun, X. J. Liu, J. R. Zhang, Q. B. Wei, H. B. Fan, F. Y. Yu, X. Zhang, C. M. Zhao and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, Z. Li, C. Zhang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang, Q. Wan, L. Kong and L. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1461–1465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, H. Li, K. Kolodziejski, C. Dun, W. Huang, D. Carroll and S. M. Geyer, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 762–768 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Feng, Z. Tu, K. Su, X. Fan, B. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao and B. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 3129–3134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Z. Gao, H. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Deng, P. Li, H. Li, Z.-H. Zhang, C. Fan and W. Bi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5116–5123 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mehetor, H. Ghosh and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Z. Hoye, M.-L. Lai, M. Anaya, Y. Tong, K. Gałkowski, T. Doherty, W. Li, T. N. Huq, S. Mackowski, L. Polavarapu, J. Feldmann, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, R. H. Friend, A. S. Urban and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1181–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Worku, Y. Tian, C. Zhou, H. Lin, M. Chaaban, L.-j. Xu, Q. He, D. Beery, Y. Zhou, X. Lin, Y.-f. Su, Y. Xin and B. Ma, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz5961 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14202–14205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Minh, J. Kim, J. Hyon, J. H. Sim, H. H. Sowlih, C. Seo, J. Nam, S. Eom, S. Suk, S. Lee, E. Kim and Y. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5713–5719 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hills-Kimball, Y. Nagaoka, C. Cao, E. Chaykovsky and C. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5680–5684 RSC .
M. Faghihnasiri, M. Izadifard and M. E. Ghazi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27059–27070 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ciccioli and A. Latini, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3756–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Xue, D. Luo, C. Huang, L. Liu, X. Qiao, C. Liu, Q. Song, C. Yan, Y. Li and T. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yin and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11569–11574 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Fu, L. Samad, L. Dang, Y. Zhao, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 460–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, L. Zhao, L. Peng, X. Li, K. Zheng, J. Qu and J. Song, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8266–8269 RSC .
S. Ye, M. Zhao, J. Song and J. Qu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4654–4663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Li, R. Liu, Y. Tu, Y. Li, J. Cheng, T. He and X. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zeng, H. Zhou, R. Liu and H. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, C. R. GarcãA, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw and J. K. Stolarczyk, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521–6527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tyagi, S. M. Arveson and W. A. Tisdale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1911–1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, S. Dai, K. Zhou, G. Liu, B. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. Pan, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 508–518 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Hintermayr, A. F. Richter, F. Ehrat, M. Döblinger, W. Vanderlinden, J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, L. Polavarapu, J. Feldmann and A. S. Urban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9478–9485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao and A. Amassian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho, Y.-H. Choi, T. E. O’Loughlin, L. De Jesus and S. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6909–6916 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. Ma and H. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Muhammad, X. Xu, M. Ran, Q. Zhang, J. Zhong, F. Zhuge, H. Li, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000102 CrossRef .
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. L. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and N. Herron, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. G. Motti, A. R. Srimath Kandada, E. Mosconi, V. D’Innocenzo, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, B. A. Kamino, L. Miranda, F. De Angelis, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Ha, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seth and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4461–4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 165–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zou, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. Liu, R. Feng, F. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng and M. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443–11450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Chen, F. Hong, X. Mao, K. Zheng, S. Yang, Y. Li, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12471–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, X. Mao, F. Hong, W. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Xia, S. Yang, W. Deng and K. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17001–17006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qi, X. Fu, T. Yang, D. Li, P. Fan, H. Li, F. Jiang, L. Li, Z. Luo, X. Zhuang and A. Pan, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1894–1899 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, T. Cai, E. Liu, K. Hills-Kimball, J. Gao and O. Chen, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 282–291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Yang, D. Ma, D. H. Kim, T. Ahamad, S. M. Alshehri and A. Vadim, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 790–796 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, Q. Ye, C. Liu, F. Cao, X. Yang, L. Ye, W. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Li and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2002639 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-J. Seol, A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, Y. Guo, Z. Xue, P. Xu, M. He and B. Liu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1997–2003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, R. Jiang, M. Sun, X. Yin, Y. Guo, M. He and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1948–1954 RSC .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, H. Lu, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Luo, J. Lin, L. Ba, H. Liu, W. Shen, L. Shi and C.-Q. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700184 CrossRef .
M. Bag, Z. Jiang, L. A. Renna, S. P. Jeong, V. M. Rotello and D. Venkataraman, Mater. Lett., 2016, 164, 472–475 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, K. Alexaki, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 12998–13002 RSC .
R. M. Pasquarelli, D. S. Ginley and R. O'Hayre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5406–5441 RSC .
C. Li, Y. Pan, J. Hu, S. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Chen, X. Liu, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, Z. Chen, S. Qiu, J. Hu, C. Li, X. Liu, G. Liang, C. J. Brabec, Y. Mai and F. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104099 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kyeongil, J. Yen-Sook, H. Youn-Jung, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, S. Jegadesan, D. J. Jones, K. Dong-Yu and V. Doojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png
        .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen and L. Li, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 366, 1509–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song and G. Cao, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 479–480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan, Z. Huang, K. Song, J. Liu, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, C. Zhou, Y. Lin, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, A. K. Johnston, N. Wei, M. N. Hedhili, M. Wei, A. Y. Alsalloum, P. Maity, B. Turedi, C. Yang, D. Baran, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, Z.-H. Lu, O. F. Mohammed, F. Gao, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, C. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, H. Chen, B. Bahrami, A. H. Chowdhury, A. Johnston, S.-W. Baek, Z. Huang, M. Wei, Y. Dong, J. Troughton, R. Jalmood, A. J. Mirabelli, T. G. Allen, E. Van Kerschaver, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Baran, Q. Qiao, K. Zhu, S. De Wolf and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 1135–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Si, Y. Liu, N. Wang, M. Xu, J. Li, H. He, J. Wang and Y. Jin, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1329–1335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, M. M. S. Chan, J. Yoo, J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, J. Even and A. Sadhanala, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704217 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shi, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Ji, X. Li, D. Wu, T. Xu, Y. Chen, Y. Tian and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1462–1472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Huang, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Zhang, W. C. Choy and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1415–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, X. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, W. Liang, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4797–4802 CrossRef .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, F. W. Rivarola, N. J. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, J. M. Knox, F. Perez-Orive, Y. Du, L. Tan, K. Hanson and B. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8983–8989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, B. Wu, X. Wu, M. Li, B. Du, Q. Wei, J. Guo, E. K. Yeow, T. C. Sum and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, J. Xing, G. Xing, L. Quan, S. T. Tan, J. Zhao, R. Su, L. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Zhao, A. Huan, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and H. V. Demir, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3157–3164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. Meng, P. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 570 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, R. Chen, Q. Sun, W. Lai, Q. Su, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3259–3302 RSC .
T. Rauch, M. Böberl, S. F. Tedde, J. Fürst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. Yu, S. Ye, J. Song and J. Qu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6704–6711 RSC .
M.-Y. Zhu, L.-X. Zhang, J. Yin, J.-J. Chen, L.-J. Bie and B. D. Fahlman, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 282, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Zhu, L.-X. Zhang, J. Yin, J.-J. Chen and L.-J. Bie, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 3046–3052 RSC .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, F. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Wang, F. Luo and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9651–9655 RSC .
X. Yu, L. Wu, D. Yang, M. Cao, X. Fan, H. Lin, Q. Zhong, Y. Xu and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2–8 CrossRef .
L. Q. Lu, T. Tan, X. K. Tian, Y. Li and P. Deng, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 986, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, W. Zhang, J. Wu and Y. Chi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16713–16719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shuai, L. Jian-Feng, P. Narendra, E. H. Heike, C. Yi-Bing, R. Yinlan and C. R. Mcneill, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6988–6995 RSC .
R. Saraf, L. Pu and V. Maheshwari, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705778 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yakunin, M. Sytnyk, D. Kriegner, S. Shrestha, M. Richter, G. J. Matt, H. Azimi, C. J. Brabec, J. Stangl and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 444–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Yong, K. H. Kim, D. Y. Son, D. N. Jeong, J. Y. Seo, Y. S. Choi, I. T. Han, Y. L. Sang and N. G. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 87–91 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cao, D. Yu, W. Ma, X. Xu, B. Cai, Y. M. Yang, S. Liu, L. He, Y. Ke and S. Lan, ACS Nano, 2019, 14, 5183–5193 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Xu, Q. Liao, Z. Xu and H. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604382 CrossRef .
S. Ye, W. Yan, M. Zhao, X. Peng, J. Song and J. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800167 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Niu, N. Li, C. Zhu, L. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ge, Y. Chen, Z. Xu, Y. Lu, M. Sui, Y. Li, A. Tarasov, E. A. Goodilin, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7338–7346 RSC .
H.-T. Zhang, T. J. Park, I. A. Zaluzhnyy, Q. Wang, S. N. Wadekar, S. Manna, R. Andrawis, P. O. Sprau, Y. Sun, Z. Zhang, C. Huang, H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, B. Narayanan, G. Srinivasan, N. Hua, E. Nazaretski, X. Huang, H. Yan, M. Ge, Y. S. Chu, M. J. Cherukara, M. V. Holt, M. Krishnamurthy, O. G. Shpyrko, S. K. R. S. Sankaranarayanan, A. Frano, K. Roy and S. Ramanathan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, S. Poddar, Y. Lin, Z. Long, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Shu, X. Qiu, M. Kam, A. Javey and Z. Fan, Nature, 2020, 581, 278–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Hui Wang
	Hui Wang is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Leyu Wang at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He obtained his BSc from the BUCT in 2016. His research projects focus on the design and fabrication of nanostructures for photoelectrical catalysis, sensing, and bioimaging.

Qing Luo
	Qing Luo is currently a PhD candidate in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Leyu Wang at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She obtained her BSc from the BUCT in 2017. Her research interest focuses on exploring functional nanomaterials for biochemical sensing and imaging.

Mei-Li Sun
	Mei-Li Sun is currently a Master's candidate in Chemical Engineering at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). She obtained her BSc from Xi'an University of Science and Technology in 2018. Her research interests are focused on functional nanomaterials for photovoltaics and catalytic applications.

Xiong Yin
	Xiong Yin is a Professor in the College of Chemistry, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He obtained his BSc in 2003 from the Shaanxi Normal University and PhD in 2008 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. In 2009, he became a Postdoctoral Researcher at the National University of Singapore and then a Staff Scientist at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, in 2010. He joined the faculty at the College of Chemistry, BUCT, in 2016. His research interests include perovskite-based devices, biochemical sensing, and low-cost catalysts for energy conversion applications.

Leyu Wang
	Leyu Wang is a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). He has been awarded the “National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholar.” He received his PhD in Chemistry from Tsinghua University in 2007. Then, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) as a Postdoctoral Researcher from 2007 to 2009. He moved to BUCT's Department of Chemistry in October 2009. His research interests span from the controlled synthesis of luminescent nanoparticles, LSPR semiconductor nanomaterials, magnetic nanomaterials, metal–semiconductor heteronanostructures, and multifunctional nanoprobes for applications such as electrocatalysis, artificial photosynthesis, biochemical sensing, multimodal imaging, drug/gene delivery, and photothermo-/chemotherapy. Prof. Wang has published over 140 research papers in journals and holds over 27 patents.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of a cubic perovskite crystal. (b and c) TEM images of as-prepared CsPbBr3 NCs. (d and e) Images and PL spectra of the all-inorganic perovskite nanogels with different emission colors under the excitation of UV light. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.5	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of CsPbX3 nanogels after reactions with (a) Cl− and (b) I−. (c) Time-dependent PL spectra for CsPbBr3 changing to CsPbI3 nanogels. (d and e) PL spectra and time-dependent PL spectra of the samples obtained by mixing CsPbBr3 nanogels with CsPbCl3 or CsPbI3 nanogels, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.96	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NCs at room temperature. (b–f) Photographs of toluene and four typical samples after the addition of various precursor solutions for 3 s: blue (c, Cl: Br = 1), green (d, pure Br), yellow (e, I: Br = 1), and red (f, I: Br = 1.5). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.93	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram and HRTEM image of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanogels. (b) PL spectra of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite NPs in toluene. (c) Film prepared with CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite nanogels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.57 (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM images. (f and g) Single selected particle and the FFT pattern of CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs, respectively. (h) Photograph of perovskite nanogels in toluene under UV-light illumination. (i) Tunability of the PL spectra. (j) TRPL decays for PQD samples prepared at 0–60 °C. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.58	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of FAPbBr3 nanogels in toluene under UV-light illumination. (b and c) Absorption, PL spectra, and TEM images of FAPbBr3 nanogels. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.126 (d) Schematic diagram for preparing FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) nanogels with PbX2–DMSO precursor. (e) TEM image of FAPbBr3 nanocrystals. (f) Photographs and PL spectra of FAPbX3 nanogels in toluene under UV-light irradiation. (g) Thermal stabilities of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.127	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Formation process of SiO2 nanospheres. (b–e) TEM images for samples with different stirring times. (f) Photographs of various MAPB-QD solutions before and after 4 days. (g) Photographs for the photostability test. (h) PL intensity and (i) change in FWHMs of the QD nanogels at different illumination times. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.66	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–f) Morphological evolution of CsPbBr3 nanostructures. Scale bar: 100 nm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.91 (g–j) Purification of CsPbBr3 NWs. Scale bar: 50 nm. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.55 (k) Photographs of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs under UV-light irradiation. (l) TEM and (m) HAADF-STEM images of CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 NWs. (n) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, or I) NWs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.54	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structural illustration of a single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (b) Optical image of 2D square sheets. (c and e) AFM image and height profile of a single layer of these sheets, respectively. (d and f) AFM image and height profile of a double layer of these sheets, respectively. (g) PL spectrum of bulk crystal and several 2D sheets: Inset shows the TEM image of a thin (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 sheet. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.6 (h) Relationship between the thickness of NPLs and OA content. TEM and SEM images of nanostructures obtained in the 20% (i and j) and 80% (k and i) OA sample. TEM images (m) and photographs (n) of the as-prepared suspensions under UV-light illumination. (o) PL and absorption spectra of perovskite-based films. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.138	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) Morphological evolution of Cs4PbBr6 perovskite MDs at various CTAB concentrations. Scale bar: 1 μm. (e and f) SEM images of hexagonal and spherical MDs, respectively. (g) Absorption, PL excitation, and PL spectra of Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (h) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6 and CsPbBr3 solutions after the addition of PbI2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.151	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process. (b) TEM, (c) SEM, and (d–g) elemental mapping images of the as-prepared Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (h) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6 MDs and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals before and after heating treatment. (i) Temperature-dependent XRD patterns of the Cs4PbBr6 MDs. (j) FL spectra and (k) fluorescence intensity evolution of the Cs4PbBr6 MDs during heating–cooling cycles. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.37	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of CsPbX3 and CsMnX3 crystal structures. (b) Schematic diagram of the lattice contraction in CsPbX3:Mn crystal. TEM and HRTEM images of (c) pure and (d) CsPbCl3:Mn QDs. (e) Corresponding XRD patterns and (f) PL spectra of CsPbCl3 and CsPbCl3:Mn QDs. (g) PL intensities for excitonic or Mn2+-related emissions of CsPbCl3:Mn QDs for various doping concentrations of Mn2+ centered at 404 and 600 nm and (h) the corresponding photographs under UV-light irradiation. (i) PL spectra of CsPbCl3 and CsPbCl3:Mn QDs at 404 and 600 nm. (j) Photographs of CsPbBr3:Mn QDs coated on a glass slide for different Mn2+ contents. (k) Schematic illustration for improving the thermal stability. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.153	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Candidate of A2M+M3+XVII6 perovskites. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.85 (b) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of Cs2AgBiX6 nanocrystals. TEM images of (c) Cs2AgBiCl6 and (d) Cs2AgBiBr6 nanocrystals. (e) Absorption spectra of nanocrystals from Cs2AgBiCl6 to Cs2AgBiI6. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.155 Photographs of (f) CsPbBr3-, (g) CsPbIBr2-, (h) CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2-based films. (i) Absorption spectra and (j) (Ahν)2vs. hν curves for different perovskite nanocrystals. (k and l) Normalized PCE retentions of PSCs based on CsPb0.9Sn0.1IBr2 (RT and 100 °C) and MAPbI3/carbon (100 °C). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.47	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Depiction of various methods for film fabrication. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011, the Royal Society of Chemistry.171 (b) Roll-to-roll production of PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.174 (c) Optical microscope images of perovskite films based on precursors aged for different times. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.59 (d) SEM image and (e) EDS line scanning of the ZnO@C60-based PSCs. (f) Schematic diagram of different ETLs with bandgap alignment. (g) TRPL spectra of CsPbI2Br thin films with different ETLs. (h) Efficiency of three ETLs-based PSCs. (i) J–V curve and SPO as a function of time. (j) EQE spectrum and integrated current density. (k) Normalized PCEs of CsPbI2Br and Cs0.04FA0.8MA0.16PbI0.85Br0.15 PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.48	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of MA molecule. (b) J–V curves for a Rb5Cs10FAI-based PSC device. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.176 (c) Schematic diagram of the passivation of Pb0 and I0 defects by Eu3+–Eu2+. (d) Stability of PSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.177 (e) Theoretical model for the passivation of PbI defects in perovskites. (f) J–V curves of PSCs with reverse and forward scanning. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.178	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the LED device. (b) Schematic diagram of the charge injection/recombination process. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.184 (c) Photographs of C10H14NiO4 QD, CsPbBr3 QD, and ZnO NP solutions. (d) SEM image and elemental mapping images of the device. (e) Dependence of the current density and luminance on the applied voltage. (f) EL spectra measured at various voltages. (g) EQE, current efficiency, and power efficiency of the LED. (h) Peak EQE of 30 devices. (i) Emission intensity of a perovskite LED. (j) EL spectra of the LED. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.185 (k–m) Diagram, EL spectrum, and optical images of the WLED device, respectively. (n) Color temperatures of the devices. (o) CIE color coordinates. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.93	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Device structure of the photodetector. (b) Transient photocurrent of the photodetector. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.43 (c) Schematic diagram of the photodetectors based on nanorods. (d) SEM image of CsPbI3 nanorods. (e) SEM image of the device with nanorods and Au electrode. (f) Typical logarithmic I–V characteristics of the photodetectors under irradiation and in the dark. (g) Reproducible on/off switching under 405 nm illumination. (h) Transient response under illumination (405 nm). (i) Time-response curves of a CsPbI3 nanorod photodetector. (j) Relationship between the photocurrents and light intensities. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.41	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) Photographs and PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs, respectively. (c) TEM images of CsPbBr3 NCs. (d) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPbBr3 NC films. (e) Pump-fluence dependence of the emission from a CsPbBr3 NC film. (f) Spectral tunability of ASE. (g) Threshold behavior for the intensity of the ASE band of the CsPbBr3 NC film. (h) Variable stripe length experiment for the estimation of modal net gain for CsPbBr3 NC films. (i) Evolution from PL to WGM lasing. (j) Single-pump laser shot mode structure of random lasing from CsPb(Br/Cl)3 NC films. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.38	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Photographs taken every 2 s for PQDs@AGs-based gas sensor by initially passing pure SO2 through the cell (a–e) and subsequently passing pure N2 through the cell (f–j). (B) Proposed mechanism for the quenching of PQDs@AGs fluorescence by SO2. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.36	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Humidity-dependent PL spectra. (b) Calibration curve of the humidity sensor. (c) Fluorescence decay in the dry and humid states. (d) Reversible conversion of a perovskite humidity sensor. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.202 (e) Photographs of Cs4PbBr6/PDMS. (f) FL spectra and (g) peak intensity of Cs4PbBr6/PDMS composite under different temperatures. (h) Calibration curve of the temperature sensor. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.37	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of the X-ray detector. (b) Photograph of spin-cast PI-MAPbI3 on the TFT backplane and MPCs printed on PI–MAPbI3. (c) Charge collection and sensitivity of the X-ray detector. (d) A hand phantom X-ray image from the MPC detector. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.209	 

 	Fig. 21  (a-1, b-1 and c-1) Bright-field, (a-2, b-2 and c-2) fluorescence images and (a-3, b-3 and c-3) overlaid pictures of RAW 264.7 cells incubated with CsPbX3 NCs@MHSs. Scale bars in (a–c) are 15 μm. (d–f) PL spectra of intracellular CsPbX3 NCs@MHSs. (g) Fluorescence image of a mixture of neat and mixed-halide NCs-tagged beads. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.211	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
