1,8-Naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemosensors: recent advances and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03681A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03681A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13501-135291,8-Naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemosensors: recent advances and perspectives

        
          
            Hong-Qiang 
            Dong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tai-Bao 
            Wei
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Qiang 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing-Yu 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yun-Fei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Jiao 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bing-Bing 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            You-Ming 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Qi 
            Lin
          
        
      *a
aKey laboratory of Polymer Materials of Gansu Province, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730070, P. R. China. E-mail: weitaibao@126.com; linqi2004@126.com
bDeputy Director-General of Gansu Natural Energy Research Institute, Renmin Road 23, Lanzhou, Gansu 730070, P. R. China
Received 
      3rd August 2020
    , Accepted 9th September 2020First published on 9th September 2020Abstract1,8-Naphthalimide, as one of the classical dyes and fluorophores, has been widely used in analytical chemistry, materials chemistry, and biochemistry fields because of its excellent characteristic photostability, good structural flexibility, high fluorescence quantum yield, and large Stokes shift. This review mainly focuses on 1,8-naphthalimide and its derivatives in ion detection, molecular recognition, material applications, and bioimaging in the past five years. Simultaneously, we hope to develop more powerful fluorescent chemosensors for broad and exciting applications in the future.
1. Introduction
More recently, the research on toxic ions and biological molecular sensing,1–3 organic optoelectronic materials,4 high-performance gels, and bioimaging applications have increasingly attracted the attention of researchers.5–7 To date, great achievements have been made in electrochemical detection,8 spectrophotometry,9 element analysis,10 and chromatography.11,12 However, there are also a few challenges in these methods, which include low accuracy, poor qualitative ability, expensive, and time-consuming. Fluorescent techniques have attracted considerable research interests compared with the above detection methods owing to their advantages of low cost, fast response, noteworthy sensitivity, and simple operation.13,14 Therefore, it has become the main detection methods and has been widely used in biochemistry, chemistry, medicine, and other fields.15–17
1,8-Naphthalimide (NI), naphthalene diimide (NDI), perylene bisimide (PBI), and their derivatives play a key role in the field of fluorescent materials and dyes.18–21 In addition, the special structure of NI, NDI, and PBI endows them excellent properties, high electron affinity, as well as good thermal stability and oxidation stability, which has led to their development and application receiving widespread attention.22–24 Naphthalimide, as the “simplest” molecule, has better water solubility than other molecules such as NDI and PBI. Therefore, the study of naphthalimide derivatives has become a hot topic. The structure of 1,8-naphthalimide is as shown in Fig. 1(a).25,26 We can see that the naphthalene ring acts as a π bridge, R1 is an electron-donating group (such as –NH2 and –OH), the imide part acts as an electronic group constituting the D–π–A system, and 1,8-naphthalimide is also an electron-deficient system.27–30 On the other hand, because of its outstanding light/thermal stability, it has become an important organic functional material.31–34 Moreover, the fluorescence colour will show changes accordingly when different substitutions are introduced at the 4-position base. At the same time, the above mechanisms have been well-confirmed through theoretical calculations.35–37 Based on these characteristics, this scaffold has found wide applications in the development of fluorescent chemosensors in the fields of molecular recognition, molecular imaging, bioorganic chemistry, analytical chemistry, materials chemistry, as well as in the biological and medical science communities.38–40
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of 1,8-naphthalimide, (b) the application of 1,8-naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemosensors. 
However, naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemical sensors have not been reviewed. Although the research progress of naphthalimide in ionic and biological aspects has been reviewed before,41,42 it has not been systematically summarized. In particular, the rapid development of optoelectronic materials in recent years has made naphthalimide the most brilliant star among classical fluorophores.43 Therefore, it is necessary to summarize the various applications based on 1,8-naphthalimide and its derivatives. In this review, we mainly introduce the chemosensors and material applications of 1,8-naphthalimide in the past five years, which include ion detection, molecular recognition, material preparation, and bioimaging (Fig. 1(b)). We are hoping for the development of more powerful fluorescent chemosensors for broad and exciting applications in the future.
2. Ion detection
The detection of ions is paramount in chemistry because of their involvement in various physiological processes; for example, iron, the most important trace element in the human body, is involved in a number of electrons transfer as well as oxidoreductase processes. However, excessive intake of iron ions can lead to an increased risk of liver cancer and neurological diseases.44,45 Of course, apart from the detection of ions in the body, the detection of toxic ions from the outside world is also extremely important. Mercury is one of the well-known heavy toxic metals. It can exist in different forms such as its elemental state, as well as organic and inorganic forms. This pollutant may be gradually concentrated through the food chain even at imperceptible trace levels, posing a threat to human health46,47 Therefore, it is necessary to develop a novel chemosensor for detecting metal ions and highly toxic ions with high sensitivity.
2.1 Cation detection
Al is one of the most abundant elements in the earth's crust due to its light weight and corrosion resistance. It is widely used in various industries and food packaging. However, excessive Al3+ can cause pathological changes in the body. For example, patients with kidney failure cannot normally discharge aluminum from the body, which can cause loss of memory, renal insufficiency, and aluminum poisoning. Therefore, the detection of Al3+ has become increasingly important. Sahoo et al. (2018) designed a high-selectivity sensor (1) for detecting Al3+ (Fig. 2).48 The sensor could detect Al3+ accompanied by fluorescence “turn on” and a blue shift in the absorbance in DMSO:H2O (1:1, v/v) solution. The light brown color becomes colorless, the lowest detection limit (LOD) was 1.52 × 10−7 M, and DFT and 1H NMR studies supported the complexing constant of 1:1. Meanwhile, if the strong chelating agent EDTA is added to complex Al3+, the solution will return to the original form and there is no interference from other metal ions in these processes.
 Fig. 2  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 1. 
In 2017, Wei et al. synthesized a water-soluble fluorescent chemical sensor (2) based on 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives as a new type of fluorescent sensor that continuously detects Fe3+ and CN− (Fig. 3).49 The chemical sensor 2 has excellent fluorescence specific selectivity and high sensitivity to Fe3+ ions in pure water. In addition, in the same medium, the complex of 2 and Fe3+ (2-Fe3+) was more sensitive to CN− than other anions, which forms an on–off–on fluorescence recognition system. The LOD of sensor 2 for Fe3+ was 1.97 × 10−7 M and the LOD of 2-Fe3+ complex for CN− was 2.6 × 10−10 M. More importantly, the recognition of the complexes by the Fe3+ sensor 2 and CN− can be successfully applied in pure water. This also provides a new concept for the detection of naphthalimide in pure water phase.
 Fig. 3  Possible binding mode of sensor 2 with Fe3+ and CN−. 
Soon after, they rationally designed and reported a water-soluble, easy-to-make, and efficient Fe3+ fluorescence sensor 3 (Fig. 4).50 By introducing a carboxyl group into 1,8-naphthalimide, the water solubility of the sensor was increased. The chemical sensor has good solubility in water and specific fluorescence selectivity for Fe3+ and H2PO4− in water. The LOD of Fe3+ and H2PO4− was 4.97 × 10−7 M and 5.27 × 10−6 M, respectively. Other ions have no significant effect in their sensing behaviour. Interestingly, sensor 3 could not only serve as a reversible Fe3+ sensor but also as a fluorescent switch controlled by Fe3+ and H2PO4−. Under ultraviolet light (365 nm), the colour of the light changes significantly and the rapid reversible fluorescence change could be observed with the naked eye. This switching process can be repeated multiple times with little fluorescence loss.
 Fig. 4  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 3. 
In 2018, Qiu et al. prepared a multifunctional copolymer sensor (4) containing rhodamine 6G and 1,8-naphthalimide group by the reversible addition–fragmentation free radical polymerization method. The sensor could effectively detect Fe3+ under the control of pH (Fig. 5).51 After adding acid, rhodamine 6G and 1,8-naphthalimide groups undergo fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and emit red fluorescence; with the addition of Fe3+, the distance between the rhodamine 6G and 1,8-naphthalimide groups is reduced, FRET is suppressed, photoinduced electron transfer (PET) is generated, and green fluorescence is emitted, which provides another method based on the 1,8-naphthalimide ion and performance.
 Fig. 5  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 4. 
Later, Fu et al. had prepared a highly selective fluorescent chemical sensor (5), which establish a method for detecting cobalt(II) ions by using a visual colorimetric response to initiate a fluorescence enhancement (Fig. 6).52 In CH3CN/HEPES (4:1, v/v, pH = 7.4) solution, the sensor emits almost no fluorescence (“off” state), which is due to the energy level difference of PET caused by the electron-rich amide group towards the naphthalimide fluorophore, causing the PET and intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) processes in a dark state; the addition of Co2+ allows the synergy with the sensor (5) receptor unit to suppress the PET and ICT processes, which directly leads to strong local emissions in the blue band (“on” state), the colour changes from pink to colorless, and the Job-plot analysis shows that the complex ratio is 1:1 and LOD is 0.26 × 10−7 M. In addition, the author also uses the sensor for environmental detection, thus expanding the sensor application.
 Fig. 6  (a) Proposed mechanism for the detection of Co2+ ion, (b) the UV-vis absorption spectrum of sensor 5 (1 × 10−5 mol L−1) and upon the addition of salts. 
In 2016, Wang et al. designed two chemical sensors (6) based on thiosemicarbazide or semicarbazide functionalized 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives (Fig. 7).53 The sensor 6 could detect Cu2+ with high selectivity in (MeCN–H2O) medium with a blue shift phenomenon. Meanwhile, the color of the solution of 6 in changed from yellow to blue. The LOD of sensor 6 for Cu2+ was 3.26 × 10−8 M, which achieved a highly sensitive level.
 Fig. 7  (a) Proposed mechanism for the detection of Cu2+ ion, (b) fluorescence photographs of the sensor in the absence (left) and presence (right) of Cu2+ in a dark-box ultraviolet analyzer when excited at 365 nm. 
Thereafter, a large number of naphthalimide-based Cu2+-selective fluorescent sensors were reported.54,55 Xu et al. (2017) reported a Cu2+ probe (7) with 1,8-naphthalimide hydrazone derivatives modified by pyrrole units (Fig. 8).56 The sensor uses a unique hydrolysis mechanism to achieve high selectivity and highly sensitive detection of Cu2+ in CH3CN/H2O (v/v = 9:1, pH = 7.40) solution. When copper ions are added, the color of the solution becomes colorless and the fluorescence changes from red to blue-green. At the same time, the complex ratio was calculated to be 1:1 and the LOD was 1.50 × 10−7 M. In addition, the hydrolysis mechanism of Cu2+ to promote the electrophilic substitution was verified by 1H NMR. This new mechanism has created a new research method for new fluorescent probes.
 Fig. 8  (a) The structure of probe 7, (b) the ultraviolet photo of probe 7 and with Cu2+, (c) the fluorescent photo of probe 7 and with Cu2+. 
In 2018, Wu et al. designed a fluorescent sensor (8) based on nitrilotriacetic acid-functionalized 1,8-naphthalimide, which was constructed by a reverse PET mechanism to detect Cu2+ with high selectivity (Fig. 9).57 The author introduced methyl acrylate hydrolysis into the system. The methyl acrylate hydrolysis group not only increased the solubility of sensor 8 but could also serve as a receptor group. It laid the foundation for the production of PET. The sensor could detect Cu2+ by fluorescence quenching in solution and the LOD was 4.67 × 10−8 M. This also provides another method for detecting ions.
 Fig. 9  The proposed binding mode of the fluorescence quenching of sensor 8 with Cu2+ based on the reverse-PET mechanism. 
After that, Li et al. (2020) designed and reported a sensor (9) (Fig. 10)58 by introducing 2-(2-aminoethoxy)ethanol to improve the hydrophilicity. Schiff base, as a polydentate ligand of Cu2+, could also detect Cu2+ with high selectivity by turning off the fluorescence. The addition of Cu2+ leads to the generation of PET in the molecule; the study found that the complex ratio of the sensor to Cu2+ is 2:1 and the LOD was 3.74 × 10−8 M. At the same time, when the chelating agent EDTA is added, it can complex copper ions well and the cycle can reach 4 times. Moreover, the changes in the fluorescence of (9) resulting from the addition of Cu2+ and EDTA were utilized to form a molecular NAND logic gate.
 Fig. 10  (a) The proposed structure of sensor 9-Cu2+ complex and its intramolecular PET process, (b) fluorescence responses of sensor 9 to various metal ions. 
Among toxic metals, Pb2+, Ag+, and Hg2+ remain one of the foremost threats to human health. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare a sensor that can efficiently detect highly toxic metal ions.59–61 Zhou et al. (2016) reported a ratiometric two-photon fluorescent probe, which was based on the D–π–A-structure two-photon fluorophore of the naphthalimide derivative and the deprotection of aryl propargyl ethers by the palladium species (10) (Fig. 11a).62 The probe introduces 3-bromopropargyl into 1,8-naphthalimide to form a D–π–A structure two-photon fluorophore-based naphthalimide derivative, which can increase the detection of Pd2+ by 25 times. When adding Pd2+ to the H2O/DMSO (99:1, v/v) solution, the colour of the solution changes from white to yellow, along with the fluorescence colour changes from blue to yellow; the LOD was 2.8 × 10−7 M. In 2015, Arami et al. obtained a 4-amino-1,8-naphthyl-conjugated polyamideamine dendrimer (11) by reacting 4-amino-1,8-naphthalic anhydride with a polyaminoamine dendrimer (Fig. 11b).63 The detection of Ag+ in the H2O/DMF (4:1, v/v) solution, which was mainly through the formation of the PET process with the metal cations in the solution, causes the fluorescence to be quenched to achieve the detection of silver ions, and other cations show little interference in the detection. Subsequently, Ye et al. designed and synthesized two chemical sensors based on naphthalimide (12A) and (12B) (Fig. 11c).64 Through the ability to coordinate with the amide group and the imidazole group, the fluorescence quenching detection of Hg2+ in phosphate buffer can be performed and the fluorescence quenching rate can reach 90% with the formation of the proton-mercury complex. Also, the sensor can detect Hg2+ ions in a wide pH range (7.0–10.0).
 Fig. 11  The structures of the fluorescent sensors 10–12. 
In 2017, Wei et al. designed a simple water-soluble chemical sensor (13), which uses carboxyl groups and imidazole groups as hydrophilic groups, and serves as an Hg2+ binding site65 (Fig. 12). The fluorescence quantum yield of sensor (13) in water is 56% with quinine hemi-sulfate salt as a reference. The addition of mercury ions can perform fluorescence quenching and the LOD was 1.785 × 10−7 M. In addition, when I− ions are added, Hg2+ ions are complexed and the circulation is up to 5 times. This also provides a method for multi-substrate analysis to detect the ions.
 Fig. 12  The proposed mechanism of 13 bonding with Hg2+. 
Next, they introduced a new fluorescent chemical sensor (14) by introducing glutathione into 1,8-naphthalimide (Fig. 13).66 The sensor could detect iron and mercury ions with high selectivity and the response time is less than 10 seconds, while the LOD was 7.92 × 10−8 M and 4.22 × 10−8 M, respectively. The test strips based on (14) were prepared, which could conveniently and efficiently detect Fe3+ and Hg2+.
 Fig. 13  (a) The structure of sensor 14, (b) fluorescence emission data of sensor 14 and different metal ions in solution. 
Europium, as the most active metal among rare earth elements, is widely used in electronic displays, LEDs, medical treatment, etc., as a red fluorescent powder for color TV together with ruthenium oxide.67–69 Therefore, the detection of europium is still a challenge. Yan et al. (2017) designed two blue fluorophores (15) and (16), namely, 4-(1,8-naphthalimide)pyridine n-oxide (4-nipyno) and 3-(1,8-naphthalimide)pyridine n-oxide (3-nipyno) (Fig. 14),70 which are used as auxiliary ligands to enhance the viability of Eu(III) ion luminescence. The ligand consists of a coordinated pyridine n-oxide (PyNO) and a substituted bluish 1,8-naphthalimide group in the para and meta positions. Pyridine n-oxide is a strong Lewis base; ligand design makes it possible to use blue organic fluorescent molecules as auxiliary ligands to enhance the possibility of the red emission of Eu(III) ions. The luminescence quantum yields of (15) and (16) were 41.5% and 28.6%, respectively. This auxiliary ligand design strategy makes the blue chromophore a luminous sensitizer for Eu(III) ions and can efficiently detect Eu(III) ions.
 Fig. 14  (a) Synthetic routes of 15 and 16 ligands and their Eu, Gd complexes, (b) ball-and-stick representation of the crystal structures of 15 and 16, (c) the coordination polyhedra of 15 and 16. 
2.2 Anion detection
Due to the important role of anions in biology and environment, designing an easily-synthesized anion sensing and recognition system has become a research hot topic in the field of ion detection. However, some anions are very toxic, such as CN− and F−, although they have great applications in other aspects; they are very toxic and seriously endanger the health. Therefore, the design and development of chemical sensors based on the detection of anions are still of great significance.71–75
In 2017, Jiang et al. designed a novel chemosensor (17), which was prepared by the introduction of the aryl-triazole derivative based on the 1,8-naphthalimide motif (Fig. 15).76 Chloride, bromide, iodide, and other spherical halide anions were selected as guest ions for anion binding studies. In this research, when spherical halide anions were added, the fluorescence was found to decrease to varying degrees. Through 1H NMR, 1H–1H NOESY measurements, and fluorescence titration experiments, it was found that the fluorescence quenching phenomenon was due to the partially anion-induced aggregation of naphthalimide, resulting in a foldamer, and the coordination ratio was 1:1.
 Fig. 15  Illustration of the chloride-binding process of the aryl-triazole foldamer 17 in the presence of anions. 
In the same year, Kubo et al. reported a 1-hydroxy-2,3,1-benzodiazaborine conjugated with 1,8-naphthalimide (18) (Fig. 16).77 The result indicated that its fluorescence characteristics are greatly affected by the nature of the solvent. In particular, in the solution of DMSO, it has no fluorescence intensity. In this case, when other anions were added to contain 18 DMSO solutions, it was found the sensor had a very high selectivity for F−. Similarly, adding AcO− to the THF solution had a very obvious reaction. UV-vis titration, nuclear magnetic resonance, and mass spectrometry analysis show that it may be due to the interaction of intermolecular hydrogen bonds (Me2SO and HO–B), which reduced the aromaticity of the benzodiazaborine macrocycle, causing an increase in the negative character of boron.
 Fig. 16  Possible reactions of 18 with AcO− in THF and F− in DMSO. 
Subsequently, the chemical sensors based on naphthalimide for F− detection were synthesized in large quantities. Zhu et al. (2017) used benzimidazole and 1,8-naphthalimide as raw materials to synthesize a novel fluoride ion colorimetric fluorescent probe (19) by Schiff Base reaction (Fig. 17a).78 The probe can be used to detect fluoride ions in acetonitrile solution with naked eyes. When the fluoride ion solution is added, the original solution's colour turns from yellow to blue and the fluorescence is red-shifted. The LOD was 0.41 × 10−6 M. The 1H NMR titration and theoretical calculation based on TD-DFT indicated that fluoride-induced deprotonation is caused by hydrogen bonding interactions. Meanwhile, Zhang et al. synthesized an acylhydrazone-functionalized sensor (20) (Fig. 17b).79 The sensor can deprotonate fluoride ions and cause fluorescence quenching to efficiently detect the fluoride ions. In addition, when carbon dioxide was introduced into the solution containing fluoride ions, it was found that the fluorescence was restored again; this is because CO2 can react with a small amount of water to form acids, which can provide protons. This also provides a possibility for detecting gas by naphthalimide derivatives.
 Fig. 17  (a) The proposed mechanism of 19 bonding with the F−, (b) the structures of the fluorescent sensor 19. 
In 2018, Wei et al. synthesized a water-soluble fluorescent chemical sensor (21); 1,8-naphthalimide was successfully functionalized with aromatic carboxyl groups (Fig. 18).80 Through the mechanism of state change from intramolecular charge transfer to reversed intramolecular charge transfer (ICT-TICT), CN− in pure water can be detected selectively and sensitively. The LOD of CN− was 1.38 × 10−8 M and less than 1.9 μmol L−1 is prescribed by the World Health Organization (WHO). At the same time, it shows a rapid response of about 1 s when identifying CN− in pure water.
 Fig. 18  The proposed mechanism of 21 bonding with CN−. 
Ultra-sensitive detection,81 aggregation-induced emission,82 and aggregation-induced enhanced emission83 are currently popular research areas in supramolecular chemistry.84 Wei et al. (2019) prepared an anion-induced assembly, which resulted in an aggregation-induced enhanced emission sensor (22) for the ultra-sensitive detection of fluoride ions (Fig. 19).85 The sensor contains a tripod formamide structure, which can provide strong self-assembly potential and the naphthalimide group of (22) could act as an anion–π, π–π interaction site, as well as a fluorescent signal group. By 1H NMR, mass spectrometry, and other experiments, hydrogen bonding and F–π interactions were proved. Moreover, the LOD was 8.67 × 10−9 M and test kits were also made to quickly detect fluoride ions in the environment.
 Fig. 19  (a) The schematic representation of the assembly and disassembly of the sensor (22)-F, (b) fluorescence emission spectra of sensor 22 in DMSO/H2O (7.4:2.6, v/v) solution in the presence of F− and other anions. 
Maragani et al. (2016) designed triarylborane-substituted naphthalimide fluorescent sensor 23 for the selective detection of F− and CN− (Fig. 20).86 The sensor 23 shows maximum red-shifting absorption and fluorescence quenching under the action of F− and CN−. The photophysical properties and theoretical results indicate that triarylborane and naphthalimide units have a strong electron transfer capability. The LODs of F− and CN− measured by fluorescence titration were 2.01 × 10−10 M and 3.94 × 10−10 M, respectively, which are far below the maximum detection limits of fluoride and cyanide in drinking water as stipulated by the WHO. In addition, the effect of F− and CN− on the structure of the sensor was also studied through DFT calculations, and the research results were basically consistent with the experiments.
 Fig. 20  The proposed mechanism of 23 bonding with F− and CN−. 
Gale et al. (2018) reported that a series of naphthalimide-functionalized ion acceptor probes 24A–24D were synthesized, which can be used for anion binding and transmembrane transport (Fig. 21).87 The results show that these compounds have good affinity for Cl− and NO3− with moderate to relatively strong affinity. Compounds 24A–24D promote the reverse transport of chloride and the symmetrical movement mechanism of Cl−/H+/OH− into the vesicles. Relative to the transmembrane transport activities, these compounds are mainly determined by their chloride affinity. It was found that the most active transporter 24A has the highest fluorescent staining efficiency of live A549 cells, which is non-toxic and has an anion transport activity that is much higher than that of the previously reported fluorescent anion transporter. This is very useful for studying the subcellular localization and pharmacokinetics of anion transporters in biological systems.
 Fig. 21  (a) The structures of compounds 1–4, (b) schematic illustration of the assays utilised for measuring the Cl−/NO3− antiport using the ISE. 
Zhu et al. (2019) reported a logic gate-based fluorescent probe (25) that reacts selectively with bisulfite (HSO3−) by selectively responding to pH differences between the intracellular organelles (Fig. 22).88 The probe detects HSO3− through the regulation of PET and ICT mechanisms. The probe has high selectivity and sensitivity towards HSO3−, and the LOD was 2.07 × 10−8 M. It is worth noting that this probe can be activated by the co-stimulation of low pH and bisulfite. In addition, it has been proved to be biocompatible and can be used to monitor HSO3− in the lysosomes of living cells. This method shows more practical and outstanding capabilities in target monitoring and real-time monitoring, thus providing an effective optical tool for biomarker detection.
 Fig. 22  Chemical structure of 25 and the proposed sensing mechanism of HSO3−. 
3. Molecule recognition
Apart from anions and cations, small organic molecules and biomolecules also play an important role in the industries, agriculture, medicine, and life.89,90 For example, amino acids are necessary substances for the human body.91 If they are lacking, it will cause disease in the body but excessive intake of amino acids will cause discomfort to the human body.92 At the same time, nitrophenol compounds also have an irreplaceable role in mining, military, and other fields93 but a small amount of nitrophenol compounds can cause explosions and other hazards.94 Therefore, it is equally important in molecular detection.
3.1 Small molecules
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) plays a crucial role in many biological processes in the human body. In 2016, Lin et al. designed a two-photon fluorescent probe (26) (Fig. 23) that detects H2O2 by the fluorescence method.95 By connecting the borate to the 1,8-naphthalimide group and attaching an electron-deficient boronate group to naphthalimide, the fluorescent chemoprobes are converted in to the “A–π–A” electronic structure. This electronic structure determines that the probe molecule has weak fluorescence emission but after the reaction of hydrogen peroxide and borate, the borate group becomes a hydroxyl group (electron donating group) and the electronic structure of the probe becomes “D–π–A”. This leads to the formation of ICT, which causes the probe to have strong fluorescence emission, thus achieving the rapid detection of H2O2.
 Fig. 23  The structure and fluorescence response mechanism of H2O2 probe 26. 
The detection of a toxic formaldehyde (HCHO) pollutant in aqueous solutions is of significance because HCHO is widely found in aquatic food due to its illicit addition or improper storage. Chen et al. (2018) reported a robust hydrophilic hydrazine-naphthalimide-based chitosan (HN-chitosan)-based polymer probe (27) (Fig. 24).96 It utilizes HCHO and grafted hydrazine-naphthoyl, a specific chemical reaction between the amine groups, to trigger the start of the fluorescence reaction; the detection limit reaches 0.05 ppm and the detection time is less than 1 min. This ultra-sensitivity, high selectivity, fast response, and wide linear detection range can extend the applications of the sensor successfully to the analysis of food and water in our daily life. In addition, based on the modular design principle of polymer probes, this method can be widely used for the ultra-fast detection of other important pollutants. Subsequently, Zhu et al. also successfully designed a fluorescent sensor (28) based on naphthalimide (Fig. 25).97 The sensor connects the homoallylamino group to the naphthalimide group, reasoned by the protonation of the nitrogen atom. Not only can formaldehyde molecules can be detected, along with the fluorescent change to blue and green, but the pH can also be detected efficiently.
 Fig. 24  HCHO-sensing mechanism of the developed hn-chitosan polymer probe 27. 
 Fig. 25  The proposed multiple imaging mechanisms based on the combination of protonation of nitrogen atom and the aza-Cope arrangement and the structure of probe 28. 
Poly-nitroaromatic compound (NACs) is a secondary chemical explosive that is widely used in various dye and textile industries. Although there are sensors that detect NACs, these sensors are not applicable for the trace detection of NACs. Therefore, the development of chemical sensors for the trace detection of NACs is still a challenge and an opportunity. In 2020, Gunnlaugsson et al. reported a fluorescent sensor (29) (Fig. 26).98 It was found that as the water content increases, the fluorescence increases and is the greatest when the water content is 30%. In DMSO/H2O (7:3, v/v) binary solution, it was used to detect picric acid, with the fluorescence quenching. Fluorescence titration, 1H NMR, and IR experiments verified that it was caused by the intermolecular hydrogen bond formed between picric acid and the sensor. In addition, other NACs such as 2,4-DNP, 2-NP, 3-NP, and 4-NP did not have a significant impact on the detection.
 Fig. 26  The proposed multiple imaging mechanisms based on the combination of protonation of nitrogen atom and the aza-Cope arrangement and the structure of probe 28. 
In 2019, Wei et al. reported a simple and effective method for the selective and sensitive detection of picric acid (PA) and CN− through a novel guest competition control aggregation-induced emission (AIE) method. First, a tripod host compound sensor 30 based on a trinaphthalimide derivative was designed and synthesized (Fig. 27).99 The sensor can be self-assembled into a supramolecular system and shows blue AIE. Interestingly, 30 could selectively detect PA and the LOD was 1.19 × 10−8 M. In this process, the self-assembled supramolecular system is destroyed, causing fluorescence quenching. More interestingly, the combination of the sensor and PA can also be used for CN− detection; the LOD was 7.45 × 10−7 M. In addition, the PA and CN− test kits were coated on a silicone board by the sensors 30 and 30-PA. These kits can easily and efficiently detect PA or CN−.
 Fig. 27  The structure of sensor 30 and the possible recognition mechanism for successively monitoring PA and CN−. 
Recently, a novel AIE supramolecular fluorescence sensor 31 based on a tripod naphthalimide derivative was reported for the highly sensitive detection of explosive analogue PA (Fig. 28).100 The sensor 31 can self-assemble into a supramolecular system through π–π stacking and hydrogen bonding with strongly blue AIE. Interestingly, the sensor 31 has a sensitive and selective response towards PA. This detection mechanism was a direct competitive combination of PA and the sensor. This competitive combination destroys the sensor self-assembly and leads to fluorescence quenching. The LOD was 4.73 × 10−8 M. In addition, the solid powder of the sensor 31 can directly recognize PA without the instrument under natural and ultraviolet irradiation.
 Fig. 28  The structure of sensor 31 and the proposed recognition mechanism for PA detection. 
Phosgene and triphosgene, as readily available chemical reagents, are also important industrial raw materials for the production of drugs, dyes, and polymers. However, they are highly toxic compounds. In severe cases, they can cause coma and even death, thus seriously endangering public safety. Therefore, it is very necessary to develop simple detection and identification methods.
Song et al. (2019) synthesized a novel fluorescent chemical sensor (32) for the first time, in which 1,8-naphthalimide was used as a fluorophore and 2-(2-aminophenyl)imidazole was used as a dual-channel recognition site. (Fig. 29).101 The LOD of phosgene and triphosgene reached 3.2 × 10−9 M and 1.9 × 10−9 M, respectively. 1H NMR titration experiments show that this is because the 1,8-naphthalimide unit with electron-withdrawing ability reduces the nucleophilicity of the imidazole nitrogen, the primary aniline (–NH2) is a strong nucleophilic group (NG), sensor (32) is acylated on the main amine by phosgene and triphosgene, and because chlorocarbonyl is a stronger electrophilic group (EG) than trichlorooxycarbonyl, it leads to the difference in time. In addition, the test paper prepared with sensor (32) is expected to become a practical gas phase phosgene detection tool.
 Fig. 29  The sensing mechanism of 32 towards phosgene and triphosgene. 
Meanwhile, Sheng et al. (2018) also designed an anthracene carboxyl fluorescent chemical sensor (33). The sensor could detect phosgene with high selectivity and high sensitivity (Fig. 30).102 On combining with phosgene, it produced a significant color change from deep red to orange and a significant ratio fluorescence enhancement. In addition, the sensor (33) can quantitatively measure phosgene (0–70 m) with low LOD (2.3 × 10−9 M) and fast response (<5 min).
 Fig. 30  The structure and fluorescence response mechanism of phosgene sensor 33. 
Wei et al. (2019) designed a novel supramolecular polymer monomer (34) based on bisnaphthalimide-functionalized pillar[5]arene (Fig. 31).103 A part of naphthalimide in this monomer provides π–π stacking site, hydrogen bonding site, and the fluorophore functional group. It could self-assemble into a stable supramolecular polymer π-gel (34-G) in cyclohexanol. Interestingly, the production of the supramolecular polymer π-gel (34-G) can distinguish o-aminobenzoic acid, p-nitrobenzoic acid or its isomers, and other common organic acids with high selectivity and sensitivity. In addition, (34-G) xerogel can effectively adsorb p-NBA and separate it from water with a separation rate of 93.2%. This provides potential for the detection and separation of aromatic acid isomers in naphthalimide with supramolecular polymers.
 Fig. 31  (a) The structure of supramolecular polymer monomer 34, (b) representative photographs of the π-gel (34-G) for the selective fluorescence detection of HBA, ABA, and NBA isomers and after the addition of o-HBA to the π-gel (34-G). 
3.2 Biological molecules
Biomacromolecules are important components of organisms, such as glycoproteins, lipoproteins, and nuclear proteins. Their movement and changes in the body reflect important life functions, such as carrying out metabolism to supply energy and materials needed to maintain life, promoting growth and development, and producing immune function. In recent years, biomolecular fluorescence detection has received extensive attention due to its high requirement in clinical diagnosis.104–106
Fluorine-containing substrates are used to observe the activity of cancer-related enzymes and explain biological events. Certain types of glutathione s-transferase (GST), such as Pi-like GST (abbreviated as GSTP-1), compared with the corresponding normal tissues, are highly expressed in various human cancer tissues. The fluorescent sensing of biological molecules has attracted intensive attention. Herein, Inoue et al. (2019) reported a practical fluorinated GST substrate sensor (35) (Fig. 32a).107 The sensor (35) exhibited significant fluorescence enhancement in the aqueous solution where GSTP1-1 and GSH are present. These results indicate that sensor (35) is a promising tool for studying the role of endogenous GSTP1-1 in physiological and pathophysiological environments. Live cell imaging shows that sensor (35) is mainly activated by endogenous GSTP-1 in living cells and has the potential to distinguish cancer cells from normal cells. Soon after, Fu et al. (2020) developed a fluorescent probe (36) for sensitively mapping the distribution of endogenous biothiols in zebrafish (Fig. 32b).108 The 1,8-naphthalimide scaffold serves as an easily modified fluorophore and the 2-thiophenecarbonyl group serves as a recognition group. Probe (36) exhibited strong emission with large Stokes shift increase and the LOD was 1.20 × 10−7 M.
 Fig. 32  (a) The sensing mechanism of 35 for GSTP1-1, (b) the synthesis and proposed mechanism of probe 36. 
Polysulfide (H2Sn, n > 1) plays an important role in the physiological functions of the human body. Some pathological processes are related to H2S. H2S2 is considered to be a powerful signal sensor recently discovered in the human body. Wang et al. (2016) connected an alkyl morpholine group and a 2-fluoro-5-nitrobenzoyl group to the 1,8-naphthalimide fluorophore, and designed and synthesized a novel H2S2 solution for the enzyme-targeted colorimetric two-photon fluorescent probe 37 (Fig. 33).109 The probe showed good stability, selectivity, and sensitivity (LOD = 1.0 × 10−10 M) and short response time (5 min). This provides a promising method for the detection and imaging of lysosomal H2Sn, and is expected to be applied to biological and pathological research related to H2Sn.
 Fig. 33  Design and synthesis of probe 37 for the detection of lysosomal H2Sn. 
Yoon et al. (2016) developed a hydrogen sulfide that opens mitochondrial targeting based on the selective thiolysis of 7-nitro-1,2,3-benzoxadiazolamide attached to a piperazinylnaphthalimide scaffold probe 38 (Fig. 34).110 Probe 38 exhibited excellent performance, with a 68-fold increase in the fluorescence. There was a significant deviation in the fluorescence response of the mitochondrial-targeted naphthalimide probe 38 and NBD to detect H2S. Needle 38 exhibits higher sensitivity and selectivity under neutral physiological conditions, and has a lower detection limit for H2S compared to other bio-related analytes such as biothiols, and the LOD was 2.46 × 10−9 M.
 Fig. 34  Chemical structure of fluorescent probe 38 and its reaction with H2S. 
Monoamine oxidases exist in the human body in the form of MAO-A and MAO-B, and they play an important role in the process of oxidative deamination. Wang et al. (2020) developed a ratiometric fluorescent probe (39) for the detection of monoamine oxidase a (MAO-A) in living cells and zebrafish (Fig. 35).111 They have previously reported a probe A for detecting monoamine oxidase a (MAO-A).112 Compared with the previously reported probe A, the length of the probe 39 alkyl group connected to the nitrogen atom of 1,8-naphthalimide is different. After adding monoamine oxidase a (MAO-A), the fluorescence intensity ratio (I550/I452) at 550 nm and 452 nm changed by about 186 times. Compared with probe A, it was more reactive and less affected by temperature.
 Fig. 35  (a) The structure of sensor 39, (b) the fluorescence spectral of probe 39 before and after the addition of MAO-A with emission color changes, (c) the structure of sensor A. 
The early diagnosis of ovarian cancer plays an important role in the its treatment. Galactosidase (gal) is an enzyme that is overexpressed in primary ovarian cancer and can be used as a valuable biomarker for ovarian cancer. To this end, Wang et al. (2017) have designed a novel two-photon fluorescent probe 40 for monitoring endogenous gal in vivo lysozymes (Fig. 36).113 The probe uses 1,8-naphthalimide fluorophore as the typical fluorescent reporter, morpholine group as the lysosomal targeting group, and the gal cleavage unit as the enzyme activity trigger. Under the action of gal, the probe cleaves the glycosidic bond and the fluorescence obviously changes from blue to green. The LOD was 4 × 10−5 U mL−1.
 Fig. 36  Proposed sensing mechanism of 40 for β-gal. 
SNAP-tag is one of the most popular gene-encoded protein tags that can be labelled with fluorescent molecules to display the protein of interest in living cells. Fluorescent probes remain dark before labelling with protein tags, thus significantly improving the signal-to-noise ratio of the image protein without the need for washing steps. However, compared with non-fluorine-derived probes, most reported SNAP-tag fluorescent probes have lower or milder labelling rates. Xu et al. (2017) reported a 4-aminonaphthylamide fluorescent probe 41 for SNAP-tag, which has a fast recording labeling rate among fluorescent probes (Fig. 37).114 Simultaneously, confocal imaging was carried out at different time points. The probe can image proteins in the mitochondria and the nuclei of live cells without a washing step. In addition, there are some other chemical sensors that can detect molecules; see Table 1 for details.
 Fig. 37  Proposed sensing mechanism of 41 for SANP-tag. 
Table 1 Other reported chemical sensors for detecting molecules











4. Material applications
In recent years, organic light-emitting materials and soft materials have been widely modified in organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), fluorescent sensing, solar photovoltaic cells, clinical medicine, and other fields due to their structural changes, which are cheap and easy to modify. New high-efficiency organic light-emitting materials and other materials are of great significance for enriching the material system and for broadening their application. As one of the most versatile groups, naphthalimide has been used in many fields122–125 as this group has excellent electron affinity, and its aromatic ring and N position can be modified by a simple and low-cost synthetic route for various multifunctional functional groups. Therefore, the development and design of materials based on naphthalimide also have extraordinary significance.126–129
4.1 Sensing gel
As a kind of soft material, gel has viscoelastic properties and can be shaped. It is widely used in skin care and medical treatment. Therefore, designing new gels has a very important value in today's society.
Wei et al. (2017) used N-(pyridine-4-acyl)-naphthalimide derivative as a novel gel agent 49,130 which was assembled under the action of n-valeric acid by π–π stacking and electrostatic interaction assembled into the supramolecular gel (49-Gel). Naphthalimide was used as a fluorescent signal group while pyridine was used as a binding site; the gel agent can be used for the highly sensitive detection of multiple substrates such as I−, Fe3+, Hg2+, and L-ser (Fig. 38).
 Fig. 38  The structure of gel agent 49 and fluorescence responses of the ionic supramolecular gels in the presence of various anions, cations, and amino acids. 
Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) was reported by Tang et al. in 2001.131 Compared with traditional aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ), AIE molecular aggregates show stronger emission than single molecules.132 After nearly 20 years of development, AIE research has made great achievements in the materials area, mechanics research, and high-tech applications.133–135 Therefore, designing a material with aggregation-induced enhancement effect can not only expand the AIEgens but also provide a better basis for research in the field of medicine.136 Pillar[n]arene, as the main new generation macrocycle, were first reported by Ogoshi in 2008.137 Pillar[n]arene exhibits various supramolecular assembly driving forces including C–H⋯π, π–π, cation–π, “exo-wall π–π”, and hydrophobic/hydrophilic, providing a novel development platform for ultra-sensitive reaction materials.138 In addition, pillar[n]arene could be used as a new type of AIEgens as well.139 Therefore, it is necessary to develop AIE performance research based on pillar[n]arene.
In 2018, Wei et al. successfully developed a novel and highly efficient sensor 50.140 Naphthalimide was introduced into the pillar[5]arene to form a supramolecular organic gel 50-G in cyclohexanol, using cation–π and exo-wall π–π interactive competition to obtain a hypersensitive method (Fig. 39). Interestingly, 50-G showed hypersensitivity towards Fe3+ and H2PO4−. In addition, 50-G has good practical potential for ion detection separation, fluorescent display materials, and ultra-sensitive logic gates. More importantly, this novel cation–π and exo-wall π–π competition method for ultrasensitive reactions provides a novel and simple method for manufacturing intelligent response supramolecular materials.
 Fig. 39  Proposed assembly and ultrasensitive-response mechanisms of 50-G with Fe3+ and H2PO4−. 
Hereafter, another naphthalimide-functionalized pillar[5]arene 51 was synthesized, which with the previously reported compound 22 through the “exo-wall” π–π and π–π stacking interactions assembled the AIE π-gels in DMSO solution (Fig. 40).141 The assembled gel could detect AsO2− in a highly sensitive way through the competition between lone pair–π and “exo-wall” π–π interactions; the lowest detection limit was 1.7 × 10−9 M. In addition, the xerogel powder of 51-G could also efficiently remove AsO2− from water. This work provides an ultrasensitive method for the detection and removal of AsO2− in water.
 Fig. 40  The possible mechanisms regarding the assembly of 51-G and the ultrasensitive sensing of AsO2−. 
Gunnlaugsson et al. (2017) reported the synthesis of a new hetero-biligand N-(4-pyridyl)-4-(4-carboxyphenoxy)-1,8-naphthalimide 52 in the presence of K+ ion (Fig. 41); a powerful photoluminescent hydrogel could be formed using 52 through potassium-carboxylate coordination and π–π interactions as the most substantial intermolecular forces.142 The gel is reversible under thermal, mechanical, or chemical stimulation.
 Fig. 41  (a) The structure of gelator 52, (b) manipulation of the gel with tweezers and the transparency of a gel monolith. 
In 2019, Wei et al. successfully designed and constructed a supramolecular polymer network gel 53-SPN (Fig. 42).143 Interestingly, 53-SPN has detection and separation capabilities for broad-spectrum pollutants such as heavy metal ions, anions, oxalates, various organic dyes, organic pollutants, and volatile organic compounds. The LODs of the 53-SPN gel for cations and anions are range in 10−8–10−9 M, and the separation rate of heavy metal ions, oxidized metal acid salts, various organic dyes, and organic pollutants can reach 99.8%. The high sensitivity and broad-spectrum adsorption and separation performance of 53-SPN are based on the multiple interaction sites that we reasonably introduce. Therefore, this is a convenient method for preparing supramolecular polymer network sponge composite functional materials.
 Fig. 42  The structure of gel-53 and guest-G, Photo showing the broad-spectrum detection and adsorption separation properties for broad-spectrum pollutants for (a) cations and anions, (b) VOCs, (c) various organic dyes. 
Soon after, they synthesized new guest molecules (TA) and naphthalimide-functionalized pillar[5]arene host (54) to design and construct a multifunctional sponge-like supramolecular polymer gel (Fig. 43).144 Interestingly, 54-G showed a spongy structure and strong AIE. In addition, 54-G also showed multi-responsiveness to external stimuli, such as heating–cooling and pH. More importantly, the 54-G xerogel has separation properties for Fe3+, methyl orange, methylene blue, and Sudan I dyes. The separation rate of the 54-G xerogel for Fe3+ ions and organic dyes can reach 99.8%.
 Fig. 43  (a) The structure of gelator 54 and guest-TA, (b) the gel–sol transitions of the supramolecular polymer gel 54-G triggered by different stimuli. 
4.2 Fluorescent photochromic materials
Photochromic material refers to a type of material that can change the color after being excited by a light source.145 This type of material mainly includes spirogyras, diarylethene, and azobenzene. Because of their excellent functions in stealth, camouflage, anti-counterfeiting, and fluorescent indication, photoluminescent and color-changing fibers have been widely used in aerospace, military equipment, special process monitoring, product anti-counterfeiting identification, and other fields. In addition, temperature discoloration and electroluminescent materials have gradually become the focus of research in the material world.146–149
Song et al. (2017) designed and synthesized a new type of “push–pull” diarylethylethylene molecule 55, which consists of an electron-withdrawing ethylene bridge (1,8-naphthalene anhydride) and two medium electron-donating side chains (2,5-dimethylthiophene) (Fig. 44).150 The study found that the molecule has a reversible fluorescence switching ability during photoisomerization. It exhibits a strong ICT characteristic between the naphthalene anhydride vinyl bridge and two substituted thienyl groups, and the fluorescence maximum red-shift exceeds 150 nm. In addition, the experimental data and theoretical calculations show that this is due to the intermolecular charge transfer between the electron-donating side chain and the electron-withdrawing ethylene bridge, which makes the fluorescence highly dependent on the solvent. At the same time, it also provides potential for monitoring the polarity of the microenvironment in chemical and biological systems.
 Fig. 44  (a) Chemical structure and photochromism of 55, (b) absorption spectra changes of 55 upon irradiation at 365 nm in cyclohexane solutions (5.0 × 10−5 M), (c) fluorescence spectra changes of 55 upon irradiation at 365 nm in cyclohexane. 
The absorption of moisture from the atmosphere by materials with different hygroscopicity can greatly change their physical and chemical properties; thus, there has been an interest in the development and manufacture of various commodities. In particular, hydrogen-chromic materials have achieved great commercial success as sensors and applications in the paint industry. These materials must be stretchable, easy to process from their raw materials, show versatility at the point of use, and be sufficiently sensitive to changes in water. Here, Olson et al. (2019) reported two fluorescent receptors 56A and 56B, which undergo reversible fluorescent hydrogen color change in the solid state to respond to the changes in the atmospheric relative humidity (Fig. 45).151 The system consists of a 1,8-naphthalimide fluorophore, an amphiphilic pyridine acceptor and its bromide ion. As a water-sensitive acceptor, it can participate in the emission unit through excited state charge transfer. The dynamic vapor absorption isotherm shows that when the raw material absorbs water at a rate of 3.8%, the emission of the raw material is red-shifted from blue to green by 27 nm. Processing the material into an ultra-light agro-absorbent aerogel with water-induced discoloration can significantly increase its sensitivity to water-induced discoloration. In solution, as the ionic strength increases and the solution freezes, the material exhibits AIEE after precipitation from the aqueous solution. The average red shift was about 109 nm. In all the cases, a robust reversible solid-state hydrogenation discoloration is achieved and the sensitivity of changes in relative humidity can be adjusted by material handling after the synthesis. This work provides a good basis for the subsequent synthetic development and material processing of compounds that exhibit AIE or AIEE in the solid state.
 Fig. 45  (a) The chemical structure of 56A and 56B, (b) photographs of fluorescent aerogels depicting the fluorescence hydrochromism of 56A and 56B based aerogels before and after being exposed to 90% RH taken under 365 nm irradiation, (c) the UV-vis absorption and fluorescence emission spectra of 56A and 56B aqueous solutions. 
Based on the strong electron coupling of the 1,8-naphthalimide receptor (A), Chi et al. (2019) designed two D–π–A type AIE active imide derivatives 57A and 57B, and developed red thermally-activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) emitter with AIE characteristics (Fig. 46)152 due to the strong electron-deficient 1,8-naphthalimide receptor. In addition, strong electron-rich 10-H-phenothiazine (Pz) or 9,9-dimethyl-9,10-dihydroacridine (DMAC) was chosen as the donor groups, and 2,6-dimethylphenyl acted as the π-bridge. Due to the steric hindrance, the π-bridge and two D–π–A derivatives adopt a twisted conformation, which results in restricted movement between solid molecules.
 Fig. 46  (a) The chemical structure of 57A and 57B, (b) 57A and 57B at different temperatures, (c) the relative fluorescence emission peak intensity of (c) 57A and 57B in THF/water mixtures with different water fractions. 
Soon after, Pu et al. developed six high solid phase emission 1,8-naphthyl compounds (Fig. 47) (58A–F).153 The study found that among them, 58A and 58C showed mechanical fluorescence discoloration, the color change was between blue, blue-green, or green emissions, and 58D and 58F showed mechanical fluorescence discoloration characteristics, including fluorescent colours from yellow-green or yellow to yellow or orange. In addition, these polymerization-induced green luminescence or polymerization-induced yellow light-emitting phosphors also exhibit different mechanical fluorescence discoloration phenomena. In order to investigate the mechanical colour change mechanism of these six mechanically-stimulated reactive luminogens, powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray single crystal measurements were performed. The XRD analysis shows that it has interesting mechanical fluorescence behaviour because of the conversion between crystalline and amorphous states. At the same time, the results of X-ray single crystal analysis suggest that the distorted molecular conformation and the absence of strong intermolecular forces lead to loosening of the packing motifs, and the change in molecular packing is responsible for the observed mechanical fluorescence effect. This provides a valuable reference for the design of high-contrast mechanical fluorescent materials based on 1,8-naphthalimide.
 Fig. 47  (a) Molecular structures of compounds 58(A–F), (b) PL spectra of luminogen 58(A–F) at different conditions. 
Cheng et al. (2019) used pyrene as the donor and 1,8-naphthalimide as the acceptor; a chiral D–A enantiomer (59A–B) was synthesized as a circularly polarized electroluminescence (CP-EL) emitter (Fig. 48).154 This chiral emitter exhibits good thermal stability in the solid state (Td = 389 °C, Tg = 112 °C), high fluorescence quantum yields (46.4/42.4%), and CPL-active materials. Notably, the non-doped CP-OLEDs based on 59A/B emitters can emit high green brightness CP-EL with gel signals of +2.15 × 10−3 and −2.23 × 10−3, respectively. This work provides a new perspective CP-EL emitter for the design of rigid chiral structures.
 Fig. 48  (a) Molecular structures of 59A and 59B, (b) cyclic voltammograms of 59B in CH2Cl2 solution, (c) calculated spatial distributions of the HOMO and LUMO energy densities of 59B. 
Xu et al. (2016) reported a novel fluorescent intelligent unit based on bisnaphthalimide 60 (Fig. 49),155 in which two fragments of naphthalimide are conjugated at the 4-position by twisting the single bonds. Taking advantage of the characteristics of the bis-naphthalimide planar structure, 60 can be used as a dual-channel rotor, outputting shorter emissions in the twisted state and longer emissions in the planar state. Due to the limitation of the intramolecular rotation effect, 60 shows strong emission characteristics in a high viscosity environment. The longer and shorter emission in the aggregate is due to the synergistic effect of RIR and intramolecular planarization. The probe produces a logarithmic response to different ratios of glycerol/water system viscosity. In addition, a very interesting viscosity-dependent temperature response was also explored in the fluorescence signal. We believe that this kind of fluorescent sensor can distinguish the temperature-induced viscosity change more effectively than that in other cases.
 Fig. 49  Molecular structures of 60, (b) emission spectra of 60 in glycerol/water (85/15, v/v) mixture (left) and ethanol (right) recorded from 233 K to 323 K. 
Hudson et al. (2020) designed and synthesized naphthalimide-based red emission TADF acrylic monomer 61 (Fig. 50).156 When copolymerized with the host material by Cu(0)-reversible inactivation radical polymerization (Cu(0)-RDRP), the polymer appears as a orange to deep red TADF, and the quantum yield in solution and solid is as high as 58% and 31%, respectively. Utilizing this dual emission characteristic, the naphthalimide-isopropylacrylamide dopant copolymerization produces blue fluorescence, preparing a red to blue temperature-responsive polymer. These polymers exhibit red TADF at room temperature and blue fluorescence at 70 °C, with a high ratio of 32.4% K fluorescence thermal response. This system is expected to play a role in bioimaging, drug delivery, and temperature sensing, thus further expanding the application range of red TADF materials.
 Fig. 50  (a) Synthetic TADF compound of 61A–Q, (b) visual representation of 61-N at various temperatures. 
4.3 Other aspects
In recent years, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),157 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),158 solar cells,159etc., have made great progress in flat panel displays, surface light sources, and energy applications, and are also expected to become flexible devices in terms of new-generation display technology and energy storage.160–163
The construction of novel highly efficient OLED materials with TADF is still a challenge in molecular designing. Lu et al. (2018) reported a pair of novel TADF enantiomers (−)-(R,R)-62 and (+)-(S,S)-62 introduced chiral unit 1,8-naphthalimide-based TADF skeleton (Fig. 51a).164 The enantiomer with TADF has high thermal stability (Td = 405 °C), excellent electrochemical performance, and obvious TADF properties with small singlet–triplet energy gap (ΔEST = 0.07 eV). The enantiomer also shows stable optical rotation with mirror image circular dichroism (CD) and circularly polarized luminescence (CPL) activity. In addition, by using the enantiomers as emitters, the OLEDs exhibit orange-red emission centered at 592 nm, with maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) values of 12.4% and 12.3%, respectively.
 Fig. 51  (a) Molecular structures of TADF enantiomers (−)-(R,R)-62 and (+)-(S,S)-62, (b) the thermogravimetric thermogram and differential scanning calorimetry trace of (−)-(R,R)-62, (c) cyclic voltammogram of (−)-(R,R)-62 with ferrocene as the internal standard. 
Zivic et al. (2019) reported four N-[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl]-modified 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives (63A–D),165 which contain different substituents (bromine, primary amine, secondary amines, and tertiary amines) to modify the naphthalimide framework. These novel frameworks could be as a single-component free radical light or a multi-component free radical or cationic photopolymerization initiator system under a variety of LED lamp irradiation (Fig. 52). Using 63-C (containing secondary amine substituents) or 63-D (containing tertiary amine substituents) alone can initiate the free radical polymerization of acrylate at 405 nm under the LED, while using 63-A (containing bromine substituents) or 63-B (containing monoamine substituents) does not work. This shows that the amine substituent (whether it is a monoamine, diamine, or tertiary amine) can significantly improve the photoinitiation ability of the polymerization reaction.
 Fig. 52  Chemical structures of the investigated photoinitiators 63(A–D), (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of 63(A–D) in acetonitrile. 
Subsequently, Nogueira et al. designed a new fullerene functional naphthalimide 64 (Fig. 53).166 By using 1,8-naphthalimide as a substituent, an inverted perovskite solar cell was prepared as the electron transport material (ETM). The effect of the molecular structure modification on the performance of the perovskite solar cell was studied. The photoluminescence quenching experiment confirmed the effectiveness of the perovskite film containing the 64 layers. It was found that the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy was 3.75 eV. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the device made with 64 was 10.79%, the photocurrent density (Jsc) was 20.23 mA cm−2, the open circuit voltage (Voc) was 1.078 V, and the fill factor (FF) was 0.497. In addition, using 64 as an ETM can obtain induced pluripotent stem cells with an inverted structure.
 Fig. 53  (a) Molecular structures of 64, (b) AFM topography images of perovskite films 64 and surface charge mapping by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) of sample 64. 
Lalevee et al. (2015) reported 7 naphthalimide-based derivatives (65-A/G) for the multifunctional development of near-ultraviolet/visible LED, 3D printing, and water-soluble priming system (Fig. 54).167 By linking nitro-, iodo-, or bromo-substituted compounds to naphthalimide, (65-A, 65-C, or 65-E) did not show good light absorption properties, resulting in low initiation ability. The substituent at the nitrogen position of the naphthalimide structure (65-G) ensures red-shift absorption but reduces the solubility. It is worth noting that 65-B/Iod, 65-D/Iod, and 65-F/Iod exhibit excellent efficiency for the cationic polymerization of epoxy compounds (50% conversion rate) when they are irradiated with 405, 455, or 470 nm LED or halogen lamps. However, it is worth noting that 65-B/Iod, 65-D/Iod, and 65-F/Iod show excellent efficiency (50% conversion rate) for the cationic polymerization of epoxy compounds. 65-B/Iod/NVK or 65-B/MDEA/chlorotriazine three-component system under 405 nm light irradiation acrylate radical polymerization effect had more efficiency than the cq system or the BAPO system. PDSs based on 65 also allow 3D objects to be manufactured using 3D printers.
 Fig. 54  Chemical structures of the studied naphthalimide derivatives (65-A/G). 
Bo et al. (2016) designed and synthesized four small molecule receptors (66-A/D) composed of a central benzene nucleus, two thiophene bridges, and two 1,8-naphthalimide end groups (Fig. 55).168 By attaching different substituents to the central benzene ring, the dihedral angle between the two end groups of 66-A/D gradually increased, resulting in a gradually reduced planarity. 66-A had a planar chemical structure and could form hydrogen bonds so as to form a film. 66-A/D had a high-energy level LUMO, which matches the wide-band gap (WBG) polymer donor that usually has a high-energy level LUMO. Among OSCs, devices based on 66-A and WBG donor PCDTBT-C12 have higher electron mobility, superior film morphology, and better photoelectric performance. After optimization, the PCE of the 66-A-based devices was 2.78% and Voc was 1.04 V, which is one of the devices with the highest PCE when Voc is greater than 1 V. The result of this study is that the development of small molecule receptor-based planarity has a significant effect on the performance of non-fullerene OSCs.
 Fig. 55  (a) Chemical structures of 66-A/D, (b) cyclic voltammetric curves of 66-A/D, (c) energy level diagrams of PCDTBT-C12, 66-A/D, and PC71BM. 
5. Bioimaging
Bioimaging plays an important role in the accurate identification of tumor cells and normal cells, and in the clinical diagnosis and prognosis of various types of cancer. Therefore, the development of biological imaging is the most direct and effective detection method.169 In recent years, the visualization of important active molecules in organisms has been a research hot topic in the field of analysis.170,171 Compared with other detection technologies, small-molecule fluorescent probes can monitor biomolecules in complex biological systems due to their high sensitivity and high specificity focus as the advantages of imaging.172–174 Therefore, using small molecular probes to accurately distinguish cancer cells from normal cells is of great significance in clinical diagnosis and prognosis.
In 2017, Wei et al. synthesized a novel naphthalimide-functionalized pillar[5]arene derivative 67 as a host; at the same time, they synthesized a guest (GBP) and assembled a supramolecular polymer through host and guest assembly (Fig. 56).175 Then, by reasonably introducing the electron donor effect of I− into the functional pillar[5]arene-based supramolecular system, different redox properties were produced, which enabled the supramolecular polymer to reduce and detect CN−, Hg2+, and cysteine. The amino acid exhibits a highly efficient fluorescent phase and the constructed supramolecular polymer network was successfully used for cell imaging. This is a novel, simple, and efficient preparation method in fluorescence imaging.
 Fig. 56  (a) Chemical structures of compounds 67 and GBP, (b) fluorescence images of live HeLa cells. 
The ortho-dithiol-containing proteins (VDPs) mainly maintain the structure and function of proteins through the conversion of dithiol and disulfide bonds. The content of VDPs also reflects the redox state of the organism. In order to accurately and conveniently detect VDPs, Fang et al. (2020) developed a single arsenide photoprobe based on the ICT mechanism 68 (Fig. 57).176 Naphthalimide was selected as the fluorophore and connected to the acceptor moiety (cyclodithioalkane) through the carbamate segment. In the presence of VDPs, the probe showed a strong green fluorescent signal generated by the cleavage of cyclodithioarsane and subsequent intramolecular cyclization, thereby releasing the fluorophore. In addition, the probe has high selectivity for VDPs compared to other protein thiols and low molecular weight thiols. The good properties of NEP make it easy to detect VDPs in living cells and in vivo. In addition, it was the first time that VDPs of Parkinson's disease were significantly decreased, which indicates that regulating VDPs levels has potential value for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
 Fig. 57  (a) Proposed sensing mechanism for the activation of 68 by VDPs, (b) imaging VDPs in live cells. 
Mitochondria are double membrane-associated subcellular organelles and the center of eukaryotic cells, which regulate various biochemical processes. For example, 95% oxygen consumption stimulates the cells to produce the major parts of adenosine triphosphate, generate most of the cell reactive oxygen species, and initiate apoptosis. Therefore, the design of mitochondrial targeting molecules to report and manipulate mitochondrial functions has aroused considerable interest.
Pope et al. (2020) synthesized 6 different 1,8-naphthalimide coupled dimer amine ligands (69-A/F) (Fig. 58).177 The ligands have a series of different naphthalimide fluorophores and colylamine chelating agents between the connecting units, which allows the overall lipophilicity to be adjusted. A series of corresponding Re(I) complexes were synthesized in the form of fac-[Re(CO)3(69-A/F)]BF4. The absorption and luminescence properties of ligands and Re(I) complexes is mainly dependent on the intramolecular charge transfer properties of the substituted fluorophores whose usual absorption was about 425 nm and 520 nm. Fluorescence confocal microscopy showed that fac-[Re(CO)3(69-E)]+ is present in the mitochondria of MCF-7 cells. SPECT/CT imaging experiments on naive mice show that fac-[99mTc(CO)3(69-E)]+ has high stability in vivo. Cell bioimaging of the MCF-7 cell line shows good image quality. The preliminary in vivo evaluation of water-soluble 99mTc(I) compounds showed rapid clearance, meeting the requirements of nuclear imaging to ensure that the background signal was minimized. The design of intrinsic fluorescent chelates has very important application prospects in the fields of biology and bioimaging in the future.
 Fig. 58  (a) Molecular structures of 69-A/F, (b) confocal fluorescence microscopy images of MCF-7 cells incubated with fac-[Re(CO)3(69-E)]+ (top left) and Mito Tracker deep red (left, middle) and overlay (right; overlap coefficient = 0.66). 
The main ingredient of yeast is protein, which accounts for almost half of the dry one and has sufficient essential amino acids, especially the low content of lysine in cereals. On the other hand, it contains a lot of niacin vitamin B1 and B2. Therefore, yeast could improve the nutritional value of fermented food. But yeast is a fermenting bacterium. If the dosage exceeds the standard, it will cause excessive fermentation of the food and cause food deterioration, and promote the growth of bacteria. Meanwhile, if the body consumes too much yeast, it will cause diarrhea and other diseases. In severe cases, it may also cause skin and respiratory tract diseases. Subsequently, Pope et al. (2017) synthesized pyrrole-derived ligands to modify a series of naphthalimide derivatives 70-A/G (Fig. 59).178 These ligands cooperated with Re(I) to form fac-[Re(phen)(CO)3(70-A/G)]BF4 mixed ligand species. This produces a fluorescent substance with adjustable emission. Some complexes were selected for cell imaging studies with simply two of (70-A/70-G), which proved to be viable cell imaging agents. The absorption of these complexes appears to be regulated by the functional properties of naphthalimide, with the most lipophilic variants showing the best cellular uptake.
 Fig. 59  (a) Molecular structures of 70-A/G, (b) confocal fluorescence microscopy of S. pombe yeast cells incubated with fac-[Re(phen)(CO)3(70-A)]BF4 depicted in green. 
Lysosomes are organelles that can break down biological macromolecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides, which have a single-layer membrane and various shapes. It is a bubble-like structure of 0.025–0.8 microns and contains many hydrolytic enzymes. All white blood cells contain lysosomal particles, which can destroy invading microorganisms. However, there are some pathogenic bacteria (such as leprosy bacillus and tuberculosis bacillus) that can tolerate the action of lysosomal enzymes, and thus can survive in macrophages. It is important that lysosomes play an irreplaceable role in the pathological process. In addition, intracellular pH is an important parameter for regulating many biological processes such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, enzyme activity, and tumor growth. Therefore, the design of cell fluorescence imaging for the detection of lysosomes and pH is of great significance to cell life. In 2018, Zhao et al. synthesized a novel ratiometric pH probe 71 (Fig. 60) based on FRET.179 Probe 71 uses the naphthalimide moiety as a donor and the rhodamine moiety as the acceptor. At the same time, 4-(2-aminoethyl)morpholine was introduced, which is a lysolytic group. The sensing mechanism is the integration of PET and FRET processes, and the combined effect causes the strength of naphthalimide and rhodamine to increase at the same time as the pH decreases. The probe has good selectivity among various metal cations, amino acids, and ATP. In addition, the probe can also selectively stain lysosomal pH changes in HeLa cells. Also, the probe showed low cytotoxicity in living HeLa cells.
 Fig. 60  (a) The proposed mechanism of 71 for sensing H+, (b) fluorescence microscopy images of living HeLa cells co-stained with 71 (5 mM) and LysoSensors Green DND-189 (1 mM). 
The activation of cancer cell apoptosis and understanding its working mechanism play a critical role in formulating effective cancer treatment strategies. Here, Lin et al. (2020) reported a selenium-containing fluorescent apoptosis agent 72 (Fig. 61).180 MPSE realizes the tracking and imaging of the apoptosis process of cancer cells. In the presence of thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) in the mitochondria, a non-emitting compound 73 is formed. This emission shutdown phenomenon allows the monitoring of the mitochondrial damage induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS). As the dysfunctional mitochondria are cleared by the lysosome, 73 enters the lysosome and its protonation leads to increased fluorescence. The results show that MPSE is very useful in elucidating the working mechanism of theranostic-based optical apoptotic agents and it is hoped that this mechanism will greatly promote the development of new cancer treatment methods.
 Fig. 61  (a) Molecular structures of 72 and 73, (b) co-localization real-time tracking of ROS production in living DU145 cells. 
Over-expressed nitroreductase (NTR) is a common biomarker of tumor hypoxia. Tang et al. (2020) designed and synthesized a compound (74) of 1,8-naphthimide modified with p-nitrobenzene, covalently attached to the side chain of poly(fluorene-co-phenylene) (PFP) (Fig. 62).181 This compound can cause both FRET and PET to occur simultaneously. When NTR is present, the nitro group is reduced to an amino group, causing the PET to be blocked. Therefore, the ratio is greatly increased and the LOD was 19.7 ng mL−1. It is important that the fluorescence of the PFP backbone remains unchanged, which allows it to be used as an internal reference. In addition, the ratio probe has high selectivity and low cytotoxicity, and can realize NTR detection and hypoxia diagnosis in tumor cells.
 Fig. 62  (a) Molecular structures of 74, (b) co-localization of 74 and Lyso-Tracker Red in A549 cells. 
RNA is a product of cell metabolism and has a wide range of functions, including protein synthesis, gene regulation, and reaction catalysts. RNA mainly includes mRNA (mRNA), tRNA (tRNA), and rRNA (rRNA). rRNA is the most abundant RNA. It is produced in the nucleus and can be assembled with ribosomal proteins in all organisms to form ribosomes. However, these methods do not provide spatiotemporal information for three-dimensional cells. Therefore, a method to display rRNA quickly and selectively in living cells is crucial. In 2019, Yi et al. developed a naphthalimide derivative probe 75 for the rapid and selective detection of intracellular rRNA.182 Probe 75-A showed a 32-fold increase in the fluorescence in response to rRNA binding and showed good selectivity for rRNA relative to DNA and other nucleic acid phosphate buffers at pH 7.2. More importantly, 75-A has excellent nucleolus permeability and can be occupied by 4 different cell lines within 1 min. This is currently the fastest nucleolar dye (Fig. 63b). At the same time, the magnified nucleolar confocal laser micro-image and RNase digestion test showed that a pair of rRNA is highly selective, even for intracellular imaging. In addition, as a live cell probe, due to the advantages of 75-A, including its water solubility, excellent selectivity, remarkable photostability, biocompatibility, and peculiar cell permeability, we expect that this probe may provide an alternative tool for commercial rRNA staining.
 Fig. 63  (a) Molecular structures of 75A–H, (b) CLSM images of HeLa cells incubated with probe 75-A. 
In 2020, He et al. introduced a new type of proportional fluorescent H2S donor 76 (Fig. 64).183 The probe has the following advantages: scavenges reactive oxygen species (more specifically H2O2) while simultaneously generating H2S; provides ratio fluorescence that visualizes and quantifies H2S release; specifically targets the mitochondria. This work provides a new effective strategy for the design of fluorescent H2S donors and provides strong evidence for the protective effect of cell models on myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. There are other fluorescent chemosensors used in cell imaging and medicine that have not been introduced one by one; see Table 2 for details.
 Fig. 64  (a) Proposed mechanism of H2S release from probe 76 and HPLC study of H2O2−induced HSD-B transformation, (b) confocal ratiometric fluorescence images on H9c2 cells. 
Table 2 Other reported chemical sensors for cell imaging











6. Conclusion
1,8-Naphthalimide is a member of the family of classic dyes and fluorophores. Due to its high fluorescence quantum yield and easy modification property, especially the modifications of different substituents (–NH2, –OH) at the 4-position, it shows different fluorescence phenomena, which greatly expand its application. 1,8-Naphthalimide and its derivatives have been widely used in chemical sensing, materials, biological imaging, and other fields. Compared with other complex chemical molecules, it has the advantages of simplicity, high selectivity, and high sensitivity, thus providing a broader research prospect for its application.
This review summarizes the latest research progress in the field of ion detection, molecular recognition, material application, biological imaging, and other aspects in the past five years, which provides opportunities for promoting development in this field. In the past years, naphthalimide has become a powerful and highly adaptable platform. We hope that this fluorophore has a bright future in the field of fluorescence sensing. However, from the perspective of applications, there are several issues that need to be resolved:
(1) In the future, priority should be given to the development of fully biocompatible probes. This means that developing and designing water-soluble sensors is crucial. The above sensors basically exist in a large amount of organic solvents, which should be solved.
(2) In terms of ion detection, most of the above reported chemical sensors detect metal ions and toxic metal ions but few of them detect alkali metals. For example, sodium ions have an irreplaceable role in the adjustment of the osmotic pressure balance of human fluids. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a sensor for alkali metal ion detection. In addition, in anion detection, the anion detection range should be expanded.
(3) For applications in in vivo bioimaging, the naphthalimide scaffold should be altered to allow excitation and emission in the red and near infrared (NIR).
(4) Organic electroluminescence, temperament discoloration, and other materials play important roles in improving the photoelectric performance of light-emitting diodes. Organic small molecule emitters based on naphthalimide have attracted more and more attention due to their unique characteristics of electron extraction, rigid structure, and high fluorescence quantum yield. In recent years, aromatic imide/amide semiconductors have been developed rapidly but there are few reports on their application in OLEDs. Therefore, designing high-performance luminescent materials is a very meaningful study.163
(5) In recent years, with the rapid development of Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) and Aggregation-induced emission enhancement (AIEE), the development of sensors with AIE effect has become a research hot topic. Similarly, molecules that develop naphthalimide and its derivatives in AIE and AIEE chemiluminescence should be designed and studied.200
Overall, we believe that there will be many fluorescent chemical sensors based on naphthalimide in the near future, and the structures and functions will be more novel and versatile. At the same time, we also hope that this review will promote interest and new ideas in this emerging field of research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21662031; 21661028; 21574104) and the Program for Chang jiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University of Ministry of Education of China (No. IRT15R56).
Notes and references
T. Islamoglu, Z. J. Chen, M. C. Wasson, C. T. Buru, K. O. Kirlikovali, U. Afrin and M. Rasel Mian, Metal-Organic Frameworks against Toxic Chemicals, Chem. Rev., 2020, 119, 9753–9835 Search PubMed .
J. O. Holloway, F. Van Lijsebetten, N. Badi, H. A. Houck and F. E. Du Prez, From Sequence-Defined Macromolecules to Macromolecular Pin Codes, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903698 Search PubMed .
S. G. Higgins, M. Becce, A. Belessiotis-Richards, H. Seong, J. E. Sero and M. M. Stevens, High-Aspect-Ratio Nanostructured Surfaces as Biological Metamaterials, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903862 Search PubMed .
H. D. Pham, L. X. Qiang, W. H. Li, S. Manzhos, A. K. K. Kyaw and P. Sonar, Organic interfacial materials for perovskite-based optoelectronic devices, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1177–1209 Search PubMed .
Y. Tian, Y. L. An, H. Wei, C. L. Wei, Y. Tao, Y. Li, B. J. Xi, S. L. Xiong, J. K. Feng and Y. T. Qian, Micron-Sized Nanoporous Vanadium Pentoxide Arrays for High-Performance Gel Zinc-Ion Batteries and Potassium Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4054–4064 Search PubMed .
H. B. Cheng, Y. Y. Li, B. Z. Tang and J. Y. Yoon, Assembly strategies of organic-based imaging agents for fluorescence and photoacoustic bioimaging applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 21–31 Search PubMed .
J. L. Yin, Y. Y. Ma, G. H. Li, M. Peng and W. Y. Lin, A versatile small-molecule fluorescence scaffold: Carbazole derivatives for bioimaging, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 412, 213257 Search PubMed .
X. F. Gu, Z. She, T. X. Ma, S. Tian and H. B. Kraatz, Electrochemical detection of carcinoembryonic antigen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 612, 610–616 Search PubMed .
S. H. Li, A. Jain, T. Tscharntke, T. Arnold and D. W. Trau, Hand-Held Photometer for Instant On-Spot Quantification of Nucleic Acids, Proteins, and Cells, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2564–2569 Search PubMed .
P. Pohl, A. Bielawska-Pohl, A. Dzimitrowicz, P. Jamroz, M. Welna, A. Lesniewicz and A. Szymczycha-Madeja, Recent achievements in element analysis of bee honeys by atomic and mass spectrometry methods, Trends, Anal. Chem., 2017, 93, 67–77 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu, W. C. Ma, H. J. Han, Y. X. Han and W. W. Ma, Catalytic ozonation of quinoline using nano-MgO: Efficacy, pathways, mechanisms and its application to real biologically pretreated coal gasification wastewater, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 91–99 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, A. C. Sedgwick, T. Gunnlaugsson, E. U. Akkaya, J. Y. Yoon and T. D. James, Fluorescent chemosensors: the past, present and future, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7105–7123 Search PubMed .
M. Pascucci, S. Ganesan, A. Tripathi, O. Katz, V. Emiliani and M. Guillon, Compressive three-dimensional super-resolution microscopy with speckle-saturated fluorescence excitation, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1327 Search PubMed .
F. Hu, W. Z. Liu, W. F. Li, Z. J. Xu, Y. Y. Diao, N. B. Lin, W. X. Guo, L. Shi, J. H. van Esch and X. Y. Liu, Fluorescence: Silk Fluorescence Collimator for Ultrasensitive Humidity Sensing and Light-Harvesting in Semitransparent Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Small, 2019, 1, 197069 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Chen, P. Tuhin, F. Wang, K. J. Seung and J. Y. Yoon, Fluorescent Chemosensors Based on Spiroring-opening of Xanthenes and Related Derivatives, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1910–1956 Search PubMed .
S. H. Park, N. Kwon, J. H. Lee, J. Y. Yoon and I. Shin, Synthetic ratiometric fluorescent probes for detection of ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 143–179 Search PubMed .
P. Wang, L. X. Liu, P. P. Zhou, W. Y. Wu, J. Wu, W. S. Liu and Y. Tang, A peptide-based fluorescent chemosensor for multianalyte detection, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 72, 80–86 Search PubMed .
R. M. Duke, E. B. Veale, F. M. Pfeffer, P. E. Kruger and T. Gunnlaugsson, Colorimetric and fluorescent anion sensors: an overview of recent developments in the use of 1, 8-naphthalimide-based chemosensors., Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3936–3953 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Chen, J. Yang, W. W. Cheng, J. Huang, D. Yang, Y. S. Xue and X. H. Wu, A novel coordination polymer based on 2, 6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid: synthesis, crystal structure and luminescence sensing, Transition Met. Chem., 2020, 45, 121–128 Search PubMed .
M. A. Kobaisi, S. V. Bhosale, K. Latham, A. M. Raynor and S. V. Bhosale, Functional Naphthalene Diimides: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11685–11796 Search PubMed .
F. Wurthner, C. R. Saha-Moller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Perylene Bisimide Dye Assemblies as Archetype Functional Supramolecular Material, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 Search PubMed .
A. Nicolescu, A. Airinei, E. Georgescu, F. Georgescu, R. Tigoianu, F. Oancea and C. Deleanu, Synthesis, photophysical properties and solvatochromic analysis of some naphthalene-1, 8-dicarboxylic acid derivatives, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 303, 112626 Search PubMed .
S. Sanchez, A. Y. Y. Woo and T. Baumgartner, Electron-accepting p-conjugated species with 1, 8-naphthalic anhydride or diketophosphanyl units, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2324–2334 Search PubMed .
M. Poddar, V. Sharma, S. M. Mobin and R. Misra, 1, 8-Naphthalimide Substituted BODIPY Dyads: Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Live-Cell Imaging, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 2881–2890 Search PubMed .
X. H. Qian, Y. Xiao, Y. F. Xu, X. F. Guo, J. H. Qian and W. P. Zhu, “Alive” dyes as fluorescent sensors: fluorophore, mechanism, receptor and images in living cells, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6418–6436 Search PubMed .
Z. C. Xu, J. Y. Yoon and D. R. Spring, A selective and ratiometric Cu2+ fluorescent probe based on naphthalimide excimer–monomer switching, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2563–2565 Search PubMed .
Z. Szakacs, S. Rousseva, M. Bojtar, D. Hessz, I. Bitter, M. Kallay, M. Hilbers, H. Zhang and M. Kubinyi, Experimental evidence of TICT state in 4-piperidinyl-1, 8-naphthalimide-a kinetic and mechanistic study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 10155–10164 Search PubMed .
K. Jo, S. Lee, A. Yi, T. Y. Jeon, H. H. Lee, D. Moon, D. M. Lee, J. Bae, S. T. Hong, J. Gene, S. G. Lee and H. J. Kim, Alkyl Conformation and π–π Interaction Dependent on Polymorphism in the 1,8-Naphthalimide (NI) Derivative, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 19705–19709 Search PubMed .
D. Jacquemin, E. A. Perpète, G. Scalmani, I. Ciofini, C. Peltier and C. Adamo, Absorption and emission spectra of 1,8-naphthalimide fluorophores: A PCM-TD-DFT investigation, Chem. Phys., 2010, 372, 61–66 Search PubMed .
T. Sun, L. L. Xia, J. X. Huang, Y. Q. Gu and P. Wang, A highly sensitive fluorescent probe for fast recognization of DTT and its application in one- and two-photon imaging, Talanta, 2018, 187, 295–301 Search PubMed .
V. B. Bojinov, I. P. Panova and J. M. Chovelon, Novel blue emitting tetra-and pentamethylpiperidin-4-yloxy-1,8-naphthalimides as photoinduced electron transfer based sensors for transition metal ions and protons, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 35, 172–180 Search PubMed .
N. I. Georgiev, A. R. Sakr and V. B. Bojinov, Design and synthesis of a novel PET and ICT based 1,8-naphthalimide FRET bichromophore as a four-input Disabled–Enabled-OR logic gate, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 625–634 Search PubMed .
X. F. Guo, X. H. Qian and L. H. Jia, A Highly Selective and Sensitive Fluorescent Chemosensor for Hg2+ in Neutral Buffer Aqueous Solution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2272–2273 Search PubMed .
P. C. Zhou, J. Yao, G. D. Hu and J. G. Fang, Naphthalimide Scaffold Provides Versatile Platform for Selective Thiol Sensing and Protein Labeling, ACS Chem. Biol., 2016, 11, 1098–1105 Search PubMed .
L. Bekere, D. Gachet, V. Lokshin, W. Marine and V. Khodorkovsky, Synthesis and spectroscopic properties of 4-amino-1,8-naphthalimide derivatives involving the carboxylic group: a new molecular probe for ZnO nanoparticles with unusual fluorescence features, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2013, 9, 1311–1318 Search PubMed .
D. Gudeika, A review of investigation on 4-substituted 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives, Synth. Met., 2020, 262, 116328 Search PubMed .
M. Poddar, G. Sivakumar and R. Misra, Donor-acceptor substituted 1, 8-naphthalimides: design, synthesis, and structure–property relationship, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14798 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, G. L. Tu, Q. G. Zhou, Y. X. Cheng, Y. H. Geng, L. X. Wang, D. G. Ma, X. B. Jing and F. S. Wang, Highly efficient green light emitting polyfluorene incorporated with 4-diphenylamino-1,8-naphthalimide as green dopant, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1431–1438 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Dai, F. Jin, Y. Long, X.-L. Jin and B. Zhou, A 1,8-naphthalimide-based turn-on fluorescent probe for imaging mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide in living cells, Free Radical Res., 2018, 52, 1288–1295 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. M. Zhang, Y. F. Li, K. P. Zhong, W. J. Qu, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, A bis-naphthalimide functionalized pillar[5]arenebased supramolecular π-gel acts as amulti-stimuli-responsive material, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 16167–16173 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. S. Ge, B. Y. Li, X. L. Meng, H. Yan, M. Yang, B. Dong and Y. Lu, Aggregation-induced emission, multiple chromisms and selforganization of N-substituted-1,8-naphthalimides, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 148, 147–153 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Y. Liu, J. Qi, X. Y. Liu, Z. G. Cui, H. X. Chang, J. T. Chen and G. M. Yang, 4-Amino-1,8-naphthalimide-based fluorescent Cd2+ sensor with high selectivity against Zn2+ and its imaging in living cells, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 204, 655–658 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) X. P. Bao, X. Wu, S. N. Berry, E. N. W. Howe, Y. T. Chang and P. A. Gale, Fluorescent squaramides as anion receptors and transmembrane anion transporters, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1363–1366 Search PubMed .

  (a) L. Yuan, W. Y. Lin, K. B. Zheng, L. W. He and W. M. Huang, Far-red to near infrared analyte-responsive fluorescent probes based on organic fluorophore platforms for fluorescence imaging, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 622–661 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. M. Yang, D. B. Wu, W. J. Gong, Q. Q. Huang, H. Y. Zhen, Q. D. Ling and Z. G. Lin, Highly efficient room-temperature phosphorescence and afterglow luminescence from common organic fluorophores in 2D hybrid perovskites, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8975–8981 Search PubMed .
A. P. de Silva and T. E. Rice, A small supramolecular system which emulates the unidirectional, path-selective photoinduced electron transfer (PET) of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction centre (PRC), Chem. Commun., 1999, 163–164 Search PubMed .

  (a) P. Du, W. H. Zhu, Y. Q. Xie, F. Zhao, C. F. Ku, Y. Cao, C. P. Chang and H. Tian, Dendron-Functionalized Macromolecules: Enhancing Core Luminescence and Tuning Carrier Injection, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4387–4398 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H. Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and L. McCulloch, Non-Fullerene Electron Acceptors for Use in Organic Solar Cells, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48(11), 2803–2812 Search PubMed .
X. H. Qian and Z. C. Xu, Fluorescence imaging of metal ions implicated in diseases, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4487–4493 Search PubMed .
H. N. Kim, W. X. Ren, J. S. Kim and J. Yoon, Fluorescent and colorimetric sensors for detection of lead, cadmium, and mercury ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3210–3244 Search PubMed .
H. L. Li, J. L. Fan and X. J. Peng, Colourimetric and fluorescent probes for the optical detection of palladium ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7943–7962 Search PubMed .
S. H. Park, N. Kwon, J. H. Lee, J. Yoon and I. Shin, Synthetic ratiometric fluorescent probes for detection of ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 143–179 Search PubMed .
T. Anand, S. K. Ashok Kumar and S. K. Sahoo, A new Al3+ selective fluorescent turn-on sensor based on hydrazide-naphthalic anhydride conjugate and its application in live cells imaging, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2018, 204, 105–112 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, W. T. Li, W. J. Qu, J. X. Su, Q. Lin, T. B. Wei and Y. M. Zhang, A highly selective fluorescent chemosensor for successive detection of Fe3+ and CN− in pure water, Supramol. Chem., 2017, 29, 489–496 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, X. P. Chen, G. Y. Liang, K. P. Zhong, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, A water-soluble fluorescent chemosensor based on Asp functionalized naphthalimide for successive detection Fe3+ and H2PO4−, Can. J. Chem., 2018, 96, 363–370 Search PubMed .
F. Kong, M. Q. Lin and T. Qiu, Multi-functional ratiometric fluorescent chemosensors of poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) containing rhodamine 6G and 1, 8-naphthalimide moieties, Polymer, 2018, 151, 117–124 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Liu, L. Yang, L. Li, Y. Q. Guo, X. X. Pang, P. Li, F. Ye and Y. Fu, A New Fluorescent Chemosensor for Cobalt (II) Ions in Living Cells Based on 1,8-Naphthalimide, Molecules, 2019, 24, 3093 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, W. Su, E. J. Wang and Y. P. Liu, 1,8-Naphthalimide-based turn-on fluorescent chemosensor for Cu2+ and its application in bioimaging, J. Lumin., 2016, 180, 301–305 Search PubMed .
J. B. Baruah and A. Tarai, Changing-interactions and conformational adjustments of N-(isonicotinylhydrazide)-1, 8-naphthalimide by hydration and complexation affect photophysical properties, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 456–465 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Gao, K. Dang, W. J. Zhang, F. L. Liu, S. Patil, A. Qadir, A. X. Ding and A. R. Qian, A 1,8-naphthalimide-[12]aneN3 derivative for efficient Cu2+ recognition, lysosome staining and siRNA delivery, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 185, 110607 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. D. Mao, W. N. Wu, X. J. Mao, X. L. Zhao, Z. Q. Xu, Y. C. Fan and Z. H. Xu, A novel colorimetric and ratiometric fluorescent Cu2+ sensor based on hydrazone bearing 1,8-naphthalimide and pyrrole moieties, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 813–820 Search PubMed .
G. Z. Huang, C. Li, X. T. Han, S. O. Aderinto, K. S. Shen, S. S. Mao and H. L. Wu, Sensitive and selective detection of Cu (II) ion: A new effective 1,8-naphthalimide-based fluorescence ‘turn off’ sensor, Luminescence, 2018, 33, 660–669 Search PubMed .
S. C. Liang, Q. Tong, X. N. Qin, X. Y. Liao, Q. Li and G. P. Yan, A hydrophilic naphthalimide-based fluorescence chemosensor for Cu2+ ion: Sensing properties, cell imaging and molecular logic behavior, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 230, 118029 Search PubMed .
M. Bahta and N. Ahmed, A novel 1,8-naphthalimide as highly selective naked-eye and ratioetric fluorescent sensor for detection of Hg2+ ions, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 373, 154–161 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, S. Z. Lu, C. M. Sha and D. M. Xu, A single thiourea-appended 1,8-naphthalimide chemosensor for three heavy metal ions: Fe3+, Pb2+, and Hg2+, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 208, 258–266 Search PubMed .
C. X. He, S. W. Yu, S. Y. Ma, Z. N. Liu, L. F. Yao, F. X. Cheng and P. H. Liu, A Novel Ruthenium(II) Polypyridyl Complex Bearing 1,8-Naphthyridine as a High Selectivity and Sensitivity Fluorescent Chemosensor for Cu2+ and Fe3+ Ions, Molecules, 2019, 24, 4032 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Zhou, S. Q. Hu, H. F. Wang, H. Y. Sun and X. B. Zhang, A novel ratiometric two-photon fluorescent probe for imaging of Pd2+ ions in living cells and tissues, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2016, 166, 25–30 Search PubMed .
M. Dodangeh, K. Gharanjig and M. Arami, A novel Ag+ cation sensor based on polyamidoamine dendrimer modified with 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2016, 154, 207–214 Search PubMed .
G. C. Li, G. Q. Gao, J. Y. Cheng, X. P. Chen, Y. F. Zhao and Y. Ye, Two new reversible naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemosensors for Hg2+, Luminescence, 2016, 31, 992–996 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, K. P. Zhong, J. X. Su, X. P. Chen, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, A novel histidine-functionalized 1,8-naphthalimidebased fluorescent chemosensor for the selective and sensitive detection of Hg2+ in water, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 3303 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Q. Fan, X. W. Guan, W. J. Qu, Q. Lin, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Y. M. Zhang, A novel naphthalimidee-glutathione chemosensor for fluorescent detection of Fe3+ and Hg2+ in aqueous medium and its application, Tetrahedron, 2018, 74, 4005–4012 Search PubMed .
H. Onodera, Y. C. Kitagawa, T. Nakanishi, K. Fushimi and Y. Hasegawa, Acid-protected Eu(III) coordination nanoparticles covered with polystyrene, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 75–81 Search PubMed .
A. Dobbins, F. Fuso Nerini, P. Deane and S. Pye, Strengthening the EU response to energy poverty, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 2–5 Search PubMed .
C. Lupan, R. Khaledialidusti, A. K. M. Mishra, V. Postica, M. I. Terasa, N. Magariu, T. Pauporte, B. Viana, J. Drewes, A. Vahl, F. Faupel and R. Adelung, Pd-Functionalized ZnO:Eu Columnar Films for Room Temperature Hydrogen Gas Sensing: A Combined Experimental and Computational Approach, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24951–24964 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, N. N. Liu, H. F. Li, P. Chen and P. F. Yan, The Role of Blue-Emissive 1,8-Naphthalimidopyridine N-Oxide in Sensitizing Eu(III) Photoluminescence in Dimeric Hexafluoroacetylacetonate Complexes, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2211–2219 Search PubMed .
N. Dey and P. S. Bhattacharya, Switchable Optical Probes for Simultaneous Targeting of Multiple Anions, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 1759–1779 Search PubMed .
C. Pati and K. Ghosh, 1,8-Naphthalimide-pyridoxal conjugate as supramolecular gelator for colorimetric read out of F− ion in solution, gel and solid states, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 2718–2725 Search PubMed .
Z. Szakacs, M. Bojtar, D. Hessz, S. Rousseva, I. Bitter, L. Drahos, M. Hilbers, H. Zhang, M. Kallay and M. Kubinyi, Strong ion pair charge transfer interaction of 1,8-naphthalimide–bipyridinium conjugates with basic anions-towards the development of a new type of turn-on fluorescent anion sensors, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6666–6674 Search PubMed .
X. L. Sun, S. D. Dahlhauser and E. V. Anslyn, New Autoinductive Cascade for the Optical Sensing of Fluoride: Application in the Detection of Phosphoryl Fluoride Nerve Agents, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4635–4638 Search PubMed .
N. Wu, L. X. Zhao, C. Y. Jiang, P. Li, Y. L. Liu, Y. Fu and F. Ye, A naked-eye visible colorimetric and fluorescent chemosensor for rapid detection of fluoride anions: Implication for toxic fluorine-containing pesticides detection, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 320, 112549 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. K. Che and H. Jiang, An aryl-triazole foldamer containing a 1,8-naphthalimide fluorescent motif for monitoring and enhancing the anion-induced folding, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 7747–7752 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Satta, R. Nishiyabu, T. D. James and Y. Kubo, A 1-hydroxy-2, 3, 1-benzodiazaborine-containing π-conjugated system: Synthesis, optical properties and solvent-dependent response toward anions, Tetrahedron, 2017, 73, 2053–2061 Search PubMed .
X. X. Chen, T. H. Leng, C. Y. Wang, Y. J. Shen and W. H. Zhu, A highly selective naked-eye and fluorescent probe for fluoride ion based on 1,8-naphalimide and benzothizazole, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 141, 299–305 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, L. Ding and J. K. Gao, Reusable colorimetric and fluorescent chemosensors based on 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives for fluoride ion detection, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 237, 118395 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, W. T. Li, W. J. Qu, Y. Q. Fan, H. Yao, Q. Lin, T. B. Wei and Y. M. Zhang, A Water Soluble Naphthalimide-Based Chemosensor for Fluorescent Detection CN− in Pure Water and Its Application in Practical Samples, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2018, 29, 1563–1569 Search PubMed .
X. L. Chen, Y. W. Wu, G. H. Cao, X. F. Wang, Z. Ji, D. Q. Huo, F. L. Xu and C. J. Hou, A methodology for ultra-sensitive detection of the sequence-specific DNA or Uracil-DNA glycosylase activity (UDG), ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1615–1623 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Wang, J. Y. Nie, W. Fang, L. Yang, Q. L. Hu, Z. K. Wang, J. Z. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Sugar-Based Aggregation-Induced Emission Luminogens: Design, Structures, and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 4534–4577 Search PubMed .
J. Li, J. X. Wang, H. X. Li, N. Song, D. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Supramolecular materials based on AIE luminogens (AIEgens): construction and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1144–1172 Search PubMed .
X. G. Gu and B. Z. Tang, No UV Irradiation Needed! Chemiexcited AIE Dots for Cancer Theranostics, Chem., 2017, 3, 922–924 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, G. F. Gong, Y. Q. Fan, Y. Y. Chen, J. Wang, X. W. Guan, J. Liu, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao and T. B. Wei, Anion induced supramolecular polymerization: a novel approach for the ultrasensitive detection and separation of F−, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3247–3250 Search PubMed .
R. Misra, T. S. Reddy and R. Maragani, Triarylborane substituted naphthalimide as fluoride and cyanide ion sensor, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 2549–2553 Search PubMed .
X. P. Bao, X. Wu, S. N. Berry, E. N. W. Howe, Y. T. Chang and P. A. Gale, Fluorescent squaramides as anion receptors and transmembrane anion transporters, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1363–1366 Search PubMed .
J. Z. Li, Y. H. Sun, C. Y. Wang, Z. Q. Guo, Y. J. Shen and W. H. Zhu, AND-Logic Based Fluorescent Probe for Selective Detection of Lysosomal Bisulfite in Living Cells, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 11946–11951 Search PubMed .
A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Azobenzene photoswitches for biomolecules, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4422–4437 Search PubMed .
N. Y. Hsu, S. Yu Tseng, C. Y. Wu, C. T. Ren, Y. C. Lee, C. H. Wong and C. H. Chen, Desorption Ionization of Biomolecules on Metals, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5203–5210 Search PubMed .
X. H. Chen, W. J. Luo, H. L. Ma, Q. Peng, W. Z. Yuan and Y. M. Zhang, Prevalent intrinsic emission from nonaromatic amino acids and poly(amino acids), Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 351–359 Search PubMed .
W. H. So, Y. Zhang, W. Kang, C. T. T. Wong, H. Y. Sun and J. Xia, Site-selective covalent reactions on proteinogenic amino acids, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2017, 48, 220–227 Search PubMed .
M. N. Chaffee-Cipich, B. D. Sturtevant and S. P. Beaudoin, Adhesion of explosives, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5358–5366 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Cho and B. Kahng, Suppression effect on explosive percolation, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 275730 Search PubMed .
M. G. Ren, B. B. Deng, J. Y. Wang, X. Q. Kong, Z. R. Liu, K. Zhou, L. W. He and W. Y. Lin, A fast responsive two-photon fluorescent probe for imaging H2O2 in lysosomes with a large turn-on fluorescence signal, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 237–243 Search PubMed .
P. Li, D. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, W. Lu, W. Q. Wang and T. Chen, Ultrafast and Efficient Detection of Formaldehyde in Aqueous Solutions Using Chitosan-based Fluorescent Polymers, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 2394–2401 Search PubMed .
Z. Xie, B. Yin, J. Shen, D. Hong, L. Zhu, J. Ge and Q. Zhu, A dual functional fluorogenic probe for visualization of intracellular pH and formaldehyde with distinct fluorescence signals, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2018, 16, 4628–4632 Search PubMed .
J. Delente, D. Umadevi, S. Shanmugaraju, O. Kotova and G. W. Watson, T. Gunnlaugsson, Aggregation induced emission (AIE) active 4- amino-1, 8- naphthalimide-Troger's base for the selective sensing of chemical explosives in competitive aqueous media, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2562–2565 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, X. W. Guan, Y. Q. Fan, J. Wang, L. Liu, J. Liu, H. Yao, Y. M. Zhang and T. B. Wei, A tripodal supramolecular sensor to successively detect picric acid and CN through guest competitive controlled AIE, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 2030–2036 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Li, Y. F. Zhang, Y. M. Zhang, Z. H. Wang, H. L. Yang, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, Tripodal naphthalimide assembled novel AIE supramolecular fluorescent sensor for rapid and selective detection of picric acid, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 21, 108563 Search PubMed .
S. L. Wang, C. Li and Q. H. Song, Fluorescent Chemosensor for Dual-Channel Discrimination between Phosgene and Triphosgene, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 5690–5697 Search PubMed .
Q. Hu, C. Duan, J. J. Wu, D. D. Su, Li. T. Zeng and R. L. Sheng, A Colorimetric and Ratiometric Chemosensor for Visual Detection of Gaseous Phosgene Based on Anthracene Carboxyimide Membrane, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 8686–8691 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, X. W. Guan, S. S. Song, H. Y. Fan, H. Yao, Y. M. Zhang and T. B. Wei, A novel supramolecular polymer π-gel based on bis-naphthalimide functionalized-pillar[5]arene for fluorescence detection and separation of aromatic acid isomers, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 253–259 Search PubMed .
H. T. Yu, J. B. Li, D. D. Wu, Z. J. Qiu and Y. Zhang, Chemistry and biological applications of photo-labile organic molecules, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 464–473 Search PubMed .
D. Basudhar, L. A. Ridnour, R. Cheng, A. H. Kesarwala, J. Heinecke and D. A. Wink, Biological signaling by small inorganic molecules, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 306, 708–723 Search PubMed .
C. J. Gerry and S. L. Schreibe, Unifying principles of bifunctional, proximity-inducing small molecules, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2020, 16, 369–378 Search PubMed .
Y. Fujikawa, K. Terakado, T. Nampo, M. Mori and H. Inoue, 4-Bromo-1,8-naphthalimide derivatives as fluorogenic substrates for live cell imaging of glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity, Talanta, 2019, 204, 633–640 Search PubMed .
J. Cao, X. X. Jiang and N. Y. Fu, A sensitive fluorescent probe for imaging biothiol in zebrafish, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 174, 107978 Search PubMed .
Q. X. Han, X. Liu, X. C. Wang, R. J. Yin, H. I. Jiang, J. X. Ru and W. S. Liu, Rational design of a lysosomal-targeted ratiometric two-photon fluorescent probe for imaging hydrogen polysulfides in live cells, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 173, 107877 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Pak, J. Li, K. C. Ko, G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Yoon, Mitochondria-Targeted Reaction-Based Fluorescent Probe for Hydrogen Sulfide, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 5476–5481 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Meng, L. Yang, C. X. Yao, H. Li, Y. Fu, K. X. Wang, Z. J. Qu and Z. H. Wang, Development of a naphthlimide-based fluorescent probe for imaging monoamine oxidase A in living cells and zebrafish, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 176, 108208 Search PubMed .
X. F. Wu, L. H. Li, W. Shi, Q. Y. Gong, X. H. Li and H. M. Ma, Sensitive and Selective Ratiometric Fluorescence Probes for Detection of Intracellular Endogenous Monoamine Oxidase A, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 1440–1446 Search PubMed .
J. X. Huang, N. Li, Q. Q. Wang, Y. Q. Gu and P. Wang, A lysosome-targetable and two-photon fluorescent probe for imaging endogenous β-galactosidase in living ovarian cancer cells, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 246, 833–839 Search PubMed .
Q. L. Qiao, W. J. Liu, J. Chen, W. Zhou, W. T. Yin, L. Miao, J. N. Cui and Z. C. Xu, A naphthalimide-derived fluorogenic probe for SNAP-tag with a fast record labeling rate, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 174, 327–333 Search PubMed .
C. P. Jiao, Y. Y. Liu, W. J. Lu, P. P. Zhang, X. Ma and Y. F. Wang, A simple sensor based on 1,8-naphthalimide with large Stokes shift for detection of hypochlorous acid in living cells, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 31196 Search PubMed .
G. Saito, D. Velluto and M. Resmini, Synthesis of 1,8-naphthalimide-based probes with fluorescent switch triggered by flufenamic acid, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 172137 Search PubMed .
Q. J. Ma, C. Y. Wang, Y. Bai, J. H. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. K. Li and X. Y. Guo, A lysosome-targetable and ratiometric fluorescent probe for hypochlorous acid in living cells based on a 1,8-naphthalimide derivative, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 223, 117334 Search PubMed .
B. Das, S. Lohar, A. Patra, E. Ahmmed, S. K. Mandal, J. N. Bhakta, K. Dhara and P. Chattopadhyay, Naphthalimide-based fluorescence “turn-on” chemosensor for highly selective detection of carbon monoxide: imaging applications in live cell, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 13497–13502 Search PubMed .
X. L. Li, J. L. Hou, C. Peng, L. Chen, W. B. Liu and Y. P. Liu, A 1,8-naphthalimide-based fluorescent probe for selective and sensitive detection of peroxynitrite and its applications in living cell imaging, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 34287–34292 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. L. Fan, Y. H. Zhao, Y. Kang, J. J. Du and X. J. Peng, Mitochondria-Accessing Ratiometric Fluorescent Probe for Imaging Endogenous Superoxide Anion in Live Cells and Daphnia magna, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 735–741 Search PubMed .
R. J. Chen, H. Lu, C. X. Liu and Q. S. Kong, Novel chemosensors for detection of glutathione by reduction or substitution of naphthalimide derivatives containing sulfoxide or sulfone substituents, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2015, 25, 59–61 Search PubMed .
J. Lovitt, C. S. Hawes, A. D. Lynes, B. Haffner, M. Möbius and T. Gunnlaugsson, Coordination chemistry of N-picolyl-1,8-naphthalimides: colourful low molecular weight metallo-gelators and unique chelation behaviours, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 296–308 Search PubMed .
C. Felip-Leon, F. Galindo and J. F. Miravet, Insight in the aggregation induced emission of 1,8-naphthalimide-based supramolecular hydrogels, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17060–17069 Search PubMed .
O. Bezvikonnyi, D. Gudeika, D. Volyniuk, J. V. Grazulevicius and G. Bagdziunas, Pyrenyl substituted 1,8-naphthalimide as a new material for weak efficiency-roll-off red OLEDs: a theoretical and experimental study, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 12492–12502 Search PubMed .
S. S. Ge, B. Y. Li, X. L. Meng, H. Yan, M. Yang, B. Dong and Y. Lu, Aggregation-induced emission, multiple chromisms and selforganization of N-substituted-1,8-naphthalimides, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 148, 147–153 Search PubMed .
S. Kotowicz, M. Korzec, M. Siwy, S. Golba, J. G. Malecki, H. Janeczek, S. Mackowski, K. Bednarczyk, M. Libera and E. Schab-Balcerzak, Novel 1,8-naphthalimides substituted at 3-C position: Synthesis and evaluation of thermal, electrochemical and luminescent properties, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 158, 65–78 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, P. P. Mao, Y. Q. Fan, L. Liu, J. Liu, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao and T. B. Wei, A novel supramolecular polymer gel based on naphthalimide functionalized-pillar[5]arene for the fluorescence detection of Hg2+ and I- and recyclable removal of Hg2+ via cation-π interactions, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 7085–7089 Search PubMed .
H. L. Yang, Q. P. Zhang, Y. M. Zhang, G. F. Gong, Y. Y. Chen, Q. Zhou, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, A novel strong AIE bi-component hydrogel as a multi-functional supramolecular fluorescent material, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 171, 107745 Search PubMed .
G. F. Gong, Y. Y. Chen, Y. M. Zhang, Y. Q. Fan, Q. Zhou, H. L. Yang, Q. P. Zhang, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, A novel bis-component AIE smart gel with high selectivity and sensitivity to detect CN−, Fe3+ and H2PO4−, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 6348–6352 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, P. P. Mao, Y. Q. Fan, P. P. Jia, J. Liu, Y. M. Zhang, H. Yao and T. B. Wei, Novel multi-analyte responsive ionic supramolecular gels based on pyridinium functionalized-naphthalimide, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 7360–7364 Search PubMed .
J. D. Luo, Z. L. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, H. Y. Chen, C. F. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. W. Zhan, Y. Q. Liu, D. B. Zhu and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission of 1-methyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenylsilole, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 Search PubMed .
X. Cai and B. Liu, Aggregation-Induced Emission: RecentAdvances in Materials and Biomedical Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9868–9886 Search PubMed .
Q. G. Zang, J. Y. W. Yu, B. Yu, J. Qian, R. R. Hu and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5165–5171 Search PubMed .
Z. G. Guo, C. X. Yan and W. H. Zhu, High-Performance Quinoline-Malononitrile Core as a Building Block for the Diversity-Oriented Synthesis of AIEgens, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9812–9825 Search PubMed .
J. S. Ni, T. Min, Y. Li, M. Zha, P. Zhang, C. L. Ho and K. Li, Planar AIEgens with Enhanced Solid-State Luminescence and ROS Generation for Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Treatment, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10179–10185 Search PubMed .
S. Xie, A. Y. H. Wong, S. J. Chen and B. Z. Tang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5824–5847 Search PubMed .
T. Ogoshi, S. Kanai, S. Fujinami, T. Yamagishi and Y. Nakamoto, 
            para-Bridged Symmetrical Pillar[5]arenes: Their Lewis Acid Catalyzed Synthesis and Host-Guest Property, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5022 Search PubMed .
T. Ogoshi, T. Yamagishi and Y. Nakamoto, Pillar-Shaped Macrocyclic Hosts Pillar[n]arenes: New Key Players for Supramolecular Chemistry, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7937–8002 Search PubMed .
J. F. Chen, G. Y. Meng, Q. Zhu, S. H. Zhang and P. K. Chen, Pillar[n]arene: A New Class of AIEgen Macrocyles Used for Luminescence Sening of Fe3+ Ion, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11747–11751 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Zhang, W. Zhu, W. J. Qu, K. P. Zhong, X. P. Chen, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, Competition of cation-π and exo-wall π–π interactions: a novel approach to achieve ultrasensitive response, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4549–4552 Search PubMed .
G. F. Gong, Y. Y. Chen, Y. M. Zhang, Y. Q. Fan, Q. Zhao, J. N. An, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Q. Lin, Competition of exo-wall π–π and lone pair-π interactions: a viable approach to achieve ultrasensitive detection and effective removal AsO2− in water, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5831–5836 Search PubMed .
C. S. Hawes, A. D. Lynes, K. Byrne, W. Schmitt, G. Ryan, M. Mobius and T. Gunnlaugsson, A resilient and luminescent stimuli-responsive hydrogel from a heterotopic 1,8-naphthalimide-derived ligand, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5989–5992 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, X. W. Guan, Y. M. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Q. Fan, H. Yao and T. B. Wei, Spongy Materials Based on Supramolecular Polymer Networks for Detection and Separation of Broad-Spectrum Pollutants, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14775–14784 Search PubMed .
X. W. Guan, Q. Lin, Y. M. Zhang, T. B. Wei, J. Wang, Y. Q. Fan and H. Yao, Pillar[5]arene-based spongy supramolecular polymer gel and its properties in multi-responsiveness, dyes sorptions, ultrasensitive detection and separation of Fe3+, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 3241–3247 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Zhang, Q. Yu, H. H. Wei, S. J. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Long-Lived Emissive Probes for Time-Resolved Photoluminescence Bioimaging and Biosensing, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 1770–1839 Search PubMed .
X. Kang and M. Z. Zhu, Tailoring the photoluminescence of atomically precise nanoclusters, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2422–2457 Search PubMed .
R. Visbala and M. Concepcion Gimeno, N-heterocyclic carbene metal complexes: photoluminescence and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3551–3574 Search PubMed .
D. Huang, C. P. Byers, L. Y. Wang, A. Hoggard, B. Hoener, S. Dominguez-Medina, S. S. Chen, W. S. Chang, C. F. Landes and S. Link, Photoluminescence of a Plasmonic Molecule, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7072–7079 Search PubMed .
J. E. Park, J. Kima and J. M. Nam, Emerging plasmonic nanostructures for controlling and enhancing photoluminescence, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4696–4704 Search PubMed .
S. J. Chen, X. Li and L. W. Song, A fluorescent photochromic diarylethene based on naphthalic anhydride with strong solvatochromism, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29854–29859 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Ni, Z. M. Sun, Y. L. Wang, H. F. Nour, A. C.-H. Sue, N. S. Finney, K. K. Baldridge and M. A. Olson, Versatile hydrochromic fluorescent materials based on a 1,8-naphthalimide integrated fluorophore-receptor system, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7399 Search PubMed .
Y. N. Wu, X. J. Chen, Y. X. Mu, Z. Yang, Z. Mao, J. Zhao, Z. Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and Z. G. Chi, Two thermally stable and AIE active 1,8-naphthalimide derivatives with red efficient thermally activated delayed fluorescence, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 169, 81–88 Search PubMed .
Y. Yin, Z. Chen, C. B. Fan, G. Liu and S. Z. Pu, 1, 8-Naphthalimide-Based Highly Emissive Luminophors with Various Mechanofluorochromism and Aggregation-Induced Characteristics, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 14324–14332 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Y. Zhang, H. P. Zhang, Y. P. Xiao, Y. W. Quan, S. H. Ye and Y. X. Cheng, High Green Brightness Circularly Polarized Electroluminescence Regulated by Rigid Chiral D-A Type Emitters, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24746–24753 Search PubMed .
T. Xia, L. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Rui, J. cao, Y. Hu, J. Yang, J. Wu and J. Xu, A Thermoresponsive Fluorescent Rotor Based on Gemel Naphthalimide for a Viscometer and Viscosity-related Thermometer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5696–5701 Search PubMed .
C. J. Christopherson, D. M. Mayder, J. Poisson, N. R. Paisley, C. M. Tonge and Z. M. Hudson, 1,8-Naphthalimide-Based Polymers Exhibiting Deep-Red Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence and Their Application in Ratiometric Temperature Sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20000–20011 Search PubMed .
A. Salehi, Y. Fu, D. H. Shin and F. So, Recent Advances in OLED Optical Design, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808803 Search PubMed .
P. M. Pattison, J. Y. Tsao, G. C. Brainard and B. Bugbee, LEDs for photons, physiology and food, Nature, 2018, 563, 493–500 Search PubMed .
Stav Rahmany and Lioz Etgar, Semitransparent Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1519–1531 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Zhang, S. W. Ng, X. Lu and Z. J. Zheng, Solution-Processed Transparent Electrodes for Emerging Thin-Film Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2049–2122 Search PubMed .
D. Li, H. Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Four-coordinate organoboron compounds for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8416–8433 Search PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, H. Y. Lu, C. Chen, M. Li and C. F. Chen, 1,8-Naphthalimide-based circularly polarized TADF enantiomers as the emitters for efficient orange-red OLEDs, Org. Electron., 2019, 70, 71–77 Search PubMed .
Y. Qin, G. Li, T. Qi and H. Huang, Aromatic imide/amide-based organic small-molecule emitters for organic light-emitting diodes, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1554–1568 Search PubMed .
J. Lalevee, D. Gigmes, F. Dumur, B. Graff, J. P. Fouassier, P. Xiao, J. Zhang and N. Zivic, 
            N-[2-(dimethylamino) ethyl]-1,8-naphthalimide Derivatives as Photoinitiators under LED, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 994–1003 Search PubMed .
G. Sivakumar, A. H. Bertoni, H. S. Kim, P. E. Marchezi, D. R. Bernardo, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and A. F. Nogueira, Design, synthesis and characterization of 1,8-naphthalimide based fullerene derivative as electron transport material for inverted perovskite solar cells, Synth. Met., 2019, 249, 25–30 Search PubMed .
R. Y. Zhang, G. L. Niu, Q. Lu, X. L. Huang, J. H. C. Chau, R. T. K. Kwok, X. Q. Yu, Mi. H. Li, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Cancer cell discrimination and dynamic viability monitoring through wash-free bioimaging using AIEgens, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 7676–7684 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Dumur, P. Xiao, B. Graff, D. Bardelang, D. Gigmes, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevee, Structure Design of Naphthalimide Derivatives: Toward Versatile Photoinitiators for Near-UV/Visible LEDs, 3D Printing, and Water-Soluble Photoinitiating Systems, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2054–2063 Search PubMed .
J. C. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, H. M. Xiao, G. G. Li, Y. H. Liu, C. H. Li, H. Huang, X. B. Chen and Z. S. Bo, 1,8-Naphthalimide-Based Planar Small Molecular Acceptor for Organic Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5475–5483 Search PubMed .
X. J. He, H. Chen, C. C. Xu, J. Y. Fan, W. Xu, Y. H. Li, H. Deng and J. L. Shen, Ratiometric and colorimetric fluorescent probe for hypochlorite monitor and application for bioimaging in living cells, bacteria and zebrafish, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 388, 122029 Search PubMed .
X. Li, X. Gao, W. Shi and H. Ma, Design Strategies for Water-Soluble Small Molecular Chromogenic and Fluorogenic Probes, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 59–659 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Chen, X. Z. Tian, I. Shin and J. Y. Yoon, Fluorescent and luminescent probes for detection of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4783–4804 Search PubMed .
K. Kikuchi, Design, synthesis and biological application of chemical probes for bio-imaging, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2048–2053 Search PubMed .
Y. Tang, D. Lee, J. Wang, G. Li, W. Y. Lin and J. Y. Yoon, Development of fluorescent probes based on protection-deprotection of the key functional groups for biological imaging, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5003–5015 Search PubMed .
P. A. Panchenko, M. A. Zakharko, M. A. Grin, A. F. Mironov, D. A. Pritmov, G. Jonusauskas, Y. V. Fedorov and O. A. Fedorova, Effect of linker length on the spectroscopic properties of bacteriochlorin-1,8-naphthalimide conjugates for fluorescence-guided photodynamic therapy, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 390, 112338 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, K. P. Zhong, J. H. Zhu, L. Ding, J. X. Su, H. Yao, T. B. Wei and Y. M. Zhang, Iodine Controlled Pillar[5]arene-Based Multiresponsive Supramolecular Polymer for Fluorescence Detection of Cyanide, Mercury, and Cysteine, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 7863–7871 Search PubMed .
G. D. Hu, H. Y. Jia, Y. N. Hou, X. Han, L. Gan, J. Si, D. H. Cho, H. Zhang and J. G. Fang, Decrease of Protein Vicinal Dithiols in Parkinsonism Disclosed by a Monoarsenical Fluorescent Probe, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 4371–4378 Search PubMed .
A. H. Day, J. Domarkas, S. Nigam, I. Renard, C. Cawthorne, B. P. Burke, G. S. Bahra, P. C. F. Oyston, L. A. Fallis, S. J. Archibald and S. J. A. Pope, Towards dual SPECT/optical bioimaging with a mitochondrial targeting, 99mTc(I) radiolabelled 1,8-naphthalimide conjugate, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 511 Search PubMed .
E. E. Langdon-Jones, C. F. Williams, A. J. Hayes, D. Lloyd, S. J. Coles, P. N. Horton, L. M. Groves and S. J. A. Pope, Luminescent 1,8-Naphthalimide-Derived ReI Complexes: Syntheses, Spectroscopy, X-ray Structure and Preliminary Bioimaging in Fission Yeast Cells, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 5279–5287 Search PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, T. Zhang, S. L. Shen, J. Y. Miao and B. X. Zhao, A ratiometric lysosomal pH probe based on the naphthalimide-rhodamine system, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3260–3266 Search PubMed .
L. Y. Zhou, F. J. Luo, W. J. Chi, Y. P. Tang, X. G. Liu and Q. L. Lin, Activatable selenium-containing fluorescent apoptotic agent for biosensing and tracing cancer cell apoptosis, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 311, 127915 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. Zhang, Q. Feng, M. Yang and Y. L. Tang, A ratiometric fluorescent biosensor based on conjugated polymers for sensitive detection of nitroreductase and hypoxia diagnosis in tumor cells, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 317, 128257 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Cao, P. Wei, R. H. Li, Y. P. Zhong, X. Li, F. F. Xue, Y. B. Shi and T. Yi, Ribosomal RNA-Selective Light-Up Fluorescent Probe for Rapidly Imaging the Nucleolus in Live Cells, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1409–1416 Search PubMed .
N. Zhang, P. Hu, Y. F. Wang, Q. Tang, Q. Zheng, Z. L. Wang and Y. He, A Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Activated Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) Donor with Self-Reporting Fluorescence, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 319–326 Search PubMed .
S. Shanmugaraju, B. L. CourPoulsen, T. Arisa, D. Umadevi, H. L. Dalton, C. S. Hawes, S. Estalayo-Adrián, A. J. Savyasachi, G. W. Watson, D. C. Williams and T. Gunnlaugsson, Synthesis, structural characterisation and antiproliferative activity of a new fluorescent 4-amino-1,8-naphthalimide Tröger's base- Ru(II)-curcumin organometallic conjugate, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4120–4123 Search PubMed .
W. L. Turnbull, E. Murrell, M. Bulcan-Gnirss, M. Majeed, M. Milne and L. G. Luyt, A study of 99mTc/Re-tricarbonyl complexes of 4-amino-1,8-naphthalimides, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14077–14084 Search PubMed .
J. Chung, H. D. Li, C. S. Lim, H. M. Kim and J. Yoon, Two-photon imaging of hydrogen polysulfides in living cells and hippocampal tissues, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 322, 128564 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Hao, Y. T. Zhang, K. H. Ruan, W. S. Chen, B. B. Zhou, X. J. Tan, Y. Wang, L. Q. Zhao, G. Zhang, P. Qu and M. T. Xu, A naphthalimide-based chemodosimetric probe for ratiometric detection of hydrazine, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 417–424 Search PubMed .
H. Sharma, J. S. Sidhu, W. M. Hassen, N. Singh and J. J. Dubowski, Synthesis of a 3,4-Disubstituted 1,8-Naphthalimide-Based DNA Intercalator for Direct Imaging of Legionella pneumophila, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 5829–5838 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, N. Li, Y. Ma, R. Wang, J. Wang and J. Wang, New strategy for the azido-ascorbic acid reaction: a convenient chemosensor and its imaging in garlic slice tissues, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6707–6712 Search PubMed .
S. K. Yao and Y. Qian, A naphthalimide–rhodamine two-photon fluorescent turn-on probe for hypochlorous acid by desulfurization-cyclization and fluorescence resonance energy transfer, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 252, 877–885 Search PubMed .
A. Y. Bi, T. Gao, X. Z. Cao, J. Dong, M. Liu, N. H. Ding, W. H. Liao and W. B. Zeng, A novel naphthalimide-based probe for ultrafast, highly selective and sensitive detection of formaldehyde, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 3292–3297 Search PubMed .
Y. Jia, P. Li, W. Song, G. J. Zhao, D. Y. Zheng, D. M. Li, Y. N. Wang, J. Y. Wang, C. Y. Li and K. L. Han, Rational Design of a Profluorescent Substrate for S-adenosylhomocysteine Hydrolase and its Applications in Bioimaging and Inhibitor Screening, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25818–25824 Search PubMed .
Y. P. Chen, J. Cao, X. X. Jiang, Z. Z. Pan and N. Y. Fu, A sensitive ratiometric fluorescence probe for chymotrypsin activity and inhibitor screening, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 204–210 Search PubMed .
X. T. Xia, F. Zeng, P. S. Zhang, J. Lu, Y. Huang and S. Z. Wu, An ICT-based ratiometric fluorescent probe for hydrazine detection and its application in living cells and in vivo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 227, 411–418 Search PubMed .
A. Oshchepkova, M. Oshchepkovb, G. Pavlovad, A. Ryabovae, S. Kamagurovb, S. Tkachenkob, S. Frolovab, A. Redchukb, K. Popovb and E. A. Kataev, Naphthalimide- functionalized bisphosphonates for fluorescence detection of calcification in soft tissues, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 314, 128047 Search PubMed .
S. Xu, H. W. Liu, L. L. Chen, J. Yuan, Y. C. Liu, L. L. Teng, S. Y. Huan, L. Yuan, X. B. Zhang and W. H. Tan, Learning from Artemisinin: Bioinspired Design of a Reaction-Based Fluorescent Probe for the Selective Sensing of Labile Heme in Complex Biosystems, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2129–2133 Search PubMed .
B. Dumat, L. Montel, L. Pinon, P. Matton, L. Cattiaux, J. Fattaccioli and J. M. Mallet, Mannose-Coated Fluorescent Lipid Microparticles for Specific Cellular Targeting and Internalization via Glycoreceptor-Induced Phagocytosis, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 5118–5126 Search PubMed .
S. J. Li, D. Y. Zhou, Y. F. Li, H. W. Liu, P. Wu, J. O. Yang, W. L. Jiang and C. Y. Li, Efficient Two-Photon Fluorescent Probe for Imaging of Nitric Oxide during Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 2311–2319 Search PubMed .
A. Sarkar, C. Fouzder, S. Chakraborty, E. Ahmmed, R. Kundu, S. Dam, P. Chattopadhyay and K. Dhara, A Nuclear-Localized Naphthalimide-Based Fluorescent Light-Up Probe for Selective Detection of Carbon Monoxide in Living Cells, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2020, 33, 651–656 Search PubMed .
P. Gopikrishna, N. Meher and P. Krishnan Iyer, Functional 1, 8-Naphthalimide AIE/AIEEgens: Recent Advances and Prospects, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12081–12111 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of 1,8-naphthalimide, (b) the application of 1,8-naphthalimide-based fluorescent chemosensors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 1.	 

 	Fig. 3  Possible binding mode of sensor 2 with Fe3+ and CN−.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 3.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of the fluorescent chemosensor 4.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Proposed mechanism for the detection of Co2+ ion, (b) the UV-vis absorption spectrum of sensor 5 (1 × 10−5 mol L−1) and upon the addition of salts.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Proposed mechanism for the detection of Cu2+ ion, (b) fluorescence photographs of the sensor in the absence (left) and presence (right) of Cu2+ in a dark-box ultraviolet analyzer when excited at 365 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The structure of probe 7, (b) the ultraviolet photo of probe 7 and with Cu2+, (c) the fluorescent photo of probe 7 and with Cu2+.	 

 	Fig. 9  The proposed binding mode of the fluorescence quenching of sensor 8 with Cu2+ based on the reverse-PET mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The proposed structure of sensor 9-Cu2+ complex and its intramolecular PET process, (b) fluorescence responses of sensor 9 to various metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 11  The structures of the fluorescent sensors 10–12.	 

 	Fig. 12  The proposed mechanism of 13 bonding with Hg2+.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The structure of sensor 14, (b) fluorescence emission data of sensor 14 and different metal ions in solution.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Synthetic routes of 15 and 16 ligands and their Eu, Gd complexes, (b) ball-and-stick representation of the crystal structures of 15 and 16, (c) the coordination polyhedra of 15 and 16.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of the chloride-binding process of the aryl-triazole foldamer 17 in the presence of anions.	 

 	Fig. 16  Possible reactions of 18 with AcO− in THF and F− in DMSO.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The proposed mechanism of 19 bonding with the F−, (b) the structures of the fluorescent sensor 19.	 

 	Fig. 18  The proposed mechanism of 21 bonding with CN−.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The schematic representation of the assembly and disassembly of the sensor (22)-F, (b) fluorescence emission spectra of sensor 22 in DMSO/H2O (7.4:2.6, v/v) solution in the presence of F− and other anions.	 

 	Fig. 20  The proposed mechanism of 23 bonding with F− and CN−.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The structures of compounds 1–4, (b) schematic illustration of the assays utilised for measuring the Cl−/NO3− antiport using the ISE.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical structure of 25 and the proposed sensing mechanism of HSO3−.	 

 	Fig. 23  The structure and fluorescence response mechanism of H2O2 probe 26.	 

 	Fig. 24  HCHO-sensing mechanism of the developed hn-chitosan polymer probe 27.	 

 	Fig. 25  The proposed multiple imaging mechanisms based on the combination of protonation of nitrogen atom and the aza-Cope arrangement and the structure of probe 28.	 

 	Fig. 26  The proposed multiple imaging mechanisms based on the combination of protonation of nitrogen atom and the aza-Cope arrangement and the structure of probe 28.	 

 	Fig. 27  The structure of sensor 30 and the possible recognition mechanism for successively monitoring PA and CN−.	 

 	Fig. 28  The structure of sensor 31 and the proposed recognition mechanism for PA detection.	 

 	Fig. 29  The sensing mechanism of 32 towards phosgene and triphosgene.	 

 	Fig. 30  The structure and fluorescence response mechanism of phosgene sensor 33.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) The structure of supramolecular polymer monomer 34, (b) representative photographs of the π-gel (34-G) for the selective fluorescence detection of HBA, ABA, and NBA isomers and after the addition of o-HBA to the π-gel (34-G).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) The sensing mechanism of 35 for GSTP1-1, (b) the synthesis and proposed mechanism of probe 36.	 

 	Fig. 33  Design and synthesis of probe 37 for the detection of lysosomal H2Sn.	 

 	Fig. 34  Chemical structure of fluorescent probe 38 and its reaction with H2S.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) The structure of sensor 39, (b) the fluorescence spectral of probe 39 before and after the addition of MAO-A with emission color changes, (c) the structure of sensor A.	 

 	Fig. 36  Proposed sensing mechanism of 40 for β-gal.	 

 	Fig. 37  Proposed sensing mechanism of 41 for SANP-tag.	 




 	Fig. 38  The structure of gel agent 49 and fluorescence responses of the ionic supramolecular gels in the presence of various anions, cations, and amino acids.	 

 	Fig. 39  Proposed assembly and ultrasensitive-response mechanisms of 50-G with Fe3+ and H2PO4−.	 

 	Fig. 40  The possible mechanisms regarding the assembly of 51-G and the ultrasensitive sensing of AsO2−.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) The structure of gelator 52, (b) manipulation of the gel with tweezers and the transparency of a gel monolith.	 

 	Fig. 42  The structure of gel-53 and guest-G, Photo showing the broad-spectrum detection and adsorption separation properties for broad-spectrum pollutants for (a) cations and anions, (b) VOCs, (c) various organic dyes.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) The structure of gelator 54 and guest-TA, (b) the gel–sol transitions of the supramolecular polymer gel 54-G triggered by different stimuli.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) Chemical structure and photochromism of 55, (b) absorption spectra changes of 55 upon irradiation at 365 nm in cyclohexane solutions (5.0 × 10−5 M), (c) fluorescence spectra changes of 55 upon irradiation at 365 nm in cyclohexane.	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) The chemical structure of 56A and 56B, (b) photographs of fluorescent aerogels depicting the fluorescence hydrochromism of 56A and 56B based aerogels before and after being exposed to 90% RH taken under 365 nm irradiation, (c) the UV-vis absorption and fluorescence emission spectra of 56A and 56B aqueous solutions.	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) The chemical structure of 57A and 57B, (b) 57A and 57B at different temperatures, (c) the relative fluorescence emission peak intensity of (c) 57A and 57B in THF/water mixtures with different water fractions.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Molecular structures of compounds 58(A–F), (b) PL spectra of luminogen 58(A–F) at different conditions.	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) Molecular structures of 59A and 59B, (b) cyclic voltammograms of 59B in CH2Cl2 solution, (c) calculated spatial distributions of the HOMO and LUMO energy densities of 59B.	 

 	Fig. 49  Molecular structures of 60, (b) emission spectra of 60 in glycerol/water (85/15, v/v) mixture (left) and ethanol (right) recorded from 233 K to 323 K.	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Synthetic TADF compound of 61A–Q, (b) visual representation of 61-N at various temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 51  (a) Molecular structures of TADF enantiomers (−)-(R,R)-62 and (+)-(S,S)-62, (b) the thermogravimetric thermogram and differential scanning calorimetry trace of (−)-(R,R)-62, (c) cyclic voltammogram of (−)-(R,R)-62 with ferrocene as the internal standard.	 

 	Fig. 52  Chemical structures of the investigated photoinitiators 63(A–D), (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of 63(A–D) in acetonitrile.	 

 	Fig. 53  (a) Molecular structures of 64, (b) AFM topography images of perovskite films 64 and surface charge mapping by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) of sample 64.	 

 	Fig. 54  Chemical structures of the studied naphthalimide derivatives (65-A/G).	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) Chemical structures of 66-A/D, (b) cyclic voltammetric curves of 66-A/D, (c) energy level diagrams of PCDTBT-C12, 66-A/D, and PC71BM.	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) Chemical structures of compounds 67 and GBP, (b) fluorescence images of live HeLa cells.	 

 	Fig. 57  (a) Proposed sensing mechanism for the activation of 68 by VDPs, (b) imaging VDPs in live cells.	 

 	Fig. 58  (a) Molecular structures of 69-A/F, (b) confocal fluorescence microscopy images of MCF-7 cells incubated with fac-[Re(CO)3(69-E)]+ (top left) and Mito Tracker deep red (left, middle) and overlay (right; overlap coefficient = 0.66).	 

 	Fig. 59  (a) Molecular structures of 70-A/G, (b) confocal fluorescence microscopy of S. pombe yeast cells incubated with fac-[Re(phen)(CO)3(70-A)]BF4 depicted in green.	 

 	Fig. 60  (a) The proposed mechanism of 71 for sensing H+, (b) fluorescence microscopy images of living HeLa cells co-stained with 71 (5 mM) and LysoSensors Green DND-189 (1 mM).	 

 	Fig. 61  (a) Molecular structures of 72 and 73, (b) co-localization real-time tracking of ROS production in living DU145 cells.	 

 	Fig. 62  (a) Molecular structures of 74, (b) co-localization of 74 and Lyso-Tracker Red in A549 cells.	 

 	Fig. 63  (a) Molecular structures of 75A–H, (b) CLSM images of HeLa cells incubated with probe 75-A.	 

 	Fig. 64  (a) Proposed mechanism of H2S release from probe 76 and HPLC study of H2O2−induced HSD-B transformation, (b) confocal ratiometric fluorescence images on H9c2 cells.	 




This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
