Open-circuit voltage shifted by the bending effect for flexible organic solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA03447C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03447C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15781-15787Open-circuit voltage shifted by the bending effect for flexible organic solar cells

        
          
            Wei-Yang 
            Chou
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chia-Te 
            Yen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fu-Chiao 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Horng-Long 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shyh-Jiun 
            Liu
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Fu-Ching 
            Tang
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Photonics, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. E-mail: weiyang@mail.ncku.edu.tw;  Fax: +886 6 2095040;   Tel: +886 6 2757575 ext. 63912
bDepartment of Physics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan
cDepartment of Greenergy, National University of Tainan, Tainan 700, Taiwan
Received 
      7th July 2014
    , Accepted 24th July 2014First published on 25th July 2014AbstractThe shift of the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of flexible organic solar cells (OSCs) under bending conditions was investigated by fabricating bi-layer heterojunction and polymer-based OSCs on flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates. To realize the performance variations of flexible solar cells characterized by important parameters, Voc was measured when the substrate was bent under various curvatures. The Voc was increased and decreased by using tensile and compressive stresses, respectively. The ratio of increase for Voc is larger than the ratio of reduction, thus indicating that the intermolecular distance of an organic semiconductor is difficult to change because of the strong electrostatic repulsive force. A quantitative analysis of energy levels by the photoluminescence spectrum, UV-visible absorption spectrum, and quantum chemical calculation at various bending states was used to explain the Voc as a function of bending curvature. The peak shifts of UV-visible absorption and photoluminescence spectra provide direct evidence of the variation in energy levels when devices are bent, which causes Voc shifts. For bent organic semiconductor films, the bending curvature-dependent intermolecular distance was studied by Raman spectroscopy by analyzing the intermolecular coupling energy. This study shows that the change of Voc cannot be neglected in the application of flexible OSCs on a flexible loading circuit.
Introduction
Organic solar cell (OSC) devices have been rapidly developed in the past few years. Both small molecule and polymer organic materials have significant potential in photovoltaic cell fabrication because of their broad absorption band, which coincides with the solar spectrum,1–4 and simple fabrication technologies, such as spin-coating, inject printing, thermal evaporation, or roll-to-roll process.5,6 Furthermore, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSC devices has been rapidly improving.7–9 The plasticity and low fabrication cost of OSCs are the main factors that give these materials significant potential in next-generation solar power. The innately bendy characteristics of organic materials benefit OSCs that are applied on flexible electronic devices,10,11 such as OSC formations on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates, which can bend and stretch without breaking.12,13 Flexible solar cells have been developed to power satellites. Flexible solar cells are lightweight, can be rolled for launch, and are easily deployable. Thus, flexible solar cells are suitable for various applications. Moreover, flexible solar cells can also be sewn into backpacks or outerwear. Flexible devices offer advantages to the development of portable merchandise. Flexible electronic devices frequently encounter bending. Thus, the influence of bending on the electronic functionality of flexible devices is an important issue. Previous studies have shown that the most obvious bending effect on OSC devices is the change of short-circuit current density (Jsc).14 The Jsc of a flexible device will change when the device is distorted by an external bending force. However, few reports have focused on the variation of open-circuit voltage (Voc). The physical mechanism of Voc when a flexible device is under bending states is also unclear.
When a flexible device is bent, the microstructure of its organic films will be altered. Microstructure properties influence charge dissociation, charge transport, charge collection, and device performance.15–17 Obvious changes can be observed in many physical and electronic features while a flexible device is bent, for example, changes in Jsc and Voc. This study investigated the physical mechanisms of Voc variation under bending. The results of this study will elucidate the issue of the bending effect on flexible OSC devices. Moreover, Voc is an important parameter for loading devices on a flexible circuit because the loading process is a decisive factor in the performance of loading devices.
Pentacene and N,N′-diheptyl-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C7H15) were used as the donor and acceptor of active layer materials, respectively, for flexible OSCs fabricated on flexible PET substrates. Apparent shifts in Voc (i.e. ΔVoc) were obtained for flexible OSCs bent under tensile and compressive stresses. The Voc of OSCs increased and decreased when the device was under tensile bending and compressive bending, respectively. To illustrate the mechanism of ΔVoc under a bending state and identify the variations in the energy gap, photoluminescence (PL) and UV-visible absorption spectra were used to analyze the optical property variations of organic thin films during bending. During bending, the microstructure variation of the active layer was investigated by using Raman spectroscopy. The results of Raman and optical measurements support the effect of microstructure changes on Voc during bending states. Quantum mechanical calculations were used to verify the relationship between the change in molecular structure and the variation of Voc. The analysis results for the effect of the bending effect on flexible OSCs can be potentially applied to photovoltaic devices that are used under winding to determine the real power output.
Experimental methods
Device fabrication
A flexible PET film that was previously coated with an Al-doped ZnO (AZO) layer with a sheet resistance of 25 Ω □−1 was used as the OSC substrate. The AZO layer served as the anode of OSCs and was patterned by using hydrochloric etching. The patterned substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 min each. The substrates were then dried inside an oven at 80 °C. After drying, the substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT:PSS, H. C. Starck) was spin-coated on PET substrates at 500 rpm/5 s and then spun at 2500 rpm/60 s to form a 30 nm thick film. All samples were baked at 150 °C for 30 min to remove the residual solvent from the film. A 45 nm thick pentacene layer, a 45 nm thick PTCDI-C7H15 layer, and an 8 nm BCP layer were deposited in sequence at a deposit rate of 0.5 Å s−1 under a pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr. The top electrode was constructed by using 10 nm thick Ag and 60 nm thick Al films. The top electrode was used as a cathode and was thermally deposited through a shadow mask to define the active area. The sizes of the active area of the small molecule-based OSCs are 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm. To extend our results, polymer-based OSCs consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) blends with the indene–C60bis–adduct as active materials were fabricated on the same flexible substrate. The sizes of the active area of the polymer-based OSCs are 3 mm × 2 mm.
Measurements and analysis
Several acrylic holders with different curvatures were used in all electrical and optical measurements to bend the device into specific tensile or compressive conditions. Holder curvatures K of 0, 0.33, 0.5, and 1 cm−1 were used in this study. Holder curvatures were defined as the reciprocal of the curvature radius. The symbols “+” and “−” marked in front of the curvature represent that the device was bent under tensile and compressive states, respectively (Fig. 1). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the devices were measured in a nitrogen-filled dark glove box. The J–V curves were obtained by using a Keithley 2400 source meter, which were controlled via Labview. An Oriel solar simulator was used to illuminate the devices from the AZO side with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 in the AM 1.5 G condition. To realize the bending effect on OSCs, PL and Raman measurements (Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR system) were performed on active OSC layers to obtain the optical responses under bending states. The organic films were excited by 532 and 632.8 nm lasers for PL and Raman, respectively. The spectrometer resolution of this measuring system was 0.2 cm−1. The UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded by using a Cintra 202 spectrometer with a resolution of 1 nm to determine the absorption spectrum variation at the bending state.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a flexible organic solar cell which is bent under various curvature states. The curvature K of the solar cell is defined as the reciprocal of radius R of the curvature. 
Theoretical calculation
The neutral geometries of a single pentacene molecule and a single PTCDI molecule were individually optimized by using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. Thereafter, two pentacene molecules constructed as a pentacene dimer and two PTCDI molecules as a PTCDI dimer were placed together to construct a two-dimer system. The intermolecular spacing of the two dimers was set to be identical, and the spacing between the two dimers was 2 Å. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of pentacene and PTCDI in the two-dimer system were calculated by DFT at the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d) level by using the counterpoise method and considered the dimer-centered basis set. The difference between the HOMO and LUMO of a molecule was defined as the band gap, and the difference between the HOMO of pentacene and the LUMO of PTCDI was denoted as the build-in energy (Vbi). All computations were performed by using the program suite of Gaussian 09.18
Results and discussion
The Jsc, Voc, fill factor (FF), and PCE of an unbent OSC are 2 mA cm−2, 333 mV, 0.44, and 0.294%, respectively [Fig. 2a]. The J–V characteristics of devices bent under different curvatures are shown in Fig. 2b. The Voc value shifts in different trends when the OSC device underwent tensile or compressive bending. In organic OSCs, the change of Voc is hardly obtained because the S value [in eqn (1)] for organic heterojunctions is small; approximately 0.1.19 Voc = S0 × Voc1 − S1 × Vb1 − S2 × Vb2 + C(1)where C is a constant that describes the interface potential of the ideal ohmic contact, and the parameters S0, S1, and S2 are the base on the index of the interface behavior.20 The Voc1, Vb1, and Vb2 in eqn (1) are the potential difference between the accepter LUMO and the donor HOMO, the work function differences of donor/anode and acceptor/cathode, respectively. The Voc value decreases from 335 mV to 324 mV (a decrease of 2.9%) when the devices were bent from a flat state to a compressive state. Contrary to the compressive condition, the Voc increases by 3.42% when the flexible OSC was significantly bent to a tensile state with a curvature of +1 cm−1 (Fig. 3). When the bending force applied on the OSC was released, the electrical characteristic returned to its original state, thus indicating that the band structure of an organic semiconductor could be affected by the bending effect. To investigate the effect of the incident light intensity in the Voc of bent devices, Fig. 2c shows that although the decay of Jsc is observed under a long time interval, Voc remains constant. Therefore, no apparent correlation between Jsc and Voc was observed in our flexible OSC. The active areas of small molecule- and polymer-based OSCs are 0.25 mm2 and 6 mm2, respectively, which result in the corresponding light incident angles of approximately 1.5° and 8.5°, respectively, at a bending curvature of 1 cm−1. We believe that the Jsc will be slightly affected by the effect of the incident light intensity because of a small variation in the light incident angle. Despite this effect, the change in Voc remains hardly observable; accordingly, the effect of the incident light intensity on the Voc shift at bending states can be ignored.
 Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a small molecule photovoltaic cell at the flat state. (b) Curvature dependence of open-circuit voltage (Voc) for the flexible solar device. (c) The change of Jsc and Voc of the unbent device which was under long time operation. 
 Fig. 3  The chart shows the curvature dependences of the ratio of Voc shift (left axis) and the ratio of coupling energy shift (right axis) for a flexible organic solar cell. 
To realize the behavior of the Voc shift induced by the bending effect, the PL and UV-visible absorption spectroscopy measurements were performed on organic semiconductor films to study the fine structural changes under bending states. Fig. 4a shows the PL spectra of a PTCDI-C7H15/pentacene semiconductor thin film that was bent to various curvatures. Given that the luminescent signal of the PTCDI-C7H15 film was stronger than the luminescent signal of the pentacene film, the PL signals are dominated by PTCDI-C7H15. The main PL peaks of the PTCDI-C7H15 film are located between 670 and 700 nm. Significant shifts of the peaks are observed within the PL spectra when various bending curvatures are conducted on the organic semiconductor film. A conspicuous blueshift of the PTCDI-C7H15 peaks appears on the PL spectra in the tensile region. An opposite redshift phenomenon is observed in the compressive region, thus indicating that the band gap of PTCDI-C7H15 increases in tensile bending and decreases in compressive bending. The gray curvy line in Fig. 4a shows the level of the peak shift at different bending states. Fig. 4b shows the UV-visible absorption spectra of the PTCDI-C7H15/pentacene film at various bending states. The absorption bands of the PTCDI-C7H15 and pentacene films range from 500 nm to 600 nm and 600 nm to 700 nm, respectively.4,21 The peak shift trend of the UV-visible spectra varies with the bending curvature and is the same as that of the PL spectra. Furthermore, the absorption peak shift of pentacene follows that of PTCDI-C7H15 (Fig. 4c). Both optical results indicate that the band gaps of donor and acceptor materials were reduced when the device was compressed. The band gap of both active layers increased during the tensile condition compared with the compressive condition. To clarify the mechanism of the Voc shift that is affected by the bending effect, the Voc shift of the bent device and the peak shift of PL are compared in Fig. 5. Interestingly, the variation of Voc as a function of bending curvature closely approaches the behavior of the PL peak shift for the PTCDI film. This result indicates that the decrease in Voc is caused by the reduction of the band gap for both active films during compressive states. When both active films are bent at the tensile state, the enlargement of the band gap increases Voc. Thus, the Voc shift of OSCs can be attributed to the band gap variations of the active layers at the bending state. Previous studies have reported that band gaps are strongly dependent on the molecular distance of organic semiconductors.22 Moreover, the molecular distance within a thin film may be changed by external compressive or tensile stress. Therefore, further studies of the relationship between the changes of band gaps and molecular distance are needed to clarify the mechanism of the Voc shift at bending states.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photoluminescence spectra (excited by the laser wavelength of 532 nm) and (b) light absorption spectra of a pentacene/PTCDI-C7H15 film formed on a flexible PET substrate. (c) Curvature dependence of the main absorption peak shifts for pentacene (right axis) and PTCDI-C7H15 (left axis) films. All measurements are carried out under various compressive and tensile curvatures. 
 Fig. 5  Compared with the curvature dependence of the Voc shift (right axis) for an OSC, the same trend is observed for the curvature dependence of the PL peak shift for the PTCDI-C7H15 film. The figure shows the curvature dependence of Voc and PL main peak shifts for the OSC, respectively. 
To investigate the relationship between molecular distance changes and band gap shifts within a bending device, Raman spectroscopy was used to analyze the bending effect of organic semiconductor films. Fig. 6 shows the normalized Raman spectra of pentacene with the vibrational band ranging from 1140 cm−1 to 1190 cm−1, which is derived from the C–H in-plane bending of pentacene.23 Both the 1158 and 1178 cm−1 bands are H-atoms with fully symmetric vibrations located at the end and on both sides of the pentacene, respectively. The vibrational band at 1155 cm−1 (denoted as the v1 band) was split from the 1158 cm−1 band, which originates from the different interaction energy between the two adjacent pentacene molecules in a unit cell and is analogous to Davydov splitting. Thus, the v1 band appears in all spectra when the pentacene molecules are stacked to form a thin film. Given that the pentacene film is subjected to the compressive force, the v1 band has an obvious redshift away from the 1158 cm−1 band (Fig. 6a). By contrast, the v1 band has a blueshift close to the 1158 cm−1 band when the pentacene film is bent at the tensile state (Fig. 6b). The 1158 cm−1 is the vibration signal of a single pentacene molecular; therefore, no apparent shift can be observed in this vibrational band under bending states. According to the concept of Davydov splitting, the coupling energy (ω1) of pentacene molecules can be calculated from the splitting level of the v1 and 1158 cm−1 bands, thus indicating that the coupling energy increases when the device is under compressive bending. In weak coupling, the vibrational coupling energy ω1 can be calculated by the following equation: (2)where Δω and ω0 are the amount of Davydov splitting and internal molecular band frequency (ω0 = 1158 cm−1 in this case), respectively. The ω1 value of unbent pentacene is 11.38 meV. Compared with the ω1 value of unbent pentacene, ω1 increases by 0.23 meV (an increase of 2.04%) at a compressive bending of curvature of −1 and decreases by 0.37 meV (a decrease of 3.22%) at a tensile bending of curvature of +1 (Fig. 3), thus indicating that the intermolecular distance of pentacene is reduced by compressive bending to result in the increase of coupling energy. The variation of coupling energy and Voc shift has the same variation behavior as the bending curvature. It is noted that the vibrational band and Voc shifts at tensile bending are more obvious than those at compressive bending because of the difficulty in changing the distance of pentacene molecules in a unit cell. This difficulty is caused by the strong electrostatic repulsive force between pentacene molecules that are subjected to the compressive force. Thus, the molecular spacing can be easily changed by the tensile force compared with the compressive force. Furthermore, the intensity of the 1178 cm−1 band increases and decreases with the increasing curvatures of tensile bending and compressive bending (raw data not shown), respectively. This result indicates that the vibrational freedom degree of the H-atoms at both sides of the pentacene increases with the increasing molecular spacing in tensile bending. Thus, molecular spacing is affected by substrate bending, which leads to changes in electronic coupling energy and band gap.
 Fig. 6  The Raman spectra of a pentacene film measured under the (a) compressive state and (b) tensile state. The Gaussian/Lorentzian function was used to fit the atomic vibration modes (green lines). (c) Curvature dependence of the coupling energy of pentacene molecules. 
The C–C aromatic stretching modes of pentacene are located between 1330 and 1390 cm−1 (Fig. 6). Three main vibrational bands at 1351, 1371, and 1379 cm−1 can be easily observed in a Raman spectrum. Among these bands, 1351 and 1378 cm−1 bands are affected by horizontal stress forces easily, especially the 1351 cm−1 band. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 1351 and 1378 cm−1 bands increases with increasing tensile bending curvature. Nevertheless, the FWHM decreases with increasing compressive bending curvature. This result shows that the degree of C–C vibration freedom increases when the pentacene film is under a tensile bending state, thus indicating that the intermolecular spacing of pentacene in a unit cell increases under tensile bending conditions again. Both Raman shifts of C–H and C–C aromatic stretching modes imply that the molecular spacing and energy level of the pentacene film changes by applying compressive or tensile stress. In conclusion, for the variations of Raman bands, PL, and absorption characteristic peaks under bending conditions, the band gap and Voc decrease with decreasing molecular distance under compressive bending. By contrast, the molecular distance was enlarged under the tensile bending to increase the band gap and Voc. In OSC devices, the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor is considered a built-in potential, which is an important parameter of OSCs.24,25 Previous studies indicate that the Voc of OSC devices is generally influenced by the built-in potential.26 However, how the bending curvature affects the HOMO and LUMO of active layers is still unclear.
To realize the changes of the HOMO and LUMO of PTCDI-C7H15/pentacene films under various bending conditions, a simple face-to-face structure for a dimer in a unit cell was used to calculate the HOMO and LUMO at a bending state (Fig. 7a). The set distance of the dimers at a flat state is 4 Å, and the two dimers are vertically separated by a gap of 2 Å. The quantum mechanical calculations display that the HOMO of the pentacene and PTCDI-C7H15 dimers increases with increasing dimer distance and that the LUMO decreases with increasing dimer distance (Fig. 7b and c, respectively). Fig. 7d and e show the band gaps of the pentacene and PTCDI-C7H15 dimers as a function of the dimer distance, respectively. The dimer distance is obtained from the difference between the HOMO and the LUMO. The band gaps of pentacene and PTCDI-C7H15 increase with increasing dimer distance, thus indicating that the band gap decreases in the compressive stress performed on organic films and increases in the tensile case. These simulation results of the band gap completely coincide with the results obtained from PL and the absorption measurements in banding states. Fig. 7f shows Vbi as a function of the dimer distance that is defined as the difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor. The Vbi also increases with increasing dimer distance; this result corresponds to the result of the Voc shift at bending states because Voc is proportional to Vbi. When the current–voltage curves in the dark intersect with the curves under illumination, the compensation voltage V0 is obtained in the inset of Fig. 8.27,28 A comparison between the curvature-dependent V0 (Fig. 8) and the curvature-dependent Voc (Fig. 3) shows that both voltage trends tend toward coincidence. Moreover, the value of V0 is very close to the built-in potential Vbi.28 The trends of the curvature-dependent V0 and Vbi are almost the same; that is, the simulated HOMO and LUMO levels for the donor and acceptor under bending states are reasonable.
 Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of the quantum mechanical calculation model. The change of the (b) HOMO energy level, (c) LUMO energy level, (d) pentacene energy band gap (Eg), (e) PTCDI Eg and (f) the build-in potential (Vbi) varied with the molecular distance. 
 Fig. 8  Curvature dependence of the compensation voltage (V0). The inset shows the J–V curve of the unbent OCS of unilluminated (JD), illuminated (JL), and offset (Jph = JL − JD), where the arrows indicate the Voc and V0. 
We extended this investigation and showed that the Voc of polymer-based flexible OSCs can also be shifted by the bending effect. The polymer-based OSC consists of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) blends with the indene–C60bis–adduct, which was formed on the same flexible polyethylene terephthalate substrate. The polymer-based OSC had a power conversion efficiency of 1.82%, a Jsc of 5.0 mA cm−2, and an FF of 46.2%, which are smaller than that fabricated on a glass substrate with the indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode.29Fig. 9a shows the influence of the bending effect on the J–V curve of the polymer-based flexible OSC. Fig. 9b shows that the behavior of the Voc shift under the bending state is similar to that of a small molecule-based OSC, i.e., the increase and decrease of Voc at tensile and compressive states, respectively. A saturation phenomenon was observed for the Voc at both bending states when the bending curvature was higher than 0.5 cm−1. Hence, the Voc shift effect induced by bending can be used to analyze bilayer heterojunction OSCs and polymer-based devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a bending polymer-based photovoltaic cell under different curvatures. (b) Curvature dependence of Voc for the flexible polymer-based solar device. 
Conclusions
In summary, we performed a series of Voc measurements at different bending curvatures that play important roles in the performance of flexible OSCs at bending states. By increasing the bending curvature of the PET substrate, Voc is enhanced at tensile bending and is reduced at compressive bending. The asymmetry of the variation ratio for Voc at tensile and compressive states indicates that the intermolecular distance is difficult to change under compressive conditions because of the strong electrostatic repulsive force between semiconductor molecules, such as pentacene molecules and PTCDI-C7H15 molecules. PL spectroscopy, absorption spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy were used to investigate the intermolecular distance of organic semiconductor films at bending states. The intermolecular distance increases under tensile conditions and decreases in the compressive case, thus resulting in corresponding variations in the band gap and Voc. We also predicted the HOMO and LUMO eigenvalues of pentacene and PTCDI-C7H15 dimers by employing the DFT function under various bending conditions to simulate the variations of the band gap and Vbi. The HOMO level increases with increasing intermolecular distance. In contrast, the LUMO level decreases with increasing intermolecular distance. According to the ratio of Voc to Vbi, the swing of Voc at the bending states can be explained by quantum mechanical calculations. Thus, these experimental and quantum mechanical calculation methods can be powerful tools for analyzing molecular electronics and predicting molecular-orbital eigenvalues, respectively, for flexible devices at bending states.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Science Council, Taiwan, through Grant NSC 102-2112-M-006-002-MY3. The assistance of the Center for Micro/Nano Technology Research, National Cheng Kung University, for support through equipment and cooperation is gratefully acknowledged. We are also grateful to the National Center for High-performance computing of Taiwan for computer time and facilities.
Notes and references
S. Karak, V. S. Reddy, S. K. Ray and A. Dhar, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Pandey, S. Dabos-Seignon and J.-M. Nunzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 113506 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Angmo, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, R. R. Sondergaard, M. Hosel, M. Jorgensen, R. Gupta, G. U. Kulkarni and F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yoon, D. Y. Ham, O. Yarimaga, H. An, C. W. Lee and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gholamkhass and P. Servati, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Yang, Y. Zhang, T. Jiang, X. F. Sun, C. Q. Lu, G. Li, X. W. Li and G. S. Fu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 297 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. He, C. M. Zhong, S. J. Su, M. Xu, H. B. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 Search PubMed .
S. F. Chen, X. Guo, Q. Wu, X. F. Zhao, M. Shao and W. Huang, Chin. Phys. B, 2013, 22, 128560 Search PubMed .
A. Chida, T. Aoyama, S. Eguchi, T. Inoue, N. Senda, T. Sakuishi, H. Ikeda, S. Shitagaki, N. Ohsawa, H. Inoue, K. Suzuki, H. Seo, T. Sasaki, Y. Nonaka, H. Nakashima, T. Suzuki, T. Watabe, S. Seo, Y. Hirakata, S. Yamazaki, S. Yasumoto, M. Sato, Y. Yasuda, S. Okazaki, W. Nakamura and S. Mitsui, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2013, 21, 422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jorgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
K. H. Tsai, J. S. Huang, M. Y. Liu, C. H. Chao, C. Y. Lee, S. C. Hung and C. F. Lin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Pandey and J.-M. Nunzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 213506 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tessler, Y. Preezant, N. Rappaport and Y. Roichman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Montgomery Jr, J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, T. Keith, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, O. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski, and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision D.01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moliton and J. M. Nunzi, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Berredjem, N. Karst, L. Cattin, A. Lakhdar-Toumi, A. Godoy, G. Soto, F. Diaz, M. A. Del Valle, M. Morsli, A. Drici, A. Boulmokh, A. H. Gheid, A. Khelil and J. C. Bernède, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 78, 148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schulze, C. Uhrich, R. Schüppel, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, E. Brier, E. Reinold and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Cheng, Y. S. Mai, W. Y. Chou, L. R. Chang and X. W. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, X. W. Hu, M. Q. Wang, H. P. Xiao, X. Gong, W. Yang and Y. Cao, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2042 RSC .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Huang, S. A. Mauger, S. Friedrich, S. J. George, D. Dumitriu-LaGrange, S. Yoon and A. J. Moule, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Tang, J. Chang, F. C. Wu, H. L. Cheng, S. L. C. Hsu, J. S. Chen and W. Y. Chou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22409 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a flexible organic solar cell which is bent under various curvature states. The curvature K of the solar cell is defined as the reciprocal of radius R of the curvature.	 
Voc = S0 × Voc1 − S1 × Vb1 − S2 × Vb2 + C	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a small molecule photovoltaic cell at the flat state. (b) Curvature dependence of open-circuit voltage (Voc) for the flexible solar device. (c) The change of Jsc and Voc of the unbent device which was under long time operation.	 

 	Fig. 3  The chart shows the curvature dependences of the ratio of Voc shift (left axis) and the ratio of coupling energy shift (right axis) for a flexible organic solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photoluminescence spectra (excited by the laser wavelength of 532 nm) and (b) light absorption spectra of a pentacene/PTCDI-C7H15 film formed on a flexible PET substrate. (c) Curvature dependence of the main absorption peak shifts for pentacene (right axis) and PTCDI-C7H15 (left axis) films. All measurements are carried out under various compressive and tensile curvatures.	 

 	Fig. 5  Compared with the curvature dependence of the Voc shift (right axis) for an OSC, the same trend is observed for the curvature dependence of the PL peak shift for the PTCDI-C7H15 film. The figure shows the curvature dependence of Voc and PL main peak shifts for the OSC, respectively.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  The Raman spectra of a pentacene film measured under the (a) compressive state and (b) tensile state. The Gaussian/Lorentzian function was used to fit the atomic vibration modes (green lines). (c) Curvature dependence of the coupling energy of pentacene molecules.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The schematic diagram of the quantum mechanical calculation model. The change of the (b) HOMO energy level, (c) LUMO energy level, (d) pentacene energy band gap (Eg), (e) PTCDI Eg and (f) the build-in potential (Vbi) varied with the molecular distance.	 

 	Fig. 8  Curvature dependence of the compensation voltage (V0). The inset shows the J–V curve of the unbent OCS of unilluminated (JD), illuminated (JL), and offset (Jph = JL − JD), where the arrows indicate the Voc and V0.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a bending polymer-based photovoltaic cell under different curvatures. (b) Curvature dependence of Voc for the flexible polymer-based solar device.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
