A solar and thermal multi-sensing microfiber supercapacitor with intelligent self-conditioned capacitance and body temperature monitoring   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA02894K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02894K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11695-11711A solar and thermal multi-sensing microfiber supercapacitor with intelligent self-conditioned capacitance and body temperature monitoring†

        
          
            Youchao 
            Teng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongbiao 
            Du
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mansoorianfar 
            Mojtaba
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dagang 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, 159 Longpan Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China Web: njfuldg@163.com
bCollege of Environment and Natural Resources, Renmin University of China, No. 59, Zhongguancun Street, 100872 Beijing, People's Republic of China
Received 
      12th March 2020
    , Accepted 19th May 2020First published on 19th May 2020AbstractA solar and thermal multi-sensing all-solid-state microfiber supercapacitor (ASSMFSC) with prominent electrochemical and mechanical performance, reliable environmental responsivity, and intelligent self-conditioned capacitance was constructed using a cellulose nanofibril-graphene-conjugated polymer, which was assembled as both a core-sheath microfiber electrode (CSMFE) and a sensing unit. The multicomponent hierarchical synergistic design fully exploited the unique attributes and synergistic interaction of each component to endow the well-designed CSMFE with high capacitance and mechanical robustness as well as excellent thermal sensitivity and photothermal conversion, enabling the valid modulation of redox reactions, interface performance, or electronic/ionic transfer in the microfiber supercapacitors toward complex external stimulations and building interrelated working responses. The fabricated ASSMFSC presented a total volumetric capacitance of 85.8 mF cm−3 (vs. the whole device), excellent cycle stability, and a volumetric energy density of 11.9 mW h cm−3. Moreover, ASSMFSC showed excellent solar-thermal conversion capacitance enhancement. At one solar power density (1 kW m−2), the capacitance was two times that of the device in the dark and the device exhibited self-regulation capacitance ability with the change in the solar intensity. As a thermosensitive device, ASSMFSC with a current sensitivity of 0.47437 ± 0.00549 °C displayed a fast response and excellent reproducibility to sense subtle temperature changes. This work demonstrates that the CSMFE-driven microfiber supercapacitor can be used as a photothermal conversion energy storage system and for body temperature monitoring, which provides an essential reference and optimistic incentives for new generation energy-related devices.
Introduction
With the rapid development of various intelligent electronics, it is of crucial practical significance to design innovative wearable energy storage systems with integrated multiple functions that are especially capable of sensing and responding to changes in the external environment, meeting different usage needs and expanding the interactive experiences of users. Multifunctional energy storage devices with shape memory, electrochromic and humidity sensing capabilities can be accomplished by adding nano sensing materials with stimulus-response capacity or connecting them in series with other sensing devices.1–4 Unfortunately, most of the currently reported devices are based on single stimulus-response systems lacking in diversity. In addition, the integrated devices constructed by conventional on-chip electrodes in series with other functional devices have the flaw of complex manufacturing processes, increased overall size, and reduced flexibility, which may limit their practical applications in wearable electronics.5,6 In this context, the microfiber supercapacitor (MFSC) is a promising candidate due to its apparent advantages, including lightweight, small dimension, integrated compatibility, and mechanical flexibility.7 The exploitation of innovative and intelligent MFSCs is a feasible strategy from theory to practice. Nevertheless, due to the unique 1D structure, it is difficult to effectively regulate the synthesis of active materials and the overall structure of the microfiber. Problems such as the unsatisfactory energy density, weak mechanical strength, and slow stimulus-response ability caused by the limited reaction surface area, weak interface bonding, and low utilization of active materials are also the key issues to be solved.8,9 Due to the strict requirements of the electrode materials, response units, preparation methods and compatibility, the design of a multi-sensing MFSC is indeed a formidable challenge.
Nowadays, to build a better homeland, space and polar explorations have become one of the most important research spotlights in the world. However, in a low-temperature environment or as the temperature goes down, the capacitance performance of energy storage devices, especially supercapacitors, can be severely degraded or even fail.10 In this regard, there is significant research value in effectively expanding the charge storage capacity of supercapacitors and solving the problem of capacitance hysteresis at low temperatures through practical methods. As we all know, solar energy is an excellent renewable resource through the conversion and utilization of solar energy and some processes like seawater desalination, photocatalysis and artificial photosynthesis.11,12 Notwithstanding, few studies have focused on their applications in solar response fiber-shaped supercapacitors to date.10 Hence, finding suitable electrode materials to prepare an MFSC with a solar response capacitance must change to meet the work requirements under different environmental conditions, which is crucial for the development of supercapacitors.
Among various electrode materials, graphene (GE) and polyaniline (PANI) are endowed with desirable photothermal conversion effects, making the integration of energy storage and solar response in a wearable device possible.13–16 As a nano additive used to enhance the mechanical and hydrophilic properties of graphene, cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) have been widely studied for their inexpensive, biodegradable and eco-friendly features. Currently, a series of studies on the graphene/cellulose nanofibril (GE/CNFs) composites have been published. These research studies mainly focus on the mechanical and capacitive properties.17–19 To the best of our knowledge, there is no report about constructing a multifunctional core-sheath GE/CNFs/PANI microfiber supercapacitors with the solar and thermal response. Based on the above considerations, a practical and effective design strategy was used to construct novel microfiber electrodes, so that microfiber capacitors could achieve excellent energy storage capacity and mechanical performance, while having the multifunctional response and scalable, practical technical achievement. This is not only a valuable innovation, but also particularly crucial and urgent.
As a conceptual exhibition, a solar and thermal response multi-sensing ASSMFSC was realized by using a core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber as a hybrid electrode and sensing device. This device was inspired by the 3D network structure between the collagen fibres and elastin fibres in the reticular layer of animal skin.20 We suspect that firm and robust electrode materials (graphene and polyaniline) can combine with soft and flexible nano-reinforcers (CNFs) successfully to build these high-performance hybrid microfibers through effective strategies. Therefore, we utilize the macromolecular interaction and intercalation effect of graphene and cellulose nanofibrils to prepare GE/CNFs core hybrid microfibers to adopt a simple and controllable wet-spinning method. Ultimately, core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers are formed by in situ depositing highly oriented polyaniline nanorod arrays on the surface of the GE/CNFs core microfibers. By a multicomponent hierarchical synergistic design strategy to entirely probe the synergy effect of the components, the GE/CNFs@PANI core-sheath microfiber electrode (CSMFE) integrates excellent electrochemical activity, mechanical robustness, photothermal conversion effects, and thermal sensitivity into one single CSMFE. Thus, such well-designed CSMFE can act contemporaneously as a current collector, hybrid electrode, and stimuli-responsive device to endow ASSMFSC with prominent electrochemical performance and versatile applications, including a photothermal conversion energy storage system and temperature sensors. In addition, the mechanism of the interface bonding of various components, electronic/ionic transfer and redox reaction in CSMFE, and the effect of the external environmental stimulations on ASSMFSC in practical applications are also elucidated to understand its working principle.
Experimental section
Materials
All reagents were of analytical grade and used as received. Pine powders were bought from (Yangzhou, China). Graphite was obtained from the Shanghai Yifan Graphite Co., Ltd. KMnO4, NaNO3, NaClO2, KOH, aniline, 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA), ammonium persulfate (APS), and hydroiodic acid (45%) were bought from the Aladdin Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. H2SO4 and CH3COOH were purchased from the Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was acquired from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Ltd.

Preparation of the GE/CNF core microfibers. 
First, the well-dispersed graphene oxide aqueous dispersion (GO, 10 mg mL−1) and CNF aqueous dispersion (10 mg mL−1) were mixed with different weight ratios of 1:0, 1:0.25, 1:0.5, 1:0.75 and 1:1. Then, the uniform dispersions were formed by sonication for 30 minutes. After that, the GO/CNF dispersions were injected into a rotating acetic acid coagulation bath by a continuous automatic wet spinning micro-device. After steeping for one minute in the coagulation bath, the microfibers were solidified and dried by an infrared heating lamp. Then, we collected the microfibers by a winding device and put the microfibers into a vacuum oven, and they were reduced by diluted hydroiodic acid at 85 °C for 10 h. The microfibers were then removed and washed several times with ethanol and water, respectively. Finally, the GE and GE/CNF microfibers were obtained by drying overnight in a vacuum oven at 65 °C.


Preparation of the core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. 
The GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers were fabricated by chemical in situ polymerization. 1.82 g of 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) was dissolved in 65 mL Milli-Q water by ultrasonic dispersion for 15 minutes to achieve a homogeneous solution. Then, the aniline monomer (0.150 mL) was added to the solution for ultrasonic dispersion for 30 minutes. Next, the GE/CNFs microfibers were placed in the solution at 2 °C. Two hours later, the ammonium persulfate (APS) solution (the molar ratio to aniline is 1:1) was added and reacted at 2 °C for 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 24 h. Finally, the GE/CNFs@PANI core-sheath microfibers were obtained by washing the solution 6 times with ethanol and Milli-Q water, and then placed into a vacuum oven at 65 °C for 12 h.


Assembly of the two-electrode aqueous microfiber supercapacitor (AQMFSC). 
The schematic diagram of the two-electrode AQMFSC is shown in Fig. S1d.† 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte was prepared by mixing 50 g H2SO4 in 500 mL Milli-Q water (1:10, in weight) and stirred until the solution was mixed uniformly. Two samples of the same length were taken from the GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers, and assembled into positive and negative electrodes (effective length: 0.4 cm) employing platinum plate electrode clips. Then, the positive and negative microfiber electrodes were immersed into a C001 electrolytic cell filled with the sulfuric acid electrolyte.


Assembly of the all-solid-sate microfiber supercapacitors (ASSMFSCs). 
The schematic diagram of the ASSMFSCs is shown in Fig. 6d inset. The PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was prepared by mixing 6 g PVA with 6 g H2SO4 in 60 mL Milli-Q water (1:1:10, in weight), and stirred at 95 °C until the solution became clear. The two GE/CNFs@PANI core-sheath microfibers were coated with this gel electrolyte several times. Then, the two PVA/H2SO4 coated composite microfibers were slightly twisted, and finally covered with PVA/H2SO4 along the twisted part to obtain ASSMFSC. The effective working length (wrapped area) of all ASSMFSCs is 0.4 cm.

Characterization

Atomic force microscopy. 
The CNFs and GO suspensions were diluted to 0.002 wt% and centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant was added dropwise to the mica flakes and dried under vacuum. Then, the heights of CNFs and GO were characterized using an atomic force microscope (Bruker, USA) in ScanAsyst mode.


Scanning electron microscopy. 
The morphology of the GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI, and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers and the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapped images of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers were obtained by a field emission SEM system (Hitachi SU8020) with the acceleration voltage of 3 kV.


Shear viscosity measurement. 
The rheological behaviours of the GO and GO/CNFs dispersions were analyzed using a rheometer (MAR S60, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) with a gap of 8 ± 0.1 mm at a temperature of 25 °C.


Zeta potentials measurement. 
The zeta potentials of the GO dispersion, CNFs dispersion, and GO/CNFs dispersions (0.001 g L−1) were tested at a pH of 7 using a Zetasizer ZEN3600 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., U.K.). The measurement of the zeta potentials for each sample was performed 5 times at 25 °C, and the average values were used.


Contact angle measurement. 
The contact angle of the GE and GE/CNFs composite microfibers was measured by an optical contact angle measuring system (Bolin Scientific, Sweden). The measurement of the contact angle for each sample was performed 5 times at 25 °C, and the average values were used.


Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy measurement. 
The FTIR measurements of GE, CNFs, PANI and the GE/CNFs@PANI composite microfiber were reported on a Bruker FTIR spectrometer (VERTEX 80 V, Bruker, USA).


Raman spectra measurement. 
The Raman spectra of GE, CNFs, PANI and the GE/CNFs@PANI composite microfiber were taken on a Lab RAM HR Raman microscope (Thermo Scientific DXR Raman spectrometer) employing 532 nm laser source


X-ray diffraction. 
XRD patterns of straight samples were collected with the ARL X'TRA Powder XRD System (Thermo Scientific) using Cu Kα radiation, l ≈ 1.5406 Å, 40 kV, 40 mA, at the scan speed of 5° min−1 with a step size of 0.02. The interlayer d-spacing (Å) of the composite fibers was calculated by the Bragg equation: 2dsinθ002 = nλ(1)
In the formula, d is the distance between the crystal planes; n is the reflection series; λ (1.5406 Å) is the X-ray wavelength that was used, and θ002 corresponds to the scattering angles of the (002) peak.


X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 
XPS measurements were performed on a Krato Axis Ultra DLD spectrometer (UK) with Al Kα radiation as the excitation source.


Tensile strain–stress measurements. 
The tensile strain–stress testing of GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and the GE/CNFs@PANI composite microfibers were measured by a SANS CMT4202 Universal Testing Machine (China). The effective test length of all samples was 2 cm, and the average cross-sectional area and the cross-sectional perimeter of microfibers were measured from the SEM images by the Image-Pro Plus software. All samples were tested using a constant speed of 1 mm min−1 at room temperature.


Conductivity test. 
The schematic diagram of the microfiber electrode conductivity test is shown in Fig. S1a.† The resistance R of the microfiber electrode can be determined from the I–V curve by linear sweep voltammetry in the electrochemical workstation. (2)where R is the microfiber electrode resistance, U is the voltage measurement interval, and I is the current measurement interval. The resistivity ρ can be calculated by the resistance, while the reciprocal of the resistivity is the conductivity σ: (3)
In the formula, S is the cross-sectional area of the microfibers, and L is the test length of the microfiber electrode.


Microfiber cross-sectional area and cross-sectional perimeter measurements. 
We first used the calibration tool of the Image Pro Plus software to set the standard size of the microfiber cross-section SEM images. Then, we used the freehand tool to draw the outline of the microfiber cross-section, and obtained the cross-sectional area and cross-sectional perimeter of the microfibers through the analysis and measurement tool.


Two-electrode AQMFSCs electrochemical performance measurements. 
The effective work length of all GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers was 0.4 cm long. The average cross-sectional area and cross-sectional perimeter of the microfibers were measured from the SEM images by the Image-Pro Plus software (Table S1, ESI†). The areal capacitance (CA-individual, mF cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (CV-individual, F cm−3) of a single microfiber electrode of the GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs were calculated from the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves, according to the following equations: (4) (5)where I (mA) represents the current; U (V) is the potential; v (mV s−1) stands for the scan rate; ΔU (V) represents the potential window; A(single) (cm2) is the superficial area of a single microfiber electrode (A = CL, where C is the cross-section perimeter of the single microfiber electrode, and L is 0.4 cm long), and V(single) (cm3) is the volume of a single microfiber electrode.
The areal capacitance (CA-individual, mF cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (CV-individual, F cm−3) of a single microfiber electrode of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs were calculated from the galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves, according to the following equations: (6) (7)where t (s) is the discharge time; I (mA) represents the constant current used for charging and discharging; ΔU (V) represents the potential window; A(single) (cm2) is the superficial area of a single microfiber electrode, and V(single) (cm3) is the volume of a single microfiber electrode.


GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs electrochemical performance measurements. 
All electrochemical measurements were carried out on a 0.4 cm long twisted ASSMFSCs (coated by the PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte). The areal capacitance (CA-individual, mF cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (CV-individual, F cm−3) of a single microfiber electrode of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs were calculated from the GCD curves, according to eqn (6) and (7).
The total areal capacitance (CA-entire, mF cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (CV-entire, F cm−3) of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs were calculated from the GCD curves, according to the following equations: (8) (9)where t (s) is the discharge time; I (mA) represents the constant current used for charging and discharging; ΔU (V) represents the potential window; A(total) (cm2) is the superficial area of the whole ASSMFSC, and V(total) (cm3) is the volume of the whole ASSMFSC.
The areal energy density (EA-entire, μW h cm−2), area power density (PA-entire, μW cm−2), volumetric energy density (EV-entire, mW h cm−3) and volumetric power density (PV-entire, mW cm−3) of the whole GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs were calculated according to the following equations: (10) (11) (12) (13)where CA-individual (mF cm−2) is the areal capacitance of a single microfiber electrode of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs; ΔU (V) is the potential window; t (s) is the discharge time; A(single) (cm2) is the superficial area of the single microfiber electrode; V(single) (cm3) is the volume of the single microfiber electrode.


Solar-sensitive measurements. 
The solar-sensitive ability was characterized by the electrochemical performance of GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs under different intensity sunlight simulated by a solar simulator (Microsolar300, PerfectLight), and the light intensity was calibrated using a full-spectrum high-beam light power meter (CEL-NP2000, CEAULIGHT). The real-time temperature was monitored by an infrared radiation (IR) camera (226, FOTRIC).


Low-temperature solar-capacitance recovery measurements. 
The GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC was placed in a temperature-adjustable freezer to simulate a cold environment, and the electrochemical performance of ASSMFSC was used to characterize the low-temperature solar-capacitance recovery ability. It should be noted that the sample was placed in the freezer for two hours to reach a stable temperature condition before each test. The light intensity was calibrated using a full-spectrum high-beam light power meter (CEL-NP2000, CEAULIGHT).


Thermal sensing and body temperature monitoring measurements. 
GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC was fixed onto a hot plate and the current change of ASSMFSC at different temperatures was recorded by the electrochemical workstation (CHI660E). The real-time temperature was monitored by an infrared radiation (IR) camera (226, FOTRIC). GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC was used as a thermometer to connect to a volunteer's finger, wrist and forehead, and the electrochemical workstation (CHI660E) recorded changes in current caused by the slight temperature variances.

Results and discussion
As shown in Fig. 1a, we first prepared the GO/CNFs composite dispersions by mixing the GO flakes and CNFs at different mass ratios. The CNFs made by chemical mechanical methods had excellent aspect ratios.21 The average thickness of the GO flakes was about 1 nm, and the lateral dimension was about 800 nm to 1 μm (Fig. 1b–e). The zeta potential was used to further determine the stability of the GO/CNFs dispersions (Fig. 1f). The CNFs and GO had excellent stability in Milli-Q water. When the pH value was 7, they were both negatively charged, and the zeta potential was −63.3 mV and −43.8 mV for the CNFs and GO, respectively. Compared with GO, the CNFs had a high zeta potential value. The reason for this phenomenon may be attributed to the sufficient microfibrillation of the cellulose fibers during the repeated ultrafine grinding process, so that more hydroxyl groups on the surface of CNFs can be exposed. In addition, although potassium hydroxide can remove most of the hemicellulose, some hemicellulose remains in the CNFs. These few residual hemicelluloses have been proven to be more conducive to the uniform dispersion of CNFs, which makes it have a high zeta potential value.22 The mixed dispersions also have excellent stability. After 20 days, the zeta potential remains at a higher potential window, and no precipitation occurs (Fig. 1a, inset). The reason for maintaining excellent dispersion stability is that the electrostatic repulsion between the charged hydroxyl groups on the CNFs and GO sheets and the steric hindrance formed by CNFs prevent the scattered GO flakes from reassembling.23
 Fig. 1  Design and fabrication of the GO/CNF dispersions. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the GO/CNF suspensions. Schematic diagram of the preparation of cellulose nanofibrils, and photos of the GO/CNF suspensions after 20 days at room temperature (inset). (b–e) AFM height image and the corresponding height profile along the crossed lines for the CNFs (b and c) and GO dispersion (d and e). (f) Zeta potentials of the GO/CNF dispersions at different times on the basis of the CNF contents. (g) Dependence of the viscosity of the GO/CNF dispersion on the shear rate. (h) Diagram of the interaction between GO and CNFs. 
Shear viscosity measurements were used to determine the rheological behaviours and spinnability of the GO/CNF mixed dispersions (Fig. 1g). The GO/CNF composite dispersions showed that the viscosity became thinner with increasing shear rate, and this trend did not change with the increase of CNF content. On the other hand, with the addition of CNFs, the viscosity of the composite dispersion tended to increase. The exception was the intertwining of CNFs, which indirectly proved the interaction between CNFs and graphene oxide flakes. In the GO/CNFs mixed spinning solution, the abundant hydroxyl groups of the CNFs can form hydrogen bonds with the neighboring graphene oxide flakes due to the availability of –O– to –O– bonding (Fig. 1h).24
The interactions between CNFs and GO flakes provide an excellent opportunity for binding the firm GO flakes with the flexible CNFs rebar. We fabricated a core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber through a multicomponent hierarchical synergistic design strategy. First, GO/CNF dispersions were injected into an acetic acid coagulation bath using a continuous automatic wet-spinning device to form GO/CNF microfibers (Fig. 2). Acetic acid has high acidity and hydrophilicity, which is an effective coagulant for the GO/CNF solution. Acetic acid can not only absorb moisture from the GO/CNF gel microfibers, but also diffuse into water and ionize to release protons. This inhibits the dissociation of the acidic groups on the GO sheets. Hence, the GO flakes and CNFs can be effectively coagulated by strong hydrogen bonding interactions.25 Finally, robust GE/CNF core microfibers were obtained by a subsequent hydroiodic acid reduction and drying treatment. The effect of the CNF addition on the performance of the GE/CNFs composite microfiber was analyzed from the aspects of hydrophilicity, mechanical properties, and electrochemical properties (Fig. S1–S4, ESI†). After a comprehensive analysis, the GE/CNF (1:0.75) composite microfibers was selected as the core microfiber electrode with an area capacitance of 185 mF cm−2 (at 10 mV s−1), a conductivity of 5950 S m−1, and a tensile strength of 423 MPa. More details of the results and discussion are written in the ESI† Analysis section. Finally, a core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber was obtained by in situ depositing highly oriented polyaniline nanorod arrays onto the surface of the GE/CNF core microfibers (Fig. 2). By controlling the depositing time (4–24 h), different morphologies of the polyaniline nanorod arrays can grow on the surface of the GE/CNF microfibers (Fig. S5, ESI†). Furthermore, we illustrated the principle of the in situ polymerization growth of polyaniline nanorods array (ESI† Analysis section). GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers are highly flexible and robust, so they could be woven into the letters NFU (an abbreviation of Nanjing Forestry University) and pentagonal shapes in the cotton textiles (Fig. 2b and c inset). Ultimately, an ASSMFSC was constructed by twisting two GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFEs covered with a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte.
 Fig. 2  Schematic for the fabrication of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber and its digital photographs. The gel microfibers can be continuously prepared in a rotary solidification bath (inset a); GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers can be woven into the letters ‘NFU’ and pentagonal shapes in cotton textiles (insets b and c). 
The GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFEs with the unique multicomponent hierarchical structure described above possess the following features: (i) CNFs as an ideal nano-functional agent not only can effectively inhibit the re-stacking of the graphene flakes and improve the electrolyte wettability of the hybrid microfibers, but the 3D network interpenetrating structure formed by CNFs can also cause the light scattering inside the microfiber as a “secondary light source” for the GE sheets to reabsorb and use, thereby reducing the light transmission of the CSMFEs. (ii) The highly oriented polyaniline nanorod array can provide a larger reaction surface area, which is more conducive for the electrolyte and solar energy to enter the active region, thereby improving the capacitive performance and photothermal conversion efficiency for the CSMFEs. (iii) By optimizing the reliable synthesis strategy and multicomponent hierarchical structure design, the CSMFE can act contemporaneously as a current collector, hybrid electrode, and stimuli-responsive devices to endow ASSMFSC to achieve the efficient integration of energy storage and multifunctional stimulus-response without sacrificing other properties.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to dissect the morphology and structure of the as-prepared microfibers. The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber demonstrated a flexible mechanical performance that can be knotted without any fractures (Fig. 3g). Compared with the GE@PANI microfiber (Fig. 3a), the diameter of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber (Fig. 3d) increased from 40 μm to 45 μm. This is because the presence of CNFs can expand the space among GE nanosheets, which is consistent with the results of the XRD test analysis (Fig. S2a, ESI†). Although a large number of the PANI nanorod arrays were grown on the surfaces of the GE@PANI microfiber (Fig. 3b) and GE/CNFs@PNAI microfiber (Fig. 3e), the surfaces of the microfibers still showed a uniform distribution without severe agglomeration. Fig. 3c and f further demonstrates that the polyaniline nanorods have a width of about 20 nm and a height of 100 nm, which are perpendicular to each other and crosslinked on the microfiber surface. Moreover, the energy dispersive X-ray element mapping analysis (EDS) shows uniform distribution of carbon and nitrogen on the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber, indicating that the PANI nanorods were successfully coated on the GE/CNF microfiber (Fig. 3h and i).
 Fig. 3  Morphology of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (a and d) The morphologies of the GE@PANI microfiber and GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber both show polyaniline nanorods with a uniform surface distribution. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of the GE@PANI microfiber and (e) GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber at different magnifications. (c and f) Morphologies of the polyaniline nanorod arrays at high magnifications. (g) The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber knotting diagram at different magnifications. (h and i) EDS mapping of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber with a uniform distribution of the C and N elements. 
To further investigate the interaction among GE, CNFs and PANI, X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and Raman spectroscopies have been employed. Fig. 4a compares the XRD patterns of the CNFs, GE, PANI, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers, where the sharp peaks of the CNFs located at 21.58° correspond to the (2 0 0) planes of cellulose I.26 The diffraction peaks at 24.18° show a typical graphite structure (0 0 2) of GE, and the peaks at 15.68°, 20.58°, and 25.6° correspond to the (0 1 1), (0 2 0), and (2 0 0) planes of PANI in the emeraldine salt form, respectively.27 Compared with the principal (0 0 2) peak positions of GE, the three microfibers gradually shift to the left as follows: GE (24.18°), GE@PANI (23.86°) and GE/CNFs@PANI (23.3°). According to the Bragg formula, the (0 0 2) interlayer spacings of GE, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI are 0.367 nm, 0.372 nm and 0.381 nm, respectively.28 The XRD of the GE/CNF core microfibers with different CNF content also shows the same trend (Fig. S2a, ESI†). This result shows that the CNFs can effectively increase the spacing of graphene sheets inside the microfibers, which are consistent with the SEM conclusion.
 Fig. 4  Physical properties of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (a) XRD patterns of the GE, CNFs, PANI, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (b) XPS N 1s spectra of the PANI, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (c) C 1s of the GE, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (d) Raman spectra comparison of the five samples. (e) FTIR spectra of the GE, CNFs, PANI, and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (f) Tensile stress and Young's modulus of our work compared with some reported hybrid microfibers. The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber lifted a 35 g weight (inset). (g) The interactions among GE, CNFs and PANI (d), black: GE; green: PANI chain; CNFs (red: oxygen, white: hydrogen, grey: carbon) in the middle of the GE sheets. 
As shown in Fig. 4b, N 1s of GE/CNFs@PANI consists of four peaks at 398.6 eV (quinoid imine, –N ), 399.6 eV (benzenoid amine, –NH–), 400.5 and 402.2 eV (charged imine N+) in the bipolar “on” state and protonated amine in the polar “on” state.29 Compared with PANI, the quinoid imine (398.6 eV) peak shows an upward trend from 5.1% to 10.8%, probably due to the π–π stacking between the GE and PANI backbone. The charged imine at 400.5 eV shows an upward trend from 24.7% of the overall PANI to 39.2% of GE/CNFs@PANI. This confirms that a large number of cations were generated between PANI and GE, resulting in high conductivity.30 As shown in Fig. 4c, the C 1s spectrum of GE/CNFs@PANI can be categorized into four main peaks of 284.6 eV (C–C sp2), 285.3 eV (C–C sp3), 286.4 eV (C–N/C–O), and 288.2 eV (CO). The relatively small recorded peaks at 286.4 eV (C–O) and 288.2 eV (CO) suggest that GO was been well reduced.31,32
The Raman spectra of the GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers both reveal typical PANI peaks, indicating that the PANI nanorods were well assembled with the GE and GE/CNFs core during the process of in situ polymerization (Fig. 4d). Notably, the Raman spectrum of GE/CNFs@PANI shows an enhanced CN stretching of the quinoid ring at 1477 cm−1, and a new peak appears at 1590 cm−1 designated as the CC stretching vibrational mode of the quinoid ring (labeled as a red circle), compared with that of pure PANI. These features probably result from the strong intermolecular π–π stacking, which causes the overlapping of the pz orbitals between the basal planes of GE and the quinoid rings of the PANI backbone.33,34 Thus, PANI can be well adsorbed on the surface of GE. Additionally, the characteristic broad peaks located at 1632, 1479, 1381, and 1095 cm−1 are ascribed to the CC stretching vibration of the quinonoid ring, the CC stretching vibration of the benzenoid ring, C–N vibration of PANI, and C–O stretching vibration mode (νC–O).35,36
Fig. S8b† shows that the tensile strength of the GE microfiber is only 296 MPa, while the tensile strength of the GE@PANI microfiber reaches 360 MPa. Although the elongation at the break of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber was slightly lower than that of the GE/CNFs microfiber, the tensile strength was further improved up to 476.25 MPa. Compared with the GE@PANI microfiber, the tensile strength of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber was significantly improved. The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber investigated in this study demonstrated a tensile strength of 476.25 MPa and Young's modulus of 17.6 GPa, which is superior to most of the composites reported in the previous literature for supercapacitors, as illustrated in Fig. 4f (more detailed comparisons are listed in Table S2, ESI†). Due to its excellent mechanical robustness, the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber can easily lift a 35 g weight (Fig. 4f, inset). Overall, the excellent mechanical properties of our GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber express the significance of the macromolecular 3D network synergy among the GE, CNFs and PANI, along with the connectivity of the composite structure, which is similarly associated with the fabricating strategy (including dispersion, synthesis and physical design) in realizing the intact properties of GE, CNFs, and PANI. Fig. 4g describes the possible interactions among the GE, CNFs and PANI. These interactions include the π–π stacking between the aromatic ring on the PANI and GE, and the electrostatic interaction between the COO– on the GE and the N on PANI. Furthermore, there is the 3D hydrogen bonding network, which involves the interaction between the hydroxyl groups on the surface of CNFs and the oxygen-containing functional groups on GE, and the interaction between the amine groups on PANI and the oxygen-containing functional groups on GE.36
The electrochemical performances of the as-prepared microfiber electrodes were first evaluated via constructing a symmetrical aqueous microfiber supercapacitor (AQMFSC) in 1 M H2SO4 liquid electrolyte. To further explore the effect of the polymerization time of the PANI nanorods on the electrochemical performance, the GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI composite microfibers with different polymerization times of PANI (4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 24 h) were prepared by the same procedure. Fig. 5a shows that the increased current density of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMSCs with increasing PANI polymerization time below 10 h should be ascribed to the pseudocapacitance provided by PANI, which was uniformly deposited on the GE/CNFs core microfiber. However, with a polymerization time exceeding 10 h, such as 12 and 24 h, the excessive PANI deposited on the surface of the GE/CNFs core microfiber led to the outermost polyaniline being unable to effectively contact the surface of the microfiber. This resulted in the charge passing through the microfiber being unable to effectively diffuse into the electrolyte, thereby decreasing the electrochemical properties of AQMSCs.37 The detailed CV curves (from 10 mV s−1 to 100 mV s−1) of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs with different polymerization times are shown in Fig. S7.† At the polymerization time of 10 h, GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE has the highest capacitance at 303 mF cm−2 with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 (Fig. 5b). By comparing the CV curves of the GE@PANI AQMFSCs with different polymerization times at the same scan rate (Fig. S6 and S8a, ESI†), it can be similarly found that it has the most significant area capacitance with 10 h of polymerization time. Based on the above results, 10 h is supposed to be the best optimized PANI polymerization time, so the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h CSMFE was selected for the follow-up studies. As shown in Fig. 5c, the CV curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC present rectangular shapes in the scan rate range from 10 to 100 mV s−1, indicating the high-grade electrochemical behaviours and excellent charge transmission. The galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC show nearly triangular shapes at various current densities ranging from 0.1 to 1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5d). The corresponding specific capacitances (Fig. 5e) of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h CSMFE were 615 mF cm−2 (547 F cm−3) at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2. Compared to the current density of 0.3 mA cm−2, the capacitance was greatly improved. It may be due to the degradation products of PANI, hydroxyl or amino-terminal oligoaniline at lower current densities, which produced an extremely high area capacitance.38 Although the capacitance of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h CSMFE showed a gradual drop at high current densities, it was still maintained at 325 mF cm−2 (289 F cm−3) at 1 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the charge transfer motive mechanism of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC was analyzed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) (Fig. 5f). The inherent ohmic resistance (Rs) of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC is 47.25 Ω. The vertical lines at low frequency and the short expected length in the Warburg regions of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC indicate the functional ion diffusion capabilities and excellent capacitive performance. The electrochemical stability was evaluated by a long-term GCD test with a current density of 2 mA cm−2. In Fig. 5g, the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC maintained an initial capacitance of 92.6% after 5000 charge/discharge cycles without significant attenuation, showing excellent cycle stability.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs at different polymerization times. (b) Area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs at different polymerization times. (c) CV curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at different scan rates. (d) GCD curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at different current densities. (e) Volume capacitance and area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC. (f) Nyquist plot and the equivalent circuit (inset) for the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC. (g) Electrochemical stability of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. (h) CV curves of four different AQMFSCs. (i) Nyquist plots of four different AQMFSCs. The inset represents the cross sections of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE (left) and GE microfiber (right). The porous nature of the GE/CNFs@PANI template facilitates ion movement through the microfiber. The GE microfiber has a few ion channels. 
For confirmation of the distinctive excellence of our multicomponent hierarchical synergistic design, and to further investigate the synergistic effect of the electrochemical performance between the GE, CNFs and PANI nanorod array, the CV and the EIS of the GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs were examined. Based on the CV curve at 30 mV s−1, the curve changed from a leaf shape to the rectangular shape after the combination of GE with CNFs and PANI, which shows that the capacitance performance improved (Fig. 5h). The corresponding area capacitance of the four CSMFEs were calculated to be 17 mF cm−2 (GE), 150 mF cm−2 (GE/CNFs), 180 mF cm−2 (GE@PANI) and 255 mF cm−2 (GE/CNFs@PANI), respectively. The area capacitance of GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC was 15 times better than that of GE AQMFSC. According to Fig. 5i, the Nyquist plots show the inherent ohmic resistance (Rs) of GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs is 19.25 Ω, 22.26 Ω, 35.62 Ω and 47.25 Ω, respectively. The relatively close Rs values indicate that our efficient synergistic design alleviates the conductivity decline of the CNF addition to CSMFE. The interfacial charge transfer resistance Rct of the GE, GE/CNFs, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs is 15917 Ω, 2642 Ω, 867 Ω and 458.6 Ω, respectively. Compared with the as-prepared GE and binary AQMFSCs, the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSC has the smallest interfacial charge transfer resistance (Rct). This suggests the improvement of the charge transfer process of electrons and ions. In addition, the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSC exhibits quasi-vertical lines at the low-frequency region, which indicates the excellent charge storage performance.39 The reason for the performance conversion can be summarized into two aspects: owing to the severe self-aggregation of the GE flake structure inside the GE and GE@PANI microfiber, the area near the roots of the PANI nanorod and inside the microfiber may not be easily accessible to the ions in the electrolyte approaching from the outside. However, when the CNF template was used, the effective ion channels were formed by the 3D network structure of the CNFs inside microfiber. A large number of hydroxyl groups on the molecular chain greatly facilitated the accessibility of the ions to the GE flakes and PANI nanorod arrays, increasing the interfacial bonding between the microfiber and the electrolyte ions, which resulted in a more extensive specific capacitance. On the other hand, the multicomponent hierarchical structure avoids the super-high density deposition of the active material to make PANI have excellent redox activity. Highly oriented polyaniline nanorod arrays with a regular arrangement help increase the diffusion rate of the electrolyte ions to the CSMFE surface, thereby reducing the internal resistance of the material. This can provide a more distinguished capacitance for the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSC. Benefiting from the synergistic effect that promotes the interfacial charge transfer among GE, CNFs and PANI, the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSC demonstrates a commendable capacitance. This process is schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. 5i.
The practicality of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE was evaluated by the electrochemical performance of the all-solid-state microfiber supercapacitors (ASSMFSCs) prepared by two twisted GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFEs coated with the PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte. Both ends of the CSMFEs were fixed on the PET film with silver paint and conductive copper tape to facilitate the electrochemical test (Fig. 6d, inset). Fig. 6a demonstrates the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC with no distinct shape change at different scan rates, indicating perfect reversibility and charge/discharge performance. The GCD curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC delivers almost linear and symmetrical triangles at different current densities, demonstrating that ASSMFSC has good reversibility with an efficient charge transport path (Fig. 6b). The EIS measurements of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC are shown as Nyquist plots in Fig. 6c, which contains the intrinsic ohmic resistance (Rs), interfacial charge transfer resistance (Rct), Warburg impedance (Zw) and constant phase element (CPE). The intrinsic ohmic resistance (Rs), including the resistances of the electrolyte and electrodes, is 2.957 kΩ. The interfacial charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC obtained from the Nyquist plot is 5.32 kΩ, which indicates a low barrier to ionic transport (Fig. 6c). The vertical lines at the low frequency region indicate the exemplary capacitive behaviour of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. Additionally, the single GE/CNFs@PNAI CSMFE of the ASSMFSC (Fig. 6d) and the whole ASSMFSC show high area capacitances of 386 mF cm−2 and 96.5 mF cm−2 at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, respectively. When the current increased by 10 times, the area capacitance could still reach up to 309 mF cm−2 and 77.25 mF cm−2, respectively, demonstrating a capacitance retention of 80%.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a–c) CV curves, GCD curves and Nyquist plots of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (d) Volume capacitance and area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC at different current densities. Schematic of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC structure (inset). (e) Electrochemical stability of ASSMFSC at a current density of 1.5 mA cm−2. Surface morphology changes of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber before and after 5000 cycles (inset). (f) Ragone plots of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC compared with other reported fiber-shaped supercapacitors. 
As shown in Fig. 6e, the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC exhibits excellent cycling stability (95.3% retention after 5000 cycles) owing to the multicomponent hierarchical structure and the excellent bonding force among each component, which is further confirmed by the SEM images of the microfiber after cycling (Fig. 6e, inset). It is worth noting that the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC showed a significant increase in the capacitance at an early stage, resulting from the “electro-activation” of the CSMFEs.40 The electrolyte diffusion and infiltration gradually exposed PANI to produce additional capacitance during the initial cycle. However, accompanied by the increase in the number of cycles, the volume expansion and shedding of PANI caused by the redox, the reaction led to the capacitance performance attenuation and gradually dropped. Furthermore, GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC provided an excellent volumetric energy density of 11.9 mW h cm−3 at the power density of 22.2 mW cm−3 (Fig. 6f), which is superior to most of the previously reported fiber-shaped supercapacitors.23,36,41–45 To provide a better reference, more detailed comparisons are listed in Table S2.†
To prove the practical application value of the fabricated GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC in wearable energy storage, we evaluated the bending behaviours, series and parallel assembly, and self-discharge characteristics of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC by testing the change in capacitance at different angles (Fig. 7a). Under severe bending deformation, the change in the capacitance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC was negligible (Fig. 7a and b), indicating that the ASSMFSC had a high degree of flexibility and the bending durability could meet the critical requirements of wearable energy supplies. The self-discharge property is an essential analysis of the supercapacitors for practical usage. However, it has often been overlooked in recent studies. We used the time course of the open-circuit voltage to embody the self-discharge to illustrate the charge holding capacity of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. As shown in Fig. 7c, the ASSMFSC experienced a speedy self-discharge process in the first 30 min after being charged at 1 V for a half-hour, which gradually slowed after several hours. Finally, the output voltage of the device reached about 0.5 V after 10 hours. These studies show that our ASSMFSC displayed outstanding low self-discharge features.46
 Fig. 7  Practical application of the fabricated GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) The capacitance retentions of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC with different bending angles at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 (the inset: bending test experiment diagram). (b) GCD curves of ASSMFSC with different bending angles at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Self-discharge curve of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (d) GCD curves of several ASSMFSCs connected in series at the current density of 0.8 mA cm−2. Three series of ASSMFSCs as the power supply can successfully illuminate an LED light (inset). (e) GCD curves of several ASSMFSCs connected in parallel at the current density of 0.8 mA cm−2. (f) Three 3 cm ASSMFSCs are integrated on a polyethene terephthalate (PET) film as a power source to keep the monochrome display running for about 5 minutes. 
As shown in Fig. 7d, the output voltage can be increased from 1 V to 3 V when three ASSMFSCs are connected in series. In the same way, by connecting three ASSMFSCs in parallel at the same operating voltage, the discharge time is extended by three times compared to the single ASSMFSC (Fig. 7e). Owing to the superior stability and controllability in practical application, three connected ASSMFSCs of the length of 3 cm can successfully illuminate the LED (Fig. 7d, inset). For monochrome displays that require a higher energy supply, the same three 3 cm ASSMFSCs can integrate on a polyethene terephthalate (PET) film as a power source to maintain their operation for approximately 5 minutes (Fig. 7f). In summary, GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC exhibit superior energy density, notable bending durability, low self-discharge features, and prominent expandability, which is hugely proper for practical applications in portable wearable electronics.
GE and PANI with the excellent photothermal effect contribute properties that help GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE become a solar response device.10,13–15 Hence, we used GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE as the hybrid electrodes and sensing units to fabricate the solar response ASSMFSCs (Fig. 8g). Interestingly, the newly designed GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC shows excellent solar-thermal conversion performance. The reason can be attributed to the fact that GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE with its multicomponent hierarchical structure plays a crucial role in the process of solar utilization. First of all, the directed PANI nanorod arrays located on the surface of the GE sheets not only provide the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE with a larger reaction surface area, which is more conducive to sunlight entering the GE surface, but also prolong the interaction length between the solar energy and matter, and reduces the sunlight reflection to improve the photothermal conversion rate.10,47 Second, the 3D interpenetrating network structure formed by CNFs can cause the light scattering inside the CSMFE as a “secondary light source” for GE to reabsorb and use, thereby reducing light transmission of the CSMFE (Fig. 8c).48 As expected, the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC has more significant temperature changes than GE ASSMFSC under the same solar power density (Fig. 8a and S9†). At the intensity of one solar (1 kW m−2), the infrared image clearly shows the temperature changes of GE/CNFs@PANI and GE ASSMFSCs after sunlight exposure (Fig. 8b). After 200 s, the temperature has increased by 41.6 °C and 30.8 °C, respectively, which verifies the existence of the photothermal effects in the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC.
 Fig. 8  Research on the solar response performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) Surface temperatures of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC and GE ASSMFSC under sunlight with different power densities. (b) Solar thermal conversion curve and corresponding IR thermal images of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC and GE ASSMFSC under the simulated sunlight illumination (1 kW m−2). (c) Schematic depiction of the sunlight interactions with the flat GE microfiber and GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE. (d–f) CV curves (d), GCD curves (e) and Nyquist plots (f) of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different solar power densities, respectively. (g) Schematic illustration of the solar response capacitance enhancement of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (h) Capacitance retention for the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different solar power densities. Inset: the dependence of the capacitance and inherent ohmic resistance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC on the solar power densities, and the enhanced brightness of the LED is shown under one solar power density. 
The CV and GCD curves show that GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC has excellent solar response characteristics and self-adjusting capacitance under different solar power densities (Fig. 8d and e). Compared with dark conditions, the integrated area of the CV curves and the charge/discharge time of the GCD curves significantly increase, while maintaining the shape of the curve, which show that the device has excellent stability and the same reaction type. The calculated area capacitances of the whole ASSMFSC at different solar power densities based on the CV and GCD curves are shown in Fig. S10a.† In the dark, the area capacitance of the whole ASSMFSC is 18.04 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and 57.8 mF cm−2 at a GCD current density of 5 mA cm−2. Under different solar illuminations, the corresponding values are 22.57, 25.15 and 30.34 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and 77.8, 90.5 and 114 mF cm−2 at the current density of 5 mA cm−2, respectively.
To further explore the causes of the capacitance enhancement, the Nyquist plots and EIS were investigated (Fig. 8f). Under different solar power densities, the inherent ohmic resistance Rs (the first intercept along the real axis) of the device was reduced from 3.004 kΩ to 1.945 kΩ, indicating that the conductivity of the electrode material was improved (Fig. 8h inset). The reason for this improvement is the increased temperature of PANI and GE under simulated sunlight illumination. This made the electrons become thermal activated to move from the valence band to the conduction band, generating electron and hole carriers, which resulted in a reduction in resistance.49 The interface charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different solar power densities are 5.43 kΩ (in dark), 4.562 kΩ (0.5 kW m−2), 4.117 kΩ (0.75 kW m−2) and 3.789 kΩ (1 kW m−2), suggesting a decreased barrier to ionic transport. The rising slope of the curves in the low-frequency region implies an improvement in the capacitor performance. Considering the negligible contribution of the PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte and PET substrate to the photothermal conversion, the change in the capacitance of ASSMFSC under simulated sunlight illumination can be attributed to the increase in conductivity due to the photothermal conversion of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFEs and the improvement in the ion transport efficiency.
In order to confirm that the photothermal effects mainly trigger the enhanced capacitance under solar illumination, the electrochemical properties of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC were investigated (Fig. S11, ESI†) by heating and irradiating to the same surface temperature (35 °C and 60 °C) respectively. The CV curves, GCD curves and Nyquist plots of heating to different temperatures were found to be similar to the corresponding photothermal conversion under solar illumination (Fig. S11, ESI†), indicating the thermal-driven predominant capacitance enhancement mechanism. Notably, the CV integral area and GCD discharge time of the solar radiation are slightly more significant than that of only heating at the same temperature, which shows that it had a more superior capacitance performance. To understand the basic principles of the capacitance change behaviour discussed above, we conducted an AC impedance analysis of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. The inherent resistance (Rs) and interface transfer resistance (Rct) at a solar radiation photothermal temperature are all slightly smaller than those at the corresponding heating temperature, which means that the ASSMFSC has better conductivity and charge transfer efficiency under solar radiation. Considering that the infrared camera records the surface temperature, and the ASSMFSC has a temperature transition zone under solar radiation, the overall temperature of the ASSMFSC under solar irradiation was slightly lower than the temperature during direct heating.10 Therefore, the reason for this phenomenon may be that the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC has a specific photoresponse during the solar radiation process.50 The periodic and rapid light/dark conversion experiments on the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC were conducted to further confirm that ASSMFSC has the ability of photoresponse. Interestingly, under the periodic light/dark conversion experiment of simulating sunlight (0.5 kW m−2), it can be found that the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC has a fast and reproducible current change (Fig. S12a, ESI†). This shows that during the solar radiation, the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSCs have the photoresponse behaviour.9
This is indicated by the capacitance retention via CV cycling at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different light illumination conditions in Fig. 8h, which shows that the illumination stability and capacitance retention improved 69% compared to the dark conditions (Fig. S13, ESI†). In addition, during the constant current charge and discharge, the electrochemical performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC showed excellent repeatability (Fig S12b, ESI†) under periodic light/dark conditions by switching to different solar power densities, which proved that the solar radiation capacitance enhancement is reliable and reproducible. To more intuitively reflecting the self-regulating capacitance change, three ASSMFSCs were in series to power the LED. As a result, an enhanced brightness of the LED was shown under one solar intensity in comparison to the dark conditions
The degradation of the capacitance performance of the supercapacitors under a temperature drop or low-temperature conditions is also an urgent problem to be solved. As shown in Fig. 9a and b, as the ambient temperature of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC decreased from 20 °C to 5 °C, the reduced integrated area of the CV curve and the shortened charge/discharge time indicated a decrease in the charge storage capacity. The calculated area capacitances of the whole ASSMFSC under different environmental temperatures based on the CV and GCD curves are shown in Fig. S10b.† At room temperature (20 °C), the area capacitances are 18 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and is 68.3 mF cm−2 at GCD current density of 3 mA cm−2. Obviously, the capacitance significantly decayed under a cold environment (5 °C), and the corresponding values were 12.9 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, and 50.2 mF cm−2 at the current densities of 3 mA cm−2, respectively. Owing to the excellent solar-thermal conversion capacitance enhancement ability, the capacitance of the whole ASSMFSC is not only restored but also improved to 25 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 and to 90 mF cm−2 at the current density of 3 mA cm−2 after being exposed under the sunlight with a power density of 1 kW m−2 for two minutes at the same low-temperature conditions.
 Fig. 9  Research on the solar radiation capacitance-restored performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) CV curves and (b) GCD curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different environmental temperatures. (c) Capacitance retention via CV cycling test at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different environmental temperatures. Infrared image of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC showing the temperature status at various time points (inset). 

Fig. 9c depicts the capacitance, temperature changes, and cyclic stability of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under various environmental conditions. The CV cycle curves of ASSMFSC at different temperatures are shown in Fig. S14.† At low temperature, under simulated sunlight illumination, the ASSMFSC surface temperature rises to 52.3 °C after two minutes and the capacitance performance increases to twice as much as before after 10 cycles. This proves that it is feasible to solve the capacitance degradation of energy storage devices at low-temperature conditions by constructing a photothermal supercapacitor using solar resources. Studies on the precise mechanism for this process are still underway. However, in this study, a sustainable resource was used as the strategy to endow flexible wearable energy storage devices with self-regulating capacitance property and improve the severely degraded capacitance in low temperature, which has significant implications.
Encouraged by the excellent solar response and photothermal conversion effect of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC, we also explored the thermal sensing behavior of ASSMFSC. For ease of measurement, we attached the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE to a PET film and placed it on a temperature-adjustable heating platform for real-time signal recording. Fig. 10a exhibits the I–V (current–voltage) curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE. As the temperature rose, it sustained increasing conductivity from 63.15 to 83.94 S cm−1 and the normalized resistance (R/R0) decreased from 1.028 to 0.774 (Fig. 10b). Here, R0 is the resistance at 20 °C.51 CSMFE with excellent thermal response performance provides the possibility of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC as a thermosensitive sensor. The thermal sensing capability of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC was evaluated by changing the ambient temperature (from 30 °C to 50 °C) at a constant voltage of 1 V. Interestingly, ASSMFSC displayed an immediate and reproducible current signal under periodic temperature stimulation, indicating the existence of a real thermal sensing capability (Fig. S15, ESI†). The current change of MFSC may be due to the difference in the number of carriers under various temperature conditions, and the effect of temperature change on the ion mobility and reaction rate. Fig. S16† shows the normalized current ΔI/I0 = (I − I0)/I0 measured during the temperature between 30 and 50 °C, where I and I0 are the currents at temperature T from 30 °C to 50 °C and at a room temperature of 20 °C, respectively. The current change exhibits an approximate linear dependence on temperature, and the current sensitivity (S) is estimated to be 0.47437 ± 0.00549 °C via the linear least squares fitting of the data. The superior thermal sensing ability enables ASSMFSC to measure temperature changes; for example, to monitor the real-time temperature during electronic devices while energy storage to prevent hidden risks of overheating.
 Fig. 10  Performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC as a thermosensitive temperature sensor. (a) I–V curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE at various temperatures. (b) Conductivity and normalized resistance (R/R0) change of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE with temperature. R and R0 are the resistance at the measured temperature and at 20 °C, respectively. (c) The current response of the thermosensitive GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC to various simulated body temperatures. Inset: the current response in the continuous temperature change. (d) The schematic diagram of ASSMFSC as a temperature-monitoring device in different parts of the body. (e) Sensing performance and infrared images of ASSMFSC monitors coated on the forehead, arms and forefinger for monitoring the body temperature. 
Additionally, due to the excellent mechanical flexibility and integration advantages of ASSMFSC, it can be used for monitoring human body temperature. In the face of the real-time simulated body temperature changes (from 37 °C to 42 °C), ASSMFSC reveals the corresponding current curve and has a sensitive ability to sense subtle temperature changes. Therefore, we can accept different response signals, which accurately correspond to the average body temperature, low fever and high fever (Fig. 10c).52
To further confirm the feasibility, we installed ASSMFSC on the forehead, arms and forefinger of a volunteer for the body temperature monitoring and recorded its monitoring signal through the electrochemical workstation. Amperometry i–t curves are shown in Fig. 10d. Precisely, the ASSMFSC was first placed at room temperature to maintain a stable current signal and then installed on the volunteer's forehead, arm and index finger. Each monitoring time was controlled for about 15 s, and then it was released. After cooling at room temperature for 30 s, we put it to the area again for monitoring. Fig. 10e shows that ASSMFSC can capture the current fluctuation signals on different body temperature surfaces. Consequently, ASSMFSC has the potential to assess the body's thermoregulatory capabilities and assist patients in self-diagnosis. It should be noted that in research studies on the temperature monitoring performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC, we pay more attention to the design concept of achieving a multifunctional response-intelligent energy storage system. In actual use, ASSMFSC can reasonably plan the overall structure to divide the thermal response unit and energy storage area, or be connected in series with another ASSMFSC for a power supply.
Conclusion
In summary, we show a new kind of solar and thermally sensing all-solid-state microfiber supercapacitor (ASSMFSC) with outstanding charge storage performance, intelligent energy administration and proper environmental responsiveness. We utilize the macromolecular interaction and intercalation effect of graphene and cellulose nanofibrils to construct GE/CNFs core microfibers. Afterwards, core-sheath GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers were formed by the in situ depositing of highly oriented polyaniline nanorod arrays on the surface of the GE/CNFs core microfibers. The multicomponent hierarchical synergistic design fully exploits the unique attributes and synergistic interaction of each component to endow the well-designed CSMFE with not only highly capacitive and mechanically robust properties, but also excellent thermal sensitivity and photothermal conversion function. This enabled the valid modulation of redox reactions, interface performance, or electronic/ionic transfer in ASSMFSC toward complex external stimulations and building interrelated working responses. Hence, based on these principles, the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC can be used as a solar-responsive energy storage system with self-regulating capacitance, and a temperature sensor with fast response capability and accuracy for human body temperature monitoring. In addition, the fabricated ASSMFSC presents a total volumetric (vs. the whole device) capacitance of 85.8 mF cm−3, excellent cycle stability, and volumetric energy density of 11.9 mW h cm−3. Our recent research study provides a valuable design solution for the multi-functional energy storage systems, which provides a positive impetus for the development of a new generation of energy-related systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (3167055 and 31370557) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK201709250). The authors are grateful to Professor Patrice Simon, Professor Yury Gogotsi and Professor Wu Jishan for the scientific guidance of supercapacitors. The authors acknowledge Professor Chao Gao and Professor Meifang Zhu for experimental assistance. The authors appreciate the answers to sensor questions of Professor Dingshan Yu and Professor Jeong Sook Ha. The author also thanks Zhangmin Wan, Qian Feng, Mengmin Mo and Taotao Meng for experimental assistance and scientific discussion.
References
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, B. Shen, D. Jiang, R. Guo, L. Kong and X. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600763 CrossRef .
X. Chen, H. Lin, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8126–8132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Peng, X. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Wang, J. Xie, J. Sun, B. He, C. Lu, W. Lu, T. Zhang and Y. Yao, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 15, 315–323 CrossRef .
F. Wang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Zhuang, G. Cuniberti and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800028 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Du, Z. Zhang, W. Liu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 299–320 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weng, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and M. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902301 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, Z. Xu, S. Yang, H. Zhang, F. Zabihi, R. Jose, S. Peng, M. Zhu and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2148–2160 RSC .
Z. Fang, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, X. Fu, L. Dai and D. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9248–9253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, R. Huaying, D. Keren, W. Xiaofeng, H. Yingzhou, W. Kexin, L. Ke, G. Baolu, W. Jie and T. Miao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2016–2024 RSC .
A. Politano, P. Argurio, G. Di Profio, V. Sanna, A. Cupolillo, S. Chakraborty, H. A. Arafat and E. Curcio, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603504 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, A. Barhoumi, R. G. Wylie, G. Reznor, R. S. Langer and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, H. Cheng, Z. Miao, Z. Yang and G. Shi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17046 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Liu, P. Bhattarai, Z. F. Dai and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2053–2108 RSC .
J. Gao, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang, J. Yan, Z. Lin and X. Guo, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wicklein, A. Kocjan, G. Salazar-Alvarez, F. Carosio, G. Camino, M. Antonietti and L. Bergström, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 277–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, Z. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Peng, W. Wang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 63–67 RSC .
L. Liu, Z. Niu, L. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4855–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, L. Guo, D. G. Anderson and R. Langer, Science, 2013, 339, 186–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Abe, S. Iwamoto and H. Yano, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 8, 3276–3278 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Iwamoto, K. Abe and H. Yano, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1022–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Chen, K. Hou, W. Ma, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Cheng, W. Weng and M. Zhu, Carbon, 2018, 127, 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhu, S. Zhu, J. Wan, Z. Liu, O. Vaaland, S. Lacey, Z. Fang, H. Dai and T. Li, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e150 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, W. Ma, Y. Cheng, Z. Weng, B. Sun, L. Wang, W. Chen, F. Li, M. Zhu and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 642–653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Abe and H. Yano, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 85, 733–737 CrossRef CAS .
C. Laslau, Z. D. Zujovic and J. Travas-Sejdic, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 30, 1663–1668 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, C. Yang, X. Li and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8467–8476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. R. Zeng and T.-M. Ko, Polymer, 1998, 39, 1187–1195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, C. Lu, H. Xu, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21078–21085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Ji, N. Park, B. G. Kim, D. S. Jung and J. W. Choi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9366–9374 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kim, C. Lee and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2489–2499 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ginic-Markovic, J. G. Matisons, R. Cervini, G. P. Simon and P. M. Fredericks, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6258–6265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S. Z. Zu, B. H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Z. Jin, L. Peng, F. Zhao, D. Xiao, Y. Jin and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800124 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zan, F. Javad, W. Caiyun, L. Hairu and W. Gordon, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Q. E. Zhang, A. A. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Wu and B. Hua, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2372–2382 RSC .
M. Li, Z. Zhao, T. Cheng, A. Fortunelli, C.-Y. Chen, R. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, B. Merinov and Z. Lin, Science, 2016, 6318, 1414–1419 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Beidaghi and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, J. Zhong, W. Sun, R. Kumar and N. Koratkar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 3, 1606461 CrossRef .
D. Yu, S. Zhai, W. Jiang, K. Goh, L. Wei, X. Chen, R. Jiang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4895–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Fang, H. Sun, S. He, J. Ren, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7854–7860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, C. Lee and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2489–2499 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, M. Li, X. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Dong and M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9283–9290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lim, A. Barhoumi, R. G. Wylie, G. Reznor and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, G. Y. Zheng, J. Yao, N. Liu, B. Weil, M. Eskilsson, E. Karabulut, Z. C. Ruan, S. H. Fan, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee, L. Wågberg and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 513–518 RSC .
P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and J. F. Fauvarque, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A292–A300 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond and H. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7205–7213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kim, H. Park, G. Lee, Y. R. Jeong and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905968 CrossRef CAS .
J. Trichereau, M. Paolino, F. Qadri, R. Plehm, R. Hanada, A. Leibbrandt, T. Hanada, S. Kitaoka, T. Furuyashiki and H. Fujihara, Nature, 2009, 462, 505–509 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02894kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
2dsinθ002 = nλ	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 1  Design and fabrication of the GO/CNF dispersions. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the GO/CNF suspensions. Schematic diagram of the preparation of cellulose nanofibrils, and photos of the GO/CNF suspensions after 20 days at room temperature (inset). (b–e) AFM height image and the corresponding height profile along the crossed lines for the CNFs (b and c) and GO dispersion (d and e). (f) Zeta potentials of the GO/CNF dispersions at different times on the basis of the CNF contents. (g) Dependence of the viscosity of the GO/CNF dispersion on the shear rate. (h) Diagram of the interaction between GO and CNFs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic for the fabrication of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber and its digital photographs. The gel microfibers can be continuously prepared in a rotary solidification bath (inset a); GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers can be woven into the letters ‘NFU’ and pentagonal shapes in cotton textiles (insets b and c).	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphology of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (a and d) The morphologies of the GE@PANI microfiber and GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber both show polyaniline nanorods with a uniform surface distribution. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of the GE@PANI microfiber and (e) GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber at different magnifications. (c and f) Morphologies of the polyaniline nanorod arrays at high magnifications. (g) The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber knotting diagram at different magnifications. (h and i) EDS mapping of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber with a uniform distribution of the C and N elements.	 

 	Fig. 4  Physical properties of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (a) XRD patterns of the GE, CNFs, PANI, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (b) XPS N 1s spectra of the PANI, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (c) C 1s of the GE, GE@PANI and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (d) Raman spectra comparison of the five samples. (e) FTIR spectra of the GE, CNFs, PANI, and GE/CNFs@PANI microfibers. (f) Tensile stress and Young's modulus of our work compared with some reported hybrid microfibers. The GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber lifted a 35 g weight (inset). (g) The interactions among GE, CNFs and PANI (d), black: GE; green: PANI chain; CNFs (red: oxygen, white: hydrogen, grey: carbon) in the middle of the GE sheets.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs at different polymerization times. (b) Area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI AQMFSCs at different polymerization times. (c) CV curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at different scan rates. (d) GCD curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at different current densities. (e) Volume capacitance and area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC. (f) Nyquist plot and the equivalent circuit (inset) for the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC. (g) Electrochemical stability of the GE/CNFs@PANI-10 h AQMFSC at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. (h) CV curves of four different AQMFSCs. (i) Nyquist plots of four different AQMFSCs. The inset represents the cross sections of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE (left) and GE microfiber (right). The porous nature of the GE/CNFs@PANI template facilitates ion movement through the microfiber. The GE microfiber has a few ion channels.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a–c) CV curves, GCD curves and Nyquist plots of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (d) Volume capacitance and area capacitance of a single CSMFE of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC at different current densities. Schematic of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC structure (inset). (e) Electrochemical stability of ASSMFSC at a current density of 1.5 mA cm−2. Surface morphology changes of the GE/CNFs@PANI microfiber before and after 5000 cycles (inset). (f) Ragone plots of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC compared with other reported fiber-shaped supercapacitors.	 

 	Fig. 7  Practical application of the fabricated GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) The capacitance retentions of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC with different bending angles at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 (the inset: bending test experiment diagram). (b) GCD curves of ASSMFSC with different bending angles at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Self-discharge curve of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (d) GCD curves of several ASSMFSCs connected in series at the current density of 0.8 mA cm−2. Three series of ASSMFSCs as the power supply can successfully illuminate an LED light (inset). (e) GCD curves of several ASSMFSCs connected in parallel at the current density of 0.8 mA cm−2. (f) Three 3 cm ASSMFSCs are integrated on a polyethene terephthalate (PET) film as a power source to keep the monochrome display running for about 5 minutes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Research on the solar response performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) Surface temperatures of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC and GE ASSMFSC under sunlight with different power densities. (b) Solar thermal conversion curve and corresponding IR thermal images of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC and GE ASSMFSC under the simulated sunlight illumination (1 kW m−2). (c) Schematic depiction of the sunlight interactions with the flat GE microfiber and GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE. (d–f) CV curves (d), GCD curves (e) and Nyquist plots (f) of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different solar power densities, respectively. (g) Schematic illustration of the solar response capacitance enhancement of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (h) Capacitance retention for the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different solar power densities. Inset: the dependence of the capacitance and inherent ohmic resistance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC on the solar power densities, and the enhanced brightness of the LED is shown under one solar power density.	 

 	Fig. 9  Research on the solar radiation capacitance-restored performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC. (a) CV curves and (b) GCD curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different environmental temperatures. (c) Capacitance retention via CV cycling test at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC under different environmental temperatures. Infrared image of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC showing the temperature status at various time points (inset).	 

 	Fig. 10  Performance of the GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC as a thermosensitive temperature sensor. (a) I–V curves of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE at various temperatures. (b) Conductivity and normalized resistance (R/R0) change of the GE/CNFs@PANI CSMFE with temperature. R and R0 are the resistance at the measured temperature and at 20 °C, respectively. (c) The current response of the thermosensitive GE/CNFs@PANI ASSMFSC to various simulated body temperatures. Inset: the current response in the continuous temperature change. (d) The schematic diagram of ASSMFSC as a temperature-monitoring device in different parts of the body. (e) Sensing performance and infrared images of ASSMFSC monitors coated on the forehead, arms and forefinger for monitoring the body temperature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02894k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
