Carbon-based HTL-free modular perovskite solar cells with improved contact at perovskite/carbon interfaces   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC02226H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02226H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9262-9270Carbon-based HTL-free modular perovskite solar cells with improved contact at perovskite/carbon interfaces†

        
          
            Ransheng 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yulin 
            Feng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chunyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Minhuan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liu 
            Jing
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Congcong 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiming 
            Bian
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yantao 
            Shi
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams (Ministry of Education), School of Physics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: jmbian@dlut.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, School of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China
Received 
      7th May 2020
    , Accepted 3rd June 2020First published on 3rd June 2020AbstractCarbon-based hole transport layer (HTL)-free perovskite solar cells (PSCs), wherein carbon layers effectively function as both HTLs and back electrodes, have attracted widespread interest due to their outstanding advantages. However, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) remains much lower as compared to the state-of-the-art PSCs with conventional organic HTLs and noble metal electrodes, mainly due to the intrinsically inferior contact at the perovskite/carbon interface and high sheet resistance of carbon electrodes. To deal with these issues, C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design were fabricated, i.e., the final PSCs were assembled by two individual elements (semi-cell A and charge collector B) under pressure. Moreover, the mixed perovskite active layers were obtained using a modified anti-solvent dripping method, in which the oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (O-MWCNTs) were dispersed in an anti-solvent solution and its concentration was optimized for the best overall performance. Results indicated that the contact quality at the perovskite/carbon interface was remarkably improved by using this innovative method; the corresponding mechanism was attributed to the penetration of O-MWCNTs into both layers and the formation of a perovskite/carbon hetero-junction, thus forming a fast hole transport pathway from a perovskite to a carbon electrode with reduced recombination loss. As a result, the PCE increased up to 8.99%, and the unencapsulated PSCs retained 80% of their initial PCE under ambient conditions without intentionally controlling humidity for 500 h. We reported a feasible and effective strategy to improve the perovskite/carbon interface in C-based HTL-free PSCs.
Introduction
Over the past decade, metal halide perovskites have attracted tremendous interest from the optoelectronics community.1–3 In particular, the current certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) rapidly increased to over 25%, which was comparable with the current state-of-the-art photovoltaic technologies.4 The great success can be attributed to the unique combination of the outstanding optoelectronic properties of perovskite crystals, such as high absorption coefficient,5 ambipolar charge transport properties,6 long charge-carrier diffusion lengths,7 extremely low exciton binding energy and high defect tolerance.8,9 So far, all reported PSCs contained a multilayered architecture that normally includes a thin layer of perovskite for absorbing light, which was sandwiched between the hole-transport layer (HTL) and the electron-transport layer (ETL), and the front and back electrode for collecting charge. The working principle and performance depend critically on the device structure and properties of each function layer. Efficient charge extraction and transport with high selectivity and minimal potential loss are essential to achieve high performance PSCs.10–12 To achieve high PCE, most PSCs applied organic HTLs and noble metals as back electrodes. Currently, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-pdimethoxy-phenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene(Spiro-MeOTAD) is the most widely used HTL. In spite of its good functionality for high performance devices, Spiro-MeOTAD does have several serious limitations:12–14 (1) it has to be doped with very hygroscopic dopants to enhance its poor intrinsic hole mobility (≈ 2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), and consequently attract moisture from the ambient conditions and accelerate the degradation of the underlying highly moisture vulnerable perovskite layer, which results in instability issues under ambient conditions. (2) High penetrability for the thermal diffusion of the metallic species from the adjacent metal electrode, and (3) excessive potential loss occurs when it is applied to perovskites with a deeper valence band maximum (VBM). In addition, expensive noble metals (such as Au or Ag), which deposited on high vacuum instruments, were commonly used as back electrodes in PSCs. Nevertheless, the metal ion migration of Au and Ag can pass through the whole solar cell structure and interact with halide perovskites under moderate temperature and illumination conditions, resulting in an irreversible loss of photovoltaic performance.15,16
To deal with the drawbacks caused by HTLs and metal electrodes, carbon based HTL-free PSCs (C-PSCs), wherein the HTL and metal electrode in typically structured PSCs were replaced by a moisture-resistant carbon layer, have emerged recently as a promising method for commercial applications due to their great advantage in terms of low cost, easy processing and excellent stability.17–19 In this novel structure, strong hydrophobic carbon effectively functioned as both HTLs and back electrodes while providing efficient hole extraction and effective protection of the device against moisture and thermally induced degradation at the same time. However, the PCEs of C-PSCs remain much lower as compared to the state-of-the-art PSCs with conventional organic HTLs and noble metal electrodes, which was mainly attributed to the poor perovskite/carbon interface quality, as well as low sheet conductivity of the C electrode.20 That is, the quality of the perovskite/carbon interface plays a key role on the performance of C-PSCs, since the hole charges are directly extracted and collected through this perovskite/carbon interface.18,20,21 However, the perovskite/carbon interface generally contains abundant structural defects, such as porosity, considerable gaps and grain boundaries. These structural defects seriously hinder the effective hole transport along the vertical direction of the perovskite/carbon interface and the lateral direction within the carbon layer, thus increasing the series resistance and reducing hole extraction efficiency.19,22 Therefore, a valid strategy that could simultaneously realize efficient vertical and lateral charge transport in C-PSCs is highly desired. In our recent study, C-PSCs with an innovative modular PSC design were proposed and demonstrated to be a promising strategy for the facile repair, efficient carrier transport and maintenance of PSCs via modular interconnections.23 That is, the modular C-PSCs was assembled by semi-cell A and charge collector B, and the individual semi-cell A or charge collector B can be disassembled and replaced repeatedly with ease (Fig. 1b). Nevertheless, the perovskite/carbon interface needed to be further improved in a bid for favourable charge collection and reduced recombination loss.
 Fig. 1  Film deposition procedure and the device structure. (a) Schematic illustrations of the deposition of the perovskite layer by using the modified anti-solvent dripping method, in which the O-MWCNTs were dispersed in the anti-solvent solution. (b) Overview of the fabrication of the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs. Semi-cell A was fabricated by sequentially depositing SnO2 ETL, doping the mixed-cation perovskite layer with O-MWCNTs, and carbon electrodes, while charge collector B was obtained by directly spreading the deposited carbon layer on the FTO/glass substrate at low temperature. After that, the C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design were assembled by stacking charge collector B and semi-cell A under a rather small pressure. 
Herein, the C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design were fabricated, wherein the high quality mixed perovskite active layer in semi-cell A was deposited using a modified anti-solvent dripping method, in which the oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (O-MWCNTs) were dispersed in the anti-solvent solution. MWCNTs have been used widely as HTLs in PSCs due to their efficient hole extraction ability as a p-type material and excellent chemical stability,18 but there are limited reports on the incorporation of O-MWCNTs for the anti-solvent dripping method. Using this innovative method, the contact quality at the perovskite/carbon interface was remarkably improved attributed to the penetration of O-MWCNTs into both layers, thus forming a fast hole transport pathway from the perovskite to the carbon electrode. As a result, the PCE increased up to 8.99% with 20% degradation after 500 hours under ambient conditions.
Results and discussion
For the modified anti-solvent dripping method (Fig. 1a), it is essential to form an extremely uniform suspension to minimize the damage on the underlying perovskite. The comparison of SEM images for MWCNTs and O-MWCNTs is shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† It is obvious that both pristine MWCNTs and O-MWCNTs exhibit a noodle type architecture, and the unprocessed MWCNTs in a state of intertwined and interconnection tends to be connected to each other. In contrast, the degree of interconnection decreased significantly after oxidation treatment. This means that the O-MWCNT has greater dispersibility, which was conducive to be dispersed in an anti-solvent and forms a uniform suspension. This characteristic will also be beneficial to promote the uniform distribution in the perovskite film and suppress the agglomeration phenomenon.24,25 Therefore, the O-MWCNTs were preferred as dopants dispersed in the anti-solvent solution during the deposition of the perovskite layer using a modified anti-solvent dripping method. The effect of O-MWCNTs modification on the crystallinity of perovskite films was investigated via XRD. As shown in Fig. 2a, the XRD patterns show that the mixed perovskite films are tetragonal phases, and the intense diffraction peaks at 14.3°, 20.2°, 24.6°, 28.6°, 32.1°, and 35.1° can be assigned to the (110), (112), (202), (220), (310), (314) diffractions of the tetragonal perovskite phase,18,26,27 but the peaks at 26.7°, 33.9°, and 38.0° correspond to the FTO glass substrate (as shown in Fig. S2, ESI†). A similar XRD pattern to the pristine perovskite film was observed for the film containing O-MWCNTs and no other phases appear, indicating that the incorporation of O-MWCNTs in the perovskite film does not significantly change the crystalline structure of the perovskite with the composition of Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3. In addition, the peak intensity at 14.3° and 28.6° became stronger as the perovskite films doped with 0.5 mg ml−1 O-MWCNTs, indicating that the optimized O-MWCNT concentration facilitates improvement in the crystallinity of the perovskite films. However, the overdose concentration of O-MWCNTs (1.0 mg ml−1) leads to weakened peak intensity, suggesting a negative effect on perovskite crystallinity. On the other hand, a peak at 12.8° corresponding to the PbI2 crystals was observed for all samples, in good agreement with the observation of our precursor solution which contains an excess of PbI2.28,29 It has been demonstrated that a slight excess of PbI2 in perovskite composition will facilitate the crystallization of perovskite films and the photo-generated carries transport ability.30,31 Moreover, to study the effect of O-MWCNTs on the optical absorption properties of the perovskite film, the UV-vis absorption spectra of the perovskite film with various O-MWCNT contents were measured, as shown in Fig. 2b. All the perovskite films have the same absorption edge at ∼780 nm, corresponding to the optical band gap of the Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite.2 Hence, the incorporation of O-MWCNTs in the perovskite film does not prominently affect its energy band-gap and optical properties. In addition, the perovskite films with 0.5 mg ml−1 O-MWCNTs exhibit the highest optical absorption coefficient in the range of 400–550 nm, which will contribute to a better short-circuit current density (Jsc) of PSC performance.32Fig. 2c and d show the cross-section SEM images of perovskite layers deposited by using the modified anti-solvent dripping method involving O-MWCNTs and the perovskite/carbon interface. It can be seen that the hydrophobic O-MWCNT interlayer bridge was partly embedded into the perovskite film being aligned upward, and partly naked on the surface of perovskite films. These vertically aligned O-MWCNTs above the perovskite layer would make efficient contact with the deposited carbon electrode by embedding into the carbon layer. In order to further study the O-MWCNT induced improvement in the crystallinity of the perovskite, Fig. 2e and f show the top-view SEM images of perovskite films with and without O-MWCNTs in the anti-solvent solution. As shown in Fig. 2e, one can see that the pristine perovskite film without O-MWCNTs contains a large number of grain boundaries. While visibly larger crystallite dimensions were observed for the perovskite films embedded with O-MWCNTs, as shown in Fig. 2f, the excess O-MWCNTs (1.0 mg ml−1) in the dripping method will impede the formation of uniform perovskite films due to the agglomeration phenomenon caused by poor dispersion,24,25 resulting in a large number of pinholes in the perovskite film (as shown in Fig. S3, ESI†). Thus, the optimized concentration of O-MWCNTs in the anti-solution was determined to be 0.5 mg ml−1. The mechanism for the improved morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film due to the incorporation of O-MWCNTs can be understood as follows: the O-MWCNTs filled the boundary between perovskite grains, and modification in the oxidation of O-MWCNTs contains a variety of oxidation of functional groups, which can interact with perovskite components of FA+, so as to reduce the transformation kinetics of the perovskite and its nucleation rate,33–35 thus increasing the grain size and improving perovskite crystallinity. It has been well established that the moisture under ambient conditions can easily penetrate through grain boundaries, which leads to the degradation of the perovskite films. Therefore, the increased grain size and decreased grain boundaries in O-MWCNT embedded perovskite layers are expected to be beneficial for improving the moisture stability of perovskite films.36 In addition, Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the comparison of J–V curves (cell area: 1 cm2) for the high performance C-based HTL-free modular PSCs, wherein the perovskite active layer is doped with unprocessed MWCNTs and O-MWCNTs. The superior photovoltaic performance of the O-MWCNT based device was consistent with the above expectation.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the as-grown perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the anti-solvent solution. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of the as-grown perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the anti-solvent solution. (c and d) Cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite layer doped with the optimized O-MWCNT concentrations before (c) and after (d) the deposition of the C-electrode; (e and f) top-view SEM images of pristine perovskite films and with optimized O-MWCNT concentration (0.5 mg ml−1), respectively. 
In order to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, the non-radiative recombination loss induced by the trap states in perovskite films must be minimized.37,38 Here, the steady-state PL and TRPL decay characterizations were carried out to investigate the charge trap states and the photo-excited carrier dynamics in perovskite films. As seen in Fig. 3a, the emission peaks in the steady-state PL spectra are around 743 nm for all perovskite films, which is consistent with our previous measurement.39 Moreover, a significant increase in PL intensity was observed for the perovskite film modified with 0.5 mg ml−1 O-MWCNTs compared with the pristine sample, indicating lowered trap state density and suppressed charge non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film with the optimized O-MWCNTs concentration.37,40 However, the excess O-MWCNTs (1.0 mg ml−1) degrade the quality of the perovskite film leading to a significant decrease in steady state PL signals. The above results can also be further confirmed by TRPL decay spectra (as shown in Fig. 3b), which can be fitted with the following bi-exponential decay eqn (1):41 (1)where τ1 is the fast decay component, related to non-radiative recombination, and τ2 is the slow decay component, related to radiative recombination. The detailed parameters deduced from the fitted results are listed in Table S1 (ESI†). The average carrier lifetimes (τave) can be calculated by the following formula:42 (2)
 Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution; (b) TRPL decay spectra of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution. (c) Steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite/carbon electrode with or without O-MWCNTs; (d) TRPL decay spectra of the perovskite/carbon electrode with or without O-MWCNTs. 
As calculated through eqn (2), the average carrier lifetimes of the perovskite films with different O-MWCNT concentrations (0 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1 and 1.0 mg ml−1) are 6.73 ns, 9.93 ns and 6.09 ns, respectively. The increased τave in the 0.5 mg ml−1 O-MWCNT incorporated perovskite films demonstrates that the O-MWCNTs can effectively passivate the trap states and hence suppress charge non-radiative recombination in the perovskite film,42–44 which will be beneficial for the enhancement of Jsc and PCE values.45 In order to confirm the enhanced hole transport ability from the perovskite active layer to the C-electrode, the steady-state PL and TRPL decay spectra of the perovskite/C-electrode samples with or without O-MWCNTs were measured as shown in Fig. 3c and d. From Fig. 3c, we can see that with the deposition of the carbon electrode on the perovskite layer, the emission peak intensity becomes weaker, indicating that the PL quenching process is significantly enhanced. In addition, by introducing the O-MWCNTs into the perovskite film, the emission peak intensity was further weakened. The above results can be further confirmed by the TRPL decay spectra (Fig. 3d), since the capability in extracting photo-generated holes from the perovskite to the C-electrode is of great significance for achieving high photovoltaic performance of C-based HTL-free PSCs.42 The much faster decay curve suggested that the photo-generated holes in the perovskite active layer could be more efficiently extracted and could transport to the C-electrode due to the incorporation of O-MWCNTs in the anti-solvent.46 The improved hole extraction and transport ability due to the incorporation of O-MWCNTs could be elucidated by the schematic illustration shown in Fig. 4. The main reasons for poor contact at the perovskite/carbon interface are: the perovskite layer usually exhibits a rough surface and the carbon electrode is generally composed of nano-size carbon-particles with a relatively larger size, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. So, it is difficult for the carbon electrode to uniformly deposit on the surface of the perovskite layer. Only those perovskite grains with larger sizes can directly contact with the carbon electrode, and the photo-generated holes in these large perovskite grains are easier to extract using the carbon electrode. However, smaller perovskite grains cannot be in direct contact with the carbon electrode, and the photo-generated holes need to travel across the grain boundary to the nearest large perovskite grains, and subsequently be extracted by the carbon electrode. The holes must travel longer distances and need to pass through grain boundaries, with a high risk of recombination loss. However, by connecting smaller perovskite nano-particles to the large perovskite nano-particles with highly conductive O-MWCNTs, which filled the boundary between perovskite grains and O-MWCNTs naked on the surface of perovskite films, the photo-generated holes were easily extracted by O-MWCNTs and transported along O-MWCNTs to the nearest large perovskite grains, which are eventually collected by carbon electrodes. On the other hand, the O-MWCNTs which vertically align above the perovskite layer embedded into the carbon layer, forming a fast hole transport pathway from the perovskite to the carbon electrode. All these factors contribute to the improved perovskite/carbon interface, facilitating hole extraction and transport ability.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the extraction and transport mechanism of photo-generated holes from the perovskite layer incorporated with O-MWCNTs to the C-electrode. 
Based on the above analysis, the high-quality perovskite film with increased grain size and decreased grain boundaries has been obtained by incorporating O-MWCNTs into the perovskite films using the modified anti-solvent method, which might be beneficial to improving the moisture stability of PSCs according to our previous report.39 Besides this, the hydrophobic ability of O-MWCNTs naked on the surface of perovskite films could also play an important role in achieving an enhanced stability of perovskite films and PSCs. By comparing the water contact angles of perovskite films with different concentrations of O-MWCNTs (Fig. 5), it can be found that the water contact angles for samples with 0.5 mg ml−1 and 1.0 mg ml−1 O-MWCNTs are 64.60° and 69.72°, respectively, which are significantly higher than the pristine perovskite film (54.95°), indicating that the O-MWCNTs incorporated perovskite film can resist erosion by moisture effectively. Based on the HTL-free modular C-PSC structure, the moisture-resistant carbon electrode was deposited on the perovskite layer to effectively resist water from invading into the perovskite layer. Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows the comparison of water contact angles for various electrodes deposited on the perovskite layer, and the silver electrode exhibits the lowest water contact angle (89.26°) while the contact angle of the pristine MWCNT based C-electrode exhibits the highest angle of 142.29°, and the O-MWCNT based C-electrode shows a moderate water contact angle of 99.90°. Hence, the unprocessed MWCNTs were more preferred as the C-electrode in terms of hydrophobic stability. Moreover, the comparison of the J–V curves for devices where the C-electrode was prepared from unprocessed MWCNTs and O-MWCNTs (shown in Fig. S6, ESI†) further confirmed the speculation. The reason for this can be mainly ascribed to the higher electrical conductivity of the unprocessed MWCNTs that facilitate hole transfer in the C-electrode with decreased energy loss. Herein, the unprocessed MWCNTs are more eligible for C-electrode materials due to their higher water contact angle and electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) Water contact angle analysis of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations (0 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1, 1.0 mg ml−1) in the modified anti-solvent solution. 
In order to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of C-based HTL-free modular PSCs, Fig. 6a shows the J–V curves of the high performance modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with various O-MWCNTs concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution, and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters deduced from Fig. 6a are summarized in Table 1, which also includes open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), filling factor (FF), PCE, series resistance (Rs), and shunt resistance (Rsh). Generally, C-based PSCs are based on a very small active area (from 0.03 to 0.16 cm2), mainly due to the enhanced interface defects caused by large areas,17 and the modular structure has been proved in our previous report to have good photovoltaic performance even for a large active area.23 So it should be emphasized that a relatively large active area of 1.0 cm2 was used for our current J–V test. A relatively low PCE of 7.96% was obtained for pristine PSCs without O-MWCNTs. With the incorporation of O-MWCNTs with the optimized concentration (0.5 mg ml−1) into the perovskite by the modified anti-solvent solution, a phenomenal improvement in PCE was achieved for the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs, i.e., a high PCE of 8.99% was obtained, with a Voc of 996 mV, a Jsc of 21.96 mA cm−2, and a FF of 41.09%. However, further increasing the concentration of O-MWCNTs to 1 mg ml−1 leads to a decrease in the photovoltaic performance with lower Voc and FF, indicating the adverse effects of excessive O-MWCNTs on charge extraction and transport. These observations are consistent with the above observation and discussions on the morphology and properties of the perovskite film. It was worth noting that the FF is related to the ratio of Rsh to Rs (Rsh/Rs), thus the higher FF for C-based HTL-free PSCs doped with the optimized O-MWCNTs can be attributed to the highest Rsh and the lowest Rs among the three samples (as shown in Table 1), hence the highest Rsh/Rs.20 Moreover, the highest Rsh/Rs indicates a more fluent hole extraction and larger suppression of non-radiative recombination loss at the perovskite/carbon interface, in good agreement with the improved contact at the perovskite/carbon interface as discussed above. To confirm the reproducibility, 15 samples were prepared and evaluated for each group of cells with different O-MWCNT contents, and the distribution statistics of the photovoltaic parameters are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†). Exactly similar trends as Table 1 were observed for all the photovoltaic parameters. Moreover, the distribution of the photovoltaic parameters for the C-based HTL-free PSCs with improved contact at the perovskite/carbon interface is narrower than other PSCs, which implies better device reproducibility.
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves (cell area: 1 cm2) of the high performance C-based HTL-free modular PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution; (b) comparison of the storage stability of PSCs exposed under realistic ambient conditions; the red line indicates the degradation process for the modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with improved contact at the perovskite/carbon interface, the black line indicates the degradation process for the reference PSCs with the conventional spiro-MeOTAD HTL and the Ag electrode. (c) Nyquist plots of modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution, measured at 0.3 V under 1.5 AM illumination. The inset shows the locally enlarged view of the high frequency region. (d) Nyquist plots of modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution, measured at 0.3 V in the dark. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of the champion performing C-based HTL-free modular PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in a modified anti-solvent solution, with the active area being 1 cm2




Solar cell (doped O-MWCNTs) (mg ml−1)

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ohm cm2)

R
sh (Ohm cm2)




0.0
0.976
21.89
37.24
7.96
26.2
577


0.5
0.996
21.96
41.09
8.99
25.8
833


1.0
0.841
19.42
32.58
5.28
28.8
93




To harvest more energy over a long period of time, PSCs with both higher efficiency and better stability are required. In this sense, the notorious instability issues were regarded as the current and future challenges for the commercial application of PSCs.47–49 Herein, the shelf stability of the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs with optimized O-MWCNTs was investigated by periodically recording the device performance, while the devices without any encapsulation were normally stored under the actual ambient conditions at room temperature (relative humidity: ∼40%, temperature: ∼30 °C, atmospheric pressure). For comparison, the typical PSCs in our lab with the conventional spiro-MeOTAD HTL and Ag electrode were also examined under the same conditions as a reference. As shown in Fig. 6b, despite their higher PCE (Fig. S8, ESI†), the reference PSCs suffered a rapid degradation due to the hygroscopic nature of the HTL, the ingress of moisture attack and inter-diffusion of metal species using the Ag electrode simultaneously. In contrast, an impressive enhancement in stability was observed for our unencapsulated C-based HTL-free module PSCs with optimized O-MWCNTs, which retained 80% of their initial PCE under ambient conditions without intentionally controlling humidity for 500 h. The improved stability is due to the presence of the carbon top electrode with a HTL-free architecture. Furthermore, the better crystallization of the perovskite layer induced by O-MWCNTs, and the larger water contact angle of the carbon electrode which worked as a hydrophobic permeation barrier to provide effective protection for the perovskite against the ingress of moisture and out-diffusion of the decomposed products of the perovskite simultaneously can be also beneficial to device stability.
To gain deeper insight into the interface-related photovoltaic phenomena, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis was conducted to elucidate the charge transfer process, which has been demonstrated to be an effective method for characterizing the interfacial impedance of photovoltaic devices.33,50 The Nyquist plots of the C-based HTL-free PSCs with different O-MWCNT concentrations at a bias of 0.3 V under AM 1.5G illumination and dark conditions are shown in Fig. 6(c and d), and the corresponding equivalent circuit which fits the EIS plots is displayed in Fig. S9(a and b) (ESI†). Under the illumination condition, the value of the starting point at the real part (Z′) corresponds to the Rs, and the semi-circle corresponds to the transfer resistance (Rtr), which is associated with the charge transfer between the perovskite and the C-electrode.19 As expected, the smallest Rs (the inset in Fig. 6c) and Rtr (Fig. 6c) were obtained for the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs incorporated with optimized O-MWCNTs (0.5 mg ml−1). The typical arc in the Nyquist plots under dark conditions (Fig. 6d) stands for overall interfacial recombination resistance (Rrec) in the devices.33 Just as one expected, the maximum Rrec was obtained for the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs incorporated with optimized O-MWCNTs (0.5 mg ml−1). The increased Rrec and reduced Rtr clearly signify an improved contact at the perovskite/carbon interface due to the incorporation of O-MWCNTs, which was consistent with the above PL and TRPL analysis, resulting in an improved Jsc and PCE in the PSCs.18,51 Hereto, the function of O-MWCNTs in this study can be summarized as follows: the first one is to bridge the perovskite film and carbon electrode through O-MWCNTs to achieve better contact quality of the perovskite/carbon interface and hence facilitate the hole extraction and collection. And the second one is the formation of the perovskite–O-MWCNT hetero-junction, in which the O-MWCNTs effectively intercalated into grain boundaries of the perovskite, and adjacent perovskite nano-particles were connected by O-MWCNTs to enhance the lateral transport ability of perovskite films. Finally, O-MWCNTs can also improve the morphology and crystallinity of perovskite films.
Conclusions
In conclusion, C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design were fabricated, where mixed perovskite active layers with the composition of Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 were deposited using a modified anti-solvent dripping method, in which O-MWCNTs were dispersed in an anti-solvent solution. The concentration of O-MWCNTs was optimized for better photovoltaic performance, and the functions of O-MWCNTs in this modified anti-solvent dripping method were systematically investigated and summarized. Using this innovative method, the contact quality at the perovskite/carbon interface was remarkably improved due to the penetration of O-MWCNTs into both layers, and the vertical and lateral charge transport in C-PSCs was also enhanced by O-MWCNTs naked on the surface of perovskite films. As a result, the PCE increased up to 8.99% with 20% of degradation after 500 hours under ambient conditions. Our work opens a new opportunity for developing HTL-free C-PSCs using an innovative modular structure.
Experimental
Preparation of O-MWCNTs
The pristine MWCNTs were purchased from Nanjing XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd. But the dispersibility of pristine MWCNTs in an anti-solvent solution was very poor, which will damage the underlying perovskite layer. To improve the dispersibility of MWCNTs in the anti-solvent solution, the MWCNTs were first oxidized to O-MWCNTs by using the following process: (1) the MWCNTs were dispersed in a mixed solution of sulfuric and nitric acid (1:3 v/v), the ratio was 1 g MWCNTs for a 44 mL mixed solvent. (2) The solution was heated up to 90 °C under magnetic stirring for 2.5 h. After performing the water bath process, the solution was cooled to 40 °C and underwent centrifugal filtration. (3) The MWCNTs were washed to remove the excess acid by leaching with deionized water (10–15 times, until the pondus hydrogenii (pH) value comes down to neutral). Finally, the O-MWCNT product was obtained by drying at 80 °C overnight.
Device fabrication
The schematic device architecture and the fabrication process for the C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design are shown in Fig. 1b. For semi-cell A, the fluorine-doped tin oxide glass (FTO) substrate was thoroughly cleaned sequentially by deionized water, ethanol, acetone and isopropanol. Then, the amorphous SnO2 ETL was deposed by spin-coating with a spin rate of 3000 rps for 30 s followed by thermal annealing at 80 °C for 1 hour. Next, the mixed perovskite active layer was deposited using the modified one-step anti-solvent dripping method as illustrated in Fig. 1a, in which the as-prepared O-MWCNTs with various concentrations (0 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1, and 1.0 mg ml−1) were ultrasonically dispersed in the anti-solvent solution (α,α,α-trifluorotoluene) for 4 hours. The triple cation mixed perovskite films with the composition of Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 were adopted as an alternative to the conventional MAPbI3 perovskite because of the wide tunable band gap, better intrinsic moisture resistance, and higher thermal stability. The details about the preparation of the mixed precursor solution and the one-step anti-solvent process have been presented in our previous reports.23,52,53 In particular, at 15 s before the end of the spin-coating process, the 250 μL as-prepared anti-solvent containing O-MWCNTs was quickly dropped onto the surface of the perovskite layer. Finally, the carbon back electrode was prepared by directly spraying the isopropanol solution containing MWCNTs on the perovskite film. The ratio of MWCNTs to isopropanol was 4:1, and the mixed solvent was ball-milled to obtain a homogeneous dispersion. The operation of spraying was carried out on the hotplate (85 °C) to speed up solvent evaporation, and hereto semi-cell A was obtained. On the other hand, charge collector B was obtained by directly spraying the isopropanol dispersion on the FTO glass substrate. Eventually, a modular HTL-free C-PSC was assembled by stacking semi-cell A and charge collector B together under a rather small pressure.
Characterization
The crystallographic characterizations of the perovskite film were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using LabXRD-6000 (Cu Kα, λ = 0.154056 nm). The micro-structures were observed by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, SU8020). A UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV 8450) was used to measure the transmittance spectra. The contact angle with water was measured by a contact angle meter (JCD2000D2W). Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra were recorded by the FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer. A Xenon lamp with a wavelength of 532 nm and a power density of 75 mW cm−2 was used as excitation for the measurement, and the excitation light was incident through the glass side for the PL and TRPL measurement. The J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2450 digital source meter under simulated illumination (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at a scan speed of 100 mV s−1, and all J–V curves were obtained under reverse scan conditions. During the J–V test, the devices were covered using a black metal mask with an aperture area of 1.0 cm2. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed via an electrochemical workstation (Zennium Zahner, Germany) in the dark, at 0.3 V forward bias and with a 20 mV amplitude of AC perturbation ranging from 100 MHz to 2 MHz. The stability of the PSCs without encapsulation was investigated by periodically recording photovoltaic parameters, while the samples were kept under actual ambient conditions at room temperature without intentionally controlling humidity (relative humidity: 30–50%, temperature: 15–25 °C).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51872036 and 51773025), the Natural Foundation of Liaoning Province (Materials Joint Foundation, Grant No. 20180510027), the Dalian science and technology innovation fund (2018J12GX033 and 2019J12GX032), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (DUT19LAB07).
Notes and references
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiong, B.-X. Zhang, W. Jia, Q.-H. Zhang and H.-Q. Xie, J. Inorg. Mater., 2019, 34, 96–102 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. I. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed March 2020.
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini and C. Menelaou, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sharenko and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Salim, S. Y. Sun, Y. Abe, A. Krishna, A. C. Grimsdale and Y. M. Lam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8943–8969 RSC .
M. Zhang, Z.-H. Wang, X.-J. Zheng and W.-H. Zhang, J. Inorg. Mater., 2018, 33, 245–250 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin, X. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Peng, W. Chen and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2963–2967 RSC .
T. Braukyla, R. Xia, M. Daskeviciene and T. Malinauskas, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 11266–11272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Wang, M. Cheng, J. Zhao and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16140–16146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, H. He, X. Zheng, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601116 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, J. Wu, N. Li, X. Li, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17594–17603 RSC .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan, X. Zheng and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24226–24231 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Sun, X. Lu, X. Gao, J. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J.-M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3852 RSC .
S. Gholipour, J.-P. Correa-Baena, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, L. Steier, F. Giordano, F. Tajabadi, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, A. Morteza Ali, N. Taghavinia, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601116 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, J. Xiao, H. Wei, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52825 RSC .
C. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Feng, W. Tian, Y. Yan, J. Bian, Y. Wang, S. Jin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and Y. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3585–3594 RSC .
S. Dong and J. Zhou, J. Nanjing Univ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 37, 6–12 CAS .
L. Bian, Z. Xue, J. Pan, W. Liu and S. Meng, Mater. Sci., 2016, 06, 398–406 Search PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Xue, X. Tang, Y. Chen, N. Li, Z. Hu, T. Shi, X. Wang, F. Huang, C. J. Brabec, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901152 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, D. Chen, J. Zhou, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7218–7227 RSC .
C. Li, Q. Guo, H. Zhang, Y. M. Bai, F. Z. Wang, L. Liu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 248–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. H. Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. l. Teuscher, J.-E. Moser, H. K. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, G. Grancini, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 RSC .
J. Li, T. Jiu, S. Chen, L. Liu, Q. Yao, F. Bi, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, M. Zhao, G. Zhang, Y. Xue, F. Lu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6941–6947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, H. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Yin, Z. Yao, N. Wang, J. Li, S. Fan, K. Jiang and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5569–5577 RSC .
M. Yavari, M. Mazloum-Ardakani, S. Gholipour, N. Marinova, J. L. Delgado, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, K. Domanski, N. Taghavinia, M. Saliba, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702719 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Kim and T. Mitani, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, R. Hu, M. Jiang, R. Zhang, H. Lv, J. Tian, L. Chu, J. Zhang, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip, R. Xia, X. A. Li and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3044–3052 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Son, S. G. Kim, J. Y. Seo, S. H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Bian, Y. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2989–2996 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Dong, K. Huang, C. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Wang, J. Shi, H. Xie, H. Huang, S. Xiao, J. He, Y. Gao, R. A. Hatton and J. Yang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4104–4110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, H. Zhang, M. Zhang and M. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 172–182 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yin, H. Zhao, H. Jiang, S. Yuan, T. Niu, K. Zhao, Z. Liu and S. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803269 CrossRef .
M. Kim, S. G. Motti, R. Sorrentino and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2609–2619 RSC .
S.-G. Kim, J. Chen, J.-Y. Seo, D.-H. Kang and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25372–25383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, J. Ryu, J. Lee, H. Yu and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1306–1311 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. Wang, C. Li, S. (Frank) and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071–3078 RSC .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, J. Schlipf, L. Oesinghaus, P. Muller-Buschbaum, N. Ramakrishnan, V. Swamy, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3653–3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Feng, Q. Dong, J. Bian, C. Ma, R. Chen and Y. Shi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 123, 110696 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Feng, Q. Dong, J. Bian, C. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Ma and Y. Shi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2019, 723, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02226h.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Film deposition procedure and the device structure. (a) Schematic illustrations of the deposition of the perovskite layer by using the modified anti-solvent dripping method, in which the O-MWCNTs were dispersed in the anti-solvent solution. (b) Overview of the fabrication of the C-based HTL-free modular PSCs. Semi-cell A was fabricated by sequentially depositing SnO2 ETL, doping the mixed-cation perovskite layer with O-MWCNTs, and carbon electrodes, while charge collector B was obtained by directly spreading the deposited carbon layer on the FTO/glass substrate at low temperature. After that, the C-based HTL-free PSCs with a modular design were assembled by stacking charge collector B and semi-cell A under a rather small pressure.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the as-grown perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the anti-solvent solution. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of the as-grown perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the anti-solvent solution. (c and d) Cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite layer doped with the optimized O-MWCNT concentrations before (c) and after (d) the deposition of the C-electrode; (e and f) top-view SEM images of pristine perovskite films and with optimized O-MWCNT concentration (0.5 mg ml−1), respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution; (b) TRPL decay spectra of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution. (c) Steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite/carbon electrode with or without O-MWCNTs; (d) TRPL decay spectra of the perovskite/carbon electrode with or without O-MWCNTs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the extraction and transport mechanism of photo-generated holes from the perovskite layer incorporated with O-MWCNTs to the C-electrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) Water contact angle analysis of perovskite films incorporated with various O-MWCNT concentrations (0 mg ml−1, 0.5 mg ml−1, 1.0 mg ml−1) in the modified anti-solvent solution.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves (cell area: 1 cm2) of the high performance C-based HTL-free modular PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution; (b) comparison of the storage stability of PSCs exposed under realistic ambient conditions; the red line indicates the degradation process for the modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with improved contact at the perovskite/carbon interface, the black line indicates the degradation process for the reference PSCs with the conventional spiro-MeOTAD HTL and the Ag electrode. (c) Nyquist plots of modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution, measured at 0.3 V under 1.5 AM illumination. The inset shows the locally enlarged view of the high frequency region. (d) Nyquist plots of modular C-based HTL-free PSCs with various O-MWCNT concentrations in the modified anti-solvent solution, measured at 0.3 V in the dark.	 

0.0	0.976	21.89	37.24	7.96	26.2	577
0.5	0.996	21.96	41.09	8.99	25.8	833
1.0	0.841	19.42	32.58	5.28	28.8	93
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02226h.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
