Iodide-functionalized graphene electrolyte for highly efficient dye -sensitized solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM33028H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM33028H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16477-16483Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsIodide-functionalized graphene electrolyte for highly efficient dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Mi-Hee 
            Jung
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Man Gu 
            Kang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Moo-Jung 
            Chu
          
        
      
Energy Application Technology Research Team, Green Devices and Materials Research Department, Convergence Components and Materials Research Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, 218 Gajeong-no, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-700, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mhjung@etri.re.kr;  Fax: +82 42 860-6495;   Tel: +82 42 860-5201
Received 
      13th May 2012
    , Accepted 20th June 2012First published on 22nd June 2012Abstract1-Octyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide, ODI, was used as an electron acceptor to functionalize graphene to impart electrocatalytic activity for triiodide reduction in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic measurements identified the graphene formation from graphene oxide with ODI. The resultant graphene positively charged via an intermolecular charge-transfer process with ODI showed remarkable electrocatalytic activity toward triiodide reduction. The inner work mechanism of solar cell devices was analyzed by intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy, by intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy, and through an analysis of photovoltage transients. The results indicated that ODI-graphene electrolyte provides effective intermolecular charge transfer, thus making it feasible for use in the creation of high-performance DSSC devices.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are inexpensive to produce and offer a high-efficiency alternative to conventional inorganic photovoltaic solar cells. The highest reported efficiency of DSSCs is for those composed of dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 films with the electrolyte in a volatile liquid state.1 However, the liquid electrolytes in such a system experience detrimental leakage, evaporation, and contamination of the solvent, all of which hinder their use in actual applications. Replacing the liquid electrolyte with solid-state media may be a solution to these problems. Several attempts have been made to find suitable materials. Examples include room-temperature molten salts, inorganic p-type semiconductors, organic hole-transporting materials, polymer-gel electrolytes, and solid polymer redox electrolytes. Unfortunately, solid-state photoelectrochemical cells have low conversion efficiencies compared to the liquid versions due to the high recombination rate at the TiO2/solid-state-electrolyte interface and the low conductivity of the solid-state electrolyte itself. However, an ionic electrolyte (IE) usually has favorable properties when used with DSSCs, such as negligible vapor pressure, high thermal stability, a wide electrochemical potential window, and high ionic conductivity.2 Moreover, it has been reported that the addition of an IE improves the physical properties of the conducting polymers.3 Among them, compounds based on alkyl imidazolium are the most commonly used materials as electrolytes owing to their high performance in DSSCs.
Here, we show that 1-octyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (ODI) acts as both a reducing agent and a stabilizer in the preparation of soluble graphene nanosheets from graphene oxide in a polymer solution.4 We prepared a graphene-polymer gel electrolyte which, when applied as an electrolyte in DSSCs, gives a maximum efficiency of 5.84%. Dialkylimidazolium cations are used as electron acceptors for functionalized graphene to impart electrocatalytic activity for an I3− reduction in the DSSCs. Our intention was that this IE would allow perfect contact between the surfaces of the dye-coated porous TiO2 and the graphene and would consequently function as a carrier mediator. Therefore, the presence of graphene facilitates an electron transfer from the counter electrode to I3−, creating additional I− ions.
2. Experimental section
Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized according to a modification of Hummers' method and exfoliated and dispersed in DI water.5 A facile synthesis of graphene electrolyte was thus developed. In brief, 1.44 g of ODI and 0.044 g of iodide were dissolved in 6 mL of propylene carbonate after which 0.1 g of GO solution was added to the solution. The solution was then heated under refluxing conditions at 90 °C for 5 h. During this process, the color of the solution changed from yellowish-brown to black. A home-made electrolyte was prepared with 0.6 M tetra-butylammonium iodide, 0.1 M lithium iodide, 0.1 M iodide and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine in acetonitrile.
To absorb the dye, TiO2 substrates were then immersed in a 0.3 mM N-719 dye (cis-diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), Solaronix) in ethanol for 30 min. To prepare Pt counter-electrodes, 10 mM hydrogen hexachloroplatinate(IV) hydrate(H2PtCl6, Aldrich, 99.9%) in a 2-propanol solution was coated on a fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO, 3 mm, 10 Ω square−1, Pilkington TEC8) glass, followed by heating at 450 °C for 30 min. The dye adsorbed TiO2 electrode and Pt counter-electrode were assembled into a sealed sandwich-type cell by heating with a hot melt of a 50 μm thick Surlyn polymer film (Surlyn, Dupont 1702). An electrolyte solution was introduced into holes drilled in the counter-electrode of the assembled cell, followed by sealing the holes using a microcover glass and Surlyn. The photocurrent (Jsc) and photovoltage (Voc) of the DSSCs were measured with an active area of 0.15–0.25 cm2 using simulated solar light at AM 1.5, produced by a 1000 W xenon lamp (Oriel, 91193). Its irradiant power was adjusted with respect to a Si reference solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System: Mono-Si + KG filter) to about one sun light intensity (100 mW cm−2). IPCE was measured using a system designed by PV measurement. A 12 W halogen lamp was applied as the light source for the monochromatic beam. For its calibration, a silicon photodiode (NIST-calibrated photodiode G425) was used. IPCE data were obtained at a low chopping speed of 5 Hz and the quantum efficiency was detected by a lock in amplifier. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data were obtained under one sun illumination with a potentiostat (Solartron 1287) equipped with a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260) under a frequency ranging from 10−2 to 106 Hz. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a VG Microtech ESCA 2000 instrument using a monochromatic MgKα X-ray energy of 1253.60 eV. The photoelectrons were collected and analyzed in a concentric hemispherical analyzer using the fixed analyzer transmission energy of 20 eV. Spectra were recorded at a take-off angle of 54.7° with respect to the sample. Raman spectra were collected in a NT-MDT confocal Raman microscopic system (laser wavelength 473 nm and laser spot-size is ∼0.5 μm). The Si peak at 520 cm−1 was used as the reference for wavenumber calibration.
The intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements were performed on a ZAHNER CIMPS system. A stationary DC voltage and a concurrent sinusoidal modulated AC voltage were imposed on a green LED, which gave out a green irradiance with a maximum wavelength at 546 nm. The LED was controlled by a potentiostatic feedback loop. The selected AC amplitude ranged from 5% to 15% of the stationary DC value. The transfer functions of IMPS and IMVS were determined by correlating the system response with the actual stimulation signal. The potential applied to the testing cell was controlled by a potentiostat unit. IMPS measurement was carried out under short-circuit conditions while IMVS measurement was carried out under open-circuit conditions. The measured shortcircuit photocurrent efficiency (Φext(ω)) of IMPS and the real and imaginary parts of modulated photovoltage ΔVoc of IMVS were fitted by using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.
For transient photocurrent and photovoltage studies, the cells were probed with a weak laser pulse at 532 nm superimposed on a relatively large background (bias) illumination at 680 nm.6 The bias light was illuminated by a 0.5 W diode laser (B&W TEK Inc., model: BWF1-670-300E/55370). The intensity of the bias light was adjusted using ND filters (neutral density filters). The 680 nm bias light is only weakly absorbed by the dye, and therefore the injected electrons are introduced into a narrow spatial region of the film, corresponding to where the probe light enters the film. A 30 mW frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser (Laser-Export Co. Ltd, model: LCS-DTL-314QT) (λ = 532 nm, pulse duration 10 ns) was used as probe light. The photocurrent transients were obtained by using a Stanford Research Systems model SR570 low-noise current preamplifier, amplified by a Stanford Research Systems model SR560 low-noise preamplifier, and recorded on a Tektronics TDS 3054B digital phosphore oscilloscope 500 MHz 5 GS s−1 DPO. The photovoltage transient was obtained by using a Stanford Research System model SR570 low-noise preamplifier, and then recorded on a Tektronics TDS 3054B digital phosphore oscilloscope 500 MHz 5 GS s−1 DPO. The response time of the preamplifier at the range of photocurrent and photovoltages used was less than 1 ms. The light intensity of the probe light was adjusted so that the collected charge due to the transient photocurrent and photovoltage was less than 1% of the steady-state charge as estimated from the product of the steady-state short-circuit photocurrent/voltage, the time constant for electron collection (τC), and the time of electron lifetime (τR). Charge collection efficiency was estimated by the relation ηCC = 1 − (τC/τR).7
3. Results and discussion
We employed ODI to serve as both a reducing agent and a stabilizer in the preparation of a colloidal suspension of graphene electrolyte. That is, the positively charged ODI first absorbs onto the surface of GO (negatively charged) via an electrostatic interaction; during the reduction of the GO, the adsorbed ODI acts as a stabilizer to stabilize the reduced GO (graphene) in the propylene carbonate (Fig. 1). The yellowish-brown exfoliated GO suspension turned black after it was kept at 90 °C for several hours. The obtained graphene nanosheets remained well-dispersed in the propylene carbonate. Careful experiments revealed that the exfoliated GO underwent a deoxygenation process in ODI. To develop a more effective chemical reduction method to produce graphene nanosheets, it is necessary to elucidate the underlying reduction mechanism of GO. In the present study, it should be noted that, in the absence of ODI, no color change was observed for the GO dispersion. This indicated that the formation of graphene can be attributed to the presence of ODI. It has been reported that ammonium salts can be used as excellent catalysts for ring-opening reactions of epoxides.8
 Fig. 1  (a) Proposed reaction pathway for the deoxygenation of exfoliated GO in the ODI solution to obtain graphene nanosheets (G), where R–N+ was used to designate ODI, (b) schematic illustration of the electron withdrawing from graphene by ODI to facilitate the I3− reduction process, (c) graphene electrolyte and ODI electrolyte. 
Therefore, we propose a possible mechanism for the deoxygenation of GO with ODI (as shown in Fig. 1). Like hydrazine reducing GO, in step I, the N+ groups of ODI attack the oxygen atoms of the epoxides in the GO,8,9 which induces a ring-opening reaction (step II).10 However, the ring opening of the epoxides with ODI in itself would not result in any oxygen removal from the GO. Previous research has shown that, during the reduction of metal salts, the N+ groups in ODI are oxidized into nitroso groups.11 The initial derivative produced by the epoxide opening reacts further via the elimination of nitroso groups to form a CC bond (step III).
We employed XPS for a further confirmation of the reduction of the GO. Fig. 2(a) shows that the oxygen content in the exfoliated GO decreased significantly after the reduction process; it was 15.5% in the graphene versus 56.6% in the GO. Moreover, the oxygen content in graphene prepared via a conventional NaBH4 reduction process is 18.6%, which indicates the higher degree of reduction in the ODI-reduced graphene nanosheet. Fig. 2(b and c) show the C1s peaks, which consist of five components arising from C–O–C/C–O (epoxy and hydroxyl), CO (carbonyl), O–CO (carboxyl), and C–C.4 The peak intensities of the oxygen functionalities in the graphene nanosheets are much smaller than that of GO. These observations indicate considerable deoxygenation through the ODI reducing process. In addition, the N1s spectra in Fig. 2(a) were observed in the graphene sample, suggesting the presence of ODI, which adsorbed onto the surface of the graphene nanosheets through a π–π process and by electrostatic interaction,12 generating electrostatic repulsion between the graphene nanosheets and resulting in good dispersibility in water.
 Fig. 2  (a) XPS survey spectra of graphene oxide and ODI graphene. The high resolution of the C1s XPS spectra of (b) graphene oxide and (c) ODI-graphene. 

Fig. 3 shows the Raman spectra of the graphene oxide and ODI-graphene. As expected, GO displays two prominent peaks at ∼1585 cm−1 and ∼1351 cm−1 corresponding to the G and D bands, respectively. The D/G intensity ratio increased slightly from GO to graphene, suggesting a decrease of the sp2-domain as induced by the ODI reduction.13 Upon ODI adsorption, the G band of graphene was up-shifted from 1585 to 1594 cm−1, indicating once again the occurrence of an electron transfer from graphene to the adsorbed ODI.14 Similar G-band shifts caused by a charge-transfer process have been reported for graphene functionalized with other electron-accepting molecules.14b,15
 Fig. 3  Raman spectrum (excited by 473 nm laser) for the selected graphene where D and G bands are indicated in the figure. 
We also investigated the influence of the physical properties of these graphene-polymer electrolytes on the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. Home-made electrolyte, ODI electrolyte, and ODI-functionalized graphene electrolyte were utilized to make cells I, II, and III, respectively. Fig. 4 presents their current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics at an irradiance level of AM 1.5G full sunlight and in the dark. Detailed cell parameters are listed in Table 1. The short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) of cell I are 10.15 mA cm−2, 0.77 V, and 64.60, respectively, yielding an overall conversion efficiency (η) of 5.05%. The photovoltaic parameters of Jsc, Voc, FF, and η of cell II are 8.15 mA cm−2, 0.72 V, 61.90, and 3.63%, respectively. Cell III with the highest fluidity electrolyte has a Jsc value of 11.11 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 0.81 V, and a FF value of 65.00, reaching an efficiency of 5.84%. The increase in Jsc of cell III was attributed to the presence of high conductivity of ODI functionalized graphene compared with the cell II. Jsc is strongly dependent on the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte.16 The highest FF and Voc values also were obtained in cell III. This indicates that cell III has a relatively low internal electric resistance because a highly conductive graphene composite layer was used between the working electrode and counter electrode of quasi-solid state DSSCs.
 Fig. 4  
J–V characteristics of cells with home-made electrolytes, ODI and ODI-functionalized graphene, as utilized to make cells I, II, and III, respectively. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic properties of graphene electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar cells




Devices

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [mV]
FFa [%]

η
a [%]





a The conversion efficiency η and fill factor (FF) were calculated from η = Pout,maxPin−1 and FF = Pout,max(Voc × Isc)−1, where Pout,max is the maximum output power density, Pin is the incident light power density, Voc is the photovoltage at an open circuit, and Isc is the photocurrent density at short circuit.





Home-made
10.15
0.77
64.60
5.05


1-Octyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (ODI)
8.15
0.72
61.90
3.63


ODI functionalized graphene electrolyte
11.11
0.81
65.00
5.84




The photocurrent action spectrum of device III, sensitized with dye N719, is given in Fig. 5. The spectrum is close to the absorption spectra of the sensitizer, indicating that the generated photocurrent results from the electron injection action of the dye. The maximum incident monochromatic photo-to-current conversion efficiency is ca. 55% at 530 nm for the DSSCs with cell III containing graphene. This demonstrates that graphene-based solid-state DSSCs have good photo-generated current density.
 Fig. 5  Photocurrent action spectra of the graphene electrolyte-based device. 
The inner-work process of DSSCs, such as the essence of holes or the ion-transport processes and the interfacial charge transport characteristics, can be understood by measuring the EIS of solar devices to which they have been applied.17Fig. 6(a) presents the resistance of the ODI and the graphene electrolyte, showing that the ionic conductivity levels reach 0.85 × 10−3 S cm−1 and 1.08 × 10−3 S cm−1, respectively. This suggests that graphene effectively improves the ionic conductivity. Fig. 6(b) shows a Nyquist plot of DSSCs with graphene composite electrolytes. In general, the Nyquist spectra of an FTO/TiO2/dye/graphene composite electrolyte/Pt/ITO device show three semicircles in a frequency range of 10 Hz to 1 MHz. The ohmic serial resistance (Rs) corresponds to the overall series resistance. The first and second semicircles correspond to the charge-transfer resistance levels at the counter electrode (Rct1) and at the TiO2/dye/carrier mediator (Rct2), respectively. The third circle represents the Warburg diffusion process (Rdiff) of I−/I3− in the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 6(b), from the high and medium frequency of the EIS Nyquist plots, the inner transport resistance of the cell III electrolyte can be greatly reduced by adding graphene. This supports the contention that the addition of graphene can improve the conductivity of the cell III electrolyte and thus lower the charge transport resistance in the DSSCs.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical impedance spectra of the DSSC electrolyte with and without graphene in the form of (a) ionic resistance of the electrochemical impedance spectra and (b) Nyquist plots which were measured at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−1 under an open-circuit voltage. 
The electron transport characteristics of the two types of DSSCs were investigated using IMPS. Because the measurements were done under short-circuit conditions, the accessible intensity range was limited by the effects of cation diffusion. Fig. 7 compares examples of cell II and cell III IMPS plots for a photon intensity level ranging from 3 W m−2 to 12 W m−2. Interestingly, diffusion of the cations gives rise to an additional relaxation feature in the upper quadrant of the IMPS response of cell II, as shown in Fig. 7. This corresponds to the decaying current transients noted under pulsed illumination. In contrast, the normal shape of the IMPS response of cell III was obtained at lower light intensities, where ionic diffusion limitations are absent.
 Fig. 7  IMPS response of cell II electrolyte at a high light intensity level, showing an additional relaxation feature in the upper quadrant arising from the diffusion of the cation species. Also shown is the cell III electrolyte at a lower light intensity level, where there is no problem with diffusion. 
The electron lifetime can be obtained from the IMVS plot by setting τn = (2πfmin(IMVS))−1. In addition, an order-of-magnitude estimate of the mean transit time for photo-generated electrons can be obtained from the frequency minimum in the complex-plane IMPS plot of τd = (2πfmin(IMPS))−1. Here, τn and τd differ by at least one order of magnitude, reflecting the difference between the mixed diffusion/recombination control characteristics under short-circuit conditions and pure recombination control under the open-circuit potential. Under short-circuit conditions with homogeneously absorbed light, the electron diffusion coefficient can be estimated from the relationship of Dn= d2/4τd, where d is the layer thickness of the nanocrystalline TiO2. The diffusion coefficients obtained from the fitted IMPS responses and the electron lifetime results from the obtained IMVS values with different light intensities are summarized in Fig. 8(a) and (b), respectively. The trends for the diffusion coefficient and the electron lifetime for the given light intensity values are similar to those reported for an electrolyte cell in that the electron diffusion speed increases as the light intensity increases, whereas the electron lifetime decreases.18 The fact that the values obtained for the electron diffusion coefficient in the solid-state solar cell are similar to those determined for electrolyte cells confirms that internal electric fields are negligible in the light intensity range studied here. As shown in Fig. 8(a), the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) of cell III is also slightly higher compared to that of cell II. This may be credited to effective charge screening in cell III, stemming from the higher conductivity of its electrolyte and resulting fast movement of the electron. Fig. 8(b) clearly shows that the electron lifetime (τn) of cell III as measured by IMVS is much longer than that of cell II.
 Fig. 8  Light intensity dependence of fmin (IMPS) (a) and fmin (IMVS) (b). On the right axis, the calculated parameters are given, i.e., the diffusion coefficient for the IMPS experiment and the lifetime for the IMVS experiment. 
For a better understanding of the charge transport and recombination characteristics inside the DSSCs, the transient photovoltage spectra of the devices with and without graphene were measured (Fig. 9). Transient spectroscopy was also employed to monitor the electron lifetime and charge recombination characteristics following the photo-induced excitation of the dye-sensitized solar cells. The electron lifetime (τe) can be calculated using voltage transient, eqn (1):19 (1)Here, κ is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the positive elementary charge. It has been suggested that the recombination reaction in dye solar cells is nonlinear and that the recombination parameter (β) can be expressed with eqn (2) as shown below.19 (2)
 Fig. 9  Typical curves of (a) photovoltage transients for the DSSCs without and with graphene. (b) The electron lifetime and recombination parameter for DSSCs without and with graphene. 
In the transient result, the Voc characteristics decay linearly with the electron lifetime (τ). The recombination property was further characterized using open-circuit voltage decay measurements. The electron recombination kinetics was investigated by monitoring the transient Voc as a function of time upon switching off of the light. After the light was switched off with a shutter under a steady voltage, the Voc decays sharply due to electron recombination, which is related to the electron lifetime.

Fig. 9(a) shows the photovoltage transient Voc decay as a function of time as measured using the cell II and cell III DSSCs. It is evident that cell III has a significantly slower Voc decay rate than that of cell II, suggesting slow recombination kinetics and a long electron lifetime in the cell III DSSCs. The longer electron lifetime indicates that more electrons surviving from the back reaction contribute to the improvement of the photocurrent.20 This indicates that DSSCs in the presence of graphene electrolyte can generate the highest level of photocurrent under the same light illumination and given the same active areas. Fig. 9(b) shows the lifetime values obtained using eqn (1). The lifetime dependence on Voc is exponential in broad terms when Voc decreases starting at ≈0.03 V. A comparison of the decay curves from different initial states shows that for the cell III electrolyte, the lifetime is longer than that for the cell II electrolyte. With eqn (2), we also found the recombination parameter β, which shows higher values in the cell II electrolyte than in the cell III electrolyte at the same Voc.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we have developed a facile approach to prepare soluble graphene sheets. The key is the introduction of a positively charged ODI, which acts as both a reducing agent and a good stabilizer during the formation of the graphene nanosheets. Notably, the ODI-adsorbed graphene electrolyte shows remarkable triiodide reduction capabilities. While further work, including theoretical calculations, is necessary for a full understanding of the triiodide reduction mechanism induced by the intermolecular charge transfer, we believe that the active site for reduction is still carbon atoms in the graphene sheets with the adsorbed ODI, which creates somewhat delocalized positive charges on the conjugated carbon surface of the graphene, thus altering the electronic properties of the graphene. We therefore expect that our finding will lead to additional developments related to the preparation of highly conductive electrolytes and that these developments may significantly facilitate the greater application of solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Government funded R&D program under the Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7164 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Lu, A. G. Fadeev, B. Qi, E. Smela, B. R. Mattes, J. Ding, G. M. Spinks, J. Mazurkiewicz, D. Zhou, G. G. Wallace, D. R. MacFarlane, S. A. Forsyth and M. Forsyth, Science, 2002, 297, 983 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. K. R. Senadeera, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 315 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, H. Liao, M. H. Engelhard, G. Yin and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1785 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva and A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Kopidakis, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11307 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. D. Benkstein, N. Kopidakis, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7759 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. v. d. Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fogassy, C. Pinel and G. Gelbard, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 557 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahesh, J. A. Murphy and H. P. Wessel, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 4118 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H.-J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S.-M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I.-S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H.-K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Gao, J. Jang and S. Nagase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 832 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Y. Wang and S. Dong, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10587 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D.-Q. Yang, J.-F. Rochette and E. Sacher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Zhang, Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 102, 372 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, R. Zhou and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5983 RSC .

  (a) A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund, S. Bandow, A. Thess and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1997, 388, 257 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Qi, K.-Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Hsiao, S.-H. Liao, M.-Y. Yen, P.-I. Liu, N.-W. Pu, C.-A. Wang and C.-C. M. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3092 CAS .
S. Y. Cha, Y.-G. Lee, M.-S. Kang and Y. S. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 211, 193 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, M. Grätzel, P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7536 CrossRef .
A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 859 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Sharma, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. J. Latempa, N. K. Allam and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3895 RSC ; 
  (b) S. H. Kang, J.-Y. Kim, Y. Kim, H. S. Kim and Y.-E. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9614 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Proposed reaction pathway for the deoxygenation of exfoliated GO in the ODI solution to obtain graphene nanosheets (G), where R–N+ was used to designate ODI, (b) schematic illustration of the electron withdrawing from graphene by ODI to facilitate the I3− reduction process, (c) graphene electrolyte and ODI electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XPS survey spectra of graphene oxide and ODI graphene. The high resolution of the C1s XPS spectra of (b) graphene oxide and (c) ODI-graphene.	 

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectrum (excited by 473 nm laser) for the selected graphene where D and G bands are indicated in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 4  
J–V characteristics of cells with home-made electrolytes, ODI and ODI-functionalized graphene, as utilized to make cells I, II, and III, respectively.	 


Home-made	10.15	0.77	64.60	5.05
1-Octyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (ODI)	8.15	0.72	61.90	3.63
ODI functionalized graphene electrolyte	11.11	0.81	65.00	5.84

 	Fig. 5  Photocurrent action spectra of the graphene electrolyte-based device.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical impedance spectra of the DSSC electrolyte with and without graphene in the form of (a) ionic resistance of the electrochemical impedance spectra and (b) Nyquist plots which were measured at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−1 under an open-circuit voltage.	 

 	Fig. 7  IMPS response of cell II electrolyte at a high light intensity level, showing an additional relaxation feature in the upper quadrant arising from the diffusion of the cation species. Also shown is the cell III electrolyte at a lower light intensity level, where there is no problem with diffusion.	 

 	Fig. 8  Light intensity dependence of fmin (IMPS) (a) and fmin (IMVS) (b). On the right axis, the calculated parameters are given, i.e., the diffusion coefficient for the IMPS experiment and the lifetime for the IMVS experiment.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Typical curves of (a) photovoltage transients for the DSSCs without and with graphene. (b) The electron lifetime and recombination parameter for DSSCs without and with graphene.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
