Emerging two-dimensional nanomaterials for electrochemical nitrogen reduction  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00120E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00120E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12744-12787Emerging two-dimensional nanomaterials for electrochemical nitrogen reduction

        
          
            Yingping 
            Pang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Su
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Guohua 
            Jia
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Liqiang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *ce
aKey Laboratory of Colloid and Interface Chemistry, Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Material, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China. E-mail: xulq@sdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Energy and Power, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang 212100, China. E-mail: chao.su@just.edu.cn
cWA School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
dCurtin Institute of Functional Molecules and Interfaces, School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia
eState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China
Received 
      29th April 2021
    First published on 14th October 2021AbstractAmmonia (NH3) is essential to serve as the biological building blocks for maintaining organism function, and as the indispensable nitrogenous fertilizers for increasing the yield of nutritious crops. The current Haber–Bosch process for industrial NH3 production is highly energy- and capital-intensive. In light of this, the electroreduction of nitrogen (N2) into valuable NH3, as an alternative, offers a sustainable pathway for the Haber–Bosch transition, because it utilizes renewable electricity and operates under ambient conditions. Identifying highly efficient electrocatalysts remains the priority in the electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), marking superior selectivity, activity, and stability. Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials with sufficient exposed active sites, high specific surface area, good conductivity, rich surface defects, and easily tunable electronic properties hold great promise for the adsorption and activation of nitrogen towards sustainable NRR. Therefore, this Review focuses on the fundamental principles and the key metrics being pursued in NRR. Based on the fundamental understanding, the recent efforts devoted to engineering protocols for constructing 2D electrocatalysts towards NRR are presented. Then, the state-of-the-art 2D electrocatalysts for N2 reduction to NH3 are summarized, aiming at providing a comprehensive overview of the structure-performance relationships of 2D electrocatalysts towards NRR. Finally, we propose the challenges and future outlook in this prospective area.
Yingping Pang
Yingping Pang received his PhD degree at Curtin University, Australia, in 2020. Currently, he works as a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Prof. Liqiang Xu at Shandong University, China. His research focuses on the synthesis, and modification of 2D materials, and their applications in energy storage and catalysis.
Chao Su
Chao Su received her PhD degree in Chemical Engineering at Nanjing Tech University, China in 2012. She is an Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow. Her research focuses on the development of functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and water splitting.
Guohua Jia
Guohua Jia Guohua Jia is a senior lecturer/senior research fellow in the School of Molecular and Life Sciences at Curtin University in Australia. He received his PhD in 2009 from the City University of Hong Kong. From 2010 to 2014, he worked with Prof. Uri Banin as a postdoctoral fellow at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel. His research focuses on colloidal heavy-metal-free semiconductor nanocrystals, with particular emphasis on their applications in optoelectronic devices, catalysis, and latent fingermark detection.
Liqiang Xu
Liqiang Xu received his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005, and then he worked at Shandong University in 2005. He acted as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technology University in Singapore from May 2012 to May 2013. He is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, China. His research focuses on the rational design of functional inorganic materials and then systematically studies their structure–property relationships and investigates their applications in areas of energy storage and catalysis.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a John Curtin Distinguished Professor at Curtin University, Australia, and also a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and then a postdoctoral fellow at California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 to 2005. His current research interests include fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, solar cells, and oxygen-permeable membranes. He has been recognized as a Highly-Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics since 2017.
1. Introduction
Ammonia (NH3) has functioned as incipient biological building blocks for the synthesis of amino acids and nucleotides in living organisms.1 Moreover, NH3 is also being considered as a future clean hydrogen energy carrier and a basic fertilizer feedstock in agriculture.2 NH3 synthesis, starting from molecular N2 and H2, has been considered as, in the 20th century, one of the greatest inventions. Along with the world's population growth, the NH3 demand is expected to increase. At present, furnishing NH3 from N2 and natural gas is essentially dependent on the traditional long-standing and well-established Haber–Bosch process. The ingenious invention of the Haber–Bosch process made artificial N2 fixation possible and fundamentally altered the landscape of the global nitrogen cycle and human agriculture, which made a great contribution to a growing global population during the past hundred years.3 The sluggish H2–N2 reaction kinetics in this transition involves high temperature (400–500 °C) and pressure (10–30 MPa) to favorably shift the equilibrium using Fe- or Ru-based catalysts.4 The catalyst reduces the reaction energy barrier and realizes the conversion of N2 to NH3. The raw material gas of N2 in the reaction is derived from air, and the H2 is originated from the steam reforming reaction of natural gas. Exacerbating this issue are highly energetically demanding and environmental impacts. The continuous and growing use of the Haber–Bosch process on such a grand scale consumes 1% of the world's natural gas per year, accounting for 1% of the global energy consumption, while it is responsible for ∼1% of yearly global CO2 emission.5 Such intense energy demands, process complexity, and environmental concerns drive us to tap a clean, sustainable, and green N2 fixation pathway, as a substitute for Haber–Bosch transition preferentially operating at ambient conditions with minimal infrastructure needs.
A plasma-assisted N2 fixation is an indirect approach for industrial NH3 synthesis. That is, nitrogen oxides are generated by N2 oxidation, and then they are reused for industrial NH3 synthesis. There are two types of plasma for this purpose: thermal plasma-assisted nitrogen fixation, and non-thermal-assisted plasma nitrogen fixation. The energy efficiency required for these processes differs a lot. The thermal plasma-assisted N2 fixation requires harsh reaction conditions (T = 3000–3500 K, P = 20–30 bar) with low energy efficiency. Most energy required is not used for N2 oxidation, but gas heating.6–9 Using non-thermal-assisted plasma N2 fixation, high-energy substances can be produced that activate N2 molecules, while maintaining low reaction temperatures and low energy consumption. Mutel et al. proved that in the presence of MoO3 catalyst, this non-thermal-assisted plasma nitrogen fixation reduces the energy consumption by 35% under the same conditions, compared with its thermal-assisted plasma method.10 In general, non-thermal-assisted plasma N2 fixation not only combines the environmental advantages of thermal-assisted plasma, but also achieves higher energy efficiency,11 which is more than 2.5 times lower than that in the traditional Haber–Bosch process.
The biological N2 fixation through nitrogenase converts atmospheric molecular N2 into NH3. Nitrogenase consists of two multi-subunit proteins: Fe protein and FeMo protein. The FeMo protein accepts electrons from Mg-adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules hydrolyzed by Fe protein. It serves as a catalytic protein to reduce N2 to NH3. The energy consumption of biological N2 fixation synthesis is relatively low. Nitrogenase theoretically requires at least 16 Mg-ATP to be hydrolyzed for every N2 molecule reduced. Eqn (1) shows the NH3 synthesis from N2 by nitrogenase. N2 + 8H+ + 16Mg-ATP + 8e− → 2NH3 + H2 + 16Mg-ADP + 16Pi(1)Here, ADP stands for adenosine diphosphate, while Pi refers to inorganic phosphate.12 Nitrogenase in nature works at mild conditions, which inspires scientists to artificially imitate the molecular structure of nitrogenase to promote NRR at mild conditions.
Enlightened by this, many Mo and Fe complexes have been reported that are capable of N2 reduction via the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process.13–17 However, their high energy consumption, ultralow yield rate, insufficient stability, and poor recycling issues in the natural process cannot satisfy large-scale applications. Taking energy consumption as an example, metal-complexes N2 fixation is discarded by industry due to low yields and large 1/2N2 energy consumption, with a theoretical limit of 2.7 MJ mol−1,18 which is 5 times higher than the theoretical energy consumption limit (0.48 MJ mol−1) in the Haber–Bosch process. Given this, more attention has been devoted to heterogeneous catalysts for the electroreduction of N2 to NH3 in recent years.19–31
Inspired by biological N2 fixation, occurring naturally at mild conditions over enzyme nitrogenase, the current scientific community focuses on how NH3 synthesis works in a green way, and how to utilize sustainable energy to provide energy support for the reaction at mild temperature and pressure.32 The employment of renewable electricity, as an attractive alternative, obtained by solar cell power generation or wind turbine generators, as opposed to fossil fuels, has been extensively accepted.33 In light of steam reforming for H2 production largely responsible for the natural gas consumption and CO2 emissions (Fig. 1a), a straight and effective strategy for achieving “green ammonia” is to replace the steam reforming unit with electrocatalytic water splitting.34 Water acts as both a solvent and an H+ source in NH3 synthesis. Ultimately, the use of electrocatalytic technology in mild conditions driven by renewable electricity should be an energy-saving and environmentally-friendly process towards NH3 production right from nitrogen and water, even wet air (Fig. 1b). This picture, based on electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), affords several merits: (1) the conversion sustainable energy in remote areas to portable chemicals; (2) the elimination of fossil fuel, and eradication of CO2 emissions; (3) the construction of smaller plant conducive to regionalized, and on-site/-demand NH3 production; (4) the technology modulation favorable for the imitation of existing electrochemical technologies and further innovation.12,33 Therefore, the electrocatalytic NRR using new energy sources with N2 and H2O as reactants, in the long run, is the most promising technology for a clean, carbon-free, and sustainable NH3 development.
 Fig. 1  Energy efficiency of (a) Haber–Bosch process, and (b) electrocatalytic approach for NH3 synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Identifying highly efficient electrocatalysts remains the priority of the sustainable electrochemical NRR, marking superior selectivity, activity, and stability. The rise of two-dimensional (2D) materials represented by graphene has brought new opportunities for the development of high-efficiency catalysts.35–41 Compared with the bulk materials, emerging 2D nanomaterials, with ultra-high specific surface area, rich active sites, tunable surface chemistry, and superior electronic properties, afford a perfect platform for delicately designing and controllably synthesizing NRR electrocatalysts. More importantly, the chemical properties of 2D nanomaterials are easily modulated via element doping, and surface defects creation, which is particularly critical for the construction and performance optimization of high-performance electrocatalysts. 2D nanomaterials show higher catalytic activity and selectivity in electrochemical NRR, which brings new opportunities for the electrosynthesis of NH3. With the advancement of calculation methods and continuous improvement of microkinetic analysis, it has become possible to study the structure and properties of 2D nanomaterials at the atomic level. Theoretical calculations provide a powerful tool in the interpretation of experimental phenomena, revealing catalytic mechanisms, and guiding the design of new catalysts in the NRR field.
Given recent Reviews reporting 2D electrocatalysts for broadly energy-related applications, ranging from hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), to oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), there exist unexplored scientific domains for 2D electrocatalysts towards NRR.42 Herein, the state-of-the-art of 2D electrocatalysts in this stimulating and fast-growing research field are summarized from both fundamental and practical viewpoints. As shown in Scheme 1, in this review, we outline the basic principles and the key metrics being pursued in electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 process. Based on the fundamental understanding, recent efforts with insights into engineering protocols have been devoted to constructing 2D electrocatalyst towards NRR. We aim at giving a comprehensive overview of recent 2D nanomaterials-based electrocatalysts, and their NRR property-structure relationships. Finally, the challenges and future outlook in the NRR area are proposed.
 Scheme 1  Overview of 2D electrocatalysts for the NRR. 
2. Fundamental understanding
The fundamental principles in N2 fixation, in terms of thermodynamic/kinetics, N2 molecule adsorption/activation, reaction pathways, scaling relations, and activity descriptors, will indeed enable the feasibility of rationally designing and developing competent 2D electrocatalysts with physical/chemical properties for N2 fixation.
2.1. Thermodynamics
The molecular N2, consisting of one triple bond between two N atoms (Fig. 2a), represents one of the most thermodynamically and chemically inert and stable chemical species in atmospheric conditions. Since the basic steps in NRR are breaking of existing N–N triple bonds and formation of new N–H bonds, the N2 molecule does not react readily, as its N–N triple bonds are strong enough making it stable. The NN bonds in the N2 molecule have one σ bond and two π bonds. There are three single electrons in the p orbitals of the N atom. Since three pairs of p orbitals themselves are perpendicular to each other, a pair of px pairs meet each other to form a σ bond, the remaining two pairs can only form a π bond side by side (py and pz) (Fig. 2b).43,44 Basically, the N2 fixation via the N2 electroreduction to NH3, thermodynamically, remains difficult for initiating because of three factors. (1) High thermodynamic dissociation energy (941 kJ mol−1) makes the N2 molecule stable. (2) The large ionization energy (15.6 eV), together with the high electron affinity (−1.9 eV), reduces its reactivity. (3) The first-H addition to form N2H+ to initiate NRR is thermodynamically forbidden (ΔH0 = 37.6 kJ mol−1). (4) The energy gap between HOMO and LUMO is especially large (∼10.82 eV), rendering one or two electrons transfer reactions kinetically difficult to occur.14,45,46
 Fig. 2  (a) N2 structure. (b) N2 orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) N2 bonding to transition metals. (d) Electronic configuration of B atom. (e) N2-B atom binding motifs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
A primary challenge in the electrocatalytic NRR to NH3 is the understanding of thermodynamic constraints of intermediates in the process of proton- and electron-coordinated transfer reactions, as well as the pathways in the course of the reaction. The related equilibrium potentials of different NRR intermediates are provided in Table 1.47,48 The equilibrium potentials of the electrochemical NRR are similar to that of HER (eqn (2) vs. eqn (3); eqn (4) vs. eqn (5)), so that the hydrogen evolution will be a competitive reaction, and thereby the major side-product of H2 will reduce the faradaic efficiency (FE) of NRR in aqueous electrolytes. The complicated multiple proton-electron transfer reactions in NRR involve multiple intermediates. The first step in electrochemical NRR is the formation of N2H intermediate (eqn (7)), such negative redox potential indicates the difficulty of initial H atom addition. Only at a sufficiently high pH value, the production of N2− (eqn (6)) can compete with the formation of N2H intermediate (eqn (7)). Furthermore, adding a second H atom is more difficult than adding a third H, leading to much negative redox potentials for the 2e− and 4e− reduction processes than the 6e− reduction reaction (eqn (8)–(10)). Apparently, it is thermodynamically difficult for N2 hydrogenation in terms of the unfavorable negative potentials of the intermediates.
Table 1 The equilibrium reaction potentials required for diverse NRR intermediates




No.
Equilibrium reaction

E°/V




N/S/RHE: normal/standard/reversible hydrogen electrode.




Eqn (2)
N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ↔ 2NH3
−0.057 vs. SHE (pH = 0)


Eqn (3)
2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2
0 vs. SHE (pH = 0)


Eqn (4)
N2 + 6H2O + 6e− ↔ 2NH3 + 6OH−
−0.736 vs. SHE (pH = 14)


Eqn (5)
2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2 + 2OH−
−0.828 vs. SHE (pH = 14)


Eqn (6)
N2 + e− ↔ N2−
−4.20 vs. SHE (pH = 14)


Eqn (7)
N2 + H+ + e− ↔ N2H
−3.11 vs. SHE (pH = 0)


Eqn (8)
N2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ N2H2
−1.01 vs. SHE (pH = 0)


Eqn (9)
N2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ N2H4
−0.27 vs. RHE (pH = 0)


Eqn (10)
N2 + 4H2O + 6e− ↔ N2H4 + 4OH−
−1.16 vs. SHE (pH = 14)




2.2. Kinetics
Despite these thermodynamic constraints, over the entire pH range, the total Gibbs free energy (0.092 V vs. RHE) for NH3 synthesis is thermodynamically favorable than the HER.33,49 From the perspective of kinetics, a major challenge in electrochemical N2 fixation is that the efficiency is too low (NH3 production rate and faradaic efficiency). This is mainly because the NN bond in N2 is very strong at ambient conditions, and the reaction between N2 and H2 is kinetically disadvantageous because of the comparable HER and NRR potentials. HER will greatly limit the NRR efficiency to NH3 as a competitive reaction. In recent years, although numerous studies have shown that by suppressing hydrogen evolution, the current efficiency of N2 reduction to NH3 can be improved to a certain extent, one problem that is ignored is that the inhibition of hydrogen evolution will inevitably restrict the nitrogen reduction activity of the electrocatalyst. A competent NRR catalyst has to be an excellent hydrogen evolution catalyst because protons will undoubtedly be more easily activated than NN bonds in proton-containing solutions. In other words, if a catalyst cannot activate even protons, let alone activate nitrogen. Electrocatalytic NRR, based on the sequence differences of N2 hydrogenation, can occur via either PCET reaction (eqn (6) and (7)) or sequential proton-electron transfer (SPET) reaction (N2 + H+ ↔ N2H+).50 In PCET reaction, the competing HER is more likely to occur owing to the probable H+–e− combination. Therefore, there are no more successful strategies to achieve high NRR selectivity for favorably separating the N2 activation and hydrogenation steps, and such ways can circumvent the PCET process. For that reason, it would be a good choice to rationally design efficient electrocatalysts to promote N2 activation and suppress HER. For example, Tsuneto and co-workers reported a lithium-ion reduction to deposit lithium metal onto the cathode surface, which reacts with N2 to form Li3N.51 Afterward, the ethanolysis of Li3N gives rise to NH3 and EtOLi, achieving a high FE of 5.3–8.4% for NH3 production under 1 atm of N2.
2.3. Chemisorption and activation
Basically, the prerequisite step for efficient electrocatalytic NRR is the adsorption of the N2 molecules on the surface-active sites of catalysts, from which N2 molecules receive electrons for the subsequent activation. The mechanism of N2 fixation by nitrogenase, and in-depth exploration of the activation mechanism by iron-based catalysts used in the Haber–Bosch process for NH3 synthesis, have pushed researchers to find that electron-rich transition metals (TMs) based catalysts (Fe, Mo, Ni, Co, etc.), which can form N-metal bonds by strongly binding to N2. The combination of empty and occupied d orbitals of TMs greatly benefits the interaction between the TMs and N2.52,53 The empty d orbitals in the TMs can accept the lone-pair electrons of N2, and meanwhile, the separated electrons in TM atoms can be donated into the antibonding orbital, and weaken the NN bond (Fig. 2c).54 For non-TM-based catalysts, p-block B-based catalysts enjoying both empty orbitals and occupied orbitals, can strongly interact with N2 with a similar “acceptance-donation” path.55 The sp2-empty orbitals of B atoms receive the σ-electrons of N2, and the occupied p-orbitals electrons can be donated into unoccupied π*-orbitals of N2. Likewise, the sp3-hybridized B atoms cover half-occupied, and empty orbitals, enabling the reduction of N2 to NH3 (Fig. 2d). Ling et al. theoretically proposed the NH3 synthesis by decorating B atoms on g-C3N4via forming two N-B bonds.54 B atoms are stabilized on g-C3N4, while leaving an occupied and an empty sp3 orbital, and then the B atom can have a strong interaction with N2 (Fig. 2e). These investigations indicate TM- or p-block non-metal-based catalysts can be a better choice for the N2 reduction to NH3.
2.4. Reaction pathways
Basic to any design and preparation of NRR electrocatalysts with high efficiency and good stability is the understanding of the NRR mechanism, which, in general, includes the dissociative pathway and the associative one.24,47 In the dissociative mechanism, the first step is the chemisorption of N2 molecules on the electrocatalyst surface to weaken the NN triple bond between two N atoms. The triple bonds of N2 molecules are, subsequently, broken before the first-H addition to N atoms, and two separated adsorbed N atoms left on the surface of catalysts. The adsorbed nitrogen atom continuously hydrogenates with the surface H atom chemisorbed, and progressively –NH, –NH2, and NH3 species form on the catalyst surface. Lastly, the NH3 products desorb from the catalyst surface, forming a gaseous state. Therefore, the dissociation pathway requires high energy input due to the need to prematurely cleave the NN triple bond of N2 molecules (Fig. 3a). Different from the dissociative mechanism, the associative pathway occurs with the first physical adsorption of free N2 molecules on the surface-active sites of the electrocatalyst, leaving cleavage of the NN bonds in N2 molecules, forming NH3 molecules. The generated NH3 molecules desorb from the surface of the catalyst. End-on, side-on, and bridge-on N2 adsorptions can occur via associative pathways. Based on N2 hydrogenation sequence differences, via PCET, end-on N2 adsorption takes place via the distal, alternating, or alternating–distal (A–D) mix pathways. N2 hydrogenation in the distal pathway preferentially undergoes two successive PCET steps to the remote surface nitrogen to release the first NH3, while the terminal N atom does not directly interact with the catalyst. Along with the release of the first NH3 molecules, the remaining N atoms continue to hydrogenate, producing a second NH3 molecule and subsequently releasing it (Fig. 3b). Two N atoms adsorbed, in the alternating pathway, on the catalyst surface alternately hydrogenate, so that the bonds between the nitrogen atoms are all broken and the first NH3 molecule is smoothly removed from the catalyst surface. Then, the second NH3 molecule is also released (Fig. 3c). For the A–D mix pathway, one H atom is added to the other N before releasing one NH3. The side-on and bridge-on adsorptions can lead to three pathways: enzymatic, consecutive, or enzymatic–consecutive (E–C) mix pathways.54,56,57 The consecutive pathway favorably leads to hydrogenation of one N through two consecutive PCET steps, releasing the first NH3, while the enzymatic pathway is similar to the alternating pathway. With the E–C mix pathway, one NH3 is released after H atom addition to the other N. Recently, in terms of theoretical prediction, bridge-on N2 adsorption configurations tend to occur preferentially.58–62 Vertical end-on N2 adsorption has been theoretically predicted superiority over horizontal side-on and bridge-on N2 adsorption configurations.63
 Fig. 3  (a–c) Three reaction mechanisms of NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) N2 activation on TM centres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Based on the reaction pathway of electrochemical NRR, three key factors are presumed affecting the performance of electrocatalysts. (1) The adsorption of N2 molecules and desorption of NH3 molecules on the surface of the electrocatalyst. Under ideal conditions, the adsorption rate of N2 molecules is, to achieve adsorption equilibrium, comparable to the desorption rate of NH3 molecules. However, the large difference between adsorption activation energy (Ea) of N2 molecules and desorption Ea of NH3 molecules is not conducive to the desorption of NH3 molecules. (2) The selectivity of NRR and HER. Since the theoretical voltage of the electrocatalytic water splitting is smaller than that for NRR, HER preferentially occurs thermodynamically, reducing the NRR selectivity. In this regard, Skulason et al. reported that N atoms cover most of the catalyst surface when the adsorption energy of the catalyst surface to N atoms is larger than to H atoms, which improves the NRR selectivity while suppresses HER;64 or the binding energy of the catalyst-N atom is large, and the catalyst surface is only covered with a small number of H atoms, which limits the rate-determining step in HER and indirectly increase the NRR selectivity. (3) The hydrogenation of N2 molecules on the catalyst surface. Theoretically, the equilibrium potential required for the hydrogenation of N2 molecules is −3.2 V, much negative than the equilibrium potential of other steps. The design of catalysts with electrochemically active sites can reduce the Ea of this step, and thereby accelerate the progress of the hydrogenation reaction.
2.5. Scaling relations
The design ideas of the current mainstream catalysts towards NH3 synthesis are mainly focused on two categories: homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. The advantage of homogeneous catalysts is that each molecule of the catalyst can participate in the NRR with high efficiency, well-defined active sites, and a definite mechanism, which is beneficial to guide the targeted structural design for NRR electrocatalysts. However, the poor stability and recycling issues of the catalyst in the natural process are still a problem to be solved. After all, the evenly dispersed catalysts are difficult to be collected and recycled. The advantage of heterogeneous catalysis is that it can be applied to a certain voltage to the catalyst, reducing the N2 molecules by electrocatalysis or photocatalysis. The catalyst is easily recovered from the reaction medium mechanically. However, in heterogeneous catalysis, the precise activation site and reaction mechanism on catalysts are yet to be clear.
In heterogeneous NRR, the Sabatier principle has delivered a qualitative outline for the optimal catalyst. If the interaction between the N2 molecule and the heterogeneous substrate is not strong, the N2 activation is not possible; while too strong intermediates binding will poison the catalyst. This leads to a bond strength-catalytic activity volcano-type relationship,65 which is called the scaling relation. The optimum catalyst should be of intermediary strength with binding atoms and molecules. Namely, researchers hope that the adsorption process of gaseous N2 molecules is fast, the activated molecules are generated quickly, and the reaction rate is increased. Conversely, optimizing the adsorption process will cause a slow desorption process of the NH3 product. The NH3 product cannot be desorbed and assemble on the substrate surface, which hinders the adsorption of other N2 molecules and poisons the active sites. More recently, Chen et al. proposed a transition metal-lithium hydride (TM-LiH) dual active site catalyst.66 As shown in Fig. 3d, the N2 molecule dissociates on the surface of TM to generate TM-N; then N atoms migrate from the TM surface to LiH to generate Li-NH species; the N species is further hydrogenated on LiH to NH3, and desorbs smoothly from the LiH surface. The construction of dual active centers allows for the activation of N2 and H2, and the adsorption of intermediate products occurring on different active centers, thus breaking the scaling relationship between the reaction energy barrier and the adsorption energy. Such a dual-center catalytic system provides a feasible way towards a low-temperature synthesis of NH3. This has opened up new ideas for the development of more energy-efficient catalysts.
2.6. Activity descriptors
To accurately compare and rationally optimize NRR electrocatalyst, three activity metrics (activity, selectivity, and stability) should never be overlooked to characterize the performance. Concerning electrocatalytic NRR, the NRR activity descriptors include FE and NH3 yield as accessible metrics by delicate measurements.
The FE of the desired NH3 product produced by the electrocatalyst has become an important indicator for examining the electrocatalytic performance of the NRR catalyst, which is of the same importance as the onset potential and the total current density at a certain potential. Faraday's law establishes the connection between the macroscopic charge/current and the microscopic electron transfer caused by chemical reactions. In NRR, FE stands for the ratio of the charge amount for NRR to the overall charge flowing throughout the circuit. FE reveals electrocatalytic NH3 selectivity in NRR. The FE can be calculated by eqn (11). FE = nFCV/MQ(11)Here, n stands for electron transfer numbers required for the electroreduction of N2 to one NH3 molecule; F is the Faraday constant; C represents the NH3 molecule concentration; V means the electrolyte volume; M equals 17 (NH3 relative molecular mass); Q refers to the total charge. The yield rate of NH3 (RNH3) can be calculated using eqn (12). RNH3 = CV/tS(12)Here, C stands for NH3 concentration; V represents the electrolyte volume; t is the NRR time; S refers to loading mass of the catalyst, or electrode geometric area, or electrode electrochemically active surface area (ECSA). The RNH3 value varies largely from catalyst to catalyst. Targeted at more reliable research, scientific communities should measure NH3 production based on the explicit calculation method with background and non-electrochemical NH3 subtractions.
3. Reaction systems
3.1. Electrochemical cell configurations
The N2 electroreduction into NH3, to a large extent, depends on the configuration of the electrochemical cell. Therefore, the rational design of the electrochemical cell configurations matters a lot in electrocatalytic NRR research. In the electrocatalytic NRR process, there are mainly four types of electrochemical cells (Fig. 4).46
 Fig. 4  (a–d) Four electrochemical cell configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematics and (f) a picture of an H-type cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
As shown in Fig. 4a, early electrocatalytic reactors utilized back-to-back cells consisting of two gas-diffusion cathodes with feeding N2 gas, and the anode with H2O. These two gas-diffusion electrodes are typically divided by a proton/anion exchange membrane (PEM/AEM). In PEM-type cells, protons are usually generated for the cathode reaction via water electrolyzing in an electrolyte solution (Fig. 4b). Back-to-back cells as well as PEM-type cells can effectively suppress HER, because of limited protons supply. However, this kind of gas-solid reaction mainly occurs at the cathode chamber, which is difficult to achieve at ambient conditions, hindering their large-scale application. Different from the above two cells, both oxidation, and reduction reactions, in single-chamber cell systems, occur in the same electrolyte solution. Such configuration will result in the re-oxidation of NH3 products at the anode, imposing false and incorrect determination of NH3 yield (Fig. 4c). The single-chamber cell will give way to the cell with two chambers, which can effectively make up for the shortcomings of a single chamber cell, and efficiently promote the NRR electrocatalytic performance. Therefore, double chamber cell (H-cell) came into being (Fig. 4d–f). In order to help the readers to know better four NRR equipment, the advantages and disadvantages of each cell are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of four cells




Back-to-back cell
PEM-type cell
Single chamber cell
H-Type cell






























• Applying to solid and liquid electrolyte
• High energy input
• Separate cathode and anode chambers
• NH3 crossover
• Operating under high pressure
• NH3 oxidation at anode
• Independent cathode and anode reaction
• NH3 crossover


• Suppressing the HER
• Gas–solid reactions not achievable
• Suppressing the HER
• Preventing NH3 oxidation.






• Preventing NH3 oxidation






In an H-cell setup, the working electrode attaching the electrocatalyst is at the cathode chamber, while the common choice for reference electrode is a conventional Ag/AgCl, Hg/HgO, or saturated calomel electrode. The counter electrode is composed of a graphite rod or Pt foil is at the anode chamber. The acidic H2SO4 solution,67 alkaline KOH solution,68 LiClO4 solution,69 or KHCO3 dilute solution,70 and the like, can serve as the electrolyte.
Under acidic conditions: Anode reaction: 3H2O → 3/2O2 + 6H+ + 6e−(13) Cathodic reaction: N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3(14)Under alkaline conditions: Anode reaction: 6OH− → 3H2O + 3/2O2 + 6e−(15) Cathodic reaction: N2 + 6H2O + 6e− → 2NH3 + 6OH−(16)
The anodic H+ or OH− species can participate in the proceeding NRR reaction under mild catalytic conditions. However, there is still a portion of NH3 products transferring through the PEM or AEM to the anode chamber, and as a result, the ammonia crossover effect cannot be neglected. Therefore, the crossover of the NH3 or NH4+ species should be minimized by selecting the PEM or AEM with a competent anti-crossover effect to achieve a precise total NH3 determination in electrolytes. Choosing two electrolytes different from each other in two separated chambers is, because of the anti-crossover effect of the membrane, the most straightforward way to tailor the electrocatalytic behaviors towards high-efficient NRR. This will further optimize the reaction conditions by the suitable selection of electrocatalyst combinations.71
3.2. Electrochemical measurements
Basis to any understanding of electrocatalytic NRR measurements are routinely four involvements of cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), chronoamperometry (CA), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). In the CA technique, a function of reaction time vs. potential is established, from which CV data could illustrate the FE of NRR, and evaluate the long-term electrolysis stability of catalysts, via the repetition of CV measurements. Moreover, the double-layer capacitance could be determined by the CV technique, estimating the ECSA of the electrode. The ECSA could be employed to normalize the electrode surface area, by eliminating the effect of surface roughness. LSV technique establishes a function relationship between the current density and the potential for the electroreduction of N2 to NH3. The LSV curve under the Ar-saturated electrolyte represents the polarization curve of HER, and the LSV curve under the N2-saturated electrolyte represents the polarization curve of both HER and NRR. The current density difference between the two curves can be regarded as a contribution from the NRR. Therefore, the current difference between the two polarization curves can, to some extent, confirm whether NRR takes place at such a potential interval. The EIS measurement is performed to identify the electrocatalytic NRR rate based on the determination of electrolyte and charge transfer resistances.
4. Ammonia detection
To evaluate the activity of the electrocatalytic NRR, establishing a precise step-by-step quantitative detection method for the electrochemical synthesis of NH3 to obtain convincing data is of great necessity. Four methods: Nessler's reagent method, indophenol blue (IB) method, salicylate method, and ion chromatography are usually adopted for NH3 determination.
4.1. Nessler's reagent method
Nessler's reagent is a solution containing K2HgI4 and KOH, where K2HgI4 reacts with NH3 under alkaline conditions to produce a colored complex of Hg2ONH2I (eqn (17)), which can be determined colorimetrically with strong absorption at wavelengths between 410 and 425 nm.72–74 2K2HgI4 + NH3 + 3KOH → HgO·Hg(NH2)I↓ + 7KI + 2H2O(17)In the absence of interference, the absorbance is directly proportional to the NH3 concentration. Using Nessler's reagent method for NH3 detection can be interfered with by a variety of metal cations (Fe3+, Co2+, Ni2 +, Cr3+, Ag+, S2−, etc.), hydrazine, carbonyl compounds, etc.75,76 To minimize the interference from other ions and prevent the formation of cloudy samples, it is usually to add a Rochelle salt solution during the NH3 detection process. It should be noted that (1) mercury ions in Nessler's reagents are toxic and reagents should be used with care;76 (2) the life of Nessler's reagents is relatively short (about three weeks); (3) the water used to prepare the Nessler's reagent solution must be free of ammonia (ultra-pure water); (4) the reaction time between NH3 and Nessler's reagent also affects the accurate quantification of NH3. The recommended reaction time is 10–30 min.
4.2. Indophenol blue method
According to Berthelot's reaction, the IB method involves the reaction of NH3 with phenol and hypochlorite in an alkaline solution to produce a blue product of indophenol.77 Sodium nitroprusside is used as a catalyst, which can enhance the color change in the indophenol reaction, and citrate buffer is used to stabilize the pH of the reaction solution. In an alkaline medium, the indophenol dissociates, and a blue color generates. Quantitatively, it can be determined by a colorimetrical method at 630–650 nm wavelengths range.78–80 The overall reaction is shown in eqn (18).81,82 (18)
The IB method may be not in its high efficiency with excessive NH3, which possibly will overwhelm the IB reaction.80 Moreover, for the accuracy of the experiment, it is recommended that the main experimental results should have more than three times of repeatability.83
4.3. Salicylate method
In the salicylate method, sodium salicylate replaces phenol, which is used in the IB method.84–86 Therefore, such kind of method removes the o-chlorophenol formation, which is noxious and volatile through the NH3 detection due to phenol absence.85 Considering the lower reactivity of salicylate than that of phenol, to get a comparable sensitivity, it is necessary to increase the concentration of salicylate, higher than that of phenol. Compared with the IB method, the salicylate method is much safer.86,87 In the salicylate method, the reaction proceeds through two steps. First, NH3 reacts with hypochlorite, giving rise to monochloramine. Second is the reaction between monochloramine and salicylate to form 5-aminosalicylate (eqn (19)).81 (19)The as-obtained 5-aminosalicylate probably undertakes oxidation, as well as a further reaction with salicylate to form blue-colored compounds.88 A color change from light yellow to green, and then to blue will occur, as the NH3 concentration in the solution increases. Generally, a wavelength of 640 nm can be used to perform colorimetrically quantitative measurements.85
4.4. Ion chromatography
The separation principle in ion chromatography is based on the interaction between a stationary phase of cation-exchange material, and the mobile phase of an eluent. More specifically, different components in the mobile phase are redistributed in the two phases, so that the residence time of each component in the separation column is different, achieving separation. A conductometric detector is used to continuously detect the separated cations. Compared with the retention times of individual known standards, the separated cations are recognized. Quantitative analyses are based on computing peak areas, and further paralleling peak areas to the standard sample areas.89
Ion chromatography has many advantages, such as high sensitivity, and good reproducibility as well for simultaneously separating, and detecting in a single path of alkali and alkaline earth metal ions, and NH4+.90,91 However, when using ion chromatography to determine the content of NH4+, of note is the proximity of the peak positions of NH4+ and Na+, posing difficulty to attain enough determination. If the content of Na+ in the electrolyte is too high, the NH4+ concentration cannot be accurately resoluted.46
4.5. Ammonia gas-sensing electrode and ammonium ion-selective electrode
It is fast and simple to use ammonia gas-sensing electrode and ammonium ion-selective electrode for the measurement of the dissolved NH3 concentration in aqueous solutions.92,93 The former electrode consists of a hydrophobic gas-permeable membrane, a pH electrode, and an internal reference electrode. Normally, the gas-permeable membrane is used to separate the sample solution and the electrode internal solution (NH4Cl aqueous solution). When NH4+ formation occurs, a strong base is added (pH > 11) to convert NH4+ into dissolved NH3(aq). NH3(aq) diffuse will lead to the pH change of the internal solution. Only when the internal solution pH is proportional to the NH3 concentration in the sample solution, the latter can be confirmed from a standard curve created with known NH3 concentrations. The ammonia gas-sensing electrode responds slowly when the NH3 concentration is low, and meanwhile, when the concentration of dissolved ions is high, its performance is also affected. Fortunately, such kind of electrode is not affected, regardless of the solution turbidity or color.46,94,95
The ammonium ion-selective electrode is composed of a poly(vinyl chloride) membrane with an NH4+ carrier. During detection, the NH3 dissolved in the sample solution is converted to NH4+, by lowering the solution pH. The electrode potential develops, depending on the free NH4+ concentration, across the membrane when the electrode contacts the NH4+ solution. We can obtain the NH4+ concentration from a standard curve created from known NH4+ concentrations.46,81 However, this method is greatly interfered with by alkali metal ions in high concentrations, such as Na+ and K+.96 The requirements of the reaction solution are relatively high.
4.6. Fluorometric method
The fluorometric method is another method that can achieve efficient and accurate quantification of NH4+. It is mainly based on the selective reaction of NH4+ in an aqueous solution with o-phthaldialdehyde and sulphite, which produces a strongly fluorescent compound with the maximum of excitation and emission locating at 362.5 and 423.0 nm, respectively.97,98 Therefore, the NH4+ concentration can be quantitatively determined via a fluorescence detector. The detection limit can reach 1 nmol L−1, N.;99 but this method also has some problems. If the concentration of NH4+ exceeds 1 µmol L−1, the actual concentration measured will deviate from the linear relationship between the concentration of NH4+ and the fluorescence intensity. In addition, the amines and amino acids present in the aqueous solution can also interfere with the detection.81,95,100
4.7. Conductivity method
The conductivity method is using the NH3-acid reaction to form salts. When the salts form between NH3 and sulfuric acid, a decrease in the solution conductivity occurs. The solution conductivity is monitored with a conductivity meter. As the conductivity decrease is proportional to the amount of absorbed NH3 by the solution, the absorbed NH3 can be confirmed from a standard curve created from known NH3 concentration.66,101 Such a method is fast and simple. However, the solution conductivity may affect the detection.
4.8. Titrimetric method
The titrimetric method is to titrate the NH3 in the distillate, after distillation of the sample solution with pH to 9.5, with a standard sulfuric acid solution until the indicator turns pale lavender. This method is effective for the concentrations of ammonia nitrogen larger than 5 mg L−1.95
4.9. 
          15N2 reduction experiments and 1H NMR measurement
To prove that the produced NH3 was converted from the supplied N2 source rather than other exogenous N-containing sources, 15N2 reduction experiments and 1H NMR measurement should be carried out to confirm quantitatively, especially, some headline results. Among many well-developed detection methods, the 1H NMR method is generally needed to make an NH3 quantification distinctly from 15NH4+. 15NH4+ is detectable as an intensive doublet in 1H NMR.28,69 Such quantification could be realized possibly either with a 15NH4Cl calibration or with an internal standard. Identifying that background 14N2 and exogenous 14NH4+, in this 15NRR experiment, are difficult to avoid, either requiring quantification of both 15NH4+ and 14NH4, or necessary demonstration that 15NH4+ is within experimental error of total NH4+ determined. The determined mol(15NH4+) must be substantially greater than mol(14NH4+) and be quantitatively consistent with the other measurements of RNH3 for this experiment to represent sufficient proof of NRR.32
As we all know, the low NH3 yield (10–1000 nmol) in the electrocatalytic NRR process at ambient temperature and pressure, makes that any trace of NH3 pollution may affect the accuracy of the experimental results. NH3 is ubiquitous in the laboratory environment as a common pollutant in chemicals, especially in gases. As a volatile gas, NH3 also tends to accumulate on the surface of ordinary glassware, or in aqueous solutions over time. In areas with impaired air quality, the NH3 content in the atmosphere can reach even much higher levels. The source of NH3 in the air as an important factor also affects the experiment's accuracy and reliability. In NRR, the use of N2-containing materials, catalysts, electrolytes, and gases can affect a lot to precise NH3 determination. Various sources of NH3 contaminants that originate from NOx in chemicals, and solvents, and nitrogen oxides in supply gases, cannot be ignored, because they are easily reduced to NH3. The NOx in the supply gas is particularly worthy of attention, for the reason that this external source is usually continuously supplied for a long time in the experiment, so even if the stable generation of NH3 is observed for a long time, it cannot be used as clear evidence for the occurrence of NRR. In addition, NOx is also a common pollutant of laboratory equipment. Even after repeated washing, as long as there are reducible N2-containing substances, nitrides, or other reducing agents in the electrode or electrolyte material, related problems will occur. N-containing forms including N2 or NOx in catalysts and electrolytes, or in gas supplies, are particularly troublesome because these are very readily reducible to NH3. Zhao et al. showed the criteria that need to be considered to achieve a precise NH3 detection.102 Of course, the best way is that the materials contain no N-containing forms before electrochemical NRR. (1) If N-containing forms exist on the surface of electrocatalysts or in electrolytes, multiple rinsing efforts with ultrapure water along with ultrasonic treatments to minimalize N-containing forms. Blank and control experiments (in particular,15N2 experiments.) are highly recommended to be carried out to recognize all possible N-species of NH3 in the electrocatalytic experiments; (2) if a handful of NH3 exists in gas supplies or most types of water exposed to air, these issues produce the need for using fresh deionized- or ultrapure-water in electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 experiments; (3) it is recommended that to choose proper NH3 detection method based on the NH3 concentration (nanomolar/millimolar) generated during electrocatalytic NRR. With the surge in the number of articles on electrocatalytic NH3 synthesis in the past two years, more and more researchers are beginning to question the accuracy of certain published results.103–105 Therefore, it is important that the NH3 determined in the NRR experiment is produced by electrochemical reduction of N2 rather than from some other external sources.
Suryanto et al. proposed specific and rigorous control experimental procedures to help to obtain convincing experimental data of NH3 production.32 (1) Gas purification. The gas (Ar, 14N2, and 15N2) required for the experiment needs to be cleaned, and the ammonia content in the purified gas is detected by ion chromatography or spectrophotometry to remove exogenous nitrogen species (x-NH3) and NOx pollutants as background NH3 content. (2) Open circuit control experiments. The test was conducted at open-circuit voltage to capture x-NH3 in the solution. The x-NH3 concentration measured under nitrogen supply should be equal to or lower than the value measured under argon supply. If the x-NH3 concentration is not lower than this value, the gas needs to be purged again. (3) Argon control electrochemical experiments. At each measurement potential, nitrogen and argon should be used as control variables for testing. Because NH3 will accumulate on the surface of the vessel, and in the solution over time, an electrochemical test under argon should be performed before each NRR experiment, and the test time should be the same as the test time under nitrogen. (4) Nitrogen-containing materials. For electrocatalysts involving nitrogen-containing active sites, or electrocatalysts prepared at any stage using a nitrogen-containing solvent or compound (such as nitrate), background x-NH3 content may be generated in argon control experiments at each measurement potential. It is recommended to repeat the argon control experiments in the static and electrolytic stages. (5) 15N2 reduction experiments. The final step is to use 15N2 in combination with a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) test to exclude the effects of nitrogen-containing materials to prove that the NH3 produced only originates from N2.
5. Design protocols for NRR electrocatalysts
According to the principle of electrocatalytic reaction, a better electrocatalyst needs to have more active sites, higher intrinsic active sites, better conductivity, and stability. This is closely related to the structure and surface charge distribution of the electrocatalyst. Given this, due to the unique anisotropy and electronic structure, 2D nanomaterial endows itself a unique electrocatalytic performance towards NRR, where the large specific surface area can provide sufficient surface active sites, and meanwhile, the catalytic activity, as well as stability, could be controlled by adjusting electronic properties. The surface chemical-functionalization of 2D materials can not only regulate the surface charge of the electrocatalyst, but more importantly, these methods do not destroy the structure of the 2D body, ensuring the conductivity and stability of the electrocatalyst. In this section, from the perspective of regulating electron structure, we elaborate on the typical three surface chemical-functionalized strategies for increasing the electrocatalytic activity of N2 to NH3 over 2D catalysts, including heteroatom doping (non-metal-atom doping or metal-atom doping), defect engineering, and hybrid engineering as well. Also, here theoretical simulations are indispensable to predict and screen the potential 2D electrocatalysts with high catalytic activity, as well as to disclose the probable NRR mechanism.
5.1. Heteroatom doping
Heteroatoms (non-metal-atoms and metal-atoms) doping represents an effective method that can not only modulate electronic structure, and elemental composition of 2D electrocatalyst, turning part of non-active sites at the surface into active sites, but also tailor adsorption abilities for reactants and intermediates,106–109 thus facilitating NRR in electrocatalytic process. Non-metal-atom doping plays a critical role in many 2D catalysts (graphene, g-C3N4, MoS2, etc.) for enhancing the electrocatalytic NRR activity. Non-metal heteroatoms (N, B, O, S, and P) can serve as an effective method to enrich charge density, as well as high inherent conductivity, to modify pristine 2D electrocatalysts, lowering reactants binding energies in NRR.110 Metal-atom doping has also been widely used to synthesize single-atom catalysts on the 2D material surface,111,112 such as Pt single atom on graphene. While on the metal-doping side, similar effects emerged to non-metal-atom doping as modulation of electronic properties, and optimization of absorption free energy towards reaction intermediates, improving electrocatalytic NRR activity. Rational regulation of surface heteroatom doping for fast electron transfer and high electrical conductivity is extremely important to the electrocatalytic activity enhancement for NH3 synthesis.113,114

5.1.1. Non-metal-atom doping. 
The non-metal-atom doping primarily showed great potential in carbon-based materials in electrocatalytic NRR, especially graphene, to well alter electronic behaviors, and chemical reactivity. Of note is nitrogen doping in graphene as N-graphene, the pioneer of 2D electrocatalysts. The effectiveness of N-doping lies in its greater electronegativity and the lone pair electrons-π-system conjugation between nitrogen and graphene.115,116 In N-doped graphene, the higher electronegativity of N atom to C atom, renders electrons transferring from C to N, whereas in B-doped graphene, oppositely, electrons transfer from B to C, because of lower electronegativity of B atom to C atom. Two different active sites were generated, owing to the electronegativity differentiation of N, C, and B atoms. However, it should be noted that nitrogen-doping content and doping sites in N-doped graphene may significantly affect the electrocatalytic NRR by theoretical and experimental studies, and therefore doping procedure and precursor choice should be carefully tailored.117 Still, because N atoms doping will increase the risk of extraneous N source, the NH3 determination method, such as 15N2 isotopic experiments, should be adopted in mind to achieve the precise NH3 production.
Inspired by N-doping, other heteroatoms (O, B, S, and P) doping, are widely developed for electroreduction of N2 to NH3.67,118–120 These heteroatoms can serve as substitutional dopants similar to N-doping, disrupting the pristine atom framework of 2D electrocatalysts. Defect creation at the edge or basal plane regions can function as the active sites to enhance NRR activities of 2D electrocatalysts. For instance, Yu et al. established a 2D B-doped graphene (BG), which can efficiently promote adsorption of N2 as a metal-free NRR electrocatalyst.67 The electron density in the graphene framework is redistributed upon B incorporation. Owing to a clear differentiation of electronegativity of boron (2.04) and carbon (2.55), B atoms are positively charged, which is favorable for N2 adsorption, providing outstanding catalytic sites for the B–N bond formation, and the subsequent fabrication of NH3. The electron-deficient boron sites prohibited Lewis acid H+ binding to suppress HER, promoting the FE of NRR. In NRR, B incorporation in the graphene framework reached an RNH3 of 9.8 µg h−1 cm−2, with an FE of 10.8% at −0.5 V vs. RHE in 0.05 M H2SO4 (Fig. 5b and c), a significant enhancement compared with the undoped graphene. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that BC3 moiety enjoys the lowest reaction energy barrier, as shown in Fig. 5a, thereby enhancing N2 reduction activity (Fig. 5d). Other B–N pairs doped 2D carbon nanosheet (NS) of NRR electrocatalyst has also been recently reported, exhibiting superior activity to single element doped ones.121 In addition, S- and O-doping into graphene has also shown the effectiveness to yield NRR activities. For instance, in 2019, Xia et al. reported S-doping graphene for electrocatalytic N2 to NH3 production. The highest RNH3 of ∼27.3 µg mg−1 h−1, and an FE of 11.5% can be achieved in an HCl electrolyte, compared to their undoped S counterparts.118
 Fig. 5  (a) B-Doped graphene for NRR. (b) The percentages of four B types. (c) The FEs of four samples. (d) Free energy diagrams of four B types in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Moreover, the electrocatalytic NRR performance is highly stable. Through theoretical simulation, it is concluded that the carbon atom near the doped S atom acts as the main active site. Under the catalysis of the above active sites, the formation of NH3 and desorption of NH3 can occur simultaneously, which is conducive to further surface reaction on the catalyst. As the same family member to the S element, O doping for 2D carbon-based materials is another good choice for improving the N2 electroreduction activity to NH3. Ling et al. recently reported O-doped amorphous carbon NSs to work as an efficient electrocatalyst towards NRR, realizing a high RNH3 of 20.15 µg h−1 mg−1, a FE of 4.97% (−0.6 V vs. RHE) in a 0.1 M HCl.122 The authors discovered that the stable π electrons in carbon NSs are converted into an active state with O-doping. Similarly, Wang et al. in 2019, also verified that O-doping graphene accomplished an RNH3 of 21.3 µg h−1 mg−1, and an FE of 12.6% at −0.55 V and −0.45 V vs. RHE, respectively.119 DFT calculations revealed that the functional groups of CO and O–CO in O-doping graphene could efficiently reduce the free energy barrier in NRR determining step.
In addition to doping in graphene, non-metal-atom doping also finds its way to other 2D families for electrocatalytic NRR, such as boron-doped MoS2 NSs, and nitrogen-doped NiO NS array. From the perspective of DFT simulations, Li et al. demonstrated that single-layer MoS2 doped with diatomic boron (B2@MoS2) could significantly activate the inert N2 molecules for electrochemical NRR with a lower activation barrier of 1.24 eV, together with excellent structural and thermodynamic stability, improved conductivity.123 Another example is the N-doped NiO NS array on carbon cloth (N-NiO/CC), reported by Chu. Such electrocatalysts displayed an RNH3 yield of 22.7 µgh−1mg−1, with an FE of 7.3% at −0.5 V vs. RHE in a 0.1 M LiClO4 electrolyte, showing superior NRR activity to those of un-doped one.124


5.1.2. Metal-atom doping. 
Metal-atom (Fe, Mo, Co, etc.) doping, like non-metal-atom doping, is also capable of altering electronic structures, optimizing the intermediates absorption free energy for promoting electroreduction of N2 to NH3.125–129 A case in point is Co-doped MoS2 with S vacancies prepared by Zhang et al., mimicking the natural Mo–nitrogenase active center.129 DFT calculation revealed that there is an N2 molecule absorption preference at defective MoS2−x sites, activating the N2 molecule for the NN triple bond dissociation. After Co doping, the free energy barrier of the N2 fixation is decreased from 1.62 to 0.59 eV, and the obtained Co-doped MoS2 by substituting lattice Mo exhibits superior N2-to-NH3 conversion activity.

5.2. Defect engineering
In 2D electrocatalysts, active defects sites could promote electrochemical N2 reduction for NH3 synthesis. Therefore, defect engineering has been predominately utilized in ultrathin 2D nanomaterials to encourage NRR electrocatalytic activity for a more sustainable NH3 production. The construction of various anion defects/vacancies, such as nitrogen,130,131 oxygen,132–135 phosphorus,136 sulfur,129 selenium,137 tellurium,138 and metal-cation vacancies,139 will significantly improve the electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 activity at ambient condition on edges or basal planes of 2D nanomaterials. The introduced defects/vacancies could effectively create more unsaturated metal sites coordination, and extraordinary atomic sites with new electronic states, tailor charge distribution and electronic structure without destroying pristine lattices, which could greatly improve N2 adsorption/activation for preceding hydrogenations. The creation of defects in 2D nanomaterials would convert the inert basal plane into catalytically active sites for electrochemical NH3 synthesis.
Li et al. developed defect-rich 2D MoS2 NSs (thickness: 4 nm).19 As shown in Fig. 6a, in electrocatalytic NRR, these 2D MoS2 NS on carbon paper (MoS2/CP) as electrocatalysts realized a superior RNH3 and FE to its defect-free counterpart (29.28/13.41 µg h−1 mg−1, 8.34/2.18%) at −0.40 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M Na2SO4 with better NRR stability. DFT calculations reveal that for defect-rich catalysts the *NH2 → *NH3 potential determining step possesses a lower energy barrier than that of the defect-free counterpart (0.60/0.68 eV) (Fig. 6b). Similarly, as reported by Liu et al., 2D S-rich MoS2 electrocatalyst attained an RNH3 of 43.4 µg h−1 mg−1, with a FE of 9.81% at −0.2 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M Li2SO4 electrolyte at ambient conditions (Fig. 6c),140 exhibiting superior electrocatalytic N2 activity than that MoS2 electrocatalyst in 0.1 M Na2SO4 without Li–S interactions. Experientially and theoretically, the in situ Li–S interactions on MoS2 NSs are responsible for superior NH3 synthesis. DFT calculations disclose that such Li+ interactions with S-edge sites of MoS2 reduces adsorption free energy of H*, suppressing HER, and increases N2 adsorption free energy. In addition, the Li–S interactions can decrease the Ea barrier of *N2 to *N2H (reaction limiting step, the distal pathway) for a better NRR performance (Fig. 6d). This work significantly paves a new way for in operando reconstruction to boost not only 2D electrocatalysts’ activity towards NRR but operando stability. The fierce competition between NRR and HER contributes to the poor selectivity of NRR. To further restrict HER, and improve NRR selectivity, Lai et al. reported Se-rich ReSe2 NSs@carbonized bacterial cellulose (Vr-ReSe2@CBC) nanofibers between two CBC layers.137 DFT calculations showed that defect engineering can positively move the d-band center of ReSe2 to improve its electrocatalytic NRR performance, but it has poor selectivity for NRR and HER. Interestingly, the competition from HER can be suppressed by covering the hydrophobic CBC layers on both sides of the Vr-ReSe2@CBC nanofibers, thereby increasing the FE by 42.5% and maintaining an RNH3 of 28.3 µg h−1 cm−2 at room temperature. This work affords a feasible approach to ameliorate potentially electroactive NRR catalysts by constructing at an abrupt interface.
 Fig. 6  (a) RNH3 and FEs for defect-rich MoS2/CP electrode. (b) Calculated Gibbs free energies on MoS2/CP in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) RNH3 and FE of S-rich MoS2 NSs. (d) Free-energy diagrams of NRR at the edges of different MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) RNH3 (red) and FE (blue) of Rh NNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) NH3 formation rates of Bi NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Anion vacancy engineering has been continuing in promoting the performance of 2D NRR electrocatalysts. For instance, O- and N-based vacancies in 2D metal oxides (TiO2,141 La2TiO7,142 TiO2/Ti2C3Tx,135etc.) and 2D metal nitrides (VN,143 and W2N3,130etc.) showed notably enhanced electrocatalytic activity for NRR. Such stable O- and N-based anion defect sites in 2D NRR electrocatalysts, especially in 2D transition metal oxide/nitride-based 2D materials, could not only give rise to N2 adsorption sites but more significantly also offers a localized electron-deficient location to activate N2 with π back-donation.130 Similarly, vacancy engineering is also a promising strategy to enhance the electrocatalytic performance of 2D metal-based electrocatalysts towards NRR. For example, Chen's group in 2018 reported Rh nano-assemblies (Rh NNs) composed of atomic-thickness Rh NSs and used them as effective electrocatalysts for electrochemical NH3 synthesis for the first time at ambient conditions.144 Having the unique ultrathin nature of 2D NS structure, rich active sites, as well as improved electronic configuration, such noble-metal electrocatalysts exhibited a superb electrochemical NRR activity with a high RNH3 of 23.88 µg h−1 mg−1 at −0.2 V vs. RHE. (Fig. 6e). However, the FE of such Rh NNs is less than 1% (Fig. 6e). It could be attributed to the HER competition reaction caused by excessive reaction current density. This work opens a new way to synthesize 2D noble metal NSs towards the electrocatalytic NRR. Li et al. successfully prepare an efficient noble-metal-free defect-rich Bi(110) nanoplates by plasma bombarding Bi2O3 nanoplates.145 Such nanoplate-like defect-rich Bi(110) realized an RNH3 of 5.453 µg mg−1 h−1 with a FE of 11.68% at −0.6 V vs. RHE (Fig. 6f). It should be noted that the NH3 product in this work was quantitatively confirmed firstly by 1H NMR measurement of 15N2 or 14N2.
5.3. Hybrid engineering
Hybrid engineering by introducing second heterogeneous support or substrate is of great interest as a powerful approach to modify the electrocatalytic materials. The activity, selectivity as well as stability of hybrid nanomaterials towards electrocatalytic NRR systems are better, in terms of boosted charge transfer,146–150 adjusted electronic structure,151,152 abundantly exposed active sites,153–157 and the constructed hydrophobic interface.137,158–160 Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is long been recognized as a truly 2D substrate platform for hybrid engineering of NRR electrocatalysts. Li et al. presented the first example of 2D hybrid NRR electrocatalysts using rGO as a substrate.161 As shown in Fig. 7a, they prepared rGO NS was coupled with CeOx-induced amorphization of Au nanoparticles via a facile reduction method. Such unique structural features endow Au/CeOx–rGO hybrid catalyst in 0.1 M HCl electrolyte with an RNH3 of 8.3 µg h−1 mg−1 and an FE of 10.10% at −0.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 7b). Inspired by the metal–sulfur (M–S) linkages in the nitrogenase enzyme, Ahmed et al. adopted a surface modification approach to tune electronic structures of the catalyst, ruthenium nanocrystals anchored on rGO (Ru/rGO) (Fig. 7c), and increase the N2 availability on the catalytic surface, thereby inhibiting HER, and synergistically increasing the rate of NH3 generation.162 A high FE (11%) with an improved RNH3 of 50 µg h−1 mg−1 in acidic conditions is achieved at −0.1 V vs. RHE (Fig. 7d). DFT calculations reveal that the competing HER is highly suppressed by surface modification, and therefore intermediate N2 adsorption and desorption of the product is achieved by electronic structure modification (Fig. 7e). To present, a bunch of 2D hybrid NRR electrocatalysts based on TMs nanomotifs by rGO support, ranging from TiO2–rGO,163 NiO–rGO,164 Mn3O4–rGO,165 to MoS2–rGO,166 have been reported.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of a-Au/CeOx–rGO for electrochemical NRR under ambient conditions. (b) RNH3 and FEs of a-Au/CeOx–rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Illustration of modification of Ru/rGO with aliphatic thiols. (d) RNH3 and FEs of Ru/rGO with aliphatic thiols. (e) The Gibbs free energy on Ru/rGO-C12 in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to rGO-based substrates, MXene NSs as substrates have also come to the stage to fabricate 2D hybrid NRR electrocatalysts.135,167,168 For example, MXene NSs-supported oxygen-vacancy-rich TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2/Ti3C2Tx) in 0.1 M HCl can obtain an RNH3 of 32.17 µg h−1 mg−1, and a FE of 16.07% at −0.45 V vs. RHE.135 In such rGO/MXene–TiO2 electrocatalysts, active species are fixed TiO2 nanomotifs, while electron transfer is encouraged by conductive substrates of rGO/MXene, for overall electrochemical NRR. Very recently, Suryanto et al. prepared a highly selective Ru/2H-MoS2 electrocatalyst towards NRR. This Ru/2H-MoS2 NRR electrocatalyst was highly selective because the MoS2 polymorphs benefit a lot to HER suppression, and therefore in 0.01 M HCl electrolyte a high RNH3 of 1.14 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1, and an FE of 17.6% at −0.15 V (vs. RHE) can be achieved (Fig. 8a).169 Unlike the rGO-/MXene-based substrate, such a kind of 2H-MoS2 substrate itself participated in the NRR process. DFT calculations with an interpretative model (Fig. 8b) showed that the good NRR activity stems from the synergistic interaction between the Ru clusters as binding sites to N2, and adjacent isolated S-vacancies as centers for hydrogenation. Once *N + *NH are formed (Fig. 8c), a train of continuous hydrogenations occur, where S-vacancy provided hydrogen.
 Fig. 8  (a) RNH3 and FEs of Ru/2H-MoS2. (b) Schematics of Ru/2H-MoS2 for NRR. (c) Energy pathway on Ru/2H-MoS2 in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
5.4. 2D materials confining single atoms (2DM@SAs)
The small size effect of nanomaterials, coupled with the size of metal nanocrystalline reducing to cluster- or atom-level is the fundamental change of energy level structure and electron structure. Theoretical results revealed that the single atoms or smaller-sized clusters possess better catalytic activity or selectivity.170 Therefore, single-atom catalysts (SACs)112,171 and double-atom catalysts (DACs)172,173 should be a good choice to make the most use of every metal atom on supported catalysts. Given this, a new category of catalysts with the integration of both 2D materials (i.e. graphene, g-C3N4, MXenes, and MoS2) and SACs (or DACs) is a highly active frontier for electrochemical NRR, and significant advantages were established to make it an independent research field.112,171 Hybridizing both the 2D matrix and SACs (2DM@SACs) creates a new electronic state that bequeaths a significant enhancement in the electrocatalytic NRR activity due to the high activity and stability and maximized utilization efficiency. Defective effects caused by N-doping and intrinsic defects of 2D carbon materials could function as support, providing additional anchor sites for metal single atoms. Furthermore, N-doped sites provide confined space for the metal single atoms by regulating the porous channels of the 2D carbon material.174 Chen et al. reported a defective single-layer BN NS supported single Mo atom (Mo–BN NS) for efficiently electrocatalytic NRR employing DFT computations.175 They optimized the structure of Mo–BN NS, and structures of N2 adsorption on Mo–BN monolayer (Fig. 9a and b). Their computations showed that the single Mo–BN NS tends to catalyze the NRR through an enzymatic mechanism (Fig. 9c), and the overpotential of 0.19 V is quite low. The remarkable activity for NH3 synthesis can be attributed to the high spin-polarization, selective N2H* stabilization, or NH2* destabilization. This study breaks the idea that BN cannot be used as an electrocatalyst, and provides a simple and new idea of electroreduction inert nitrogen molecules to synthetic ammonia products under mild conditions by single-atom electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 9  (a) Optimized structure of Mo–BN NS. (b) Optimized structures of N2 adsorption on Mo–BN NS. (c) Optimized geometric structures of various intermediates on Mo–BN NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Currently, TM SAs confined in 2D N-containing matrix shows great potential in electrochemical NRR, because of the strong TM-N bonding stability, plus better 2D matrix conductivity.171 Mechanistically, mimicking FeMo-cofactor TM complexes moieties in nitrogenase for biological NRR, TM-N motifs come into being.176 Moreover, Pennycook and co-workers prepared a class of Cu-embedded porous N-doped carbon (Cu–N–C) networks.177 This Cu single atom electrocatalyst exhibits precise RNH3 of ∼53.3/49.3 µg h−1 mg−1, and FE of 13.8%/11.7%, under 0.1 M KOH/HCl (Fig. 10a and b), making them truly pH-universal. DFT calculations revealed that a relatively small fraction of Cu–N2 configuration, giving rise to numerous active sites, which contributes to the excellent NRR performance via an alternating reaction pathway (Fig. 10c). Wang et al. firstly reported 2DM@SACs NRR electrocatalyst in 2018.178 They prepared the single Au1 atoms on C3N4 NS (via Au1–Nx bonding) for N2 electroreduction to NH3. Very recently, Hui et al. reported Mo SAs (Mo0) on graphdiyne (GDY) through Mo–C bonding.179 After a facile solvothermal reduction process, the Mo0/GDY catalysts were generated (Fig. 10d). A high RNH3 of 113.4–145.4 µg h−1 mg−1 with an FE of 15.2–21.0% at −1.2 V vs. SCE in 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte was achieved. To date, such Mo0/GDY represents the best performance towards electrocatalytic NRR (Fig. 10e and f). Mo sites favor terminal N2 adsorption and lower limiting potential, which is responsible for the excellent NRR performance via an associative pathway. This work shed light on new carbon members of 2D GDY serving as useful matrix integrating SAs for electrocatalytic NRR.
 Fig. 10  
R
NH3 and FEs of Cu–N–C in (a) 0.1 M KOH and (b) 0.1 M HCl. (c) Calculated Gibbs free energies on Cu–N–C in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis and structural configuration evolution of the catalysis process. (e) FEs and (f) RNH3 of Mo0/GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
5.5. Theoretical calculation
Basically, three main catalytic steps integrate the overall NRR process. (1) H+ formation at the interface of anode and electrolyte; (2) the H+ migration through the electrolyte; (3) the H+–N2 combination at the catalytic sites, forming NH3 upon electrons uptake.83 DFT calculations disclose electrochemical N2 reduction on TM surfaces is largely dependent on scaling relationships of *N2H–*NH2 adsorption energies.180 For that reason, a suitable NRR electrocatalyst has to satisfy three standards: (1) the bond formation between the catalyst and the molecular N2 for fully activating stable NN bonds; (2) selective *N2H stabilization for suppressing the undesirable competing HER side reaction; (3) destabilization of *NH2 species for breaking the scaling between *N2H and *NH2.151 Accordingly, theoretical calculations have been conducted to describe the free energy (ΔG) variations for NRR intermediates on active metal sites.60,175,181 These theoretical investigations are of great importance as a guiding tool to rationally design novel highly efficient electrocatalysts and shed light on the NRR mechanisms over different materials. The rate-determining step in electrocatalytic NRR is the NN cleavage. It is usually achieved in industry conditions using high temperature and high pressure, difficult to occur at ambient conditions. Therefore, it is very difficult to find and screen the effective electrocatalysts towards NRR. Fundamentally understanding the NRR mechanism theoretically and design the catalyst in a targeted manner is of great importance.182,183 Theoretical studies of the N2 adsorption energy, and the reaction ΔG can predict whether the reaction can proceed and the reaction direction. The establishment of a micro-kinetic model can predict the occurrence of the NRR on the catalyst surface, the electrocatalysts’ activity, and the probable reaction pathway. It is also helpful to plot free energy volcanic curve for some metal catalysts or compound catalysts. Through comparing and screening various catalysts, it is possible to design and select the most effective catalyst for the electrochemical NRR, improving ammonia production activity and inhibiting competitive HER. The calculation of the density states of the material can speculate the catalyst the changes of the position of the conduction band, and valence band, as well as band gaps, and confirm whether there is a defect state, conducive to the improvement of the electrocatalytic NRR activity. The d-band center theory can be used to understand the reason why the catalyst improves the catalytic activity of NRR by providing the filling and overlapping degree of the anti-bonding orbit after the reactant and the catalyst are bonded. The prediction of reaction intermediates helps guide the design of electrocatalysts from a microscopic perspective and regulates the surface properties of electrocatalysts.175,180,184–188 From the theoretical calculation, the reaction mechanism of N2 reduction to NH3 can be determined as the association mechanism or dissociation mechanism, and the effect of the electronic structure changes on the NRR after material coupling can also be speculated.
Electrocatalytic NRR generally involves N2 adsorption/activation and electroreduction of N2 molecules. Nitrogen binding is the first step in the NRR and an ideal electrode material should have optimized nitrogen binding. 2D electrocatalysts afford ultrahigh specific surface area, which promotes the adsorption of N2 molecules with optimized nitrogen binding. 2D electrocatalysts could provide abundant defect sites, such as edge defects, topological defects, and vacancy defects, which can be used as NRR active sites for effective N2 activation. In electroreduction of N2 molecules, electronic structures of 2D electrocatalysts can be precisely regulated via defect engineering, surface engineering, and heteroatom doping to improve the conductivity and create new active sites. These structures provide 2D materials as an ideal 2D model of atomic layer thickness, showing extraordinary potential for the adsorption, activation, and electroreduction of N2 molecules, as well as the regulation of the active sites of NRR at the atomic level. These interplaying factors to rationalize the 2D structure-NRR performance relationship are established.
When it comes to the material design, a better NRR electrocatalyst is considered to own desired crystal configuration, chemical composition, and rich surface functionality, which encourage strong N-adatoms binding, rather than H-adatoms, well-defined nanostructure, including porosity, defects, and pit falls, to realize abundant active sites, as well as good electrical conductivity to facilitate electron transfer.
In recent years, coupled with the great stride in the synthesis are the appearances of some in situ/operando characterization techniques, and in the actual reaction process, the reaction mechanism and reaction intermediates speculated by the theoretical calculations begin to be proved. In situ infrared (IR) spectroscopy could confirm the existence of some intermediate bodies in NRR by detecting whether there appear the vibration peaks of N–H, N–N, and N = N bond, and the peak intensity increasing with time;189–191in situ transmission electron microscope (TEM) can be directly used to investigate the catalysts formation process, guiding to design and prepare electrocatalysts, and to maximize the electrocatalytic performance;192,193in situ synchrotron radiation technology can observe the bonding of reactants on the surface of the catalyst, and the given reaction process can be further speculated.194 Proceeding from the experimental results, we could prove the correctness of theoretical speculation, promote the continuous development of theoretical calculations, and continue to better guide the experiment practice. Current theoretical simulations and experiments have been utilized as powerful tools for exploring and designing an efficient NRR electrocatalyst to NH3 with good catalytic activity at a relatively lower temperature and pressure.
6. 2D electrocatalysts for NRR
Since its discovery in 2004, graphene has shown extensive applications in the fields of electronic and optoelectronic devices, catalysis, and energy.195–199 It also opened the prelude to the research of 2D nanomaterials. Up to now, a large population of 2D nanomaterials has sprung up, including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),200–202 2D carbides and nitrides,203,204 g-C3N4,205,206 2D metal oxides,207 2D metals,208 2D covalent organic frameworks (COFs),209 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),210 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),207,211 emerged as new types of 2D family. Among all catalysts explored so far, 2D materials have demonstrated superior catalytic activity for the electrocatalytic NRR.38 In this section, we firstly summarize the synthetic methods and the related characterization methods of such unique 2D materials. Generally speaking, the intrinsic properties of 2D materials endow them as efficient electrocatalysts for NRR. When compared to its 0D, and 1D counterpart, 2D nanomaterials possess several merits: (1) the ultrahigh specific surface area of 2D electrocatalysts better benefits N2 adsorption in an optimized way; (2) 2D electrocatalyst with a large flat plane, could largely afford rich defect sites, including edge and vacancy defects, which serve as highly efficient active sites for N2 activation and electroreduction; (3) the defects created can improve the conductivity and create new active sites, generating 2DM@SAs (2D materials confining single atoms), at the atomic level in NRR. These structural advantages of 2D electrocatalysts can directly interact with reactants/intermediates in a more energy-effective way to boost the electrocatalytic NRR activity. Then, in contrast to non-2D catalysts (Table 3), we review recent experimental advances of such unique 2D NRR electrocatalysts (Table 4), emphasizing material design strategies converting 2D materials into superior 2D electrocatalysts.
Table 3 Recent non-2D NRR electrocatalysts




Category
Electrocatalyst
Electrolyte

R
NH3 (µg h−1 mg−1)
FE (%)
Stability (h)
Ref.


Potential vs. RHE
Potential vs. RHE




Noble metal-based catalysts
Au nanorod
0.1 M KOH
1.648 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.2 V
4.0, −0.2 V
18

68



Au nanocage
0.5 M LiClO4
3.9 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.5 V
30.2, −0.4 V
60

69



Ru nanoparticles
0.01 M HCl
∼0.2 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.1 V
5.4, 0.01 V
4

212



Pd/C
0.01 M HCl
4.5 µg h−1 cm−2, 0.1 V
8.2, 0.1 V
3

213



Non-noble metal-based catalysts

β-FeOOH nanorods
0.5 M LiClO4
23.32, −0.75 V
6.7, −0.7 V
2

214



Fe3O4 nanorods
0.1 M Na2SO4
5.6 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.4 V
2.6, −0.4 V
24

215



Cr2O3 microspheres
0.1 M Na2SO4
∼25.3, −0.9 V
6.78, −0.9 V
2

216



Fe2O3 nanorods
0.1 M Na2SO4
15.9, −0.8 V
0.94, −0.8 V
24

217



MnO particles
0.1 M Na2SO4
1.1 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.39 V
8.02, −0.39 V
25

218



Nb2O5 nanofibers
0.1 M HCl
43.6, −0.55 V
9.26, −0.55 V
27

219



VN nanoparticles
0.1 M HCl
3.3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.1 V
6.0, −0.1 V
<1

220



NbO2 nanoparticles
0.05 M H2SO4
11.6 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.65 V
32.0, −0.6 V
12

221



CoP nanocage
1.0 M KOH
10.78, 0 V
7.36, 0 V
—

222



Metal-free catalysts
S-CNS nanospheres
0.1 M Na2SO4
19.07, −0.7 V
7.47, −0.7 V
24

223



NPC
0.05 M H2SO4
11.76 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.9 V
1.42, −0.9 V
—

117



BCN nanotubes
0.1 M HCl
7.75, −0.3 V
13.79, −0.3 V
4

121



BP nanoparticles
0.1 M HCl
26.42, −0.6 V
12.7, −0.6 V
2

224



N-carbon
0.1 M KOH
3.4 × 10−6 mol h−1 cm−2, −0.3 V
10.2, −0.3 V
18

225





Table 4 Recent 2D NRR electrocatalysts




Category
Electrocatalyst
Electrolyte

R
NH3 (µg h−1 mg−1)
FE (%)
Stability (h)
Ref.


Potential vs. RHE
Potential vs. RHE




Noble metal-based catalysts
Au
0.1 M HCl
25.57, −0.2 V
6.05, −0.2 V
20

226



Ag
0.1 M HCl
2.8, −0.6 V
4.8, −0.6 V
24

227



Rh
0.1 M KOH
23.88, −0.2 V
0.217, −0.2 V
30

144



Non-noble metal-based catalysts
Defective Bi
0.2 M Na2SO4
5.453, −0.6 V
11.68, −0.6 V
24

139



2D mosaic Bi
0.1 M Na2SO4
13.23, −0.8 V
10.46, −0.8 V
25

145



a-MoO3−x
0.1 M KOH
35.83, −0.4 V
12.01, −0.2 V
16

228



MoO3
0.1 M HCl
29.43, −0.5 V
1.9, −0.3 V
10

229



OVs-MoO2
0.1 M HCl
12.20, −0.15 V
8.2, −0.15 V
12

230



R-WO3
0.1 M HCl
17.28, −0.3 V
7.0, −0.3 V
24

231



La2Ti2O7
0.1 M HCl
25.15, −0.55 V
4.55, −0.55 V
24

142



Y2O3
0.1 M Na2SO4
1.06 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.9 V
2.53, −0.9 V
20

232



F-SnO2/CC
0.1 M Na2SO4
19.3, −0.45 V
8.6, −0.45 V
10

233



TiO2/Ti
0.1 M Na2SO4
9.16 × 10−11 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.7 V
2.5, −0.7 V
24

141



NiO
0.1 M Na2SO4
29.1, −0.5 V
10.8, −0.5 V
15

234



MoS2 flowers
0.1 M Na2SO4
29.28, −0.4 V
8.34, −0.4 V
20

19



MoS2 array
0.1 M Na2SO4
4.9, −0.5 V
1.17, −0.5 V
26

20



S-Rich MoS2
0.1 M Li2SO4
43.4, −0.2 V
9.81, −0.2 V
12

140



Fe3S4
0.1 M HCl
75.4, −0.4 V
6.45, −0.4 V
2

235



Sn/SnS2
0.1 M NaOH
23.8, −0.8 V
6.5, −0.7 V
25

236



Fe–ReS2
0.1 M Na2SO4
80.4, −0.2 V
12.3, −0.2 V
2

237



Bi2Te3
0.1 M KOH
3.9 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.4 V
7.9, −0.4 V
10

138



Fe–Ni2P
0.1 M HCl
88.51, −0.3 V
7.92, −0.3 V
20

126



MoN
0.1 M HCl
3.01 × 10−10 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.3 V
1.15, −0.3 V
27

238



VN
0.1 M HCl
8.40 × 10−11 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.5 V
2.25, −0.5 V
8

143



Metal-free catalysts
B-Graphene
0.05 M H2SO4
9.8 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.5 V
10.8, −0.5 V
10

67



S-Graphene
0.1 M HCl
27.3, −0.6 V
11.5, −0.5 V
24

118



Fluorographene
0.1 M Na2SO4
9.3, −0.7 V
4.2, −0.7 V
28

239



N-Carbon
0.1 M KOH
15.7, −0.2 V
1.45, −0.2 V
12

240



O-Carbon
0.1 M HCl
18.03, −0.55 V
10.3, −0.45 V
26

241



Hexagonal BN
0.1 M HCl
22.4, −0.75 V
4.7, −0.75 V
24

242



C-BN
0.1 M HCl
36.7, −0.55 V
6.51, −0.55 V
14

243



Crystalline B4C
0.1 M HCl
26.57, −0.75 V
15.95, −0.75 V
30

244



Black P
0.01 M HCl
31.37, −0.7 V
5.07, −0.6 V
10

245



2D boron
0.1 M Na2SO4
13.22, −0.8 V
4.04, −0.8 V
24

246



2D β-boron
0.1 M HCl
3.12, −0.14 V
4.84, −0.14 V
10

247





6.1. Advantages of 2D materials for NRR
2D nanomaterials feature large lateral dimensions, while in the thickness direction only one or a few atomic layers (<5 nm), where electrons can only move freely in two dimensions.248 These ultrathin 2D materials with atomic thickness, possessing an ordered layered atomic structure and ultrathin atomic thickness, manifest specific and controllable physicochemical, electronic, and surface properties. In brief, the complete electrochemical N2-to-NH3 process is divided into three parts. (1) Anode-electrolyte interface: H+ migration; (2) in-electrolyte: H+ migration; (3) catalytic sites: H+–N2 combination, upon e− uptake to release NH3.83 These steps need to be sensibly considered and promoted by the design and optimization of electrocatalysts to achieve excellent electrocatalytic high NH3 yield. To be more specific, 2D electrocatalysts benefiting from their inherent chemical properties,249–251 enjoy the following advantages: (1) the ultrahigh specific surface area encourages N2 adsorption; (2) rich defect sites create sufficient surface-active sites for N2 activation/reduction; (3) defect-, surface-, and heteroatom doping precisely regulates the electronic structures; (4) Atomically thick 2D model is ideal to explore the active sites-catalytic activity relationship. Accordingly, all merits endow 2D electrocatalysts, compared with their bulk counterparts, great possibility for N2 adsorption/activation/reduction, and the atomic level.
6.2. Synthetic methods
Using simple and reliable methods to prepare 2D thin materials with specific composition, size, thickness, crystallinity, crystal phase, defects, and surface properties is of great significance for exploring their properties and applications. The current preparation methods are mainly divided into top-down and bottom-up methods. The premise of the top-down method is that the bulk material must have a layered structure (Fig. 11a and b), while the bottom-up method relies on the chemical reaction of the precursor under specific reaction conditions (Fig. 11c and d). We will briefly introduce these two preparation methods.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis strategies of 2D NSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 

6.2.1. Top-down methods. 
Micromechanical cleavage. 
Micromechanical peeling refers to the use of Scotch tape to weaken the interlayer van der Waals force of layered bulk crystals, without destroying the covalent bonds in the plane of each layer. 2D material with a monolayer or few layers can be achieved via repeated cleavage.253 Geim et al. firstly adopted this method in 2004 to successfully exfoliate a single layer of graphene from the graphite surface.195 The currently optimized micromechanical cleavage method has been applied to other bulk materials. The lateral size of the obtained 2D material can reach several to tens of microns. Because no chemical substances and chemical reactions are introduced during the micromechanical cleavage, the surface of the obtained 2D material is very clean, and high crystal quality can be guaranteed. Since this method is manual peeling, it has disadvantages, such as low yield, low production efficiency, and uncontrollable size, shape, and thickness of the 2D materials.
Mechanical force-assisted liquid exfoliation. 
Mechanical force-assisted liquid exfoliation refers to the application of acoustic waves and shear forces to bulk materials in the liquid phase (Fig. 11a). The mechanical force weakens the van der Waals force between the layers to obtain 2D NSs. The choice of solvent is very important. Generally, a specific solvent (such as N-methylpyrrolidone, N,N-dimethylformamide, etc.) is used to prevent the stripped NSs from re-stacking and agglomeration. The well-matched tension between solvent and the crystal surface can effectively reduce the peeling energy, and improve the peeling efficiency. The sonication-assisted liquid exfoliation is to disperse the bulk material in a solvent under continuous sonication treatment. Because the generated bubbles will be accompanied by micro jets and vibration waves during the bursting process, concentrated tensile stress is created between the bulk material layers to assist the peeling. This method is simple and easy to implement, and has low cost, but has the disadvantages of low stripping efficiency, small NS size, and easy introduction of defects and impurities. The shear-assisted liquid exfoliation uses the shear force generated by the rotor-stator agitator to perform peeling. The shear-assisted liquid exfoliation has high peeling efficiency and is a potential peeling method. It has been used in the commercial production of graphene.
Ion exchange-assisted liquid exfoliation. 
The ion exchange-assisted liquid exfoliation uses organic or inorganic ions with a larger radius to place the ions with a smaller radius that originally existed between the layers of the bulk material to increase the layer spacing to facilitate subsequent mechanical force to assist the peeling. It is mainly divided into cation exchange liquid exfoliation and anion exchange liquid exfoliation. This method has the potential for efficient and mass production of specific 2D materials, but due to chemical reactions, the product composition may be biased.
Ion intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation. 
The ion intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation is to intercalate cations with a small radius (such as Li+) into the bulk material forming an interlayer compound. The insertion of ions reduces the van der Waals force between the layers to facilitate subsequent mechanical force-assisted peeling (Fig. 11b). According to the different methods of ion intercalation, it can be divided into chemical intercalation and electrochemical intercalation. The advantage of the ion intercalation-assisted liquid exfoliation is high yield, but the disadvantage is that the degree of ion insertion in the chemical intercalation is difficult to control, and the electrochemical intercalation process is complicated and easy to introduce impurities.


6.2.2. Bottom-up methods. 
The liquid exfoliation method only applies to the bulk materials with a layered structure, which limits its application for non-layered structure materials. Bottom-up approaches utilize the chemical reaction of the precursor in the liquid phase to synthesize the target 2D materials with a non-layered structure.
Hydro/solvothermal synthesis. 
Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are technologies that seal the reactants in a sealed vessel and use chemical reactions of substances in solution to synthesize the 2D materials at a high temperature and pressure. The main feature of this method is the simple operation, very low cost, and can synthesize nanocrystals with special morphology. For example, Xie et al. prepared defect-rich MoS2 NSs with thiourea via this method.254
2D-Oriented attachment. 
2D-Oriented attachment refers to that adjacent nanocrystals grow into a single-layer nanomaterial by sharing the crystal plane to reduce, and even remove the high facet energy and interface energy,255–257 and a fine morphology can be obtained. It is an effective method for preparing non-layered two-dimensional materials. For instance, Schliehe et al. adopted this method to effectively prepare PbS NSs.258
2D-Templated synthesis. 
The 2D-templated synthesis uses pre-prepared nanomaterials or bulk substrates as templates to guide the growth of 2D materials with a high degree of anisotropy (Fig. 11d).259,260 In 2016, Xiao et al. used water-soluble salt crystals as growth templates to synthesize several TM oxides, such as MoO3, WO3, MoO2, and MnO.261

6.3. Characterization for 2D materials
The obtaining of high-quality 2D materials is indispensable to its effective characterization techniques in terms of optical microscopy, scanning probe microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy. Optical microscopy (OM) can quickly provide 2D materials the position, outline, and thickness.262–264 The scanning probe microscope (SPM) is a powerful tool for studying the surface and electronic properties (defects, thickness, and band structure) of 2D materials at high resolution.265 Through different interactions and careful analysis, the surface morphology, electronic shielding, and electronic energy bands of ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials can be studied. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a widely used method to characterize the morphology (size, shape), topological structure, and detailed surface structure of 2D solid materials.266 The TEM is another dominant tool to characterize the size, crystallinity, phase structure, exposed crystal planes, and growth direction of thin 2D materials.267 Raman spectroscopy is a fast and non-destructive way to provide material structure, number of layers, and electronic information with a high spatial resolution.268
6.4. Noble metal-based electrocatalysts
Noble metals serving as promising electrocatalysts have been widely used for HER, OER, and ORR, owing to their good conductivity, sufficient uncoordinated atoms, and right reactants adsorption.83,269,270 To date, noble metal-based electrocatalysts, such as Rh NSs and Au flowers, have been widely used in the electrocatalytic NRR.144,226,271
Wang et al. successfully synthesized flower-like Au microstructures (Fig. 12a) with a dramatically enhanced NRR activity, exhibiting an RNH3 of 25.57 µg h−1 mg−1 with an FE of 6.05% at 0.2 V vs. RHE (Fig. 12b), outperforming Au sphere counterparts (Fig. 12c) thanks to larger ECSA.226 Also, Au flowers achieved 100% selectivity (no N2H4 production), and good stability towards electrochemical NH3 production. The excellent N2 electroreduction to NH3 originates from the highly dendritic structures of staggered nanoplates, affording rich active sites in electrochemical NH3 synthesis. However, the authors experimentally used capping ligands, which might remain on the catalysts’ surface, consequently obstructing active sites for electrocatalytic NRR reaction.271 Hence, it is highly desirable to rationally design 2D noble metals absent from agent coatings to achieve preferred electrocatalytic NRR properties. Given this, Liu et al. designed ultrathin Rh NNs with clean surface electrocatalytic NRR.144 The excellent catalytic activity was highly correlated to their typically ultrathin 2D NS structure (∼1 nm) with a large surface area. However, the FE of NRR is quite low (0.22%) because of the competitive HER process dominating active sites. Not only Au and Rh have a good electrocatalytic NRR performance, but other noble metals also exhibit superior NRR activity performance. Sun's group developed an Ag NS/CP acting for NRR at mild conditions.227 Such an Ag NS/CP catalyst achieves an RNH3 of 4.62 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 at −0.60 V vs. RHE with a high FE of 4.8% in a 0.1 M HCl electrolyte (Fig. 12d), with high selectivity, stability, and durability (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and (b) average RNH3 and FEs of the Au flowers. (c) Average RNH3 and FEs for Au flowers and Au spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) RNH3 and FEs of Ag NS/CP. (e) Cycling stability of Ag NS/CP. (f) Stability evaluation of Ag NS/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
While these noble metal materials show excellent electrocatalytic NRR activity, the low abundance, and high cost severely hinder their widespread applications. In future research, the amount of noble metals should be minimized to save costs, as well as to optimize the electrocatalytic performance. It is a feasible way to combine noble metals with other low-cost non-metal materials to reduce the usage of noble metals.161,162,169,178,272,273 In addition, considering the competitive reaction of HER, reducing NRR selectivity, it is recommended to use organic solvents as electrolyte solutions. Meanwhile, the electrocatalytic performance of N2 fixation depends highly on the pH value of electrolytes. The pH value in electrocatalytic NRR systems can be adjusted by introducing acidic, neutral, or alkaline electrolytes, such as dilute H2SO4, HCl, LiClO4, Na2SO4, and KOH aqueous solutions, etc. In acidic solution, HER develops better than the NRR, leading to low N2 conversion rate to NH3 product, while HER in alkaline electrolytes is largely limited, because of low proton concentration. Considering the inefficient N2 mass transport plus undesired HER in purely aqueous electrolytes, researchers have attempted to increase the solubility of N2, and meanwhile to suppress the competing HER, to preferential production of NH3 in some organic solvents, or organic solvent/water mixtures to increase NRR efficiency. By adopting an aprotic fluorinated ionic liquid having superior N2 solubility to water (17 vs. 0.66 mmol L−1), Zhou et al. achieved an impressive FE of 60% in the electrochemical NRR process.28 Tsuneto et al. reported, in tetrahydrofuran-based electrolytes, the NRR activity of Ti, Mo, Co, Ni, Fe, Ag, and Cu catalysts obtained higher FE and RNH3 of 58% and 1 × 10−9 mol s−1 cm−2, respectively.51 Kim et al. used porous Ni electrocatalysts in an electrolyte containing isopropanol and water, achieving an FE and RNH3 of 1.0% and 1.54 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2, respectively.274 Because of easy isopropanol reduction at the cathode, the FE and RNH3 increased to 17.2% and 3.58 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2, when the electrolyte was replaced with LiCl-containing ethylenediamine.71 For the same catalyst, the FE and RNH3 in an organic electrolyte are higher than those in an aqueous electrolyte. Therefore, using organic solvents as the electrolyte can effectively enhance the capture of N2 and inhibit the HER.
6.5. Non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts
Different from noble metals, non-noble metals (particularly TMs) are of great interest for NRR in terms of their relatively low price, high abundance, and good catalytic activity. To date, an array of transition metal-based electrocatalysts, such as transition metal oxides, chalcogenides, nitrides, carbides, phosphides, and their composites, are used for N2 electrocatalysis.

6.5.1. Transition metal-based electrocatalysts. 
2D semimetal bismuth (Bi) is an encouraging electrocatalyst for electrochemical NRR, because of its poor binding with H adatoms,275,276 which can minimalize side effects of HER, and increase the electrocatalytic NRR selectivity for NH3 synthesis. Unfortunately, the stable valence-electron structure of Bi is unfavourable to adsorb and activate N2. Fortunately, defects engineering of Bi electrocatalysts has also been confirmed useful for the enhancement of NRR activities. For example, Li et al. successfully fabricated 2D mosaic Bi NS via an in situ electrochemical reduction manner.145 The Bi NS exhibited a favourable average RNH3 of 13.23 µg mg−1 h−1, with an FE as high as 10.46% at −0.8 V vs. RHE in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The elevated electrocatalytic NRR activity might originate from the ultrathin feature of Bi NSs, exposing sufficient edge-exposed defective sites, and high delocalization of p-orbital electrons. In addition, the semiconducting nature of Bi NSs, limiting surface electron availability, can efficiently boost the FE. Wang et al. reported defect-rich Bi(110) nanoplates with plasma bombarding on Bi2O3 nanoplates (Fig. 13a).139 The TEM image shows that Bi(110) nanoplates have a partly porous structure (Fig. 13b). The nanoporosity can contribute to highly efficient electrocatalytic N2 reduction.277 The surface of Bi catalyst is rough with an ultrathin nature, confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements (Fig. 13c). These defect-rich Bi(110) nanoplates showed high FE and RNH3 (Fig. 13d). DFT calculations revealed that defective Bi(110) facet energetically favourable for N2H* species formation via adsorbing and activating N2 (Fig. 13e). The lower Ea of defective Bi(110) to Bi(110) facets is also good for NRR performance (Fig. 13f).
 Fig. 13  (a) Defect-rich Bi nanoplates for NRR. (b) TEM and (c) AFM images of defect-rich Bi nanoplates. (d) RNH3, (e) free-energy diagrams, and (f) activation energy for Bi(110) and defect-rich Bi(110) facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


6.5.2. Transition metal oxide-based electrocatalysts. 
The 2D ultrathin nature of transition metal oxides (TMOs) are competent in exposing plenty of unsaturated coordinative surface atoms as active canters and are capable of improving the electronic conductivity. In light of these benefits, TMOs have attracted much attention as potential NRR electrocatalysts, and the great success of TMOs in N2 fixation has been achieved.141,216,219,234,278–280 Motivated by FeMo protein of nitrogenase for biological nitrogen fixation, Mo-based electrocatalysts are drawing wide attention and have been intensively investigated. For example, Han et al. reported MoO3 NSs acting as efficient catalysts for highly selective electrochemical NRR with good stability, achieving an RNH3 of 29.43 µg h−1 mg−1 with a FE of 1.9% and in a 0.1 M HCl electrolyte (Fig. 14a).229 The superior electrocatalytic NRR performance, revealed by DFT calculations, could be attributed to the active outermost Mo sites for effectively adsorbing N2. The experiment results demonstrated that the electrocatalytic NRR performance of amorphous catalytic materials is usually superior to that of their crystalline counterparts. For instance, Liu et al. experimentally confirmed that amorphous 2D MoO3−x monolayers (a-MoO3−x) exhibited considerably higher NRR activity.228 A RNH3 reaches 35.83 µg h−1 mg−1 at 0.40 V with an FE of 12.01% at 0.20 V vs. RHE (Fig. 14b). DFT calculations reveal that the high electrochemical performance in NH3 yield originates from the strong Anderson localization and electron confinement dimensionally. Such Anderson tail states can resonate efficiently with the states of intermediate HNNH, playing an important role in the rate-limiting step of NRR (Fig. 14c). Zhang et al. adopted a modified chemical vapor deposition process introducing O-vacancies on the surface of atomically-thick MoO2 NSs (OVs-MoO2 NSs).230 The as-prepared electrocatalyst achieved an RNH3 and FE of ∼12.20 µg h−1 mg−1, and a FE of 8.2% at −0.15 V, respectively (Fig. 14e). N2 adsorption isotherms coupled with DOS calculation revealed that the presence of OVs smoothed N2 adsorption, favoring the electron transfer during the catalysis process. More importantly, DFT calculation unveiled that the right confinement of OVs in MoO2 layers was beneficial for the proton transfer step via selective stabilization of *N2H and destabilizing *N2H2via a distal/alternating hybrid path, thereby lowering the Ea barrier (Fig. 14f).
 Fig. 14  (a) RNH3 and FEs of MoO3 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) RNH3 and FEs of a-MoO3−x NSs. (c) NRR free energy profile of a-MoO3−x from first-principles calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) RNH3 and FEs of R-WO3 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) RNH3 and FEs of OVs-MoO2 NSs. (f) Free energy diagram for different NRR pathways on OVs-MoO2 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) RNH3 and FEs of La2Ti2O7 NSs/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) RNH3 and FEs of F-SnO2/CC. (i) Illustration of F-SnO2/CC for NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) RNH3 and (k) FEs of TiO2/Ti for NRR. (l) Illustration of TiO2/Ti for NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
As same group family elements as Mo, W-based oxide, inspired by Mo SAs-N-doped carbon for NRR,281 has been considered as a promising candidate in electrochemical NRR fields. Sun's group experimentally demonstrated that O-vacancies rich WO3 NSs (R-WO3 NSs) display significantly better N2 electroreduction.231 The obtained electrocatalysts achieve a large NH3 yield and a high FE in a 0.1 M HCl electrolyte (Fig. 14d), with good stability, much superior to the O-vacancies deficient WO3 NSs. The NRR performance enhancement could be attributed to the introduction of active O-vacancies sites in R-WO3 NSs that could affect the electronic structure of WO3 NSs, making better the N2 adsorption/activation. Unlike the above-mentioned 2D metal oxide NSs; however, 2D perovskites in the form of NS, have also been applied for the electrochemical NH3 synthesis. Yu et al. reported that a perovskite La2Ti2O7 NSs/CP electrocatalysts realize a large RNH3 and a FE of 25.15 µg h−1 mg−1, and 4.55%, respectively in 0.1 M HCl (Fig. 14g).142 This work opens up a new possibility of exploring perovskite-based catalysts towards electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 conversion.
Given the corrosion problems in acidic or in alkaline electrolytes, the process of ambient electrocatalytic NRR to NH3 at neutral pH is highly desired and is still of immense importance.282 2D Y2O3 NS, firstly reported by Li et al. could achieve a large NH3 yield, and a high FE, as well as superb stability and durability.232 DFT calculations reveal that the addition of the first H atom (potential-determining step), promotes the following hydrogenation steps, efficiently releasing NH3 molecules. Normally, the electrocatalytic NRR performance largely relies on the electronic structure of the electrocatalyst, as NRR is mainly related to the PCET between catalysts and N2.83 The doping approach, thus, serves as an effective strategy. Chu's group experimentally and theoretically confirmed carbon cloth-supported fluorine-doped mesoporous SnO2 NSs (F-SnO2/CC) to be effective and durable NRR catalysts (Fig. 14i).233 The catalysts showed a large RNH3, and a high FE, as well as robust durability (Fig. 14h). The excellent NRR performance of F-SnO2/CC was intimately connected with the synergetic structure advantages of the sheet-like mesoporous structure and F-doping. Specifically, DFT results unveiled that F-doping could improve the conductivity, and increase the positive charge density on active Sn sites, resulting in lower barrier energetics, and better NRR activity. Moreover, the catalysts with nanoarray morphology are further capable of exposing rich active sites, allowing easier electrolyte diffusion.283,284 For example, Zhang et al. found that the TiO2 NSs array on the Ti plate (Fig. 14l) shows electrochemical NRR activity at ambient conditions.141 Such electrocatalyst attains a high RNH3 and FE (Fig. 14i and k). In situ OVs in such array catalysts enhance N2 adsorption/activation, which leads to good electrochemical NRR activity.


6.5.3. Transition metal dichalcogenide-based electrocatalysts. 
Mo and S elements as key components in biological nitrogen fixation have triggered much attention to the development of Mo-based electrocatalysts for the NRR. Though MoS2 NS usually benefits from reducing water over N2, its edges could be active for electrocatalytic NRR revealed by DFT calculations. Zhang et al. confirmed experimentally, early in 2018, that MoS2 NSs show NRR activity with good RNH3 and FE in acidic media.20 DFT calculations indicate that the Mo-edge positive charge could promote N2 molecules polarization/activation for NRR. Also, Li et al. reported MoS2 nanoflowers with sufficient defects, greatly enhancing electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3 conversion with excellent selectivity and strong electrochemical stability.19 At present, most works on electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation are centered on the design and selection of electrocatalysts, aiming to improve the ability of the catalyst to activate nitrogen, but well inhibiting the activity of hydrogen production. As we all know, in addition to the catalyst, the electrolyte also plays an important role in affecting the electrocatalytic NRR. Therefore, Liu et al. thought of using the electrolyte-catalyst interaction to suppress HER of the catalyst while improving its catalytic in NRR.140
Iron-group (Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) electrocatalysts, as one group of the cheapest and most abundant TMs, display great potential as an ideal alternative for traditional noble-metal catalysts.285 Zhao et al. adopted a one-step solvothermal method to prepare a highly crumpled but well-defined porous Fe3S4 NSs from deep eutectic solvents (Fig. 15a), showing a high RNH3 of 75.4 µg h−1 mg−1 with FE of 6.45%, and superb repeatability (Fig. 15b and c).235 DFT calculations reveal that Fe3S4 NSs benefit N2 adsorption, promoting N2 electrocatalysis. Recently, a series of amorphous flower-like Sn/crystalline SnS2 (Sn/SnS2) NSs consisting of numerous NSs (Fig. 15d), was reported via in situ electrochemical reduction approach, as an efficient NRR catalyst.236 The optimized Sn/SnS2 catalyst accomplishes a high RNH3 and FE of 23.8 µg h−1 mg−1 at 0.8 V, and 6.5% at 0.7 V vs. RHE (Fig. 15e and f). Electrochemical tests showed that the conversion of SnS2 to an amorphous Sn phase substantially enhances its catalytic activity, while the amorphous Sn serves as the active phase. The amorphous materials can induce defects, and lower the energy barrier to improve the electrocatalytic NRR activity. Liu and co-workers reported low-valent TM doping-ReS2 NSs for NH3 fabrication.237 The electrocatalyst of Fe-doped ReS2 NSs wrapped N-doped carbon nanofiber (Fig. 15g) achieves an RNH3 = 80.4 µg h−1 mg−1 (NMR and IB methods), and a FE of 12.3% (Fig. 15h), as well as good stability retaining of ∼99% (Fig. 15i). The doped low-valent transition Fe domains aids N2/H2O chemisorption, and electron transfer, which weakens the NN/O–H bonds, and lifts the d-band center to Fermi level, providing more electron energy for reducing N2/H2O. Very recently, Zhang et al. adopted hexagonal Bi2Te3 nanoplates (Fig. 15j), as highly robust electrocatalysts to efficiently reduce small molecules of N2 into targeted NH3 products.138 They can achieve excellent activity, selectivity, and durability for the NRR with 7.9% FE of NH3 (Fig. 15k and l). Theoretical calculations established that the Te vacancy formation will completely modify the surface of Bi2Te3 into the electroactive and reductive feature as the active sites for the universal reduction reactions via energetically favorable paths.
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM image, (b) RNH3 and FE, and (c) NRR cycling test of Fe3S4 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image, (e) RNH3, and (f) FE of Sn/SnS2 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) SEM image, (h) RNH3 and FENH3, and (i) NRR stability test of Fe–ReS2@N-CNF-5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (j) STEM image of the Bi2Te3 nanoplates. (k) FE and (l) RNH3 of activated and commercial Bi2Te3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 


6.5.4. Transition metal phosphide-based electrocatalysts. 
Up to now, there are only limited studies on transition metal phosphides (TMPs) for electrocatalytic NRR. Theoretically, Huang's group designed a novel group of materials, 2D pentagonal TMPs (penta-MPs, M = Ti, Zr, Hf), and investigated their electrocatalytic NRR performance. The quasi-planar structures and metallic properties of these 2D penta-MPs facilitate strong N2 adsorption on the surface.286 DFT calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations reveal that penta-MPs are dynamically, thermally, and mechanically stable for N2 reduction in the distal reaction pathway. Their findings take one step towards designing 2D TMPs for the NRR possibility and provide some central insights in guiding experiments. Experimentally, Jin et al. successfully synthesized electrochemically reduced O-doped rich P-vacancies Cu3P NSs (RO–Cu3P), as greatly catalytically active species for electrocatalytic N2-to-NH3.136 An NH3 yield of 28.12 µg h−1 cm−2, a high FE of 17.5%, and excellent stability was achieved under ambient conditions (Fig. 16a and b). Both control experiments and DFT calculations confirmed that the RO–Cu3P NSs with rich surface P vacancies are the most likely active species for NRR. Very recently, Sun's group fabricated Fe-doped porous Ni2P NSs (Fe–Ni2P NSs) (Fig. 16c),126 which exhibited excellent catalytic activity and satisfactory stability in the electrochemical NRR (Fig. 16d). DFT calculation unveils that along with the Fe doping, more active centers are generated on both Ni-, and Fe-sites. The Fe atom location on the top site of Fe–Ni2P, lowering adsorption barrier energetics, contributes to easier N2 adsorption in a distal pathway, while the adsorption energy reduction of −0.68 eV reached for Ni site after Fe atoms incorporation. All results reveal that the as Fe atoms doping truly enhanced the adsorption of N2 molecule (Fig. 16e and f).
 Fig. 16  (a) RNH3 and FEs, and (b) stability evaluation of RO–Cu3P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image, (d) RNH3 and FEs of Fe-doped Ni2P NS. (e) Free-energy diagram of intermediates on Ni2P and Fe–Ni2P NSs. (f) Intermediates structures in NRR on Fe–Ni2P NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


6.5.5. Transition metal carbide-based electrocatalysts. 
Recently, DFT investigations suggested that 2D transition metal carbides of M3C2, can be used as promising catalysts for NH3 electrosynthesis.58,287 It has been theoretically verified that V3C2 and Nb3C2 are two outstanding candidates capturing and reducing N2 because of their low Ea. The NRR activity of MXene materials was not justified experimentally until the development of an exfoliated Ti3C2 with a sheet thickness of 1.5 nm (Fig. 17a), which can catalyze N2-to-NH3 conversion.22 An RNH3 of 4.72 µg h−1 cm−2 with a FE up to 4.62% was achieved (Fig. 17b and c). Moreover, the same group explored the possibility of vertical alignment using Ti3C2Tx NSs attached to a FeOOH NSs host for the electrosynthesis of NH3. The FE of Mxene/FeOOH reached 5.78%. It was proposed that the edge Ti atoms sites and the sluggish nature of the host material (FeOOH) towards HER were responsible for the NRR performance enhancement. Currently, 2D MXenes are of great interest in electrochemical NRR.203,288 In 2018, Zhao et al. showed Ti3C2Tx (T = F, OH) NSs attain a high RNH3 and FE.168 Subsequently, Shao and co-workers conducted another computational study, which explored the feasibility of cubic Mo2C for NH3 electrosynthesis.289 Cheng et al. developed Mo2C dots supported on atomic-thick carbon NSs (Mo2C/C NSs) via a sol–gel strategy (Fig. 17d), to further confirm the NRR catalytic activity of MXenes.21 The as-synthesized Mo2C/C NSs exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity with a high RNH3 of 11.3 µgh−1mg−1, and a high FE of 7.8% (Fig. 17e and f). The vacant d orbital of Mo2C dots lowers much nitrogen adsorption energy than that of pure carbon NSs (−0.842/−0.098 eV) (Fig. 17g and h). Therefore, it is not difficult to infer that Mo2C nanodots are the main catalytic centers that promote the NRR reaction. Both the experiments and DFT calculations show that rich nitrogen adsorption active sites, coupled with typical electronic structure contribute to NN bond cleavage and hydrogenation for excellent NH3 production. In addition, the ultra-thin NS substrate can effectively enhance the conductivity and inhibit the competitive HER, thereby improving the FE, increasing the NH3 yield. Other 2D transition metal carbides including Mo2TiC2 MXene,290 and 2D cobweb-like MoC6 monolayer,60 are active for NRR.
 Fig. 17  (a) AFM image of MXene NSs. (b) FE, and (c) RNH3 of MXene/stainless steel mesh. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic of molten salt synthesis path, (e) FEs, (f) RNH3, and (g) the molecular structure of Mo2C/C NSs. (h) The nitrogen adsorption energy of Mo2C and C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


6.5.6. Transition metal nitride-based electrocatalysts. 
Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) have been theoretically predicted by comprehensive DFT investigations for catalyzing electrochemical NRR to produce NH3. TMNs, likewise noble metals with similar electronic structure,291 are believed as more active candidates towards electrocatalytic NRR.291–293 In addition, Abghoui et al. proposed a favorable Mars–van Krevelen (MvK) NRR pathway for TMN-based electrocatalysts. The first surface N atom reduction to NH3 creates N-vacancies in TMNs-based electrocatalyst. The created N-vacancies are then restored when adsorbing N2 molecules, which completes, and sustains the catalytic cycle.291 A host of DFT calculations, based on MvK mechanism, benefits the activity, and stability evaluation of a range of TMNs, under the circumstance of the probability of N-vacancy poisoning and electrocatalyst decomposition/regeneration.294 Although an array of TMNs, such as ZrN, NbN, CrN, and VN, was considered active for NRR via theoretical investigations, only limited Mo- and V-based TMNs are experimentally proved as electrocatalysts towards NRR.143,220,238,295,296 Abghoui and Skúlason, in 2017, predicted that VN can be used for NH3 electrosynthesis.294 This prediction was further verified with experimental evidence by Sun's group in 2018.143 Their work evidenced that the N2 electroreduction over VN NS array followed the MvK mechanism and achieved an RNH3 of 8.40 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 and a FE of 2.25%. Particularly, this VN NS array shows good selectivity and electrochemical stability. Similar to the VN NS, Li et al. computationally studied MoN2 NSs as NRR electrocatalysts under the DFT scheme.297 While pristine MoN2 displays potential for N2 adsorption/activation, the strong Mo-N bonding prohibits a second NH3 formation, and MvK cycle is terminated. Targeting this problem, the authors offered a Fe doping strategy, mildly weakening the Mo-N bonding to balance N2 activation, as well as NH3 generation, thereby promoting the electrocatalytic NRR.297 In 2018, Zhang et al. explored MoN NSs array on CC (MoN NSs/CC) for NH3 electrosynthesis, which delivered a high RNH3 of 3.01 × 10−10 mo1 s−1 cm−2 and a FE of 1.15% at −0.3 V vs. RHE, as well as good electrochemical stability (Fig. 18a).238 DFT calculations revealed that such catalyst experienced NRR via the MvK mechanism. The N-vacancies on TMN are regarded as perfect active sites for NRR on account of their unique vacancy properties for N2 adsorption, and poor reaction activity for HER.220,291 However, the N-vacancies on TMN would be deactivated during the NRR process, leading to poor stability.220 Given this, Jin et al. designed 2D layered W2N3 NS with stable N-vacancies (NV-W2N3) (Fig. 18b).130 In electrochemical NRR, a steady RNH3 of 11.66 µg h−1 mg−1 and FE of 11.67% at −0.2 V vs. RHE for 12 cycles (24 h) were achieved (Fig. 18c and d). DFT calculations disclose that N-vacancies create an electron-deficient location (free energy change over 2 eV), which is beneficial for N2 adsorption, and lowering NRR thermodynamic limiting potential (Fig. 18e and f).
 Fig. 18  (a) RNH3 and FEs of MoN NSs/CC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image, (c) RNH3, and (d) FE of NV-W2N3. (e) Theoretical limiting potentials of W2N3 and NV-W2N3. (f) Charge density difference induced by N-vacancy on NV-W2N3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Zhang et al. provided some insights into that N2 reduction on VN and MoN follows the MvK pathway in the NRR process.143,238 Specifically, the authors found VN and MoN electrocatalysts decomposed, and the N species in them vanished after NRR experiments in Ar, producing NH3 molecules. After NRR, the lost N species were still in VN and MoN electrocatalysts in N2. Additionally, isotope investigations displayed that only 14NH4+ formed in Ar, while both 14NH4+ and 15NH4+ were generated when 15N2 was used as the reactant. These results show that the N2 reduction over VN and MoN undertakes via an MvK mechanism. However, 2D N-containing TMNs NSs employed as NRR electrocatalysts can bring uncertainties of the nitrogen source for NH3 production because of their possibility of decomposition and regeneration. 15N2 isotopic labeling experiments or quantitative isotope measurements should be carried out to identify the true nitrogen source of the NH3 product.

6.6. Metal-free electrocatalysts
So far, an array of reported NRR electrocatalysts are cantered on metal-based 2D materials. TMs could receive N2 σ-electrons and back-donation electrons to N2 π orbitals. However, these types of catalysts have some intrinsic drawbacks that should not be overlooked in practical applications:55,131 (1) the binding capacity of most TMs to N2 is not strong enough to activate N2; (2) the d orbit electrons in TMs also lead to easy formation of metal–H bonds for HER side reaction, reducing the FE of NRR; (3) the release of TM in the course of the electrocatalytic NRR may bring about environmental problem. As a result, it is highly desirable developing green metal-free electrocatalysts with abundant valence electrons, and weak hydrogen adsorption.298 2D family of metal-free catalysts (graphene, g-C3N4, boron NS, BP, etc.) have been widely explored with its intrinsic advantages, including 2D ultrathin nature, high surface area, tailorable electronic structures, sufficient surface defects, and rich active bonding sites.299 The state-of-the-art progresses, in this section, of C-, B-, and P-based 2D metal-free nanomaterials for electroreduction of N2 to NH3 will be overviewed in brief.

6.6.1. Carbon-based electrocatalysts. 
Because of high selectivity for NH3 evolution, and energetically unfavorable H2 formation on the edge of the C site, carbon-based NRR electrocatalysts are emerging as highly efficient and robust substitutes to metal-based catalysts.300–302 Pristine 2D carbon-family catalysts (e.g. graphene, rGO, g-C3N4) exhibit less catalytic activity towards NH3 electrosynthesis, because of the intrinsically inert π electrons. Fortunately, two encouraging ways are there to modulate graphene for better NRR performance. (1) Defect creating. Rich defects will facilitate N2 adsorption/activation, endowing 2D carbon-based materials for electrocatalytic NRR. For example, rich-defects fluorographene NSs showed an RNH3 of 9.3 µg h−1 mg−1, FE of 4.2% (Fig. 19a).239 DFT calculations unveil that defects in graphene could afford active sites for effective N2 activation. (2) Heteroatom doping. Doping with non-metal heteroatoms (N, B, O, S, P, etc.) could benefit 2D carbon-family electrocatalysts towards NRR, via altering surface electronic structures, creating more defects, and modifying the adsorption abilities.106–108,131,303,304 In detail, electronegativity-different heteroatoms could be able to stimulate charge transfer in 2D carbon-based electrocatalysts, encouraging the N2 adsorption on electron-deficient location.305,306 For example, Yu et al. successfully prepared B-doped graphene for NRR.67 Song et al. prepared different carbon-based catalysts consisting of N-doped C-nanospike (CNS). The tips of sharp spikes can concentrate the electric field to promote the electrochemical N2-to-NH3 conversion. The FE reached 11.56%, and the RNH3 was 97.18 ± 7.13 µg h−1 cm−2 (Fig. 19b–d).300 Inspired by an important role played by the S element in biological NRR, Sun's group synthesized S-doped graphene on CP (S-G/CP) for NRR with an RNH3 of 27.3 µg h−1 mg−1 and a FE of 11.5% (Fig. 19e).118 DFT calculation verified that upon S introduction, adjacent carbon atoms are greatly active for NRR. Similar to the S element, O doping is also of interest in 2D carbon-family NRR electrocatalysts. Recently, Chen et al. used the amorphous oxygen doped porous carbon NS (O–C NS) for electrocatalytic NRR.307 The as-obtained O–C NS electrocatalyst achieved a high RNH3 of 20.15 µg h−1 mg−1 with a FE of 4.97% (Fig. 19f). Very recently, Wu et al. prepared P-doped graphene on CP (PG/CP), achieving a high RNH3 of 32.33 µg mg−1 h−1 and an FE of 20.82% (Fig. 19g).120 Notably, multiple dopant-doping pathways have been adopted to synergistically improve electrochemical NRR. For example, B/N co-doped 2D defective carbon NS (BN-C NS) has been reported.121 Electrochemical test results and DFT calculations revealed that B/N co-doping makes a great contribution to activate NRR as well as inhibit the unfavorable HER progression. Therefore, the BN-C NS catalyst delivered an excellent RNH3 of 7.75 µg h−1 mg−1 and an FE of 13.79% (Fig. 19h and i).
 Fig. 19  (a) RNH3 and FE of d-FG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) TEM image of CNS. (c) RNH3, and (d) FEs of CNS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2018, AAAS. (e) RNH3 and FEs for S-G/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) RNH3 and FEs of O–C NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) RNH3 and FEs of PG/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) RNH3, and (i) FEs of BN-C NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) RNH3 and FEs of S-NV-C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (k) RNH3, and (l) FEs of NVs-PCN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the 2D graphene-based materials, a typical layered g-C3N4, has stimulated tremendous interest for N2 electroreduction. The active vacancies sites on 2D g-C3N4, similar to that on graphene, play an important role in NH3 synthesis. Lv et al. introduced N-vacancies (NV) into polymeric carbon nitride (PCN).131 The incorporated N-vacancies cracked long-range periodicity in PCN, while maintained the short-range structure of s-triazine ring and aromatic C–N heterocycles. Meanwhile, N-vacancies introduction could further change the electron distribution around carbon atoms. Theoretical calculations reveal that N-vacancies benefit N2 activation. Such defective NVs-PCN presented superior electrocatalytic NRR performance, attaining a high RNH3 of 8.09 µg h−1 mg−1, and a better FE of 11.59% (Fig. 19k and l). Very recently, Chu et al. annealed NV-C3N4 in S vapor to prepare an S-NV-C3N4 electrocatalyst.308 With S doping, an increased RNH3 of 32.7 µg h−1 mg−1 and an FE of 14.1% was achieved (Fig. 19j). DFT calculations showed that S doping promoted *N2H stabilization and *NH2 destabilization. Moreover, an S-NV-C3N4 electrocatalyst contributes to a high NRR selectivity, suppressing competitive HER owing to the high energy barrier for water splitting.


6.6.2. Boron-based electrocatalysts. 
Boron carbide (B4C) NSs (Fig. 20a), also displayed superb electrocatalytic NRR performance.244 In 0.1 M HCl, the B4C NS presented a high RNH3 of 26.57 µg h−1 mg−1 with a high FE of 15.95% (Fig. 20b). In addition, this catalyst also yielded NH3 notably in neutral media. Such as, the RNH3 achieved 14.70 µg h−1 mg−1, with an FE reaching 9.24%. DFT calculations reveal that two neighboring B atoms with a bridge-on configuration are good for N2 absorption. N2 molecules will selectively bind to B atoms with an electron-deficient nature, boost NH3 generation. (Fig. 20c). Due to its electron deficiency nature, 2D B NS (BNS) with unique bonding features shows a better N2-to-NH3 reduction.246 In 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution, BNS/CP accomplishes a superior RNH3 of 13.22 µg h−1 mg−1, an FE of 4.04% with good stability (Fig. 20d). The ultrathin 2D nature offers abundant exposing active sites and enhanced conductivity for electron transfer. Fan et al. adopted a liquid exfoliation method, massively producing B NSs from bulk B.247 The exfoliated boron NSs show an RNH3 yield of 3.12 µg h−1 mg−1 and a FE of 4.84% at −0.14 V vs. RHE in a 0.1 M HCl electrolyte. DFT calculations confirmed that the reactive icosahedron borons sites in 2D NSs could strongly promote N2 adsorption, which can indeed benefit NRR. 2D h-BN NSs are also active for catalyzing NRR, owing to its narrow bandgap, defects, and high conductivity by electron tunneling.242 Recently, Zhang and Du et al. found that h-BN NS, in 0.1 M HCl solution, achieved an inspiring RNH3 of 22.4 µg h−1 mg−1, and a FE of 4.7%. DFT calculations revealed that unsaturated B at the edge site can favor N2 activation, and considerably decrease the energy barrier for NH3.
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image, (b) RNH3 and FEs, and (c) energy profiles of B4C NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) RNH3 and FEs of BNS/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) FEs, and (f) RNH3 of FL-BP NSs/CF. (g) Diagram reaction mechanism, and (h) DFT-calculated reaction pathways of FL-BP NSs/CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


6.6.3. Phosphorus-based electrocatalysts. 
2D carbon- and boron-based materials have shown great potential towards NRR. Up to now, only limited kinds of 2D phosphorus-based electrocatalysts are reported for electroreduction of N2 to NH3 formation. Notably, black phosphorus (BP) enjoys a similar valence electron structure (3s23p3) to that of nitrogen (2s22p3). Therefore, according to the principle of “like dissolves like”. Wang's group has successfully synthesized a member of the nitrogen family, well-exfoliated few-layer BP NSs on carbon fiber (FL-BP NSs/CF).245 The FL-BP NSs/CF can attain a high RNH3 of 31.37 µg h−1 mg−1 with an FE of 5.07% under ambient conditions (Fig. 20e and f). DFT calculations reveal that the zigzag and diff-zigzag edges of the FL-BP NSs serve as the center of electron and active sites, coupled with the active orbital make it possible to selectively electrocatalytic NRR through an alternating hydrogenation pathway (Fig. 20g and h).

6.7. 2D MOFs
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are hot spots in the field of new materials. It is a type of organic–inorganic hybrid material, which is constructed from organic linkers and inorganic metal units. Generally, MOFs have variable topological structures and physical and chemical properties. Because of their high function tunability, porosity, and crystallinity, MOFs are of great interest in various application fields, such as separation, storage, delivery, and catalysis.309–315
The downsizing of MOFs into 2D NSs possesses a host of merits, in terms of ultrathin thickness nature,310,316–318 electrical conductivity, and hierarchical pores. The combination of these factors can give rise to highly exposed active sites, dramatically decreased electron transfer distance, and in principle render 2D MOFs a versatile and high-performance electrocatalyst. However, the potentials of 2D MOFs in electrocatalytic NRR have yet to be explored. Sun's group, in 2019, conducted a DFT investigation predicting that a host of 2D MOFs of TM3(HAB)2 (HAB = hexaaminobenzene) should possess NRR electrocatalytic activities.319 2D Mo3(HAB)2 MOF, among a series of newly fabricated 2D MOFs, exhibits an excellent electrocatalytic NRR performance, via a distal pathway, at room temperature, and the overpotential is very low. Very recently, Li et al. synthesized 2D ultrathin TM1–TM2-MOFs composed of two metals.320 The Co3Fe-MOF attains a FE of 25.64% with the RNH3 of 8.79 µg h−1 mg−1 in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. In 2017, this kind of 2D MOFs was experimentally made via an interfacial reaction.321 Additionally, another new family of 2D MOFs of π-conjugated metal bis(dithiolene) (MC4S4; M: Fe, Co, Ni, Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt, Os, and Ir) is predicted to be as an electrocatalyst for conversion of N2 into NH3.322 In prediction, 2D OsC4S4 MOF achieves a low NRR overpotential of 0.31 V. Owing to their diverse ligands, and metal nodes, 2D MOFs properties could be tuned to be good candidates for NRR electrocatalysis. In future work, we can employ high-throughput computation to screen MOF structures with high NRR activity. It is also of great importance to make the most of the intrinsic advantages and properties of 2D MOFs for the illumination of catalytic mechanisms and utilize the findings for the subsequent design/optimization of the catalysts’ structure.
6.8. 2D hybrid electrocatalysts
2D material itself is not merely participating NRR, but serving as a well-designed matrix to enhance catalytic performance of the attached single atoms (SAs, see Section 5.4)323 and nanoparticles (NPs).
A host of 2D graphene-, rGO-, MoS2-, and MXene-based substrates have been developed. For instance, when growing Au NPs on N-doped graphitic carbon membrane (NCM), the established functional NCM-Au NP hybrids showed a noticeably better activity with high RNH3 and FE, superior to pristine NCM without Au NPs (0.36/0.08 g m−2 h−1, 22/5.2%) (Fig. 21a and b).272 The outstanding performance of NCM-Au NP hybrids could be ascribed to the high-surface-area porous construction of 2D NCM, and the uniform distribution and high Au NPs embedding, which facilitated mass diffusion, and provided abundant active sites. Another example, Xu et al. adopted an ethanol-thermal treatment to grow in situ O-vacancy-rich TiO2 NPs on Ti3C2Tx NSs (TiO2/Ti3C2Tx).135 The obtained TiO2/Ti3C2Tx exhibited an RNH3 of 32.17 µg h−1 mg−1, a remarkable FE of 16.07%, and excellent stability in 0.1 M HCl (Fig. 21c and d). The excellent NRR performance of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx lies in two factors. First, active O-vacancy sites enable NH3 generation. Second, Ti3C2Tx NSs conductive support could facilitate the electron transfer, and avoid TiO2 NPs self-agglomeration. In return, the TiO2 NPs can increase the specific surface area of Ti3C2Tx supports. Chen et al. prepared a class of strong-coupled CoSx/NS-G hybrids by growing CoSx NPs on N- and S-doped rGO (NS-G) (Fig. 21e) via an interfacial engineering strategy for electrochemical NH3 production.324 The hybrids display superior NRR activity with a high FE of 25.9%, a high RNH3 of 25.0 µg h−1 mg−1 at −0.2 V vs. RHE under ambient conditions (Fig. 21f). The electrocatalytic NRR performance of recent 2D hybrids is summarized in Table 5.
 Fig. 21  (a) FEs, and (b) RNH3 of NCM-Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. RNH3 and FEs of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx (c) at −0.55 V tested ten times, and (d) at different potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) TEM and HRTEM images, (f) RNH3 and FEs of CoS2/NS-G. Reproduced with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2019, National Academy of Science. 
Table 5 Summary of representative 2D hybrid electrocatalysts for NRR




Electrocatalysts
Reaction conditions
Determination methoda

R
NH3 (µg mg−1 h−1)
Faradaic efficiency (%)
Stability
Ref.


Potential vs. RHE





a IB: indophenol blue method.





a-Au/CeOx-RGO
H-Cell, 0.1 M KOH
Salicylate method
8.3, −0.2 V
10.1
2 h

161



Au1/g-C3N4
H-Cell, 0.005 M H2SO4
IB
1305, −0.1 V
11.1, −0.1 V
7000 s

178



NCM-AuNPs
H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl
IB
0.36 g m−2 h−1, −0.1 V
22, −0.2 V
4 d

272



Ru/rGO
H-Cell, 0.05 M H2SO4
IB
50, −0.1 V
11, −0.1 V
12 h

162



Ru SAs/g-C3N4
H-Cell, 0.5 M NaOH
Nessler's reagent
23.0, 0.05 V
8.3, 0.05 V
12 h

273



Ru/2H-MoS2
H-Cell, 0.01 M HCl
IB
1.14 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.15 V
17.6, −0.15 V
60 min

169



MoS2/CC NSs
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
8.08 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.5 V
1.17
26 h

20



MoS2/rGO
H-Cell, 0.1 M LiClO4
IB
24.82, −0.45 V
4.58, −0.45 V
26 h

166



Mo SAs/graphdiyne
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4 or 0.1 M HCl
IB
113.4–145.4, −1.2 V vs. SCE
15.2–21.0, −1.2 V vs. SCE
100 h

179



CoS2/NS-G hybrid
H-Cell, 0.05 M H2SO4
IB
25, −0.4 V
25.9, −0.05 V
10 h

324



Mo2C/C
PEM-Cell, 0.5 M Li2SO4
Nessler's reagent
11.3, −0.2 V
7.8
2 h

21



TiO2/Ti3C2Tx
H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl
IB
32.17, −0.55 V
16.07
50 h

135



TiO2/Ti3C2Tx
H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl
IB
26.32, −0.6 V
8.42, −0.6 V
24 h

167



TiO2/rGO
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
15.13, −0.9 V
3.3, −0.9 V
24 h

163



NiO dots/graphene
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
18.6, −0.7 V
7.8, −0.7 V
6 h

164



Mn3O4@rGO
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
17.4, −0.85 V
3.52
24 h

165



BP QDs/MnO2
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
25.3, −0.5 V
6.7, −0.5 V
12 h

325



CuO/graphene
H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4
IB
1.8 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.75 V
3.9, −0.75
12 h

326



Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO
H-Cell, 0.1 M NaOH
IB
2.80, −0.2 V
4.5, −0.2 V
7000 s

327



Fe2O3 NPs/rGO
H-Cell, 0.5 M LiClO4
IB
2.13, −0.5 V
5.89, −0.4 V
24 h

328





7. Conclusions and outlook
The efficient electrochemical N2-to-NH3 conversion utilizing renewable electric energy is of great importance for a green substitute to the traditional Haber–Bosch process, thereby increasing accessibility, and an underpinning for the sustainable energy and environmental future to store renewable energy into chemical form, as well. Stimulated by great strides in the synthesis, and properties related to 2D materials, a series of big advances have been achieved, from fundamental study and practical electrocatalytic NRR applications.
In this Review, the seminal advancement of state-of-the-art 2D electrocatalysts for electroreduction of N2 to NH3 are summarized. Following the Introduction, Section 2 and 3 summarize the NRR fundamentals, electrochemical NRR measurement, and NH3 detection (Scheme 2). To be specific, Section 2 elaborates the fundamental principles and the key metrics being pursued in NRR to provide readers with a holistic understanding, including thermodynamics, kinetics, chemisorption and activation, reaction pathways, scaling relations, and activity descriptors. Section 3 aims at providing electrochemical cell configurations and measurements in the NRR process. Section 4 reviews in more detail four commonly used NH3 detection methods in terms of Nessler's reagent method, IB method, salicylate method, and ion chromatography, ion chromatography, ammonia gas-sensing electrode and ammonium ion-selective electrode, fluorometric method, conductivity method, titrimetric method, enzymatic method, and 15N2 reduction experiments and 1H NMR measurement (Scheme 2). In Section 5, we summarize recent exciting design protocols of catalysts with heteroatom doping, defect chemistry, hybrid engineering, 2DM@SAs, and theoretical calculations, and try to understand how the heteroatom doping, defects, and hybrid structures affect the electrocatalytic NRR performance. In Section 6, synthetic methods of 2D electrocatalysts, including top-down methods (micromechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation) and bottom-up methods (hydro/solvothermal synthesis, 2D-oriented attachment, 2D-templated synthesis) were thoroughly discussed. In addition, the related characterization methods of such unique 2D materials, such as optical spectroscopy, SPM, TEM, and SEM were emphasized (Scheme 2). Next, we proceed to discuss recent experimental advances of such unique 2D NRR electrocatalysts for NRR, ranging from noble metal-based electrocatalysts, non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts, metal-free electrocatalysts, 2D MOFs to 2D hybrid electrocatalysts. Finally, based on the latest discovery of 2D materials towards NRR, and the understanding of the relationship between 2D features and NRR performance, we provide the perspectives to accurately design high-performance 2D NRR electrocatalyst (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Current progresses and future challenges of 2D electrocatalysts for the NRR (P: progresses; C: challenges). 
Based on the understanding of seminal progresses of 2D electrocatalysts for N2-to-NH3 conversion, our comments on future directions and challenges in the field NRR are provided in Scheme 2. First, from the sustainable and eco-friendly development point of view, green chemistry is highly desired. Future electrochemical NRR systems should satisfy the overall requirement of high NH3 yield, as well as high FE. To present, it is still difficult to achieve a momentous RNH3 increase, particularly for electrocatalytic NRR under mild conditions. Moreover, owing to the competing HER, the FE of the N2 electroreduction is still not satisfactory. Effective design approaches of electrocatalyst must thus be explored to optimize N2 adsorption and H+-adding thermodynamics, while successfully suppressing HER in the overall NRR process, supporting an optimized NRR to NH3. The following three points should be paid attention to when designing an electrocatalyst with higher NRR selectivity: (1) optimize the electrochemical system setup (reaction cells, electrolytes, membranes, etc.) to eliminate the influence of the diffusion process of nitrogen molecules to prevent the catalyst from being unable to fully exert its chemical effect; (2) introduce reasonably foreign atoms, active groups or vacancies, etc. to change the microstructure of the electrocatalyst to produce active sites with good NRR selectivity, and thus to improve the electrocatalytic NRR efficiency; (3) utilize theoretical simulations to predict the structure-performance relationship between the electrocatalyst and NRR electroreduction, and to rationally design and optimize the catalyst. In addition, qualitative and quantitative NH3 detection is relatively difficult. At present, the commonly used methods for the qualitative analysis of NH3 include NMR (isotope 15N as nitrogen source), and infrared spectroscopy. Quantitative analysis includes spectrophotometry, ion-selective electrode method, and ion chromatography. Among them, the spectrophotometer methods include Nessler colorimetry, salicylic acid-hypochlorite colorimetry, and IB colorimetry. In contrast, the IB colorimetric method and the salicylic acid-hypochlorite colorimetric method have high sensitivity, but the IB colorimetric method is unstable and the results are unreliable. The Nessler colorimetry method requires less samples, but it is time-consuming with lower sensitivity. Compared with the colorimetric method, the ammonia ion-selective electrode method and ion chromatography have the advantages of short test time, small sample amount, high sensitivity, low detection limit, and continuous monitoring.
Second, from the material synthesis point of view, a general and reproducible synthesis method should be developed to meet the industry's increasing requirement of high-yield and massive production of high-performance electrocatalysts. The ultimate goal of scientific researches is to transfer scientific discoveries and technologies to market application.
Third, the electrocatalytic N2 fixation is springing up, and the electrocatalytic performance is gradually improving. the electrocatalytic NRR mechanism and the reaction process of ultrathin 2D materials could be identified with theoretical investigations. However, theoretical calculations are of limit help to predict accurately the surface structure conversions, the element valence state, and the exposed active sites. However, at present, the electrocatalytic activity, RNH3, and FE in NRR are generally low, and researchers need to further rationally design electrocatalysts with high activity, high selectivity, and high stability as well. Future researches are needed in the following directions. (1) Standardizing the experimental operation, and eliminating the interference of environment impurities, to guarantee a reliable experimental result in NRR. (2) Continuing to explore and study the reaction mechanism. At present, there is a lack of systematic cognition and explanation of the reaction mechanism in NRR. The mechanisms proposed in most research works remain at the level of specific material systems. This limits the development of the NRR field, and to a certain extent the precise research of the material system. From the characterization point of view, advanced in situ/operando characterization techniques can be combined to accurately explore the active sites and intermediates in NRR. In situ XRD, in situ HR-TEM, in situ FT-IR, in situ XPS, and in situ Raman are of great significance to investigate the dynamic transformation of the catalyst surface, and reaction intermediates, helpful in revealing the real electrocatalytic NRR mechanism and the reaction course under the operating conditions, and thus to better understand the electrocatalytic NRR mechanism. (3) Developing a new electrocatalytic NRR material system. Combining bionics, calculations, simulations, and other strategies, we can explore a new material system suitable for electrocatalytic NRR more extensively. (4) Improving the electrocatalytic activity of the existing material system. We can adopt design strategies, such as doping, vacancy, or defect engineering, to improve the NRR reaction activity, or adopt surface and interface regulation (morphology, and size control) to increase the active sites to improve N2 adsorption. In addition, it is feasible to reduce the exposure of HER active sites, and increase the H+ adsorption energy barrier, to inhibit HER to improve the electrocatalytic NRR activity and selectivity. (5) Bettering the catalytic stability of the existing material system. On the one hand, through material design and regulation, the physical and chemical properties and stability of the catalytic materials can be improved. On the other hand, the deactivation mechanisms of the active sites during the NRR process should be explored to prolong the lifetime of active sites of electrocatalytic materials.
Fourth, with the extensive development and application of nanomaterials, like Ag NSs, it is inevitable that nanomaterials will be released into the environment.329,330 Nanomaterials are easy to interact with existing pollutants in the environment via adsorption/desorption, oxidation/reduction, etc., which in turn affects the environmental behaviour and toxic effects of pollutants. Given this, considerable efforts have to be devoted to examining the physiological effects of acute and chronic exposure to nanomaterials by scientific communities. Also, scientists need to fundamentally understand the biological interactions of nanomaterials, achieving a high degree of biocompatibility with cells, proteins, and tissues to delicately design safe nano-electrocatalysts.
Finally, from the application point of view, another critical challenge in this field lies in the development of reliable methods to stabilize these 2D electrocatalysts. Although many catalysts can obtain high selectivity under strict reduction conditions, their stability and how to effectively transfer them into electrode materials are still problems. Adding a certain support material has a greater impact on the stability of the catalyst, and attention should be paid to the selection of the support: (1) the support material should improve the dispersibility of the catalyst, and at the same time enhance the catalyst-support interaction to prevent the aggregation and the accumulation and shedding of the catalyst, thereby reducing the activity and stability of the catalyst; (2) the support or substrate should have good electrochemical stability and conductivity to ensure the stability of electron transfer, thereby improving the overall electrocatalytic NRR performance of 2D catalysts; (3) the support and the catalysts could have synergistic effects for the further FE improvement.
In short, the development of green and sustainable electrocatalysts towards the electrocatalytic NRR under ambient conditions is of positive significance. However, the catalysts currently studied and reported still have poor adsorption kinetics, strong competitive HER, deficient active sites, and poor stability. Through rational design, diversified fabrication, theoretical investigation, advanced characterizations, experimental techniques, coupled with trustworthy NH3 detection will establish the relationship between catalyst active sites and catalyst performance, and give some insights for rationally designing 2D NRR electrocatalysts. This requires joint efforts of scientific communities from all walks of life.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (22071135), the Academy of Sciences large apparatus United Fund of China (U1832187), the Nature Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2019MEM030), Taishan Scholar Project of Shandong Province (ts201511004), and the Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University (2018JC022). C. S. would like to acknowledge the financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20190965). Z. S. is grateful for the financial support from the Australian Research Council Discovery Projects (DP200103332 and DP200103315).
References
V. Rosca, M. Duca, M. T. de Groot and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2209–2244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 345, 610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Liu, Ammonia Synthesis Catalysts: Innovation and Practice, World Scientific,  2013 Search PubMed .

          C. Philibert, Renewable Energy for Industry: from Green Energy to Green Materials and Fuels, International Energy Agency,  2017 Search PubMed .
K. R. Birkeland, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1906, 2, 98–116 RSC .
S. Eyde, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1912, 4, 771–774 CAS .
P. Fauchais and J. Rakowitz, J. Phys., Colloq., 1979, 40, 289–312 CrossRef .
E. N. Eremin and A. N. Mal’tsev, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 30, 1179–1181 CAS .
B. Mutel, O. Dessaux and P. Goudmand, Rev. Phys. Appl., 1984, 19, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Rusanov, A. A. Fridman and G. V. Sholin, Sov. Phys. Usp., 1981, 24, 447–474 CrossRef .
S. L. Foster, S. I. P. Bakovic, R. D. Duda, S. Maheshwari, R. D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, M. J. Janik, J. N. Renner and L. F. Greenlee, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 490–500 CrossRef .
K. C. MacLeod and P. L. Holland, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 559–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Jia and E. A. Quadrelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 547–564 RSC .
J. Rittle and J. C. Peters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4243–4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Rodriguez, E. Bill, W. W. Brennessel and P. L. Holland, Science, 2011, 334, 780–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Anderson, J. Rittle and J. C. Peters, Nature, 2013, 501, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Sadoway, JOM, 1998, 50, 24–26 CrossRef .
X. Li, T. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wei, W. Qiu, H. Guo, X. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801357 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, L. X. Ding, G. F. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Xue and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803694 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luo, G. F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. X. Ding, G. F. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 2638–2642 CrossRef .
Y. Wan, J. Xu and R. Lv, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 69–90 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, H. Xie, L. Chang, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, X. Tong, T. Wang, Y. Luo, P. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Sun, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100011 CrossRef .
M. Li, H. Huang, J. Low, C. Gao, R. Long and Y. Xiong, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800388 CrossRef .
X. Guo, H. Du, F. Qu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3531–3543 RSC .
F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, M. Ali, M. Kar, A. N. Simonov, C. McDonnell-Worth, C. Sun, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2516–2520 RSC .
X. Chen, Y. Guo, X. Du, Y. Zeng, J. Chu, C. Gong, J. Huang, C. Fan, X. Wang and J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903172 CrossRef .
Z. Yan, M. Ji, J. Xia and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902020 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Patil and D. Y. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H. L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. M. Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360, eaar6611 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Xia, H. Wang, K. Huang, C. Qian, C. T. Maravelias and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1055–1074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, M. N. Uddin, W. Chen, S. Javaid, E. Barker, Y. Li, A. Suvorova, M. Saunders, Z. Yin and G. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, C. Priest, S. Li, P. Xu and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 33, 2000381 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Li, C. He, X. Ren, P. Zhang and H. Mi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003294 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liao, K. Xie, L. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Luo, S. Liang, F. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 359–366 CrossRef .
R. Shi, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Y. Zhao and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000659 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, M. Chen, X. Du, H. Ai, K. H. Lo, S. Wang, S. Chen, G. Xing, X. Wang and H. Pan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2008983 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Y. Dou, S. Chen, Z. Zhu, P. Liu and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904870 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kitano, Y. Inoue, Y. Yamazaki, F. Hayashi, S. Kanbara, S. Matsuishi, T. Yokoyama, S. W. Kim, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 934–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, F. Ichihara, H. Pang, H. Chen and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803309 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100013 CrossRef .
X. Y. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
C. J. M. van der Ham, M. T. M. Koper and D. G. H. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
T. A. Bazhenova and A. E. Shilov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1995, 144, 69–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, J. A. Iñiguez and C. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 846–856 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. M. Koper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1399–1407 RSC .
A. Tsuneto, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 367, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Yandulov and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2003, 301, 76–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Liu, Q. Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. G. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. H. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4771–4776 RSC .
C. Ling, X. Niu, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Légaré, G. Bélanger-Chabot, R. D. Dewhurst, E. Welz, I. Krummenacher, B. Engels and H. Braunschweig, Science, 2018, 359, 896–900 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ying, K. Fan, X. Luo, J. Qiao and H. Huang, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 1285–1292 RSC .
X. Lv, W. Wei, B. Huang, Y. Dai and T. Frauenheim, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1871–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Azofra, N. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2545–2549 RSC .
A. Simonneau and M. Etienne, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 12458–12463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9623–9628 RSC .
Z. W. Chen, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800291 CrossRef .
J. B. Geri, J. P. Shanahan and N. K. Szymczak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5952–5956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, X. Zhao, Z. Kong, W.-J. Ong and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21941–21948 RSC .
E. Skúlason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, F. Chang, W. Gao, J. Guo, G. Wu, T. He and P. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 64–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, P. Han, Z. Wei, L. Huang, Z. Gu, S. Peng, J. Ma and G. Zheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 1610–1622 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bao, Q. Zhang, F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, M. M. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. M. Yan, Q. Jiang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604799 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nazemi, S. R. Panikkanvalappil and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, C. Mebrahtu, D. Su and G. Centi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, C. Y. Yoo, J. N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J. I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1523–F1526 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhou and Y. W. Zhang, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 591–625 RSC .
F. J. Krug, J. Růžička and E. H. Hansen, Analyst, 1979, 104, 47–54 RSC .
J. Thompson and G. Morrison, Anal. Chem., 1951, 23, 1153–1157 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yuen and A. G. Pollard, J. Sci. Food Agric., 1952, 3, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
ASTM D1426-15, Standard Test Methods for Ammonia Nitrogen in Water, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, 2015 .
W. T. Bolleter, C. J. Bushman and P. W. Tidwell, Anal. Chem., 1961, 33, 592–594 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Harfmann and S. R. Crouch, Talanta, 1989, 36, 261–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Afkhami and R. Norooz-Asl, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2008, 19, 1546–1552 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hampson, Water Res., 1977, 11, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou and C. E. Boyd, Aquaculture, 2016, 450, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Park, H. N. Oh and S. Y. Ahn, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 30, 2032–2038 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
J. Reardon, J. A. Foreman and R. L. Searcy, Clin. Chim. Acta, 1966, 14, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Bower and T. Holm-Hansen, Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 1980, 37, 794–798 CrossRef CAS .
H. Verdouw, C. J. A. Van Echteld and E. M. J. Dekkers, Water Res., 1978, 12, 399–402 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. T. Le and C. E. Boyd, J. World Aquacult. Soc., 2012, 43, 885–889 CrossRef .
M. D. Krom, Analyst, 1980, 105, 305–316 RSC .

          H. Small, Ion Chromatography, Springer Science & Business Media,  1989 Search PubMed .
R. Michalski, Separations, 2018, 5, 16 CrossRef .
R. Michalski and I. Kurzyca, Polym. J. Environ. Stud., 2006, 15, 5–18 CAS .
D. Borden and R. F. Giese, Clays Clay Miner., 2001, 49, 444–445 CrossRef CAS .
A. LeDuy and R. Samson, Biotechnol. Lett., 1982, 4, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
ASTM D1426-15 Standard Test Methods for Ammonia Nitrogen in Water, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, 2015 .

          E. W. Rice, B. Baird, A. D. Eaton and L. S. Clesceri, Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Water Works Association, 22nd edn,  2012 Search PubMed .
T. Suzuki, T. Yasuda, T. Yamané and S. Shimizu, J. Ferment. Technol., 1986, 64, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Genfa and P. K. Dasgupta, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 408–412 CrossRef .
N. Amornthammarong and J.-Z. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 1019–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Amornthammarong, J.-Z. Zhang and P. B. Ortner, Anal. Methods, 2011, 3, 1501 RSC .
X. Gao, Y. Wen, D. Qu, L. An, S. Luan, W. Jiang, X. Zong, X. Liu and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5342–5348 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aika, J. Catal., 1992, 136, 126–140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, R. Shi, X. Bian, C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, F. Wu, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802109 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Du, T. R. Gengenbach, R. Hodgetts, D. R. MacFarlane and A. N. Simonov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6839–6850 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, B. H. R. Suryanto, D. Wang, H. L. Du, R. Y. Hodgetts, F. M. F. Vallana, D. R. MacFarlane and A. N. Simonov, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166–3180 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, G. Zou, C. Yan, S. Cong, T. Lei, X. Dai, J. Guo, R. Lu, Y. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705045 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiao, P. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Song, Y. P. Feng, D. Gao and J. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602086 CrossRef .
X. Du, J. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Yan, C. Wu, Y. Hu, C. Yan, T. Lei, W. Chen, C. Fan and J. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4484–4502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Jiao and T. Ling, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14154–14162 RSC .
T. Sun, S. Mitchell, J. Li, P. Lyu, X. Wu, J. Pérez-Ramírez and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Z. Zhu, C. Zhu, K. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Tang and J. Chen, Mater. Today, 2020, 38, 99–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, D. D. Babu, Z. Peng and Y. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qing, R. Ghazfar, S. T. Jackowski, F. Habibzadeh, M. M. Ashtiani, C. P. Chen, M. R. Smith III and T. W. Hamann, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5437–5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Pan, L. Yu, Y. Cui, Y. Jiang, J. Qi, W. X. Li, Q. Fu, X. Ma and Q. Xue, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Li, Z. Zhou, P. W. Shen and Z. F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1952–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Su, X. Quan, X. Fan, S. Chen, H. Yu, H. Zhao, Y. Zhang and J. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1186–1191 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xia, J. Yang, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, W. Fang, A. M. Asiri, F. Xie, G. Cui and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3371–3374 RSC .
T. Wang, L. Xia, J. J. Yang, H. Wang, W. H. Fang, H. Chen, D. Tang, A. M. Asiri, Y. Luo, G. Cui and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7502–7505 RSC .
T. Wu, X. Li, X. Zhu, S. Mou, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, Y. Zhang, B. Zheng, H. Zhao and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1831–1834 RSC .
C. Chen, D. Yan, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zou, Y. Li and S. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805029 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ling, X. Bai, Y. Ouyang, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16842–16847 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li and Q. Tang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18769–18778 RSC .
X. H. Wang, J. Wang, Y. B. Li and K. Chu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, T. T. Tsega, I. U. Islam, A. Iqbal, J. Zai and X. Qian, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2487–2490 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, X. Liu, L. Gao, X. Kuang, X. Ren, X. Ma, M. Zhao, H. Yang, X. Sun and Q. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118296 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chu, Y. P. Liu, Y. B. Li, Y. L. Guo, Y. Tian and H. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118525 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wang, J. Q. Wang, R. Zhang, C. Q. Cheng, K. W. Qiu, Y. J. Yang, J. Mao, H. Liu, M. Du, C. K. Dong and X. W. Du, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4914–4921 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Tian, M. Liu, H. Guo, J. Zhou, Q. Fang, Z. Liu, Q. Wu and J. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19269–19275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, L. Li, X. Liu, C. Tang, W. Xu, S. Chen, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902709 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lv, Y. Qian, C. Yan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, G. Chen and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10246–10250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, H. X. Liu, Y. Qiu, S. Q. Liu, J. X. Diao, C. R. Chang, R. Si and X. H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6586–6596 RSC .
F. L. Lai, J. R. Feng, X. B. Ye, W. Zong, G. J. He, C. Yang, W. Wang, Y. E. Miao, B. Pan, W. S. Yan, T. X. Liu and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1652–1659 RSC .
W. Fang, J. Zhao, T. Wu, Y. Huang, L. Yang, C. Liu, Q. Zhang, K. Huang and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5913–5918 RSC .
Y. Fang, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Jin, Y. Han, F. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. Wu and Y. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803406 CrossRef .
M. Jin, X. Zhang, M. Han, H. Wang, G. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5936–5942 RSC .
F. Lai, W. Zong, G. He, Y. Xu, H. Huang, B. Weng, D. Rao, J. A. Martens, J. Hofkens, I. P. Parkin and T. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13320–13327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, F. Zheng, B. Huang, Y. Ji, Q. Shao, Y. Li, X. Xiao and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. M. Shi, D. Bao, F. L. Meng, Q. Zhang, Y. T. Zhou, K. H. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Z. Wang, Z. W. Chen, D. P. Liu, Z. Jiang, M. Luo, L. Gu, Q. H. Zhang, X. Z. Cao, Y. Yao, M. H. Shao, Y. Zhang, X. B. Zhang, J. G. Chen, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9464–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Han, Q. Xiong, S. Zhang, C. Zhao, W. Gong, G. Wang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803935 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, X. Shi, F. Xie, B. Zheng, X. Guo and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28251–28255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, C. Li, B. Li, X. Zhu, R. Zhang, L. Ji, D. Tang, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun, Q. Li, S. Liu and Y. Luo, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6401–6404 RSC .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Ren, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri, B. Zheng and X. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9545–9549 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Liu, S. H. Han, Y. Zhao, Y. Y. Zhu, X. L. Tian, J. H. Zeng, J. X. Jiang, B. Y. Xia and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3211–3217 RSC .
L. Li, C. Tang, B. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zheng and S. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Zhu, Q. Chen, W. Xiong, X. Chen, Y. Luo, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, Z. Jiang and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26227–26230 RSC .
Y. Li, P. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Ren, Y. Zhou, T. Ge, J. Chen and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13307–13310 RSC .
Z. Zhao, S. Luo, P. Ma, Y. Luo, W. Wu, Y. Long and J. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8814–8822 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, B. Huang, S. Bai, Y. Feng, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, Y. Li, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Liu, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Gao, B. Huang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13021–13027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Lin, S. N. Zhang, Z. H. Xue, J. J. Zhang, H. Su, T. J. Zhao, G. Y. Zhai, X. H. Li, M. Antonietti and J. S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4380 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, M. Qiao, J. P. Veder, R. D. Marco, J. Bradley, R. Wang, Y. Li, A. Huang, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18604–18609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. T. Liu, C. Ma, J. Yu and B. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22235–22241 RSC .
Y. Chen, B. Wu, B. Sun, N. Wang, W. Hu and S. Komarneni, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18874–18883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Liu, Y. B. Li, D. J. Huang, H. Zhang and K. Chu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 11933–11939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Yang, S. Liu, S. Yin, H. Yu, Y. Xu, X. Li, Z. Wang and L. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19969–19974 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, T. Tang, Y. Zhang, L. Gu, Y. Li, J. Bao, Z. Dai and J. S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8920–8926 RSC .
Y. Yang, S. Q. Wang, H. Wen, T. Ye, J. Chen, C. P. Li and M. Du, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15362–15366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, M. Qiao, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Li, C. Chen, Y. Li, H. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Chem, 2019, 5, 617–633 CAS .
G. Xu, H. Li, A. S. R. Bati, M. Bat-Erdene, M. J. Nine, D. Losic, Y. Chen, J. G. Shapter, M. Batmunkh and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15875–15883 RSC .
S. J. Li, D. Bao, M. M. Shi, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Ahmed, C. Liu, Y. Zhao, W. Ren, X. Chen, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21465–21469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, Y. Luo, X. Sun and T. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17303–17306 RSC .
K. Chu, Y. P. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2288–2295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, F. Gong, Y. Wang, H. Wang, X. Wu, W. Lu, R. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, T. Li, Q. Liu and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1093–1098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Ren, X. Liu, J. Zhao, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Kuang, T. Yan, Q. Wei and D. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2524–2528 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Yang, H. Wang, G. Zhu, H. Wen, H. Feng, X. Sun, X. Guan, J. Wen and Y. Yao, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 5414–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Y. Xie, X. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Liu, W. H. Fang, X. Shi, G. Cui and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24031–24035 RSC .
B. H. R. Suryanto, D. Wang, L. M. Azofra, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, R. Jalili, D. R. G. Mitchell, M. Chatti and D. R. MacFarlane, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 430–435 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winans, J. W. Elam, R. J. Meyer and P. C. Redfern, Science, 2010, 328, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ying, X. Luo, J. Qiao and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007423 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Gu, S. Lin, S. Zhang, Z. Chen and S. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5709–5721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Huo, Y. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, H. Liu and G. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900159 CrossRef .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, Y. Ouyang, Q. Li, X. Bai, X. Mao, A. Du and J. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 33, 1800376 Search PubMed .
W. Zang, T. Yang, H. Zou, S. Xi, H. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Kou, Y. Du, Y. P. Feng, L. Shen, L. Duan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10166–10173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Wang, M. Qiao, G. Wu, W. Chen, T. Yuan, Q. Xu, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Ge, X. Hong, Y. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1246–1253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Yu and J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 12835–12844 RSC .
A. Vojvodic, A. J. Medford, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. S. Khan, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 598, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorf, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Munter, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5202–5206 RSC .
J. M. P. Martinez and E. A. Carter, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2940–2949 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Li, Q. K. Li, J. Cheng, L. Liu, Q. Yan, Y. Wu, X. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Wang, Q. Qiu and Y. Luo, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2016, 138, 8706–8709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mehta, P. Barboun, F. A. Herrera, J. Kim, P. Rumbach, D. B. Go, J. C. Hicks and W. F. Schneider, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 269–275 CrossRef .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Guo, R. Jiang, F. Qin, H. Zhang, W. Lu, J. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8497–8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Li, Z. Y. Zhou, I. Broadwell and S. G. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 485–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Depalma, S. Cowen, T. Hoang and H. A. Al-Abadleh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 1922–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Konuspayeva, G. Berhault, P. Afanasiev, T. S. Nguyen, S. Giorgio and L. Piccolo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17360–17367 RSC .
S. Meister, S. B. Kim, J. J. Cha, H. S. P. Wong and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2742–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B. J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers and T. J. Schmidt, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, A. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. Dubonos, I. Grigorieva and A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Tan, H. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Geim and K. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nair, P. Blake, A. Grigorenko, K. Novoselov, T. Booth, T. Stauber, N. Peres and A. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. Wallace, K. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. Stach and R. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. Shin, G. Eda, L. Li, K. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
R. Lv, J. Robinson, R. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and Y. Wu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804736 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 136–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. Zhang, W. Niu, C. Li, N. Yang, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6409–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Diercks, S. Lin, N. Kornienko, E. A. Kapustin, E. M. Nichols, C. Zhu, Y. Zhao, C. J. Chang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Wang, Q. Huang, C. T. He, Y. Chen, J. Liu, F. C. Shen and Y. Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4466 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. O’Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, L. M. Azofra, M. Harb, L. Cavallo, X. Zhang, B. H. R. Suryanto and D. R. MacFarlane, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3416–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Hu, G. Chen, H. Xin and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1795 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, Y. Wu and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11332–11335 RSC .
Q. Liu, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Luo, G. Cui, F. Xie and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14386–14389 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Qiu, Y. Ma, Y. Luo, Z. Tian, G. Cui, F. Xie, L. Chen, T. Li and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8540–8544 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiang, Z. Wang, X. Shi, M. Fan and X. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 4530–4535 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Gong, L. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Ji, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Guo, Y. Li, P. Gao, X. Shi, B. Li, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801182 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, G. Cui, F. Xie, F. Wang, Y. Wu, S. Gao, Y. Xu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Nash, J. Anibal, M. Dunwell, S. Kattel, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, J. Wu, P. Han, A. M. Al-Enizi, T. M. Almutairi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800386 CrossRef .
W. Guo, Z. Liang, J. Zhao, B. Zhu, K. Cai, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800204 CrossRef .
L. Xia, X. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Niu, Q. Liu, T. Li, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800251 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, T. Wu, L. Ji, C. Li, T. Wang, S. Wen, S. Gao, X. Shi, Y. Luo, Q. Peng and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16117–16121 RSC .
S. Mukherjee, D. A. Cullen, S. Karakalos, K. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, H. Xu, K. L. More, G. Wang and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Li, H. Yu, Y. Xu, H. Xue, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3480–3485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, L. Xia, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11427–11430 RSC .
W. Liu, C. Li, Q. Xu, P. Yan, C. Niu, Y. Shen, P. Yuan and Y. Jia, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5412–5416 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, X. Ji, X. Ren, G. Cui, L. Li, F. Xie, H. Wang, B. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12974–12977 RSC .
G. Zhang, Q. Ji, K. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Li, H. Liu, J. Li and J. Qu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Ji, G. Yu, T. Wang, Y. Luo, X. Shi, Y. Xu and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19274–19277 RSC .
X. Li, L. Li, X. Ren, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, H. Ma, X. Sun, B. Du, Q. Wei and B. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 16622–16627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Liu, Y. B. Li, H. Zhang and K. Chu, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 10424–10431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Li, Y. P. Liu, J. Wang, Y. L. Guo and K. Chu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 455–463 RSC .
X. Zhao, X. Lan, D. Yu, H. Fu, Z. Liu and T. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13010–13013 RSC .
P. Li, W. Fu, P. Zhuang, Y. Cao, C. Tang, A. B. Watson, P. Dong, J. Shen and M. Ye, Small, 2019, 15, 1902535 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lai, N. Chen, X. Ye, G. He, W. Zong, K. B. Holt, B. Pan, I. P. Parkin, T. Liu and R. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907376 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, B. Zheng and X. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9550–9554 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Yang, L. Ji, H. Wang, H. Chen, Z. Niu, Q. Liu, T. Li, G. Cui and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4266–4269 RSC .
X. Yang, K. Li, D. Cheng, W. L. Pang, J. Lv, X. Chen, H. Y. Zang, X. L. Wu, H. Q. Tan, Y. H. Wang and Y. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7762–7769 RSC .
J. Chen, H. Huang, L. Xia, H. Xie, L. Ji, P. Wei, R. Zhao, H. Chen, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 3547–3550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Du, Y. Ma, L. Ji, H. Guo, Z. Tian, H. Chen, H. Huang, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri, F. Qu, L. Chen and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 919–924 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Cang, X. Ji, B. Liu, W. Yang, D. Li and J. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5278–5286 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, X. Xie, J. Qiu, W. Fang, R. Liang, X. Ren, X. Ji, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri, G. Cui, B. Tang and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3485 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Ding, G. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2612–2616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Wu, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Wang, P. Wei, Y. Luo, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4609–4615 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, C. Choi, C. Yan, Y. Qu, J. Qiu, S. Hong, Y. Jung and Z. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4246–4249 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, G. Zhang, D. Xu, X. Lian, H. Li, W. Chen and C. Su, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 215–238 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Song, J. Zeng, Y. Song, X. Duan, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1593–1616 RSC .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Liao and L. Kou, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, E. Sutter, N. Shi, J. Zheng, T. Yang, D. Englund, H. J. Gao and P. Sutter, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Schliehe, T. Wang, Y. Nagaoka, Y. Cao, W. Bassett, H. Wu, H. Fan and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14484–14487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, B. Pan, M. Kong, J. Chen and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11908–11911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Evers, B. Goris, S. Bals, M. Casavola, J. de Graaf, R. van Roij, M. Dijkstra and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2317–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schliehe, B. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2841–2850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
X. Xiao, H. Song, S. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. Zhan, Z. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. Yang, T. Li, L. Jiao, J. Zhou, J. Tang and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jung, M. Pelton, R. Piner, D. Dikin, S. Stankovich, S. Watcharotone, M. Hausner and R. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3569–3575 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Lu, Z. Yin, Q. He, H. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, X. Huang, G. Lu, J. Yang, X. Lu, Q. Xiong and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10344–10353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bottomley, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 425–476 CrossRef .
C. Oatley, W. Nixon and R. Pease, Adv. Electron. Electron Phys., 1966, 21, 181–247 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1153–1175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. F. Qiao, W. Shi, J. B. Wu, D. S. Jiang and P. H. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2757–2785 RSC .
H. L. Liu, F. Nosheen and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3056–3078 RSC .
J. Gu, Y. W. Zhang and F. Tao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8050–8065 RSC .
Y. Jiang, J. Su, Y. Yang, Y. Jia, Q. Chen, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 849–856 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Q. Qiao, Y. Zhu, P. Song, D. Li, L. He, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, T. Wu and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12360–12364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, H. Li, J. White, S. Donne, J. Yi, S. Xi, Y. Fu, G. Henkelman, H. Yu, Z. Chen and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1905665 CrossRef .
K. Kim, N. Lee, C.-Y. Yoo, J.-N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J.-I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F610–F612 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, L. Ji, W. Kong, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Li, B. Li, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5263–5266 RSC .
F. Naseem, P. L. Lu, J. P. Zeng, Z. Y. Lu, Y. H. Ng, H. T. Zhao, Y. P. Du and Z. Y. Yin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7734–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Du, X. Guo, R. Kong and F. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12848–12851 RSC .
C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 6181–6184 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, T. Li and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12966–12969 RSC .
T. He, S. K. Matta and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 1546–1551 RSC .
N. Cao and G. Zheng, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2992–3008 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7587–7590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, H. Zhao, T. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, C. Li, S. Lu, A. M. Asiri, D. Ma and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 555–569 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ying, K. Fan, X. Luo and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11444–11451 RSC .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
L. L. Yu, J. Z. Qin, W. J. Zhao, Z. G. Zhang, J. Ke and B. J. Liu, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2020, 2020, 5251431 CrossRef .
M. Shao, Y. Shao, W. Chen, K. L. Ao, R. Tong, Q. Zhu, I. N. Chan, W. F. Ip, X. Shi and H. Pan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 14504–14512 RSC .
Y. Gao, Y. Cao, H. Zhuo, X. Sun, Y. Gu, G. Zhuang, S. Deng, X. Zhong, Z. Wei, X. Li and J. Wang, Catal. Today, 2020, 339, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6141–6151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, J. G. Howalt, T. Vegge and E. Skúlason, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 635–646 CrossRef .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, G. Cui, L. Chen, F. Xie, Q. Wei, Z. Tian and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 8474–8477 RSC .
X. Zhang, R. M. Kong, H. Du, L. Xia and F. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5323–5325 RSC .
Q. Li, L. He, C. Sun and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27563–27568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia, B. Li, S. Liu and B. Tang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, D. Johnson, R. Peng, D. K. Hensley, P. V. Bonnesen, L. Liang, J. Huang, F. Yang, F. Zhang, R. Qiao, A. P. Baddorf, T. J. Tschaplinski, N. L. Engle, M. C. Hatzell, Z. Wu, D. A. Cullen, H. M. Meyer, B. G. Sumpter and A. J. Rondinone, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, e1700336 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yu, E. Nagelli, F. Du and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2165–2173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782–5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, X. Yan and X. Yao, Small, 2018, 14, 1800235 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, A. Santandreu, W. Kellogg, S. Gupta, O. Ogoke, H. Zhang, H. L. Wang and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 83–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Yang, S. J. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Z. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. W. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, L. Xia, R. Cao, Z. Niu, H. Chen, Q. Liu, T. Li, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 1914–1917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chu, Q. Q. Li, Y. P. Liu, J. Wang and Y. H. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118693 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Rice, C. R. Martin, V. A. Galitskiy, A. A. Berseneva, G. A. Leith and N. B. Shustova, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8790–8813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C. T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Tan, C. T. He, P. An, F. Xie, S. Jiang, Y. Zhu, K. H. Wu, B. Zhang, H. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Liu, J. Dong and Z. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 881–890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, S. Yuan, J. S. Qin, Y. Wang, A. Kirchon, D. Qiu, L. Cheng, S. T. Madrahimov and H. C. Zhou, Matter, 2019, 1, 156–167 CrossRef .
Y. He, L. Wang, C. Dong, C. Li, X. Ding, Y. Qian and L. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 35–45 CrossRef .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Zeng, H. Muheiyati, Y. Zhai, C. Li, X. Ding, L. Wang, D. Wang and L. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1496–1504 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, K. Na, J. Kim, Y. Sakamoto, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2019, 461, 246–249 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058–12063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cui, G. Qin, W. Wang, K. R. Geethalakshmi, A. Du and Q. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14510–14518 RSC .
W. Li, W. Fang, C. Wu, K. N. Dinh, H. Ren, L. Zhao, C. Liu and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3658–3666 RSC .
N. Lahiri, N. Lotfizadeh, R. Tsuchikawa, V. V. Deshpande and J. Louie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 19–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Zhao and Y. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 833–839 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gusmão, M. Veselý and Z. Sofer, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9634–9648 CrossRef .
P. Chen, N. Zhang, S. Wang, T. Zhou, Y. Tong, C. Ao, W. Yan, L. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 6635–6640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Gao, J. G. Zhao, D. J. Yan and X. D. Zhu, Small, 2020, 16, 1907091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. P. Liu, H. Zhang and K. Chu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, S. J. Li, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800124 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Zhu, T. Wang, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2682–2685 RSC .
L. Xu, H. W. Liang, Y. Yang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3209–3250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharifi, S. Behzadi, S. Laurent, M. L. Forrest, P. Stroevee and M. Mahmoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2323–2343 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yingping Pang
	Yingping Pang received his PhD degree at Curtin University, Australia, in 2020. Currently, he works as a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Prof. Liqiang Xu at Shandong University, China. His research focuses on the synthesis, and modification of 2D materials, and their applications in energy storage and catalysis.

Chao Su
	Chao Su received her PhD degree in Chemical Engineering at Nanjing Tech University, China in 2012. She is an Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow. Her research focuses on the development of functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, such as fuel cells, metal–air batteries, and water splitting.

Guohua Jia
	Guohua Jia Guohua Jia is a senior lecturer/senior research fellow in the School of Molecular and Life Sciences at Curtin University in Australia. He received his PhD in 2009 from the City University of Hong Kong. From 2010 to 2014, he worked with Prof. Uri Banin as a postdoctoral fellow at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel. His research focuses on colloidal heavy-metal-free semiconductor nanocrystals, with particular emphasis on their applications in optoelectronic devices, catalysis, and latent fingermark detection.

Liqiang Xu
	Liqiang Xu received his PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2005, and then he worked at Shandong University in 2005. He acted as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technology University in Singapore from May 2012 to May 2013. He is currently a professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, China. His research focuses on the rational design of functional inorganic materials and then systematically studies their structure–property relationships and investigates their applications in areas of energy storage and catalysis.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a John Curtin Distinguished Professor at Curtin University, Australia, and also a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and then a postdoctoral fellow at California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 to 2005. His current research interests include fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, metal–air batteries, solar cells, and oxygen-permeable membranes. He has been recognized as a Highly-Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics since 2017.
N2 + 8H+ + 16Mg-ATP + 8e− → 2NH3 + H2 + 16Mg-ADP + 16Pi	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Energy efficiency of (a) Haber–Bosch process, and (b) electrocatalytic approach for NH3 synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 1  Overview of 2D electrocatalysts for the NRR.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) N2 structure. (b) N2 orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) N2 bonding to transition metals. (d) Electronic configuration of B atom. (e) N2-B atom binding motifs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 


Eqn (2)	N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ↔ 2NH3	−0.057 vs. SHE (pH = 0)
Eqn (3)	2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2	0 vs. SHE (pH = 0)
Eqn (4)	N2 + 6H2O + 6e− ↔ 2NH3 + 6OH−	−0.736 vs. SHE (pH = 14)
Eqn (5)	2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2 + 2OH−	−0.828 vs. SHE (pH = 14)
Eqn (6)	N2 + e− ↔ N2−	−4.20 vs. SHE (pH = 14)
Eqn (7)	N2 + H+ + e− ↔ N2H	−3.11 vs. SHE (pH = 0)
Eqn (8)	N2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ N2H2	−1.01 vs. SHE (pH = 0)
Eqn (9)	N2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ N2H4	−0.27 vs. RHE (pH = 0)
Eqn (10)	N2 + 4H2O + 6e− ↔ N2H4 + 4OH−	−1.16 vs. SHE (pH = 14)

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) Three reaction mechanisms of NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) N2 activation on TM centres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 
FE = nFCV/MQ	(11)
RNH3 = CV/tS	(12)

 	Fig. 4  (a–d) Four electrochemical cell configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematics and (f) a picture of an H-type cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 


• Applying to solid and liquid electrolyte	• High energy input	• Separate cathode and anode chambers	• NH3 crossover	• Operating under high pressure	• NH3 oxidation at anode	• Independent cathode and anode reaction	• NH3 crossover
• Suppressing the HER	• Gas–solid reactions not achievable	• Suppressing the HER	• Preventing NH3 oxidation.

	
	• Preventing NH3 oxidation	

Anode reaction: 3H2O → 3/2O2 + 6H+ + 6e−	(13)
Cathodic reaction: N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3	(14)
Anode reaction: 6OH− → 3H2O + 3/2O2 + 6e−	(15)
Cathodic reaction: N2 + 6H2O + 6e− → 2NH3 + 6OH−	(16)
2K2HgI4 + NH3 + 3KOH → HgO·Hg(NH2)I↓ + 7KI + 2H2O	(17)
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 5  (a) B-Doped graphene for NRR. (b) The percentages of four B types. (c) The FEs of four samples. (d) Free energy diagrams of four B types in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) RNH3 and FEs for defect-rich MoS2/CP electrode. (b) Calculated Gibbs free energies on MoS2/CP in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) RNH3 and FE of S-rich MoS2 NSs. (d) Free-energy diagrams of NRR at the edges of different MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) RNH3 (red) and FE (blue) of Rh NNs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) NH3 formation rates of Bi NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of a-Au/CeOx–rGO for electrochemical NRR under ambient conditions. (b) RNH3 and FEs of a-Au/CeOx–rGO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Illustration of modification of Ru/rGO with aliphatic thiols. (d) RNH3 and FEs of Ru/rGO with aliphatic thiols. (e) The Gibbs free energy on Ru/rGO-C12 in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) RNH3 and FEs of Ru/2H-MoS2. (b) Schematics of Ru/2H-MoS2 for NRR. (c) Energy pathway on Ru/2H-MoS2 in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Optimized structure of Mo–BN NS. (b) Optimized structures of N2 adsorption on Mo–BN NS. (c) Optimized geometric structures of various intermediates on Mo–BN NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  
R
NH3 and FEs of Cu–N–C in (a) 0.1 M KOH and (b) 0.1 M HCl. (c) Calculated Gibbs free energies on Cu–N–C in NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis and structural configuration evolution of the catalysis process. (e) FEs and (f) RNH3 of Mo0/GDY. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 


Noble metal-based catalysts	Au nanorod	0.1 M KOH	1.648 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.2 V	4.0, −0.2 V	18	
68

Au nanocage	0.5 M LiClO4	3.9 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.5 V	30.2, −0.4 V	60	
69

Ru nanoparticles	0.01 M HCl	∼0.2 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.1 V	5.4, 0.01 V	4	
212

Pd/C	0.01 M HCl	4.5 µg h−1 cm−2, 0.1 V	8.2, 0.1 V	3	
213

Non-noble metal-based catalysts	
β-FeOOH nanorods	0.5 M LiClO4	23.32, −0.75 V	6.7, −0.7 V	2	
214

Fe3O4 nanorods	0.1 M Na2SO4	5.6 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.4 V	2.6, −0.4 V	24	
215

Cr2O3 microspheres	0.1 M Na2SO4	∼25.3, −0.9 V	6.78, −0.9 V	2	
216

Fe2O3 nanorods	0.1 M Na2SO4	15.9, −0.8 V	0.94, −0.8 V	24	
217

MnO particles	0.1 M Na2SO4	1.1 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.39 V	8.02, −0.39 V	25	
218

Nb2O5 nanofibers	0.1 M HCl	43.6, −0.55 V	9.26, −0.55 V	27	
219

VN nanoparticles	0.1 M HCl	3.3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.1 V	6.0, −0.1 V	<1	
220

NbO2 nanoparticles	0.05 M H2SO4	11.6 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.65 V	32.0, −0.6 V	12	
221

CoP nanocage	1.0 M KOH	10.78, 0 V	7.36, 0 V	—	
222

Metal-free catalysts	S-CNS nanospheres	0.1 M Na2SO4	19.07, −0.7 V	7.47, −0.7 V	24	
223

NPC	0.05 M H2SO4	11.76 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.9 V	1.42, −0.9 V	—	
117

BCN nanotubes	0.1 M HCl	7.75, −0.3 V	13.79, −0.3 V	4	
121

BP nanoparticles	0.1 M HCl	26.42, −0.6 V	12.7, −0.6 V	2	
224

N-carbon	0.1 M KOH	3.4 × 10−6 mol h−1 cm−2, −0.3 V	10.2, −0.3 V	18	
225



Noble metal-based catalysts	Au	0.1 M HCl	25.57, −0.2 V	6.05, −0.2 V	20	
226

Ag	0.1 M HCl	2.8, −0.6 V	4.8, −0.6 V	24	
227

Rh	0.1 M KOH	23.88, −0.2 V	0.217, −0.2 V	30	
144

Non-noble metal-based catalysts	Defective Bi	0.2 M Na2SO4	5.453, −0.6 V	11.68, −0.6 V	24	
139

2D mosaic Bi	0.1 M Na2SO4	13.23, −0.8 V	10.46, −0.8 V	25	
145

a-MoO3−x	0.1 M KOH	35.83, −0.4 V	12.01, −0.2 V	16	
228

MoO3	0.1 M HCl	29.43, −0.5 V	1.9, −0.3 V	10	
229

OVs-MoO2	0.1 M HCl	12.20, −0.15 V	8.2, −0.15 V	12	
230

R-WO3	0.1 M HCl	17.28, −0.3 V	7.0, −0.3 V	24	
231

La2Ti2O7	0.1 M HCl	25.15, −0.55 V	4.55, −0.55 V	24	
142

Y2O3	0.1 M Na2SO4	1.06 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2, −0.9 V	2.53, −0.9 V	20	
232

F-SnO2/CC	0.1 M Na2SO4	19.3, −0.45 V	8.6, −0.45 V	10	
233

TiO2/Ti	0.1 M Na2SO4	9.16 × 10−11 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.7 V	2.5, −0.7 V	24	
141

NiO	0.1 M Na2SO4	29.1, −0.5 V	10.8, −0.5 V	15	
234

MoS2 flowers	0.1 M Na2SO4	29.28, −0.4 V	8.34, −0.4 V	20	
19

MoS2 array	0.1 M Na2SO4	4.9, −0.5 V	1.17, −0.5 V	26	
20

S-Rich MoS2	0.1 M Li2SO4	43.4, −0.2 V	9.81, −0.2 V	12	
140

Fe3S4	0.1 M HCl	75.4, −0.4 V	6.45, −0.4 V	2	
235

Sn/SnS2	0.1 M NaOH	23.8, −0.8 V	6.5, −0.7 V	25	
236

Fe–ReS2	0.1 M Na2SO4	80.4, −0.2 V	12.3, −0.2 V	2	
237

Bi2Te3	0.1 M KOH	3.9 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.4 V	7.9, −0.4 V	10	
138

Fe–Ni2P	0.1 M HCl	88.51, −0.3 V	7.92, −0.3 V	20	
126

MoN	0.1 M HCl	3.01 × 10−10 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.3 V	1.15, −0.3 V	27	
238

VN	0.1 M HCl	8.40 × 10−11 mol s−1·cm−2, −0.5 V	2.25, −0.5 V	8	
143

Metal-free catalysts	B-Graphene	0.05 M H2SO4	9.8 µg h−1 cm−2, −0.5 V	10.8, −0.5 V	10	
67

S-Graphene	0.1 M HCl	27.3, −0.6 V	11.5, −0.5 V	24	
118

Fluorographene	0.1 M Na2SO4	9.3, −0.7 V	4.2, −0.7 V	28	
239

N-Carbon	0.1 M KOH	15.7, −0.2 V	1.45, −0.2 V	12	
240

O-Carbon	0.1 M HCl	18.03, −0.55 V	10.3, −0.45 V	26	
241

Hexagonal BN	0.1 M HCl	22.4, −0.75 V	4.7, −0.75 V	24	
242

C-BN	0.1 M HCl	36.7, −0.55 V	6.51, −0.55 V	14	
243

Crystalline B4C	0.1 M HCl	26.57, −0.75 V	15.95, −0.75 V	30	
244

Black P	0.01 M HCl	31.37, −0.7 V	5.07, −0.6 V	10	
245

2D boron	0.1 M Na2SO4	13.22, −0.8 V	4.04, −0.8 V	24	
246

2D β-boron	0.1 M HCl	3.12, −0.14 V	4.84, −0.14 V	10	
247


 	Fig. 11  Synthesis strategies of 2D NSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and (b) average RNH3 and FEs of the Au flowers. (c) Average RNH3 and FEs for Au flowers and Au spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) RNH3 and FEs of Ag NS/CP. (e) Cycling stability of Ag NS/CP. (f) Stability evaluation of Ag NS/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Defect-rich Bi nanoplates for NRR. (b) TEM and (c) AFM images of defect-rich Bi nanoplates. (d) RNH3, (e) free-energy diagrams, and (f) activation energy for Bi(110) and defect-rich Bi(110) facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) RNH3 and FEs of MoO3 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) RNH3 and FEs of a-MoO3−x NSs. (c) NRR free energy profile of a-MoO3−x from first-principles calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) RNH3 and FEs of R-WO3 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) RNH3 and FEs of OVs-MoO2 NSs. (f) Free energy diagram for different NRR pathways on OVs-MoO2 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) RNH3 and FEs of La2Ti2O7 NSs/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) RNH3 and FEs of F-SnO2/CC. (i) Illustration of F-SnO2/CC for NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (j) RNH3 and (k) FEs of TiO2/Ti for NRR. (l) Illustration of TiO2/Ti for NRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM image, (b) RNH3 and FE, and (c) NRR cycling test of Fe3S4 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image, (e) RNH3, and (f) FE of Sn/SnS2 NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) SEM image, (h) RNH3 and FENH3, and (i) NRR stability test of Fe–ReS2@N-CNF-5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (j) STEM image of the Bi2Te3 nanoplates. (k) FE and (l) RNH3 of activated and commercial Bi2Te3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) RNH3 and FEs, and (b) stability evaluation of RO–Cu3P. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image, (d) RNH3 and FEs of Fe-doped Ni2P NS. (e) Free-energy diagram of intermediates on Ni2P and Fe–Ni2P NSs. (f) Intermediates structures in NRR on Fe–Ni2P NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) AFM image of MXene NSs. (b) FE, and (c) RNH3 of MXene/stainless steel mesh. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic of molten salt synthesis path, (e) FEs, (f) RNH3, and (g) the molecular structure of Mo2C/C NSs. (h) The nitrogen adsorption energy of Mo2C and C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) RNH3 and FEs of MoN NSs/CC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image, (c) RNH3, and (d) FE of NV-W2N3. (e) Theoretical limiting potentials of W2N3 and NV-W2N3. (f) Charge density difference induced by N-vacancy on NV-W2N3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) RNH3 and FE of d-FG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) TEM image of CNS. (c) RNH3, and (d) FEs of CNS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2018, AAAS. (e) RNH3 and FEs for S-G/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) RNH3 and FEs of O–C NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) RNH3 and FEs of PG/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) RNH3, and (i) FEs of BN-C NS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (j) RNH3 and FEs of S-NV-C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (k) RNH3, and (l) FEs of NVs-PCN. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image, (b) RNH3 and FEs, and (c) energy profiles of B4C NSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) RNH3 and FEs of BNS/CP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) FEs, and (f) RNH3 of FL-BP NSs/CF. (g) Diagram reaction mechanism, and (h) DFT-calculated reaction pathways of FL-BP NSs/CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) FEs, and (b) RNH3 of NCM-Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. RNH3 and FEs of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx (c) at −0.55 V tested ten times, and (d) at different potentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) TEM and HRTEM images, (f) RNH3 and FEs of CoS2/NS-G. Reproduced with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2019, National Academy of Science.	 



a-Au/CeOx-RGO	H-Cell, 0.1 M KOH	Salicylate method	8.3, −0.2 V	10.1	2 h	
161

Au1/g-C3N4	H-Cell, 0.005 M H2SO4	IB	1305, −0.1 V	11.1, −0.1 V	7000 s	
178

NCM-AuNPs	H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl	IB	0.36 g m−2 h−1, −0.1 V	22, −0.2 V	4 d	
272

Ru/rGO	H-Cell, 0.05 M H2SO4	IB	50, −0.1 V	11, −0.1 V	12 h	
162

Ru SAs/g-C3N4	H-Cell, 0.5 M NaOH	Nessler's reagent	23.0, 0.05 V	8.3, 0.05 V	12 h	
273

Ru/2H-MoS2	H-Cell, 0.01 M HCl	IB	1.14 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.15 V	17.6, −0.15 V	60 min	
169

MoS2/CC NSs	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	8.08 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.5 V	1.17	26 h	
20

MoS2/rGO	H-Cell, 0.1 M LiClO4	IB	24.82, −0.45 V	4.58, −0.45 V	26 h	
166

Mo SAs/graphdiyne	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4 or 0.1 M HCl	IB	113.4–145.4, −1.2 V vs. SCE	15.2–21.0, −1.2 V vs. SCE	100 h	
179

CoS2/NS-G hybrid	H-Cell, 0.05 M H2SO4	IB	25, −0.4 V	25.9, −0.05 V	10 h	
324

Mo2C/C	PEM-Cell, 0.5 M Li2SO4	Nessler's reagent	11.3, −0.2 V	7.8	2 h	
21

TiO2/Ti3C2Tx	H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl	IB	32.17, −0.55 V	16.07	50 h	
135

TiO2/Ti3C2Tx	H-Cell, 0.1 M HCl	IB	26.32, −0.6 V	8.42, −0.6 V	24 h	
167

TiO2/rGO	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	15.13, −0.9 V	3.3, −0.9 V	24 h	
163

NiO dots/graphene	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	18.6, −0.7 V	7.8, −0.7 V	6 h	
164

Mn3O4@rGO	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	17.4, −0.85 V	3.52	24 h	
165

BP QDs/MnO2	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	25.3, −0.5 V	6.7, −0.5 V	12 h	
325

CuO/graphene	H-Cell, 0.1 M Na2SO4	IB	1.8 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1, −0.75 V	3.9, −0.75	12 h	
326

Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO	H-Cell, 0.1 M NaOH	IB	2.80, −0.2 V	4.5, −0.2 V	7000 s	
327

Fe2O3 NPs/rGO	H-Cell, 0.5 M LiClO4	IB	2.13, −0.5 V	5.89, −0.4 V	24 h	
328


 	Scheme 2  Current progresses and future challenges of 2D electrocatalysts for the NRR (P: progresses; C: challenges).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
