Why ultrafast charge separation occurs in bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells: a multichain tight binding model study  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP03686F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP03686F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 22685-22691Why ultrafast charge separation occurs in bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells: a multichain tight binding model study

        
          
            Yujuan 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Longlong 
            Zhang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yuying 
            Hao
          
        
      
College of Physics and Optoelectronics, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, 030024, China. E-mail: zhanglonglong@tyut.edu.cn
Received 
      11th August 2021
    , Accepted 7th September 2021First published on 7th September 2021AbstractBulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) exhibit ultrafast charge separation (UCS) which enables lower geminate charge recombination and high internal quantum efficiency. Unravelling why UCS occurs in BHJ-OSCs is important for the exploration of devices in future, however it is still far from clear. In this work, we build a multichain tight-binding model to study the conditions for realizing UCS. We propose that two conditions are important: (i) the BHJ-OSC has a morphology with donor and acceptor molecules being individually aggregated; (ii) the ratio of the donor/acceptor interfacial coupling to the internal donor/donor and acceptor/acceptor coupling should be smaller than a threshold. In addition, we suggest that increasing the donor/acceptor energetic offset will boost the UCS efficiency. As a fundamental theoretical analysis on the underlying mechanism of UCS, our work provides design rules for optimizing high-performance BHJ OSCs.
I. Introduction
In solar energy harvesting devices, photocreated excitons must be dissociated via charge transfer at heterojunctions to yield free charges. Understanding the fundamental physics of the charge separation process is important for device optimization, particularly for the improvement of the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE). Regarding bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structured OSCs, it has been previously found that free charges are produced through a multistep process:1,2 (i) first, photoexcitation creates strongly bound Frenkel excitons in the donor (D) or acceptor (A) molecules; (ii) subsequently, the Frenkel excitons diffuse and arrive at the D/A interfaces,3,4 where the charge-transfer (CT) state forms; (iii) eventually, the interfacial CT state dissociates into free charges. This multistep process implies that the generation of free charges takes a long time, at least in the order of picoseconds. However, due to the development of ultrafast technologies in previous years, this idea has been facing continuous challenges by experimental observations that ultrafast charge separations (UCSs) often take place (<100 fs).5–15 Now, UCS has been widely observed, not only in fullerene acceptor OSCs13–15 but also in non-fullerene acceptor OSCs.16,17
Several theories have been proposed to explain the UCS phenomenon in BHJ OSCs. Among them, the roles of quantum coherence,7,18 quantum resonance,19 delocalization20 and the entropy effect21 have been highlighted. Particularly, it has been found that the morphologies of BHJ OSCs can significantly influence the UCS rate.9,22 In actual fullerene acceptor OSCs, fullerenes tend to aggregate to form small clusters. Experimental findings suggest that such a molecule-aggregation effect can greatly facilitate UCS.13,23,24 Furthermore, some recent theoretical investigations pointed out more possibilities, for example: Li et al. suggested that a non-uniform packing morphology acted as a driving force to promote UCS from a cold CT state;25,26 Meng et al. suggested that a non-uniform electric field could lead to ultrafast exciton migrations along polymers,27 and this is beneficial for promoting UCS; and so on. However, the conditions that can definitely lead to UCS in BHJ OSCs still remain elusive. Considering that UCS completes within a time scale much smaller than the average lifetime of a CT state, long-range separated free charges seem to be directly formed upon light irradiation, without any CT state formation [(3) in Fig. 1]. This scenario is accessible when the energy difference between the charge separated (CS) state and the CT state (ΔEb in Fig. 1) shrinks. From a theoretical point of view, comparing the energy of the CT and CS states can be a feasible way to understand UCS.
 Fig. 1  Scheme illustrating the charge generations in BHJ OSCs. In both (a) and (b), (1) indicates the process of excitons diffusing to the D/A interface and subsequently forming the CT state; (2) indicates the CT state dissociating into the charge separated (CS) state; (3) shows the direct ultrafast charge separation upon photoexcitation. 
In this work, we build a multichain tight-binding (TB) model to describe the electronic structure of the BHJ OSCs. By setting the electron occupations in the energy band, we can mimic the photoexcited state S1. The self-consistent resolution gives the most probable electronic structure of S1, and we could clearly clarify what state (CT or CS) is preferably achieved after a rapid ultrafast relaxation. The decisive conditions leading to the UCS can thus be discussed and revealed.
II. Model and method
Without loss of generality, we consider a multichain electronic system including five donor and five acceptor chains [see Fig. 2(a)]. The TB Hamiltonian of this system is written as: (1) denotes the Su–Schrieffer–Heeger type intrachain Hamiltonian:28–31 (2)where c†l,i (cl,i) creates (annihilates) an electron at site i on chain l [the bottom five chains (l = 1–5) are the donor (D) chains (D1–D5), while the upper five (l = 6–10) are the acceptor (A) chains (A1–A5)]; εl,i denotes the on-site energy of site i on chain l; t‖l,i = t‖D(A) + (−1)it1 − αyl,i is the nearest-neighbor intrachain transfer integral, with t‖D(A) being the intrachain transfer integral for a uniform bond structure of the D(A) chains, t1 is the symmetry breaking parameter; α is the electron–lattice (e–l) coupling constant; yl,i = ul,i+1 − ul,i is the (l, i)-th bond length with ul,i being the displacement of site (l, i) from its equilibrium position; K denotes the elastic constant.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the multichain tight-binding model. (b) Schematic representation of the energy structure of the D/A hetero-structured multichain system. (c) Calculated projected density of states (PDOS) of the D and A chains, with the Lorentzian broadening parameter being adopted as 0.03t‖D. 
The interchain Hamiltonian  reads as: (3)with t⊥l,i being the interchain coupling. For convenience, we set t⊥l,i = t⊥DD, t⊥AA, and t⊥AD for the couplings between the D and D chains, A and A chains, and the D/A interface, respectively. In this work, unless otherwise specified, the parameters are set as:29t‖D = t‖A = 2.4 eV, t1 = 0.1t‖D, tc ≡ t⊥DD = t⊥AA = 0.3t‖D, t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D, α = 4.1 eV Å−1, K = 21.0 eV Å−2. The on-site energies are set as εl,i ≡ ΔE = 0.2t‖D for the D chains and zero for the A chains.
At half filling, the self-consistent calculation of eqn (1) gives rise to the type-II semiconductor energy band structure with an energy offset between the D and A molecules. The lattice configuration of each chain is dimerized. The smooth bond orders are further defined as ỹl,i = (−1)i[2yl,i − yl,i−1 − yl,i+1] and the resultant lattice configuration is . The calculated energy gap value is 0.63t‖D. This energy structure can be further confirmed by calculating the projected density of states (PDOS), which is expressed by:  where lD = 1–5 counts for the PDOS on the D chains (PDOSD) and lA = 6–10 for the PDOS on the A chains (PDOSA); ϕ[l,i],ν is the wavefunction of the molecular orbital with energy Eν. We show PDOSD(A) in Fig. 2(c) with the blue (red) curve. One can identify that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the whole system is primarily contributed to by the D chains [blue in (c)] while the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is mainly contributed to by the A chains [red in (c)]. The energy offset is around 0.2t‖D, indicating that it is mainly determined by the on-site energy difference between the D and A chains, namely, ΔE.
Assuming the D chains absorb one photon, a singlet exciton (S1) forms. This process can be theoretically simulated by moving one electron from HOMOD to LUMOD. As revealed in ref. 30, this high-energy occupation is not stable and subsequently undergoes a rapid relaxation process. The excited electron will rapidly move to the edge of the conduction band, namely, LUMOA. Within only 50 femtoseconds, the final stable occupancy is achieved with the electron occupying LUMOA and the hole occupying HOMOD, namely, the relaxed S1 state. It is worth noting that the relaxed S1 state can behave as either the interfacial CT state or the CS state. By computationally checking which is the most probable one, we can judge whether the system tends to undergo the photoinduced ultrafast charge separations or not.
III. Results and discussions
The charge density at site (l, i) is calculated by , where  means the summation over the occupied energy levels. Fig. 3 demonstrates the calculated net charge distributions (〈nl,i〉 − 1) of the two relaxed S1 states upon absorbing one photon. Here, the interfacial D/A couplings are set as t⊥AD = 0.18t‖D in (a) and t⊥AD = 0.4t‖D in (b), with other parameters unchanged. As shown in (a), the photogenerated net charges are long-range separated. The net electrons accumulate at the center of the A chain region while the net holes accumulate at the center of the D chain region. The summation of net electron densities almost reaches unity, indicating a high internal quantum efficiency (IQE) almost approaching 100%. In (b), the net electrons and holes both accumulate in vicinity of the D/A interface. The transferred electron amount is only about 0.4e. This state is actually a mixed one consisting of the bound Frenkel singlet exciton state on the D chains and the interfacial CT state. One can deduce that this state easily undergoes geminate recombination, and thus the total PCE of the BHJ OSCs is lowered.
 Fig. 3  Calculated net charge distributions of the (a) CS and (b) CT state. 
Then, there arises a pertinent question, under what conditions does the relaxed S1 state prefer to be the CS state and undergo the UCS. Clearly, the value of t⊥AD plays an important role. In the following section, we continuously vary t⊥AD and observe the corresponding results. Fig. 4(a1–a5) demonstrate the net charge distributions on different chains with varying t⊥AD values. The solid lines are for the electron densities on the A chains while the dotted lines are for the hole densities on the D chains. Particular attention is paid to the red and black curves, which present the net charges on the middle D3 (A3) chain and the interfacial D1 (A1) chain, respectively. One can find that, with increasing t⊥AD, the weight of the D1 and A1 curves grows while that of the D3 and A3 curve decreases. It indicates that with increasing D/A coupling strength, the relaxed S1 state favors the interfacial CT state, like that in Fig. 3(b). In one of our previous works,29 we have theoretically shown that increasing the D/A coupling will enhance the energy barrier between the CT and CS states. It means the e–h pair prefers to be stabilized in a local potential well rather than dissociating. When t⊥AD is weak, this energy barrier could shrink, then the UCS could take place.
 Fig. 4  Net charge densities on the D (solid lines) and A (dotted lines) chains for different parameters. The upper figures are for the cases with varying t⊥AD as (a1) 0.18, (a2) 0.25, (a3) 0.28, (a4) 0.35 and (a5) 0.5t‖D; the middle figures are those with varying tc ≡ t⊥AA = t⊥DD as (b1) 0.12, (b2) 0.15, (b3) 0.22, (b4) 0.23, (b5) 0.32t‖D; the bottom figures are those with varying ΔE as (c1) 0.1, (c2) 0.2, (c3) 0.24, (c4) 0.4 and (c5) 0.5t‖D. Noting that lines A1 and D1 (black) are for the interfaces, while A3 and D3 (red) are for the centering chains within the A and D region. 
How about the effects of the internal D/D or A/A couplings on the UCS rate? Fig. 4(b1–b5) further demonstrate the net charge distributions on different chains with varying tc ≡ t⊥DD = t⊥AA. When tc = 0.1t‖D [Fig. 4(b1)], the D1 and A1 curves dominate and exhibit the highest weight, indicating the net electrons and holes are accumulated at the D/A interface. With increasing tc, the D1 and A1 weight decreases while the red lines become dominant, indicating that UCS becomes attainable. The values of t⊥DD and t⊥AA respectively determine the degree of delocalization of holes and electrons in the D and A chain regions. The higher the charge delocalization is, the easier it is for UCS to take place. A consensus on the important role of excited state delocalization on UCS has been reached based on a series ultrafast transient spectroscopy experiments.5–9 This point can be understood through quantum uncertainty: the relaxed S1 state is a coherent superposition of eigenstates with the electron (hole) wavefunction being distributed on different A(D) chains. Higher delocalization promotes direct charge generation based on the wavefunction decoherence effect rather than a dissociation process from the Frenkel exciton at interfaces. It is worth noting that the symmetrical setting of t⊥DD = t⊥AA here is not a necessary condition. For the general case t⊥DD ≠ t⊥AA, the delocalization of electrons and holes are not equivalent any more, but this does not induce the qualitative changes of the main conclusion realved in this work.

Fig. 4(a3 and b3) are two special cases where the net charges are almost equivalently distributed on the interfacial chains (D1 and A1) and the centering chains (D3 and A3). This is the critical case for triggering UCS. Defining a ratio η = t⊥AD/tc, we find that these two cases have the same value of η = 90%. Those BHJ OSCs satisfying η < ηc are easy for the realization of UCS. In the practical design of BHJ OSCs, under the premise of other basic requirements being satisfied, optimizing the chemical composition and morphologies of the D and A molecules to meet this requirement will be beneficial for triggering UCS and promoting the total PCE.
In BHJ OSCs, the D/A energetic offset is regarded as the driving energy for charge transfer. Because the energetic offset can be conveniently controlled in experiments,32–34 studying its effect has practical meaning for device exploration. Theoretically, the value of energetic offset is described by the difference between the HOMOD and HOMOA levels. In Fig. 2(c), we have shown that the energy offset can be estimated by ΔE. In the previous investigations, it has been proposed that ΔE can act as the access energy to ensure the high dissociation efficiency of the CT state. It means even the CT state is fully relaxed to a “cold” one, the dissipated excess energy is funneled into a local bath to increase the local temperature and enhance the oscillation of the electron–hole (e–h) pair. Here, we will show that ΔE is also a promoting factor for UCS. Fig. 4(c1–c5) demonstrate the net charge distribution of the relaxed S1 state for different ΔE values, with other parameters unchanged. When ΔE is small, e.g., 0.1t‖D [Fig. 4(b1)], the D1 and A1 curves exhibit the highest weight indicating that net electrons and holes are accumulated at the interfaces. With increasing ΔE, the D3 and A3 curves gradually dominate. When ΔE is as large as 0.5t‖D, net electrons and holes mainly accumulate on the middle chains of the D and A regions, indicating that UCS takes place. Actually in ref. 13, the pump–probe spectroscopy results have clearly shown that a faster charge separation rate is observed with larger D/A energetic offset. Our result is consistent with the experimental observations. Now we can summarize that, no matter whether the photogenerated S1 state is to evolve into the interfacial CT state or directly undergo UCS, ΔE will definitely promote free charge generations, and thus could improve the short-circuit current. However, it should also be noted that, a large ΔE value is a disadvantage for improving the high open circuit voltage. Therefore, there ought to be an optimal ΔE for designing high-efficiency devices.
The D-to-A charge transfer amount is an important quantity to assess the degree of charge separations, which can be calculated by (4)where  means the summation over the A chains. Fig. 5 demonstrates the calculated nCT values with varying (a) t⊥AD, (b) tc ≡ t⊥DD = t⊥AA, and (c) ΔE. It can be seen that nCT is monotonically decreased with t⊥AD, while monotonically increased with tc and ΔE. We propose that nCT is an important indicator to assess whether UCS could take place. Fig. 4(a3), (b3), (c3) are those for the critical cases for triggering UCS. Those three exhibit almost the same value for nCT, which is around 0.76e (see the yellow circle region shown in Fig. 5). This means one can theoretically judge whether the relaxed S1 state undergoes UCS by observing its polarization degree.
 Fig. 5  Transferred charge amounts between the D and A chains for different values of (a) t⊥AD, (b) t⊥c, and (c) ΔE. The transient state between the CS and CT states is highlighted by the yellow circles. 
Finally, we assess the D(A) molecular packing morphology's effect on the UCS rate. It should be noted that the above calculations are all performed for BHJ OSCs with D(A) molecules being individually aggregated. Next, we calculate the scenario in systems with a uniform ⋯D/A/D/A/D/A⋯ packing morphology. Here, the D/A interchain coupling is set for three typical cases: (1) t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D, (2) t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D, and (3) one half of the system is t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D while the other half is t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D. The results show that the D-to-A charge transfer amount nCT is 0.17e, 0.25e, and 0.18e for the cases (1), (2) and (3), respectively. Clearly, the charge transfer is strikingly suppressed compared to the BHJ OSCs with the aggregated D(A) molecules. To understand this result, we further demonstrate the net charge distributions and the lattice configurations of the three parameter cases in Fig. 6. One can see that for case (1), charge transfer almost does not occur [Fig. 6(a1)]. However, the lattice configuration shows a clear local deformation [Fig. 6(b1)]. Within the local deformation is the strongly bound e–h pair, therefore, this is nothing but the Frenkel exction state. For case (2), it is shown that charge transfer takes place to some extent [Fig. 6(a2)], but the total amount is still small. This state can be regarded as a mixture of CT and Frenkel exciton states, behaving more as the Frenkel exciton. In particular, one can see that, even though some charge transfer takes place, the transferred net charges tend to be alternately distributed on the D and A chains like a charge-density-wave (CDW) state, without forming an individual electron or hole accumulation center. In case (3), as the system is asymmetric, the photocreated CT/Frenkel exciton state prefers to be formed in the low t⊥AD region. In practical terms, the low t⊥AD corresponds to the region with the sparsely distributed D and A molecules. Our results clearly show that UCS prefers to occur in the BHJ OSCs with phase separation of the D and A molecules rather than in the uniform alternate D/A structures. Such a point has already been experimentally observed in ref. 13, 23 and 24. This trend can also be understood from the electronic delocalization perspective. For the alternating D/A structures, the charge delocalization is strongly suppressed due to the weak hybridization of the wavefunctions of the D and A chains, which further hinders the occurrence of UCS.
 Fig. 6  Net charge distributions on the alternate D/A structures for (a1) t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D, (a2) t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D, and (a3) t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D for the lower half while t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D for the upper half system. The corresponding lattice deformations ỹl,i are shown in (b1), (b2), and (b3). 
IV. Summary
To summarize, we have built a multichain TB model to study the feature of the photoexcited state of BHJ OSCs, which can be applied to reveal the decisive conditions for triggering UCS. According to our results, we can summarize that two conditions are of essential importance: (i) the D and A molecules should be individually aggregated to clusters; (ii) the ratio between the interfacial D/A coupling and the internal D/D (A/A) coupling should be smaller than a threshold. In most fullerene acceptor BHJ OSCs, since fullerene is easily aggregated whilst the D/A inter-molecule distance is larger than the internal D/D (A/A) distance, these two conditions can be generally satisfied. That is the prime reason why UCS seems very common in these fullerene acceptor related devices. Furthermore, we have also proved that the D/A energetic offset can promote the UCS rate. In previous work,29 we have already theoretically proved that the energetic offset is also a promoting factor for the dissociation of the CT state. Therefore, we can make a conclusion that the energetic offset is certainly beneficial for the free charge generations, and thus could certainly improve the short-circuit current of the devices. Our work gives guidance for exploring the new generation BHJ OSCs, particularly for exploring the non-fullerene acceptor BHJ OSCs, such as all-polymer OSCs and small-molecule OSCs. Following the principles revealed, we can optimize the design to pursue higher PCE devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (11904254, 62074108), NSFC-Joint Foundation program of Shanxi Coal Based Low Carbon Nurturing Project (U1710115), Platform and Base Special Project of Shanxi (201805D131012-3) and Natural Science Foundation for Young Scientists of Shanxi Province (201901D211113). Research Project Supported by Shanxi Scholarship Council of China.
References
Y. Ji, L. Lu, X. Hao and K. Gao, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000130 CrossRef .
H. Bässler and A. Köhler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 28451 RSC .
S. M. Menke and R. J. Holmes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 499 RSC .
K. Feron, W. J. Belcher, C. J. Fell and P. C. Dastoor, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 17019 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Kaake, C. Zhong, J. A. Love, I. Nagao, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen, F. Huang, Y. Cao, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2000 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Kaake, J. J. Jasieniak, R. C. Bakus, G. C. Welch, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Kaake, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2264 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Kaake, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 075436 CrossRef .
C. M. Zhong, H. Choi, J. Y. Kim, H. Y. Woo, T. L. Nguyen, F. Huang, Y. Cao and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2036 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Jailaubekov, A. P. Willard, J. R. Tritsch, W. Chan, N. Sai, R. Gearba, L. G. Kaake, K. J. Williams, K. Leung, P. J. Rossky and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, K. Vandewal, S. R. Yost, M. E. Bahlke, L. Goris, M. A. Baldo, J. V. Manca and T. V. Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Jakowetz, M. L. Böhm, J. Zhang, A. Sadhanala, S. Huettner, A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11672 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef .
A. C. Jakowetz, M. L. Bohm, A. Sadhanala, S. Huettner, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 551 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamai, Y. Fan, V. O. Kim, K. Ziabrev, A. Rao, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, R. H. Friend and S. M. Menke, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Polkehn, P. Eisenbrandt, H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2017, 118, e25502 CrossRef .
E. R. Bittner and C. Silva, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3119 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, X. Xie and H. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4830–4835 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Monahan, K. W. Williams, B. Kumar, C. Nuckolls and X. Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 247003 CrossRef .
J. L. Bredas, E. H. Sargent and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Heitzer, B. M. Savoie, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7456 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Savoie, A. Rao, A. A. Bakulin, S. Gelinas, B. Movaghar, R. H. Friend, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2876 CrossRef CAS .
G. D'Avino, Y. Olivier, L. Muccioli and D. Beljonne, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3747 RSC .
C. Li, Y. Li, M. Zhang, L. Xu, W. Qin and K. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2746 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Zhang, C. Li, W. Qin and K. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 20676 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meng, Y. Li, K. Gao, W. Qin and L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20546 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 22, 2099 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Hao and K. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 123301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun and S. Stafström, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 164905 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun and S. Stafström, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 115420 CrossRef .
Koen H. Hendriks, A. S. G. Wijpkema, J. J. van Franeker, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Yi and Z. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22309 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme illustrating the charge generations in BHJ OSCs. In both (a) and (b), (1) indicates the process of excitons diffusing to the D/A interface and subsequently forming the CT state; (2) indicates the CT state dissociating into the charge separated (CS) state; (3) shows the direct ultrafast charge separation upon photoexcitation.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the multichain tight-binding model. (b) Schematic representation of the energy structure of the D/A hetero-structured multichain system. (c) Calculated projected density of states (PDOS) of the D and A chains, with the Lorentzian broadening parameter being adopted as 0.03t‖D.	 
	(3)

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated net charge distributions of the (a) CS and (b) CT state.	 

 	Fig. 4  Net charge densities on the D (solid lines) and A (dotted lines) chains for different parameters. The upper figures are for the cases with varying t⊥AD as (a1) 0.18, (a2) 0.25, (a3) 0.28, (a4) 0.35 and (a5) 0.5t‖D; the middle figures are those with varying tc ≡ t⊥AA = t⊥DD as (b1) 0.12, (b2) 0.15, (b3) 0.22, (b4) 0.23, (b5) 0.32t‖D; the bottom figures are those with varying ΔE as (c1) 0.1, (c2) 0.2, (c3) 0.24, (c4) 0.4 and (c5) 0.5t‖D. Noting that lines A1 and D1 (black) are for the interfaces, while A3 and D3 (red) are for the centering chains within the A and D region.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  Transferred charge amounts between the D and A chains for different values of (a) t⊥AD, (b) t⊥c, and (c) ΔE. The transient state between the CS and CT states is highlighted by the yellow circles.	 

 	Fig. 6  Net charge distributions on the alternate D/A structures for (a1) t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D, (a2) t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D, and (a3) t⊥AD = 0.2t‖D for the lower half while t⊥AD = 0.3t‖D for the upper half system. The corresponding lattice deformations ỹl,i are shown in (b1), (b2), and (b3).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
