Solution-processed inverted solar cells using an inorganic bulk heterojunction of iron pyrite nanocrystals and cadmium selenide quantum dots with a po ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA00836G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00836G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9758-9763Solution-processed inverted solar cells using an inorganic bulk heterojunction of iron pyrite nanocrystals and cadmium selenide quantum dots with a polymeric hole-transport medium

        
          
            Minwoo 
            Nam†
a, 
      
        
          
            Donghyeuk 
            Choi†
b, 
      
        
          
            Sungwoo 
            Kim
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Sunghee 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Keekeun 
            Lee
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Sang-Wook 
            Kim
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Republic of Korea. E-mail: keekeun@ajou.ac.kr
bDepartment of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Republic of Korea. E-mail: swkim@ajou.ac.kr
cNanomechanical Systems Research Division, Korea Institute of Machinery and Materials, Daejeon 305-343, Republic of Korea
Received 
      17th February 2014
    , Accepted 28th April 2014First published on 30th April 2014AbstractInverted solar cells were developed using a donor–acceptor (D–A) bulk heterojunction (BHJ) of iron pyrite nanocrystals (FeS2 NCs) and cadmium selenide quantum dots (CdSe QDs). The all-inorganic BHJ nanocomposites showed broad-range absorption and effective dynamics of charge dissociation and transfer through bi-continuous D–A interactions under a type II band-offset system. The developed solar cell, which contained an optimized ratio of FeS2–CdSe in the blend and a polymeric hole-transport layer between the photoactive layer and the anode electrode, showed a significantly enhanced photovoltaic efficiency. The long-term ambient stability of the inverted devices was better than that of conventional devices fabricated in this study, but was relatively lower than the air stability of other NC solar cells. Our findings suggest the potential of FeS2 NCs as an environmentally benign, earth-abundant material for solution-processed photovoltaic applications. The merits of an FeS2–CdSe D–A BHJ system with an inverted device architecture and its long-term stability are addressed.
Introduction
Colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) allow large-area solution processing and give rise to tunable band gaps through the quantum confinement effect.1 Solar cells using NCs have recently been shown to have great promise in third generation photovoltaic systems; the particular NC materials and device architecture used in these cells play important roles in their photovoltaic performance.2 Since their first significant demonstration in 2005,3 much work has been published on NC solar cells using various device architectures, such as Schottky diodes,4 NC-sensitized cells,5 depleted heterojunctions,6 and donor–acceptor (D–A) bulk heterojunctions (BHJs).7 Among the NC semiconductor materials available for solar cell applications, PbS is, to date, the most widely studied material as a result of its unique properties, including a large dielectric constant (∼170), a large exciton Bohr radius (18 nm), and a narrow bulk band gap (0.41 eV).8,9 These properties have led to continuously increasing power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) in PbS NC solar cells, from less than 1% (ref. 3) to over 8%,6 together with other benefits from extensive research and parallel improvements in nanoscience. However, to expand the range of available materials, there is a need to develop other low-cost semiconductor NCs free from heavy metals and with suitable optical band gaps and favourable electrical properties.
Iron pyrite (FeS2) is an environmentally benign, earth-abundant semiconductor with the highest availability as a raw material of all the existing semiconductor systems.10 Its unique advantages, such as its large optical absorption coefficient (over 105 cm−1), a suitable bulk energy band gap (∼0.95 eV) and an adequate minority carrier diffusion length (100–1000 nm), make colloidal FeS2 NCs a highly attractive option for solution-processed, ultra-low-cost photovoltaic solar cell applications.11,12 However, a suitable photovoltaic efficiency has not yet been reported in solar cells based on FeS2 NCs utilizing the structures of the Schottky barrier or a depleted heterojunction due to the absence of a photovoltage, FeS2 phase impurities, and a large density of surface states.12–14 It would appear that a D–A BHJ concept based on a type II band alignment is more suitable for FeS2 NC solar cells than other systems because a D–A BHJ accepts not only a non-zero open-circuit voltage (VOC) due to the built-in field at the D–A interfaces, but also has improved photogenerated carrier separation at the two nanoscale components.
A few recent studies using FeS2 NCs in organic–inorganic hybrid BHJ nanocomposites15,16 and in an all-inorganic BHJ system17 have shown the potential of FeS2 NCs as a new photovoltaic material. However, their low short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF) reflect the need for a better understanding of the properties of FeS2 NCs and for improving the charge separation and transport efficiencies in FeS2 NC-based BHJ nanocomposites to achieve reasonable photovoltaic efficiencies. In addition, there have been no reports on the lifetime of FeS2 NC solar cells, although stability is another very important factor in the development and commercialization of NC solar cells.
In the work reported here, we developed inverted solar cells based on nanocomposites of FeS2 NCs and cadmium selenide quantum dots (CdSe QDs), in which the FeS2 serves as a p-type semiconductor and the CdSe serves as an n-type component. Our all-inorganic BHJ blends allow photogenerated carrier separation at nanoscale interfaces with improved photovoltaic operation. The efficiency of these FeS2–CdSe devices was significantly improved by optimizing the blend ratio between the two components and by incorporating a polymeric hole-transport medium (HTM) between the BHJ layer and the top anode electrode. In our air stability test, the inverted structure provided better long-term ambient stability due to a high resistance to oxidation compared with the corresponding stability of a conventional structure, thereby promising a better suitability for commercialization. Our findings indicate the potential of solution-processed solar cells based on pyrite NCs with good optical properties and extremely low material costs.
Experimental details
Synthesis of FeS2 NCs
FeS2 NCs were synthesized using a previously reported method.18 A mixture of 0.1 g iron chloride (Sigma-Aldrich), 2.824 g oleic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 g octadecylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) was loaded in a 50 mL three-necked flask, heated to 120 °C, and stored under vacuum for 2 h to remove water. An injection solution was prepared by dissolving 0.096 g of sulfur (Strem Chemicals) in 5 mL of diphenylether (Sigma-Aldrich) in a flask. After degassing at 60 °C for 2 h, the solution was injected into the hot reaction solution at 220 °C under an N2 atmosphere. The reaction mixture was then heated at 220 °C for 3 h. The pyrite NCs were precipitated from the reaction solution by adding ethanol and then separated by centrifugation. The NCs were dispersed in chloroform and filtered using a 0.5 μm polytetrafluoroethylene filter.
Synthesis of CdSe QDs
A mixture of 5 g trioctylphosphine oxide (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2.5 g hexadecylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) in Flask 1 was heated at 120 °C and stored for 1 h under vacuum. After cooling to room temperature, 2 mL of trioctylphosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the flask and degassed at 120 °C for 1 h. Cadmium acetylacetonate (Strem Chemicals) (189.6 mg) in Flask 2 was heated to 120 °C for 1 h under vacuum. After cooling Flask 2 to room temperature, 0.6 mL of 1 M stock solution of trioctylphosphine selenide (Aldrich) was injected and N2 was introduced into the flask. The solution in Flask 1 was then heated to 360 °C under this N2 atmosphere, followed by injection of the solution in Flask 2 to Flask 1 at 350 °C with vigorous stirring. The reaction solution was maintained at 250 °C for 2 h and then cooled to 40 °C. The CdSe QDs were precipitated using ethanol and then dispersed in chloroform for solution processing.
Device fabrication
For the fabrication of the inverted-type solar cells, a chloroform solution consisting of FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs with a weight ratio of 1:1 was spin-coated on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (see Fig. 2a for photographs of the chloroform solutions of FeS2 NCs, CdSe QDs, their 1:1 blend, and the corresponding films spin-coated on bare glasses). A 1,2-ethanedithiol/acetonitrile solution was then spin-coated onto the nanocomposite for 1 min, followed by the spin-coating of pure acetonitrile to wash away any unbound ligands. Five cycles of this layer-by-layer process formed a 160–180 nm FeS2–CdSe photoactive layer. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) dissolved in dichlorobenzene was spin-coated on top of the inorganic nanocomposite with a thickness of ca. 30 nm as an HTM. Finally, a 60 nm Au counter electrode was thermally evaporated under a high vacuum condition of ∼10−6 Torr.
Characterization
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the synthesized FeS2 NCs were taken to evaluate their shape and size using a Tecnai G2 F30 S-Twin field emission (FE) transmission electron microscope (FEI). The crystal structures of the NCs were characterized using an Ultima III high-resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD) microscope (Rigaku) with a Cu-Kα radiation source. The method for measuring cyclic voltammetry (CV) data for FeS2 NCs has been reported elsewhere.19 The samples used for the cross-sectional microscopic images were prepared using a Nova 600 NanoLab focused ion beam system (FEI). Cross-sectional TEM images and energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) elemental analysis of the device were obtained using a Jeol JEM-2100F instrument operated at 200 kV. The current-to-voltage (J–V) characteristic measurement of the inverted solar cells was obtained using a source meter (Keithley 2400), for which the white light was provided by a 450 W Xe lamp (Oriel) equipped with an air mass (AM) 1.5G filter as a solar simulator. The surface topographies of the inorganic BHJ blends were observed using atomic force microscopy (AFM) (XE-100 microscope, Park Systems).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the material properties of the synthesized FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs. Fig. 1a shows the TEM image of well-dispersed FeS2 NCs with a diameter ranging between 10 and 15 nm. The high-resolution TEM image (Fig. 1b) shows a clear crystalline structure of the NCs with no obvious crystal defects. Our NCs have prominent 2θ peaks indexed to the (111), (200), (210), (211), (220) and (311) planes corresponding to the cubic crystal structure of standard pyrite (JCPDS 42-1340) (Fig. 1c). CV measurements are an easy and effective method to evaluate the position of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of semiconductor nanomaterials. Fig. 1d shows the CV data of FeS2 NCs with ferrocene as a reference, which were used to obtain the energy levels of the FeS2 NCs. The LUMO level can be calculated from the onset of the reduction peak and the LUMO of ferrocene using the following equation:LUMO (eV) = −4.8 – [(Eonset − E1/2(ferrocene)]where the ferrocene value of −4.8 eV indicates the vacuum energy level potential for an Ag/AgCl reference electrode.19 The CV result showed the onset of a reduction peak at −0.53 eV, resulting in a LUMO value of −3.84 eV. The HOMO level can be calculated from the optical band gap of the NCs of 1.41 eV, which is based on an onset wavelength of 880 nm (Fig. 2b). As a result, the HOMO/LUMO level of FeS2 NCs is −5.25/−3.84 eV. The LUMO level obtained is in a similar range to those reported previously,14,25 while a fundamental difference in the measurement method for determining the HOMO level may have resulted in a small difference in the HOMO and band gap values. A slightly higher band gap of 1.41 eV compared with previously reported values14,15 may be attributed to the difference in the synthesis process and the capping reagent, or to the oxygen alloying of pyrite.26
 Fig. 1  Material properties of synthesized nanomaterials. (a) TEM image, (b) high-resolution TEM image, (c) XRD pattern and (d) CV result for FeS2 NCs. (e) TEM image and (f) XRD pattern for CdSe QDs. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Photographs of the thin films of FeS2, CdSe and the 1:1 blend of the two species, prepared by spin-coating of the corresponding solutions on bare glass substrates, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. (b) UV-visible-NIR absorption spectra and (c) photoluminescence intensities of BHJ blends at different FeS2–CdSe ratios. 
The TEM image of the CdSe QDs (Fig. 1e) shows their mean diameter of ∼4 nm and a clear crystalline structure. The FeS2 NCs are non-spherical, whereas CdSe is spherical. The locations of the 2θ peaks for CdSe QDs match the reference diagrams for the corresponding bulk phases (Fig. 1f).

Fig. 2b shows the UV-visible-near-infrared (NIR) absorption spectra of FeS2–CdSe blends at different ratios. The blended samples show absorption profiles similar to those of FeS2 NCs, but the shoulder at 600 nm originates from the exciton peak of CdSe QDs. The broad spectral response of the blend samples is mainly attributed to the narrow band gap of FeS2 NCs that absorb across the spectrum from the UV to the NIR, as CdSe QDs have no spectral reaction beyond their absorption onset at 640 nm. Fig. 2c shows the photoluminescence (PL) intensity spectra of the blends to evaluate the charge dissociation efficiency between FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs. Even though both FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs can be excited, it is difficult to detect a PL signal for the FeS2 NCs owing to the intrinsically indirect semiconducting property of FeS2 crystals.20 The PL intensities of the blends were significantly quenched compared with that of the pure CdSe QD sample, suggesting efficient charge separation at the interfacial areas between the two nanomaterials. This indicates the existence of efficient non-radiative channels for charge transfer between the two components.
To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of FeS2 NCs, inverted-type solar cells were fabricated using the inorganic nanocomposite as a photoactive layer. Fig. 3a shows the cross-sectional TEM image of the device fabricated via solution processing, where the sequential layers of the FTO/FeS2–CdSe film/P3HT are clearly observed. The complete photoactive films prepared via five cycles of the layer-by-layer process were highly dense and flat due to the ability of the repeated deposition technique to gradually fill the cracks in the earlier films, whereas the film prepared via only one cycle of the deposition process showed a relatively rough film surface (see Fig. 5). The magnified TEM image of the nanocomposite in Fig. 3b shows that the FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs are uniformly distributed across the photoactive layer, where the small CdSe QDs fill the voids between large FeS2 NCs for bi-continuous interactions between the components, ultimately facilitating efficient charge separation and transfer. Fig. 3c shows the EDS elemental mapping images across the cross-section of the device. Each element (Sn, Fe, Cd and C) indicates the presence of the corresponding layers of the FTO, the BHJ blend of FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs, and P3HT, respectively, well stacked via solution processing. Based on the microscopic images in Fig. 3a and c, the thickness of the inorganic FeS2–CdSe BHJ layer and the P3HT HTM were determined to be ca. 160 nm and ca. 30 nm, respectively. The adjacent atomic number and similar X-ray characteristic values of Sn (Lα = 3.443) and Cd (Lα = 3.133) are expected to cause elemental interference between the two elements and the unexpectedly strong Cd signal in the FTO layer during EDS analysis, rather than diffusion of Cd element into the FTO layer during the solution-based layer-by-layer deposition process.
 Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of the developed inverted solar cell; (b) magnified TEM image of the FeS2–CdSe BHJ blend; and (c) EDS elemental mapping profiles (red for Sn of FTO, green for Fe of FeS2 NCs, grey for Cd of CdSe QDs, and blue for C of P3HT). 

Fig. 4a shows the energy band diagram of the solar cell. With the favourable type II band alignment, the photogenerated charge carriers can be separated and transferred at the D–A interfacial areas of the FeS2 NCs and the CdSe QDs. The transport of the photogenerated holes from the BHJ film to the top Au electrode is facilitated by the polymeric HTM.
 Fig. 4  (a) Energy band diagram of the solar cell. (b) Representative J–V characteristics of the inverted solar cells consisting of FeS2 NCs without an HTM and the FeS2 NC–CdSe QD (1:1) blend with or without an HTM. (c) J–V characteristics and (d) photovoltaic parameters of the devices as a function of FeS2–CdSe ratio in the presence of the HTM. 

Fig. 4b shows the J–V characteristics of the solar cells consisting of either FeS2 NCs (without the HTM) or the 1:1 BHJ of FeS2 and CdSe (without or with the HTM). The FeS2-only device did not show any significant photovoltaic efficiency, in agreement previously reported results,12 whereas the BHJ devices showed good photovoltaic operation under the AM 1.5G illumination. This suggests that the efficient separation and transport of charge carriers in the inorganic nanocomposites are dependent on the bi-continuous D–A interactions of a standard type II heterojunction system. In addition, the band offset of ∼0.8 eV between the HOMO of FeS2 and the LUMO of CdSe produces a built-in field at their heterojunction, thereby generating a non-zero VOC of ∼0.4 V. The devices with the HTM showed a significantly higher PCE than the device without the HTM. A large increase in the JSC value suggests efficient transport of the photogenerated charge carriers from the inorganic BHJ layer to the top electrode via the polymeric HTM, given that P3HT can be electronically coupled with both FeS2 NCs15 and CdSe QDs21 as a hole conductor. The series resistance (RS) of the devices was obtained by fitting the illuminated J–V characteristics with an ideal diode model. The decrease in RS from ∼54.1 to ∼35.5 Ω cm2, the values for the devices without and with the polymeric HTM, respectively, is mainly attributed to the enhancement in FF obtained by using the P3HT HTM; the RS is one of the critical factors limiting the FF of solar cells. The improvement in performance indicates the importance of the thin polymeric HTM in increasing the device efficiency by enhancing the hole injection into the HTM before recombination, by blocking the electron transport toward the top electrode, and providing a smooth interfacial contact between the BHJ layer and the top electrode.
To gain an insight into the effect of the blending ratio of D–A materials, Fig. 4c shows the J–V characteristics of the solar cells with different FeS2–CdSe ratios and Fig. 4d compares their photovoltaic parameters. The photovoltaic parameters depend on the blending ratio of FeS2 and CdSe; the PCE largely depends on the JSC value. The photovoltaic efficiency dramatically increased with the increase in CdSe content in the blend and reached a peak at an FeS2 NC–CdSe QD weight ratio of 1:1, which is considered to be the optimum weight ratio of the two inorganic components; moreover, the best-performing 1:1 device among more than eight devices investigated showed a VOC value of 0.4 V, a JSC value of 4.96 mA cm−2 and an FF value of 0.43. On increasing the CdSe QD content, a slow reduction in the efficiency was observed. It can be expected that the D–A ratio has a great impact on the nanomorphology of the BHJ composites and the interactive networks between the components, both of which affect the efficiencies of exciton diffusion, exciton dissociation, charge transport and charge collection.
The AFM topographies of the inorganic BHJ blends in Fig. 5 show the nanomorphology of films for different D–A ratios. Aggregation and the consequent formation of an inefficient film morphology should be avoided through the optimal blending of the D–A materials in BHJ solar cells. However, a relatively high loading of the FeS2 NCs or CdSe QDs increased the surface roughness of the film, which is due to the aggregation of the nanomaterials, thereby leading to the low efficiency. Notably, the blend with an FeS2–CdSe weight ratio of 2:1 showed remarkably large agglomerates compared with the other blends with optimal or high CdSe loadings, which may explain the significantly lower performance in the devices with a high FeS2 concentration. The reason why the FeS2–CdSe weight ratio of 1:1 gave the best results is associated with several variables in a complicated manner, but one of the main reasons is related to the dependence of the nanomorphology of the inorganic BHJ blends on the weight ratio of the two nanomaterials. In BHJ blends with an optimum FeS2–CdSe weight ratio of 1:1, small and spherical CdSe QDs can be located at void sites between large and non-spherical FeS2 NCs, which prevents the agglomeration of the components and facilitates the continuous conductive links between the D–A materials. In contrast, in the case of a high FeS2 concentration, small CdSe QDs cannot infiltrate between the large FeS2 agglomerates, leaving the voids between the FeS2 NCs unconnected, whereas small CdSe QDs tend to agglomerate rather than to form charge-separating junctions with FeS2 NCs at high CdSe concentrations.
 Fig. 5  AFM surface topographies of the BHJ blends and expected distribution of nanomaterials for different FeS2–CdSe weight ratios (scale bar = 200 nm). 
To examine the long-term air stability of our inverted solar cells, the developed devices were stored without encapsulation under ambient conditions and their J–V characteristics were tested under AM 1.5G illumination. Fig. 6 compares the air stability between the conventional and inverted devices over a period of 10 days. The conventional device, consisting of an ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/FeS2–CdSe blend/Al, was fabricated by the same procedure as for the inverted device, except that a 40 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer served as an HTM instead of P3HT. The efficiencies of the conventional devices were decreased to less than half of their initial values after only 1 day of storage and were totally degraded after almost 4 days. However, the efficiencies of the inverted devices were maintained at over 20% for 7 days. For the conventional devices, a significant reduction in the JSC, VOC and FF values was observed simultaneously during ambient storage, leading to the very rapid degradation of the overall efficiency, whereas the VOC and FF values of the inverted devices were not considerably decreased for a long time. These results clearly indicate that the polymeric HTM operates as a barrier to preventing the injection of oxygen and the diffusion of the top electrode to the photoactive layer, thereby improving the long-term air stability of the device. For the conventional structure, the absence of the polymeric interlayer and the high reactivity of Al to oxygen result in a more unstable contact between the inorganic BHJ layer and the top electrode. However, the degree of efficiency degradation for the inverted device of approximately 85% after 10 days is higher than those of the common semiconductor NC solar cells (e.g. PbS9 or CdSe22) reported previously and also that of the inverted PbS QD solar cells fabricated in this study (Fig. 6). The structure of the inverted solar cell based on PbS QD, consisting of FTO/PbS QDs/polymer/Au, and its fabrication procedure is similar to those of the inverted solar cells based on FeS2; further details of the PbS device can be found in our previous report.23 The low air stability in solar cells based on FeS2 NCs can be attributed to a considerably higher reactivity of FeS2 NCs towards oxidation. Thus a better surface passivation of FeS2 NCs, e.g. the use of a suitable surfactant in the synthesis procedure, is required to produce FeS2 NCs that are stable in air.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of JSC and PCE as a function of storage time between conventional and inverted inorganic BHJ solar cells stored under ambient conditions. The PCE of PbS QD-based inverted solar cells based on FTO/PbS QDs/polymer/Au is also shown. 
Our optimized solar cells showed relatively high JSC and FF values compared with those of previously reported FeS2 NC-based BHJ solar cells,15–17 suggesting the merits of an FeS2–CdSe BHJ system with an inverted device architecture. An insertion of effective carrier-transport interlayers for electrons (e.g. polyfluorene derivatives) and holes (e.g. MoO3)24 can be considered to improve the efficiency, as well as enhancing the long-term ambient stability of the solar cells based on FeS2. Alternatively, a better surface passivation of the FeS2 NCs is a good way to develop high-efficiency solar cells that are stable in air.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated inverted-type all-inorganic BHJ solar cells based on FeS2 NCs. The optimized device, consisting of FeS2 NCs and CdSe QDs at a weight ratio of 1:1 and a polymeric HTM between the photoactive layer and the top electrode, had a good photovoltaic performance under AM 1.5G illumination. The air stability of the inverted device was better than the corresponding stability of the device with a conventional structure also fabricated in this study. Our experimental findings provide a path towards the development of efficient solution-processed, low-cost solar cells based on colloidal FeS2 NCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the New & Renewable Energy Core Technology Program (no. 20133030000140) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Priority Research Centers Program (2009-0093826), Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, J. D. Bass, P. M. Rice, T. Topuria, L. Krupp, S. M. Thon, A. H. Ip, R. Debnath, H.-C. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Piliego, L. Protesescu, S. Z. Bisri, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3054 CAS .
H. Zhang, K. Cheng, Y. M. Hou, Z. Fang, Z. X. Pan, W. J. Wu, J. L. Hua and X. H. Zhong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11235 RSC .
P. Maraghechi, A. J. Labelle, A. R. Kirmani, X. Lan, M. M. Adachi, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, A. Lee, Z. Ning, A. Fischer, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, J. Osmond and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 529 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, J. Gao, M. T. Lloyd, O. E. Semonin, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ennaoui and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater., 1986, 14, 461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bi, Y. Yuan, C. L. Exstrom, S. A. Darveau and J. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Steinhagen, T. B. Harvey, C. J. Stolle, J. Harris and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2352 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Wang, Y.-T. Jiang, C.-C. Lin, S.-S. Li, Y.-T. Wang, C.-C. Chen and C.-W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Lin, D.-Y. Wang, H.-C. Yen, H.-L. Chen, C.-C. Chen, C.-M. Chen, C.-Y. Tang and C.-W. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 405207 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Layek, S. Middya and P. P. Ray, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2013, 24, 3749 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirkeminde, R. Scott and S. Ren, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7649 RSC .
J. Puthussery, S. Seefeld, N. Berry, M. Gibbs and M. Law, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, M. Kang, S. Kim, J.-H. Heo, J.
H. Noh, S. H. Im, S. I. Seok and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ennaoui, S. Fiechter, C. Pettenkofer, N. Alonso-Vante, K. Bűker, M. Bronold, C. Hȍpfner and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1993, 29, 289 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Krűger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nam, T. Lee, S. Kim, S. Kim, S.-W. Kim and K.-K. Lee, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 Search PubMed .
B. J. Richardson, L. Zhu and Q. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, Y. Zhang, M. Law and R. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† M. Nam and D. Choi contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
LUMO (eV) = −4.8 – [(Eonset − E1/2(ferrocene)]

 	Fig. 1  Material properties of synthesized nanomaterials. (a) TEM image, (b) high-resolution TEM image, (c) XRD pattern and (d) CV result for FeS2 NCs. (e) TEM image and (f) XRD pattern for CdSe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photographs of the thin films of FeS2, CdSe and the 1:1 blend of the two species, prepared by spin-coating of the corresponding solutions on bare glass substrates, followed by annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. (b) UV-visible-NIR absorption spectra and (c) photoluminescence intensities of BHJ blends at different FeS2–CdSe ratios.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of the developed inverted solar cell; (b) magnified TEM image of the FeS2–CdSe BHJ blend; and (c) EDS elemental mapping profiles (red for Sn of FTO, green for Fe of FeS2 NCs, grey for Cd of CdSe QDs, and blue for C of P3HT).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Energy band diagram of the solar cell. (b) Representative J–V characteristics of the inverted solar cells consisting of FeS2 NCs without an HTM and the FeS2 NC–CdSe QD (1:1) blend with or without an HTM. (c) J–V characteristics and (d) photovoltaic parameters of the devices as a function of FeS2–CdSe ratio in the presence of the HTM.	 

 	Fig. 5  AFM surface topographies of the BHJ blends and expected distribution of nanomaterials for different FeS2–CdSe weight ratios (scale bar = 200 nm).	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of JSC and PCE as a function of storage time between conventional and inverted inorganic BHJ solar cells stored under ambient conditions. The PCE of PbS QD-based inverted solar cells based on FTO/PbS QDs/polymer/Au is also shown.	 
Footnote
† M. Nam and D. Choi contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
