Structural and electronic properties of organo-halide hybrid perovskites from ab initio molecular dynamics   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP00599J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP00599J
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9394-9409Structural and electronic properties of organo-halide hybrid perovskites from ab initio molecular dynamics†

        
          
            Claudio 
            Quarti
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Edoardo 
            Mosconi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Filippo 
            De Angelis
          
          
        
      *
      Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO), CNR-ISTM, Via Elce di Sotto 8, I-06123, Perugia, Italy. E-mail: filippo@thch.unipg.it
Received 
      30th January 2015
    , Accepted 5th March 2015First published on 5th March 2015AbstractThe last two years have seen the unprecedentedly rapid emergence of a new class of solar cells, based on hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites. The success of this class of materials is due to their outstanding photoelectrochemical properties coupled to their low cost, mainly solution-based, fabrication techniques. Solution processed materials are however often characterized by an inherent flexible structure, which is hardly mapped into a single local minimum energy structure. In this perspective, we report on the interplay between structural and electronic properties of hybrid lead iodide perovskites investigated using ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations, which allow the dynamical simulation of disordered systems at finite temperature. We compare the prototypical MAPbI3 (MA = methylammonium) perovskite in its cubic and tetragonal structure with the trigonal phase of FAPbI3 (FA = formamidinium), investigating different starting arrangements of the organic cations. Despite the relatively short time scale amenable to AIMD, typically a few tens of ps, this analysis demonstrates the sizable structural flexibility of this class of materials, showing that the instantaneous structure could significantly differ from the time and thermal averaged structure. We also highlight the importance of the organic–inorganic interactions in determining the fluxional properties of this class of materials. A peculiar spatial localization of the valence and conduction band edges is also found, with a dynamics in the range of 0.1 ps, which is associated with the positional dynamics of the organic cations within the cubo-octahedral perovskite cage. This asymmetry in the spatial localization of the band edges is expected to ease exciton dissociation and assist the initial stages of charge separation, possibly constituting one of the key factors for the impressive photovoltaic performances of hybrid lead-iodide perovskites.
Claudio Quarti
Claudio Quarti earned his Master Degree and his PhD in Materials Engineering from the Politecnico di Milano, in the group of vibrational spectroscopy Castiglioni-Zerbi. After that, he spent one year and a half as a post-doc at the CNR-ISTM of Perugia, under the supervision of Dr Filippo De Angelis. There, he was devoted to the study of structural and electronic of hybrid perovskite for photovoltaic applications. Recently, he gained a post-doc position at the University of Mons. His main research interests include the study of opto-electronic properties and the spectroscopic response of systems in the condensed phase, through first principle calculations.
Edoardo Mosconi
Edoardo Mosconi obtained his PhD degree in 2011 in theoretical chemistry from University of Perugia under the supervision of Prof. Antonio Sgamellotti and Dr Filippo De Angelis, working on Computational Modeling of Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics and Complex Reaction Mechanisms. From January 2012 he is a Post Doctoral Researcher at CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology (ISTM-CNR) in Perugia, at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO). His main research interests are in the field of new generation photovoltaics (Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, Organic Photovoltaics, and Perovskite Solar Cells), employing DFT, TDDFT, ab initio Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics and GW methods to predict and interpret the optical and electronic properties of materials and interfaces.
Filippo De Angelis
Filippo De Angelis is a senior research scientist and deputy director at the CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology, in Perugia, Italy. He is the founder and co-leader of the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics in Perugia. He earned a BS in Chemistry 1996 and a PhD in Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry in 1999, both from the University of Perugia, Italy. He is an expert in the development and application of first principles computational methods to the simulation of the structural, electronic and optical properties of metallorganic, inorganic and hybrid materials and molecules and related interfaces. The main application studies are in the field of solar energy materials, with emphasis on dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells. His main contribution constitutes in the study of the excited states of dyes and perovskite absorbers, in the modelling of inorganic semiconductors and in the alignment of energy levels at sensitized semiconductor interfaces. Additional areas of expertise are in the field of non-linear optics, luminescent materials for OLEDs and organometallic reactivity and catalysis. He is the 2007 recipient of the Raffaello Nasini Gold Medal of the Inorganic Chemistry Division of the Italian Chemical Society.
1. Introduction
The field of photovoltaics has recently witnessed the swift surge of a new class of solar cells based on organo-halide lead perovskites. The unique properties of this class of materials allowed researchers worldwide to achieve impressive photovoltaic performances in just few years, at the point that hybrid perovskites have been claimed as the “next big thing in photovoltaics”.1 Their first application in the field of photovoltaics was reported by Kojima et al. and it traces back only to 2009,2 but the use of the lead-halide based compounds, like KPbI3, in this field was already envisaged in the 1980s.3,4 From the seminal work of Kojima et al.,2 the interest towards hybrid lead halide perovskites increased exponentially, followed by an unprecedented boost in their photovoltaic performances. The use of TiO2 surface treatment before the perovskite deposition allowed Park et al. to improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from the original 3.8% obtained by Kojima et al.2 to 6.5%.5 Subsequently, the use of the spiro-MeOTAD as a solid state hole transporting material (HTM) allowed further improvements in both the stability and the PCE of organic–inorganic perovskite based-solar cells, reaching independently values of 9.7% and 10.2%, respectively.6,7 The development of new cell structures and the improvement over the materials morphology control signalled further steps forward the development of performing perovskite based devices, with PCE of 12.0% reported by Seok and coworkers,8 15% by Grätzel and coworkers,9 and 15.4% by Snaith and coworkers.10 The latter result, obtained with a planar heterojunction architecture, is of particular technological interest, paving the way for the production of stable and highly reproducible devices. The current PCE records in perovskite-based solar cells, 19.3% reported in the scientific literature11 and a certified 20.1%,12 make this new technology competitive with respect to other, long standing technologies, such as thin-film CdTe devices.13
Together with the impressive improvement in the materials synthesis techniques and in the device design, there has been a great effort made to unveil the basic properties of this class of materials. Snaith and coworkers firstly demonstrated the capability of methylammonium lead-halide to act both as a photon absorber and as an electron transporting material.7 The use of vibrational spectroscopy allowed us to identify the markers of the crystalline order,14,15 and to highlight the importance of the orientational dynamics of the methylammonium, MA, organic cation in the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (here on MAPbI3),16 which is the most investigated organic–inorganic perovskite in photovoltaics. Time-resolved UV-vis absorption and photoluminescence measurements probed the micrometer diffusion length of the photo-generated species, in CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) and in its chlorine doped analogue, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx),17,18 and demonstrated their inherent low charge recombination rates.19 Further studies reported by Petrozza et al. finally established the nature of the photo-generated species, demonstrating that free electrons and holes are the main photo-generated species in the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite under typical photovoltaic working conditions.20 Hodes et al. have further demonstrated the ambipolar response of the photoactive perovskite layer within the solar cell, with carriers generated on the hole transporting and electron transporting perovskite interfaces.21,22
Theoretical simulations have assumed a crucial role in the fundamental understanding of hybrid-organo halide perovskites. The unexpected agreement of the standard DFT predicted band gap with experiments23,24 highlighted the role of both relativistic and electronic correlation effects. Mosconi et al. suggested the possibility that such an agreement is merely fortuitous, due to an error cancellation between contributions from electronic correlation and spin–orbit-coupling (SOC).24 A giant spin–orbit coupling effect was indeed reported by Even et al., which led to the expected underestimate of the SOC-DFT calculated band-gap.25 State-of-the-art SOC-GW calculations have then delivered improved band-gap values, confirming the importance of SOC and correlation effects.26–28 Recently, Menendez Proupin et al. also confirmed the importance of the subtle balance between electronic correlation and SOC, based on hybrid DFT calculations.29 The introduction of relativistic SOC contributions in DFT calculations pointed out also very peculiar features of the band structure of hybrid lead-halide perovskites, as the Rashba–Dresselhaus effect, i.e. a splitting in the momentum space of the spin bands.26,29,30 The specific role of the Rashba–Dresselhaus splitting in their photovoltaic working mechanism of the hybrid perovskite is still to be clarified, but the presence of two decoupled spin channels could provide opportunities to exploit the spin and orbital degrees of freedom in the photoinduced effect of photovoltaics.30
Electronic structure calculations have also been at the basis of the analysis of the claimed ferroelectric properties of MAPbI3. A permanent polarization of the MAPbI3 in the tetragonal β-phase under an external electric field has been reported by Stoumpos et al.,31 and also the presence of ∼100 nm size ferroelectric domains in MAPbI3 has been observed.32 However, contributions from ferroelectricity to the photovoltaics working mechanisms of this class of materials were not conclusively demonstrated.32 A theoretical estimate of 38 μC cm−2 for the polarization of the MAPbI3 perovskites has been provided by Frost et al. from DFT calculations,33 a value in the same order of magnitude of traditional ferroelectric oxides. Other research groups have however provided much smaller polarization values for MAPbI3, ∼4 μC cm−2,34,35 as well as for the CH(NH2)2SnI3 perovskite (here on FASnI3), ∼5 μC cm−2.36 All these results thus suggest a potentially reduced role of bulk ferroelectricity in the photovoltaic properties of this class of materials. As a matter of fact, we recently reported that despite a (mild) ferroelectric phase is the most stable structure for MAPbI3 at zero temperature, disordered structures lay just 0.02 eV higher per unit formula,34 thus being accessible at room temperature. Theoretical simulations have also been fundamental to study other basic aspects of hybrid halide perovskites, as the role of the MA cation,34,38–40 the role of the MAPbI3 and TiO2 interface,41,42 the transport properties,26,43–45 the energetics of defects,46,47 and the role of van der Waals interactions.48–50
One of the main advantages of this class of materials is the possibility to resort to low cost, solution synthesis techniques, paving the way for the production of low cost perovskite-based devices. On the other hand, solution processed materials generally have an inherently “soft” structure. For instance, the orientational dynamics of the MA cation in the cubo-octahedra cavity of MAPbI3 has been long time pointed out in the literature.51,52 In this regard, the description of this class of materials should be able to account for this inherent structural flexibility. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) represent an interesting simulation tool in this sense, since they directly consider the structural flexibility of the material retaining a first principles description of their electronic structure. In addition, AIMD tools allow researchers to simulate the material under conditions closer to the operative one, i.e. at finite and varying temperature or pressure. To the best of our knowledge, only four molecular dynamics investigations have been reported in the literature on hybrid metal-halide perovskites, three in the high temperature cubic α-phase,16,38,53 and one in the room temperature tetragonal β-phase of the prototypical MAPbI3.34
In this perspective, we wish to provide a unified view of recent results from previous Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics simulations, carried out on the α-phase,16 and on the β-phase of MAPbI3.34 Besides, we report the results from additional AIMD simulations on the β-phase of MAPbI3 and on the α-phase of the CH(NH2)2PbI3 perovskite, hereafter FAPbI3. Here, we focus on the large structural flexibility of hybrid lead iodide perovskites in relation to: (i) the different crystallographic structure (cubic/tetragonal); (ii) the effect of different organic cations (MA vs. FA); and (iii) the different starting orientation of the organic cations. In addition we demonstrate that the ion dynamics of this class of materials results in the localization of the valence and conduction electronic states, which is expected to facilitate charge separation and to reduce carrier recombination.
The manuscript is organized as follows. In the Section 2, we detail the structural models and computational methods employed. In the Section 3.1, we discuss the structural features of the MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 perovskites. In the Section 3.2, we focus on the electronic properties of these materials. In the Section 4, we summarize our results, in relation with their implications in the photovoltaic field.
2. Models and methods
We investigate the cubic, α-phase and the tetragonal, β-phase of the MAPbI3 hybrid perovskite, resorting to the models reported in ref. 16 and 34 for these two phases, respectively. An additional structural model for the β-phase of MAPbI3 and for the α-phase of FAPbI3 is presented here for the first time. All the investigated structural models are depicted in Fig. 1. The β-phase of the MAPbI3 is simulated by a 2 × 2 × 2 tetragonal supercell, and it contains 32 MAPbI3 chemical units. While there are claims that this supercell may be insufficient to capture the long range disorder of the MA cations,73 still it should be reasonable for qualitative comparisons. The cell parameters are fixed at twice the experimental value from the values by Poglitsch and Weber (a = b = 17.71 Å, c = 25.32 Å).51 Here, we use the two models reported in ref. 34, named MA β1 and MA β3, and an additional new structure, named MA β2. These three structures differ in the starting orientation of the MA cations. MA β1 is characterized by an isotropic orientation of the MA cations within the ab-plane, and an anisotropic orientation with respect to the c-axis, with the MA cations tilted by ∼30° with respect to the ab-plane. The present model shows a polarization along the c-axis of 4.41 μC cm−2.34 The β2 and β3 model show an isotropic distribution of the MA cations both with respect to the ab-plane and along the c-axis and they are thus paraelectric. The β2 structure possesses a symmetry plane at half of the c cell parameter, with the MA cations lying upper/lower to such a plane that has the nitrogen atoms pointing down/up. In other words, β2 is globally paraelectric but it has two domains with opposite orientation of the MA cations (see Fig. 1). β3 instead is both locally and globally paraelectric.
 Fig. 1  Top view and side view of the structural models for MAPbI3 and FAPbI3: the tetragonal β-phase of MAPbI3 (MA β1,2,3) and the cubic-α phase of MAPbI3 (MA α) and the triclinic, pseudo-cubic-α phase of FAPbI3 (FA α). For the tetragonal MA β1,2,3 structures, we report also the starting orientation of the MA cations. The red-arrows represent the cell parameters. 
The α-phase of MAPbI3, here-on named MA α, is simulated using a 2 × 2 × 2 cubic supercell and it contains 8 MAPbI3 chemical units. The cell parameter was fixed to twice the experimental value reported by Poglitsch (12.66 Å),51 and the initial orientation of the 8 MA cations was along the [111] direction. Finally, the α-phase of FAPbI3, here on FA α, is simulated with a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of the XRD experimental trigonal structure from ref. 31, with the cell parameters doubled with respect to the experimental parameters (a = b = 17.96 Å, c = 22.01 Å). The α-FAPbI3 structure reported by Stoumpos et al. does not show the typical octahedral tilting found for instance in the β-MAPbI3, thus being more similar to a cubic structure. For this reason, we will refer to α-FAPbI3 as “pseudo-cubic”.
Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics54 simulations have been performed on all these structures, as implemented in the Quantum-Espresso package.55 All calculations are performed with PBE exchange–correlation functional,56 along with scalar-relativistic (SR), ultrasoft57 pseudopotentials and a 25/200 Ry cutoff for wavefunction/density plane wave expansion. A time step of 5 a.u., an electronic mass of 400 a.u, and real ionic masses have been used, except for the hydrogen that has been deuterated. For MA α, a time step of 4 a.u. was used and all the ionic masses are real. All the simulations, except MA α, are conducted at 350 K without constraints. The simulation on the MA α system has been carried out at 319 K. To avoid possible phase transitions to the room temperature stable tetragonal β-phase, which takes place at 327 K, we have fixed the lead atoms in their cubic sites. For more details regarding the assumptions introduced for MA α, we refer to ref. 16. In all cases, the simulation time was at least 12 ps, after a few picoseconds of thermalization.
The importance of spin–orbit coupling in the electronic properties of this class of materials has been already highlighted in the literature,24–29 but its impact on the structural properties has also been shown to be relatively small with comparable equilibrium geometries calculated by SR- and SOC-DFT.26 This justifies the use of SR-DFT as the electronic structure basis for AIMD simulations.
We also notice that our as well as previously reported AIMD simulations do not include van der Waals interactions. While van der Waals interactions may surely affect the dynamics of organo-halide perovskites (as any other change in the interaction potential would do) we previously showed that they do not affect neither the shape of the crystalline cell of MAPbI3 (i.e. the c/a ratio) nor the energetics with respect to the cation orientation.34 Since here we mainly compare the properties of similar materials, we believe the present level of theory to be sufficient for their qualitatively homogeneous description.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Structure and dynamics of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 perovskites
An in-depth understanding of the structure of hybrid lead halide perovskites requires the use of different experimental techniques, probing different spatial scales, from the crystal grains to the local octahedral distortion, and the inherent dynamics of the structure. To the best of the author's knowledge, the structure of this class of materials has been investigated mainly through X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements,31,51,58–60 but such a technique is informative only of the static (long time scale), long range order of the material and it provides limited indications of the local order or of the structure dynamics. Few vibrational spectroscopic investigations have been reported in the literature, pointing out the different time-scale of the inorganic framework dynamics (below 100 cm−1), of the librations of the MA cations (below 200 cm−1) and of the internal vibrations of the MA cations (above 300 cm−1).14–16 Also the analysis of the radial distribution function (RDF) of specific atomic species, obtained from X-ray diffraction, was particularly useful to unveil the inherent local disorder of hybrid metal halide perovskites.60,61 In Fig. 2, we report the RDF, obtained from our AIMD simulations, associated with the inorganic framework of the investigated structures. The theoretical data for the β-phase of MAPbI3 are also compared with the available experimental data,60 while the RDF of the MA α and FA α are reported for the sake of comparison. The general agreement between theory and experiment for β-MAPbI3 is quite good, especially for the β1 model. A very small signal at ∼5.5 Å is found experimentally, which is not paralleled by our calculations. It is worth mentioning however that the analysis of the experimental RDF from ref. 60 pointed out the presence of a significant fraction of disordered domains (∼70%) in the sample. Thus, the fact that such a signal is not found in the periodic crystalline model is consistent with its assignment to spatial disorder. Notice that the most stable among our calculated MAPbI3 structures, i.e. MA β1,16 closely resembles the most recently reported experimental structure found at 180 K,62 showing a similar optimized cell shape to the experimental one.34 This suggests the calculated MA β1 structure to be associated with the low-temperature, partly ordered, MAPbI3 phase of ref. 62.
 Fig. 2  Radial distribution function (RDF) associated with the inorganic framework of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, obtained from CP simulations; (upper panel) RDF of three structural models for the tetragonal MA β1, β2 and β3, characterized by a different starting orientation of the MA cations, compared with the experiment. The theoretical intensity is normalized with respect to the intensity of the I–I peak at 4.5 Å; (central panel) theoretical RDF for the cubic, MA α perovskite; (lower panel) theoretical RDF of the cubic, FA α. Experimental RDF from ref. 60, adapted with permission from J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Structure of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Within Mesoporous Titanium Dioxide: Active Material in High Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
We observe that the different starting orientation of the MA cations for the MA β1,2 and 3 structures (see Fig. 2) results in a different broadening and relative height of the peaks in the RDF, thus demonstrating that the structure and the dynamics of the inorganic framework is not decoupled from the organic component, as discussed in a previous work.16 The peaks in the RDF become broader going from the β1 to β2 and β3 structure, with a larger broadening that can be addressed to a smaller degree of long-range order (static disorder) and/or to a less “rigid” structure (dynamic disorder). Note that static techniques, such as the XRD, are quite insensitive to the orientation of the MA cations and to their effects on the structure of the inorganic component. In fact, in Fig. S1 (ESI†), we show that the theoretical XRD patterns computed on the average structures over the whole simulation time (12 ps) for the MA β1,2 and 3 structures are almost the same, differing in very weak signals which are not resolved in the experimental data.
Moving to the α-MAPbI3 phase, we found much broader peaks and a general different shape of the RDF at a distance larger than 6 Å, as expected from the different crystal structure. The larger broadening of the RDF in the case of α-MAPbI3 is clearly associated with the inherent larger disorder of this phase, consistently with the fact that such a phase is stable at high temperature; on the other hand, we will show that such behavior is also connected to a much faster rotational dynamics of the MA cations (see Section 3.2). Finally, the RDF calculated for the FA α phase resembles that of the β-MAPbI3 models rather than that of the MA α phase, despite the different crystalline structure.
One of the main advantages of molecular dynamics simulations relies on the possibility of following the value of specific structural variables and of its evolution in time, thus obtaining a deeper description of the system under investigation. One of the most important structural parameters, which determines the final crystalline structure of ABX3 perovskites is the rotation or titling of the BX6 octahedra along the pseudo-cubic axes, as discussed by Glazer.63 A fully cubic structure is characterized by null rotations of the PbI6 octahedra, or by a a0a0a0 structure in the Glazer notation. In other words, the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles measured along each of the three pseudo-cubic axes are zero, as schematically depicted in the Fig. 3a. The tetragonal, β-phase of MAPbI3 is instead characterized by an “out-of-phase” rotation of the PbI6 octahedra along the c-axis,31,58 or by a a0a0c− structure in the Glazer notation,63 as depicted in Fig. 3b. Such a structure results in alternating positive and negative I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles along the c-axis. For the investigated structures, we have followed the evolution of all the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles within the simulation cell (in Fig. S2, ESI,† we report their average, without sign, along the three pseudo-cubic axes). In Fig. 3c, we have plotted the distributions of the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles along the three pseudo-cubic axes, as obtained from our AIMD simulations. The main difference of the tetragonal MA β1,2,3 with respect to the cubic MA α and pseudo-cubic FA α structures is found along the [001] directions, as expected from the aforementioned octahedral rotation. For the MA α and FA α structures, the distributions along [001] have a maximum for a value of the dihedral I–Pb–Pb–I angle of 0° and it oscillates mainly between ±20°. In contrast, the distribution of the dihedral angles for the tetragonal MA β1,2,3 along [001] shows two maxima at ±30°, corresponding to the “out-of-phase” rotation of the octahedra along the [001] direction. Note that such a value of the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle is partly overestimated with respect to the experimental values from Kawamura et al., 21°,58 and from Stoumpos et al., 16°.31 However, such a behavior was found also for static DFT calculations, thus the tilting overestimation is probably inherent to the employed electronic structure method64 or it could be a consequence of the short simulation times which may not allow a full thermalization of the slow atomic motion components.
 Fig. 3  (a) I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle for a cubic crystal, characterized by a null rotation of the PbI6 octahedra (a0a0a0 in the Glazer notation);63 (b) I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle for a tetragonal crystal, characterized by an “out-of-phase” rotation of the PbI6 octahedra along the c-axis (a0a0c− in the Glazer notation);63 (c) distribution of the values assumed by all the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles within the cell during the AIMD simulations, for the MA α and FA α structures (left panel) and the MA β1,2,3, (right panel). The distributions are reported for the crystallographic directions corresponding to the pseudo-cubic axes. 
Focusing on the tetragonal structure, we found two important results. First, also for the “more rigid” MA β1 structure, all the distributions show a broadening of the order of 20° along the [110], [1−10], and 10° along the [001] direction, thus pointing to a certain degree of structural flexibility for this class of materials. Second, for the MA β3 structure the distributions of the dihedral angles along the [110] and [1−10] directions show two distinct maxima around ±10°, thus demonstrating that MA β3 is characterized by a a−b−c− structure, different from the a0a0c− structure proposed for the MAPbI3 perovskite.31,59 On the other hand, previous static DFT calculations showed that the MA β3 structure is less stable than MA β1, by only 0.02 eV per formula unit.34 It is therefore possible that at room temperature the most stable, a0a0c− structure (MA β1) evolves to the less stable a−b−c− structure, as a consequence of a various random reorientations of the MA cations, which take place on the picoseconds time-scale.51,52 Then, the system remains in such distorted structure, as long as various rotations of the MA cations bring it back to the more stable a0a0c− like structure (MA β1). This result however demonstrates that the actual structure of the MAPbI3 perovskite can deviate significantly from the nominal a0a0c− structure, highlighted from XRD measurements.
From Fig. 3, we also observe that the MA α and FA α structures show a broader distribution of the I–Pb–Pb–I angles with respect to the tetragonal structures, thus pointing to a larger flexibility for cubic and pseudo-cubic structures. We also observe that the MA α structure shows a slight splitting of the dihedral angle distribution along [001], as in the case of the tetragonal structures, although to a much smaller extent. This behavior could be a signature of the initial stages of a cubic → tetragonal phase transition (our simulations on the MA α structure are carried out at the edge of the phase transition temperature). However, it is worth noting that for MA α a constraint on the motion of the lead atoms was imposed, fixing them to the cubic sites; thus, it is difficult to assess whether such a peculiar feature is specific of α-MAPbI3 over α-FAPbI3 or if it is due to this constraint.
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites are characterized by the presence of an organic cation, which interacts with the inorganic framework mainly through hydrogen bonds. As a result, the organic cations are partly free to rotate within the cubo-octahedral cavity, and their dynamics is obviously determined by available thermal energy, the reciprocal size of the cation and the cubo-octahedral cavity and the strength of the specific organic–inorganic interactions. In Fig. 4, we report the radial distribution function (RDF) associated with the distances between the iodine atoms and the nitrogen-bound hydrogen atoms, which is informative of the formation of hydrogen bonds between the organic cations and the inorganic framework. The calculated RDFs are significantly different in the case of the tetragonal and (pseudo)cubic structures. The tetragonal structures show a well defined peak at 2.65 Å, corresponding to NH3+–I hydrogen bonds. On average, the number of NH3+–I hydrogen bonds during the AIMD simulation is 2.5 for MA β1 and it decreases to 2.3 to 2.1, going from MA β2 and to MA β3. Together, we observe a general broadening of the first peak going from the MA β1 to MA β2 to MA β3 structure. In the case of the MA α and the FA α structures, we still observe the peak at 2.65 Å but it reduces to less than 1.5 hydrogen bonds, on the average.
 Fig. 4  Radial distribution function of the hydrogen atoms of the ammonium group and the iodine atoms for the five investigated structures: MA β1,2,3 (top panel), MA α (central panel) and FA α (lower panel). 
Now, we show that such a difference in the organic–inorganic interactions, going from the cubic to the tetragonal phase, is reflected in a different dynamics or the rotations for the organic cations. We followed the orientation of CN (CH) bond associated with each MA (FA) cation and we described it by using the Tait–Bryan angles, θ and φ (see Fig. 5a), as in our previous studies.16,34 The θ angle describes the orientation of the CN (CH) vector within the ab-plane and it assumes values between 0 and 360°, with 0° corresponding to the CN (CH) vector aligned along the a-axis (see Fig. 5a). The φ angle describes the tilting of the CN (CH) vector with respect to the ab-plane and it is comprised between −90 and 90°, with 90° or −90° corresponding to the CN (CH) vector aligned along or opposed to the c-axis and 0 corresponding to the CN (CH) vector lying within the ab-plane (see Fig. 5a). To summarize the orientational dynamics of the organic cations in the investigated systems, we performed a statistical analysis of the θ and φ values assumed by the MA/FA cations during the AIMD simulations, see Table 1. The standard deviation and the range of values assumed by both θ and φ are much larger in the cubic than in the tetragonal phase, with the MA/FA cations that explore nearly all the orientations within the ab-plane. In Fig. 5b, we report the θ and φ angles of a selected MA cation for the MA β3, during the CPMD simulation. In the tetragonal phase, the MA cation jumps among specific configurations, which maximize the hydrogen bonding interactions;34 in other words, in the tetragonal phase the MA cation goes through a re-orientational motion. In contrast, in the cubic MA α structure, the selected MA cation shows very fast rotations around 6 ps (see Fig. S3, ESI†), in good agreement with the results from Knop et al.,65 which suggest nearly free rotations of the MA cations in the cubic phase. Summarizing, the specific organic–inorganic interaction represents a fundamental feature in the tetragonal–cubic phase transition. In the tetragonal phase of the hybrid lead iodide perovskites, the thermal motion of the organic cations is hindered by the presence of a strong hydrogen-bond network. Going to the cubic phase, such a hydrogen-bond network weakens and the MA cations are no more constrained along specific orientations, thus being free to rotate.
 Fig. 5  (a) Description of the orientation of the organic cation in MAPbI3 using the Tait–Bryan angles, θ and φ; (b) time evolution of the orientation (θ and φ) of one of the rotating MA cations in MA β3. 
Table 1 Statistical analysis of the orientations of the organic cations, for MA β1,2,3, MA α and FA α. The average (av.), standard deviation (st. dev.) and the range of values of θ and φ assumed by the MA/FA cations are reported, averaged on all number of MA/FA cations and over the whole simulation time. Data are in degrees




 

θ


φ



Av.
St. dev.
Range
Av.
St. dev.
Range




Tetragonal


MA
β1
180
8
57
−26
6
53


β2
136
10
55
1
7
49


β3
177
16
89
−2
9
55






Cubic


MA
α
163
65
349
−26
32
132


FA
α
177
86
355
0
38
161




It is worth mentioning that the short duration of our AIMD simulations (12 ps), with respect to the typical timescale of the rotational motion of the organic cations (∼ps), does not allow us to provide accurate estimations of kinetic parameters associated with this motion, as relaxation51 or correlation times.52 On the other hand, a much longer simulation (58 ps) on the cubic phase of MAPbI3 has been carried out by Frost et al.38 Notably, also in this case, the authors pointed out that the simulation time may be too short to reach the complete coverage of the possible orientation of the MA cations, which preserve in good part their initial 〈100〉 orientation. In this regard, the use of classical dynamics simulations, allowing for much longer time scales to be probed, is highly desirable, to investigate the kinetic parameters associated with the cation rotation, on a statically meaningful time scale.
3.2 Dynamics and band-gap fluctuations
As from previous studies, it is clear that the nuclear dynamics may imply significant oscillations of the electronic energy levels of the MAPbI3 perovskite.16,34 For the cubic phase of MAPbI3, we found that the energy of the HOMO level varies within a range of ∼0.5 eV,16 which is comparable to the variation in the electronic properties typically found for organic semiconductors and dye-sensitized interfaces.64,66 In a subsequent paper on the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3, we reported a strongly reduced variation of the HOMO level, within a range of ∼0.1 eV, for the structure corresponding to the current MA β1.34 In this Section, we treat more in the detail the effect of the ion dynamics on the electronic properties of hybrid organo-lead-halide perovskites. Here, we evaluate the variation of the band gap for the MA β1, MA β2, MA β3 structures and the FA α structure. We exclude the MA α structure from this discussion, because of the constraint on the lead atoms used in this simulation. In this way, the variation of the electronic properties is evaluated on the same ground: ∼330 K average temperature and no geometrical constraints. For the MA β1, MA β2, MA β3 and FA α structures, we selected 200 geometries over the whole dynamics (one geometry each ∼0.06 ps) and we performed a single point calculation to determine the band gap, at the same theoretical level of the AIMD simulations. For the MA β2 and FA α structures, we performed single point calculations also at the SOC-DFT level, thus considering also spin orbit coupling effects. We have previously showed that the electronic SOC-DFT band gap is more sensitive with respect to SR-DFT band gap to the octahedral tilting, as defined in the Fig. 3a and b.64 Thus, it is reasonable to expect larger oscillations of the electronic levels at the SOC-DFT level of theory.
The variation of the band gap at the SR-DFT level for the four investigated structures is reported in Fig. 6, while a statistical analysis of the results is summarized in Table 2. The average band gap calculated at the SR-DFT level for the MA β1 (1.66 eV) and MA β2 (1.62 eV) is in good agreement with the experimental data of the literature, ranging from 1.55 to 1.63 eV.20,67–69 The average band gap of MA β3 (1.79 eV) and of the FA α (1.75 eV) instead are slightly overestimated with respect to the experiments (we recall that the experimental band gap of α-FAPbI3 is 1.48 eV).31,70 On the other hand, it is well known that the agreement of the SR-DFT band gap with the experiment is fortuitous and it is due to the cancellation of the contributions from electronic correlation and spin–orbit-coupling.25,26 In fact, the average SOC-DFT band gap of the MA β2 and FA α phases is underestimated by ∼1 eV.
 Fig. 6  Evolution of the band gap during the CPMD simulations, for the tetragonal MA β1,2 and 3 and for the FA α structure. SR- and SOC-DFT calculated band-gaps are reported in red and black colors, respectively. 
Table 2 Average, standard deviation (st. dev.) and range of values (included with maximum and minumum values) assumed by the band gap during the molecular dynamics. The bang gap is evaluated at the SR-DFT level for the MA β1,2,3 and FA α structures and at the SOC-DFT for the MA β2 and FA α structure. In parentheses, the difference between the SOC-DFT value with respect to the SR-DFT one is reported. Data are in eV




 
Average
St. dev.
Range
Max
Min




SR-DFT


MA
β1
1.66
1.49 × 10−2
0.07
1.70
1.63


β2
1.61
3.51 × 10−2
0.20
1.73
1.53


β3
1.79
2.83 × 10−2
0.15
1.85
1.70


FA
α
1.75
3.90 × 10−2
0.20
1.84
1.64






SOC-DFT


MA
β2
0.59
2.94 × 10−2 (−10%)
0.13 (−10%)
0.65
0.52


FA
α
0.66
4.79 × 10−2 (+23%)
0.22 (+8%)
0.77
0.55




The MA β1 structure shows the narrowest variation of the band gap among the investigated structures, within only 0.07 eV, as reflected by the smallest structural variations during the dynamics, i.e. by the narrower oscillation of the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle and the by less mobile organic cations (see Table 1). The band gap in MA β2 and MA β3 instead shows a wider variation, within 0.20 and 0.15 eV, respectively, consistently with the wider variation of both the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles (see Fig. 3c) and MA cation orientations (see Table 1). In this regard, it is difficult to disentangle the specific contributions from the inorganic component, i.e. to the band gap variations due to the oscillation of the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle, or to the rotational motion of the organic cations. Further work is ongoing in this direction. Finally, the band gap in the FA α structure, for which full rotations of the organic FA cations are found, shows the largest variations, within 0.20 eV. Summarizing, in the present work, we estimate a variation of the band gap in hybrid lead-halide perovskites between 0.07 eV and 0.20 eV, in between with respect to our previous estimations in ref. 16 and 34 (0.46 and 0.07 eV global oscillation of the HOMO level during the dynamics). Thus, the variation of the electronic energy levels in this class of material is smaller, but still comparable to the typical variations found for organic semiconductors and dye-sensitized interfaces (∼0.4 eV).
We now evaluate the contributions from spin–orbit-coupling to the band gap variations during the dynamics. As shown in Fig. 6, for the MA β2 and the FA α structures, the SOC-DFT band gap follows quite closely the SR-DFT band gap, apart from the aforementioned band gap underestimation at the SOC-DFT level. From Table 2, we observe two opposite trends in the pseudo-cubic FA α and in the tetragonal MA β2 phase. In the former, we observe an increase in the band gap variation, as expected from the discussions from ref. 64, while in the latter we observe a reduction in the band gap variation. The rationale behind the present results is the following. In ref. 64, the band gap modulation with the increase of the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle has been associated with a decrease of the Pb contribution to the conduction band, thus in a different covalency/ionicity of the Pb–I bond. Thus, in light of the main role of the lead atom, the spin–orbit coupling is essential to catch the correct band-gap variation with the nuclear dynamics. Fig. 3c shows that in the tetragonal phase the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle along [001] does not pass through zero, or, in other words, the structure never passes through a cubic-like structure. For this reason, the covalency/ionicity of the Pb–I bond does not change significantly in this phase and thus the effect associated with SOC is expectedly small. In the cubic phase instead, since the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle along [001] passes through zero (see Fig. 3c), or, in other words, the structure oscillates from a cubic to a tetragonally distorted structure, with the character of the Pb–I bond oscillating from the “most ionic” (for I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral → 0) to “most covalent” (for dihedral angles → ±30°). Concluding, the contribution from spin–orbit coupling effects on the band gap variation with the nuclear dynamics is larger in the cubic than in the tetragonal cell. On the other hand, also in the cubic phase, such a contribution is limited to a maximum of 23% of the total variation.
Finally, we focus on the electronic Density of States (DOS) in correspondence of the valence band. Lindblad et al.53 already pointed out the role of the structural dynamics in the broadening of the valence band. In Fig. S4 (ESI†), we report the DOS calculated for the investigated structures. There is a general good agreement between our DOS and that obtained by Lindblad et al.,53 with a valence band that is spread over a similar range of energies of that found by Lindblad et al. and that found experimentally. It is interesting to note that our SOC-DFT calculations, carried out only on MA β2 and FA α, predict a shape of the valence band in better agreement with the experiments with respect to the SR-DFT calculations, with the presence of two main maxima with an intensity ratio of ∼3/2. The good agreement of the SOC-DFT DOS, obtained on the structures from molecular dynamics at the SR-DFT level, confirms the reliability of the latter method to describe the structural dynamic features of hybrid perovskites.
3.3 Impact of nuclear dynamics on charge localization.
Finally, we investigated the localization of the electronic states during the nuclear dynamics, as follows. For all the structures, together with the band gap, we calculated also the density of states (DOS) and the contributions from all the atoms within the reference cell (pDOS). Then, for the β-phase of MAPbI3 we estimated the delocalization of the frontier electronic states along the [001] direction,‡i.e. along the non symmetric cell parameter, by summing the contributions from the inorganic atoms lying on the same crystallographic plane. We excluded the organic atoms since they do not contribute to the frontier orbitals.24 In this way, we obtained the local DOS associated with a specific i-th layer, DOSi(t,E), as in ref. 34. In Fig. 7, we report the DOSi(t,E) for the paraelectric MA β3 structure, in the energy range of the frontier levels, calculated for two consecutive geometries extracted from the AIMD simulations (time difference 0.06 ps) between 7 and 8 ps simulation time. The valence and conduction states are mainly localized for values of the c-axis of 0.00, 12.66, 18.99 and 25.32 Å, in correspondence of layers containing the largest number of inorganic atoms and show no localization in the initial optimized structure.34 As shown in Fig. 7, in the first selected geometry occurring at ca. 7 ps, the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) edges are clearly localized in the layers lying, respectively, at 12.66 Å and at 0.00 Å. After just 0.06 ps instead, the localization of the electronic states is different, with the valence and conduction band edges localized, respectively, on the 6.33 Å and 18.99 Å lying layers. Thus, Fig. 7 points out that the valence and conduction band edges may localize in spatially separated regions with a very fast, sub-ps, dynamics. This effect could play an important role in the photovoltaic working mechanism of MAPbI3, for instance, in relation to the exciton and/or charge separation mechanism.20,37Fig. 7 suggests in fact that, subsequently to the photon absorption, the photo-generated species may diffuse in spatially separated regions of the material. Recent DFT calculations reported by Ma et al.71 pointed out a similar space-localization of the valence and conduction states of the MAPbI3 perovskite, as a result of the random orientation of the MA cations. These authors also found that such a spatial-localization is much more evident in the case of large models (1728 MA cations). The computational cost of AIMD simulations limits the dimension of the present model to only 32 MA cations; however, it is interesting to note that the state localization is noticeable also at this spatial scale. It is also worth mentioning that Ma et al. fixed the inorganic framework to the tetragonal structure.71 For very large models, with a random orientation of the MA cations, the assumption of small relaxation of the inorganic framework seems to be reasonable but, on the other side, it could result in the overestimation of the spatial-localization of the electrons, because of the lack of indirect screening introduced by the relaxation of the inorganic cage.
 Fig. 7  Surface plot of the density of states of the valence and conduction states for the various layers within the reference cell, for the MA β3 structure, for two consecutive geometries (0.06 ps time difference). The corresponding structure is reported on the right. The arrows indicate the spatial localization of the valence band (VB) and conduction (CB) edge. 
Finally, our calculations highlight that the present localization is dynamical in nature, with a clear change of the valence and conduction edge position in only 0.06 ps (see Fig. 7). This short time corresponds to frequencies of the order of hundreds of cm−1, i.e. much faster than the fastest motion of the inorganic component,14 and thus the localization of the valence and conduction states in Fig. 7 can be likely associated with the dynamics of the MA cations.
Now, for each structure, we provide a general picture on the localization of the electronic states among the various layers, during the AIMD simulations. To quantify the electronic localization layer-by-layer, we calculate qi(t,E), which corresponds to the difference between the number of states at the LUMO energy, DOSi(t,E = LUMO), and the number of states at the HOMO energy, DOSi(t,E = LUMO), for the i-th layer; in mathematical form:qi(t) = DOSi(t,E = LUMO) − DOSi(t,E = HOMO)
Positive/negative values correspond to an excess of conduction/valence states in a given layer.
The evolution of the qi(t,E) parameter for the investigated structures is reported in Fig. 8 and it shows that the spatial localization of the valence and conduction band edges in a specific layer, as that reported in Fig. 7, is quite common. Moreover, it confirms that the present mechanism is characterized by sub-ps dynamics (∼200 cm−1), that is reasonably related to the libration motions of the MA cations. In ref. 37, Even and coworkers suggested a role of collective MA cation motions in exciton screening, leading to almost free charges. Once again, the limited dimension of our models, mainly imposed by the computational cost of our approach, does not allow us to catch the effect of collective MA motions. Anyway, our AIMD simulations highlight a very local effect of the motion of the organic cations on the electronic properties, resulting in the separation of the electronic states within a few pseudo-cubic units.
 Fig. 8  Evolution of the qi(t) parameter (i.e. the difference between the number of states calculated at the LUMO and HOMO energy) for the MA β1,2,3, and FA α structures. The arrows between 0–2 ps represent the starting orientation of the MA cations, for the MA β1,2,3 structures. 
In general, we observe a more effective localization for the conduction states than for valence states. It is interesting to note that MA β1, characterized by the lower mobility of the MA cation, shows the smallest variations for qi(t,E), between 5 and −2. The MA β3 structure, characterized by more mobile MA cations, shows much larger oscillations for qi(t,E), between 12 and −4. The present results highlight once more the importance of the dynamic disorder on this dynamically driven state separation mechanism. It is worth mentioning that MA β1 and MA β2 possess, respectively, a ferroelectric and antiferroelectric orientation of the MA cations and a polarization of 4.41 μC cm−2 and nearly 0 has been calculated for these structures, respectively.34 The presence of bulk polarization and the bulk polarization photovoltaic effect for structural models similar to the present MA β1 and MA β2 has been widely discussed by Zheng et al. in ref. 35. The case of MA β2 is probably the most interesting, since it shows a static localization of the valence and conduction bands at the layers lying, respectively, at 0.00 Å and 12.66 Å, which is directly related to the peculiar starting orientation of the MA cations, see Fig. 8. In fact, the frontier states localize in correspondence of the interface of two domains with opposite alignment of the MA cations along the c-axis, which are expected to behave as two ferroelectric domains with opposite polarizations. Thus, the present results point out the role of the interface between domains with orientated molecules in the photovoltaic working mechanism of hybrid perovskites, recalling the model of the “ferroelectric-highways” proposed by Walsh and coworkers33 and the recently reported domain wall effect on charge separation proposed by Rappe and coworkers.72 On the other hand, such models rely on the presence of domain interfaces which are stable on very long time-scales, to be able to affect the photovoltaic mechanism. In this regard, it is necessary to further investigate on the presence and stability of these domains, in light of the picosecond rotational dynamics of the MA cations.51,52
The FA α phase, characterized by the largest orientational mobility of the organic cations (see Table 1), shows the smallest oscillation of the qi(t,E) parameter, between 3.5 and −1.5, excluding sporadic cases with a very strong localization of the valence states. It is worth noting that the smallest degree of charge separation, i.e. smallest values of qi(t,E), is found for the model with the smaller and the larger mobility of the MA cations, MA β1 and FA α. These results point out on different localization mechanisms for the tetragonal and the cubic phase of hybrid, lead iodide perovskites. The rationale behind these results could be the aforementioned weakening of the hydrogen bonds, going from the tetragonal to the cubic structure (see Fig. 4), which results in a less effective, hydrogen-bond induced, localization of the electronic states.
4. Conclusions
In this perspective, we have illustrated the potential use of ab initio molecular dynamics for the study of the structural and electronic properties of hybrid organic–lead halide perovskites and for elucidating the atomistic origin of the impressive photovoltaic properties of this class of materials. Ab initio molecular dynamics are a powerful investigation tool, since they provide information on the electronic structure of the materials, taking the inherent structural dynamics into account. This feature is particularly relevant in the case of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, where the presence of rotating organic cations within the cubo-octahedral cavity,51,52 and of the inherent “soft” nature of the inorganic framework are considerable.60,61 As such, the local material structure can deviate significantly from the nominal structure of the material, for instance, the structure obtained from XRD measurements.31,58,59
Structural analyses of the molecular dynamics trajectories highlight the flexible structure of the hybrid lead iodide perovskite, MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, demonstrating that the actual material structure can deviate significantly with respect to the experimental structure from X-ray diffraction measurements. The latter in fact represents a thermal average of different structures, characterized by different organic cation orientations and octahedral rotation,63 accessible within a time scale that is much longer with respect to the picosecond MA cation rotational dynamics. Together, our dynamics simulations outlined the different nature of the rotational motion of the MA/FA organic cations in the tetragonal and cubic phases, as due to a different balance between hydrogen bonds and thermally activated rotational motion. In the tetragonal phase, the presence of a strong hydrogen bond network keeps the organic cations oriented along specific directions, thus resulting in a re-orientational motion, from a strongly bound orientation to another. In the cubic phase instead, the isotropic inorganic environment results in a nearly free rotational motion of the cations within the cubo-octahedral cavity, in agreement with earlier results of Knop et al.65 Our results thus suggest a central role of the balance between specific organic–inorganic interactions (hydrogen bonds) and thermally activated motion in the transition from the tetragonal to the cubic crystalline structure. The estimated oscillation of the electronic levels and the band gap, associated with the ion dynamics, has been set between 0.07 eV and 0.20 eV, to be compared with 0.40 eV of strongly disordered systems, as organic semiconductors and dye-sensitized interfaces.64 Moreover, we found that the dynamic disorder from the ionic motion has important consequences on the electronic properties of hybrid lead halide perovskites. The analysis of the localization of the electronic states demonstrates that a spatial separation of the valence and conduction states takes place in hybrid perovskites, during the molecular dynamics simulations. Such charge localization is obviously associated with an easier charge separation process, but can be also at the basis of the small charge recombination rates found in MAPbI3.19 Similar evidence of electron state localization has been already pointed out by Ma et al.,71 using DFT calculations. In the present perspective, however, we stress the dynamic character of such spatial localization of the valence and conduction states, which takes place on a sub-ps time scale. In other words, we address such spatial localization not to a static and disordered orientation of the organic cations but to their inherent rotational dynamics within the cubo-octahedral cavity. Thus, the mechanism of exciton screening due to the dynamics of the MA cation, hypothesized by Even in ref. 37, finds here a demonstration from electronic structure calculations. Our calculations also show that in correspondence of borders between two domains with opposite alignment of the organic cations, there is a strong localization of valence/conduction states, thus demonstrating the “ferroelectric-highways” and the impact of domain walls on charge separation reported in the literature.34,72 We also highlight, however, the possible instability of such configurations in light of the disorder generated in the material by the cation rotation at room temperature.
In summary, the huge amount of work devoted to understanding the structural and electronic features of hybrid lead-halide perovskites has delivered important information on the materials characteristics underlying their superior photovoltaic properties. In this context theoretical modeling and in particular ab initio molecular dynamics simulations may play a major role in further advancing the field of perovskite solar cells.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received fundings from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007%2013] under Grant Agreement No. 604032 of the MESO project.
Notes and references
J. Bisquert, The Swift Surge of Perovskite Photovoltaics, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2597–2598 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Salau, Fundamental Absorption Edge in PbI2:KI alloys, Sol. Energy Mater., 1980, 2, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Organohalide lead perovskites for photovoltaic applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448 CAS .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N. G. Park, 6.5% efficient perovskite quantum-dot-sensitized solar cell, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum and J. E. Moser, Lead iodide perovskite sensitized all-solid-state submicron thin film mesoscopic solar cell with efficiency exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient hybrid solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Heo, S.-H. Im, J.-H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y.-H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S.-I. Seok, Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, Md. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Interface engineering of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/
        .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, The Raman Spectrum of the CH3NH3PbI3 Hybrid Perovskite: Interplay of Theory and Experiment, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, S. Marras, M. Prato, C. Giannini, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis, M. De Bastiani, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, L. Manna and A. Petrozza, The Impact of the Crystallization Processes on the Structural and Optical Properties of Hybrid Perovskite Films for Photovoltaics, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3836–3842 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, C. Quarti, T. Ivanovska, G. Ruani and F. De Angelis, Structural and electronic properties of organo-halide lead perovskites: a combined IR-spectroscopy and ab initio molecular dynamics investigation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16137–16144 RSC .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron-and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic-Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, High Charge Carrier Mobilities and Lifetimes in Organolead Trihalide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Why lead methylammonium tri-iodide perovskite-based solar cells require a mesoporous electron transporting scaffold (but not necessarily a hole conductor), Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Elucidating the charge carrier separation mechanism in CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3461 Search PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Electronic structures of lead iodide based low-dimensional crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, First-Principles Modeling of Mixed Halide Organometal Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902–13913 CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, Importance of Spin–Orbit Coupling in Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Relativistic GW calculations on CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3SnI3 Perovskites for Solar Cell Applications, Sci. Rep., 2013, 4, 4467 Search PubMed .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Relativistic quasiparticle self-consistent electronic structure of hybrid halide perovskite photovoltaic absorbers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
M. R. Filip and F. Giustino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 245145 CrossRef .
E. Menendez Proupin, P. Palacios, P. Wahnon and J. C. Conesa, Self-consistent relativistic band structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 045207 CrossRef .
M. Kim, J. Im, A. J. Freeman, J. Ihm and H. Jin, Switchable S = 1/2 and J = 1/2 Rashba bands in ferroelectric halide perovskites, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6900–6904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Semiconducting Tin and Lead Iodide Perovskites with Organic Cations: Phase Transitions, High Mobilities, and Near-Infrared Photoluminescent Properties, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kutes, L. Ye, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, B. D. Huey and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3335–3339 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Interplay of Orientational Order and Electronic Structure in Methylammonium Lead Iodide: Implications for Solar Cell Operation, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6557–6569 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zheng, H. Takenaka, F. Wang, N. Z. Koocher and A. M. Rappe, First-Principles Calculation of the Bulk Photovoltaic Effect in CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stroppa, D. Di Sante, P. Barone, M. Bokdam, G. Kresse, C. Franchini, M.-H. Whangbo and S. Picozzi, Tunable ferroelectric polarization and its interplay with spin–orbit coupling in tin iodide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5900 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, Analysis of Multivalley and Multibandgap Absorption and Enhancement of Free Carriers Related to Exciton Screening in Hybrid Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11566–11572 CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Molecular ferroelectric contributions to anomalous hysteresis in hybrid perovskite solar cells, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081506 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ma and L.-W. Wang, Nanoscale Charge Localization Induced by Random Orientations of Organic Molecules in Hybrid Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, Cation Role in Structural and Electronic Properties of 3D Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskites: A DFT Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12176–12183 CAS .
V. Roiati, E. Mosconi, A. Listorti, S. Colella, G. Gigli and F. De Angelis, Stark Effect in Perovskite/TiO2 Solar Cells: Evidence of Local Interfacial Order, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2168–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, E. Ronca and F. De Angelis, First-Principles Investigation of the TiO2/Organohalide Perovskites Interface: The Role of Interfacial Chlorine, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2619–2625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, MAPbI3−xClx Mixed Halide Perovskite for Hybrid Solar Cells: The Role of Chloride as Dopant on the Transport and Structural Properties, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, Small Photocarrier Effective Masses Featuring Ambipolar Transport in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite: A Density Functional Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4213–4216 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng and B. Xiao, Crystal Structures, Optical Properties, and Effective Mass Tensors of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I and Br) Phases Predicted from HSE06, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Du, Efficient carrier transport in halide perovskites: theoretical perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 CAS .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, The Role of Intrinsic Defects in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Gould, J. F. Dobson, H. Zhang, H. Yang, X. Yao and H. Zhao, Density functional theory analysis of structural and electronic properties of orthorhombic perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1424–1429 RSC .
D. A. Egger and L. Kronik, Role of Dispersive Interactions in Determining Structural Properties of Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskites: Insights from First-Principles Calculations, J. Phys.
Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2728–2733 CAS .
W. Geng, L. Zhang, Y.-N. Zhang, W.-M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, First-Principles Study of Lead Iodide Perovskite Tetragonal and Orthorhombic Phases for Photovoltaics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19565–19571 CAS .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, Dynamic Disorder in Methyl-ammoniumtrihalogenoplumbates(II) Observed by Millime-terwave Spectroscopy, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop and J. B. Macdonald, Cation Rotation in Methylammonium Lead Halides, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 581–582 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lindblad, D. Bi, B.-W. Park, J. Oscarsson, M. Gorgoi, H. Siegbahn, M. Odelius, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Electronic Structure of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell Interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Unified Approach for Molecular Dynamics and Density-Functional Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS .
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Coccioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari and R. M. Wentzcovitch, QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a Modular and Open-Source Software Project for Quantum Simulations of Materials, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CAS .
D. Vanderbilt, Soft self-consistent pseudopotentials in a generalized eigenvalue formalism, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 7892–7895 CrossRef .
Y. Kawamura, H. Mashiyama and K. Hasebe, Structural Study on Cubic-Tetragonal Transition of CH3NH3PbI3, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 71, 1694–1697 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, Synthesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3)PbI3 for solid-state sensitised solar cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 CAS .
J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Structure of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Within Mesoporous Titanium Dioxide: Active Material in High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Worhatch, H.-J. Kim, I. P. Swainson, A. L. Yonkeu and S. J. L. Billinge, Study of Local Structure in Selected Organic–Inorganic Perovskites in the Pm3m Phase, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1272–1277 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Weller, P. Henry, O. Weber, A. Di Pumpo and T. Hansen, Complete Structure and Cation Orientation in the Perovskite Photovoltaic Methylammonium Lead Iodide between 100 and 352 K, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4180–4183 RSC .
A. M. Glazer, The Classification of Tilted Octahedra in Perovskites, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1972, 28, 3384–3392 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Cation-Induced Band-Gap Tuning in Organohalide Perovskites: Interplay of Spin–Orbit Coupling and Octahedra Tilting, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Knop, R. Wasylishen, E. M. White, T. S. Cameron and M. J. M. Van Oort, Alkylammonium lead halides. Part 2. CH3NH3PbX3 (X = C1, Br, I) perovskites: cuboctahedral halide cages with isotropic cation reorientation, Can. J. Chem., 1990, 68, 412–422 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and R. Gebauer, Simulating Dye-Sensitized TiO2 Heterointerfaces in Explicit Solvent: Absorption Spectra, Energy Levels, and Dye desorption, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 813–817 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Papavassiliou and I. B. Koutselas, Structural, Optical and Related Properties of Some Natural Three- And Lower-Dimensional Semiconductor Systems, Synth. Met., 1995, 71, 1713–1714 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kitazawa, Y. Watanabe and Y. Nakamura, Optical Properties of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = halogen) and Their Mixed-Halide Crystals, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 3585–3587 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Bana, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Comparative study on the excitons in lead-halide-based perovskite-type crystals CH3NH3PbBr3 CH3NH3PbI3, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Formamidinium lead trihalide: a broadly tunable perovskite for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. Ma and L. W. Wang, Nanoscale charge localization induced by random orientations of organic molecules in hybrid perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. Wang and A. M. Rappe, Ferroelectric Domain Wall Induced Band Gap Reduction and Charge Separation in Organometal Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693–699 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Carignano, A. Kachmar and J. Hutter, Thermal Effects on CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite from Ab-initio Molecular Dynamics Simulations, arXiv:1409.6842, 2014.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp00599j‡ For the FA α, we chose the (111) planes, which are orthogonal to one of the pseudo-cubic axes.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

Claudio Quarti
	Claudio Quarti earned his Master Degree and his PhD in Materials Engineering from the Politecnico di Milano, in the group of vibrational spectroscopy Castiglioni-Zerbi. After that, he spent one year and a half as a post-doc at the CNR-ISTM of Perugia, under the supervision of Dr Filippo De Angelis. There, he was devoted to the study of structural and electronic of hybrid perovskite for photovoltaic applications. Recently, he gained a post-doc position at the University of Mons. His main research interests include the study of opto-electronic properties and the spectroscopic response of systems in the condensed phase, through first principle calculations.

Edoardo Mosconi
	Edoardo Mosconi obtained his PhD degree in 2011 in theoretical chemistry from University of Perugia under the supervision of Prof. Antonio Sgamellotti and Dr Filippo De Angelis, working on Computational Modeling of Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics and Complex Reaction Mechanisms. From January 2012 he is a Post Doctoral Researcher at CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology (ISTM-CNR) in Perugia, at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO). His main research interests are in the field of new generation photovoltaics (Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, Organic Photovoltaics, and Perovskite Solar Cells), employing DFT, TDDFT, ab initio Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics and GW methods to predict and interpret the optical and electronic properties of materials and interfaces.

Filippo De Angelis
	Filippo De Angelis is a senior research scientist and deputy director at the CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology, in Perugia, Italy. He is the founder and co-leader of the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics in Perugia. He earned a BS in Chemistry 1996 and a PhD in Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry in 1999, both from the University of Perugia, Italy. He is an expert in the development and application of first principles computational methods to the simulation of the structural, electronic and optical properties of metallorganic, inorganic and hybrid materials and molecules and related interfaces. The main application studies are in the field of solar energy materials, with emphasis on dye-sensitized and perovskite solar cells. His main contribution constitutes in the study of the excited states of dyes and perovskite absorbers, in the modelling of inorganic semiconductors and in the alignment of energy levels at sensitized semiconductor interfaces. Additional areas of expertise are in the field of non-linear optics, luminescent materials for OLEDs and organometallic reactivity and catalysis. He is the 2007 recipient of the Raffaello Nasini Gold Medal of the Inorganic Chemistry Division of the Italian Chemical Society.

 	Fig. 1  Top view and side view of the structural models for MAPbI3 and FAPbI3: the tetragonal β-phase of MAPbI3 (MA β1,2,3) and the cubic-α phase of MAPbI3 (MA α) and the triclinic, pseudo-cubic-α phase of FAPbI3 (FA α). For the tetragonal MA β1,2,3 structures, we report also the starting orientation of the MA cations. The red-arrows represent the cell parameters.	 

 	Fig. 2  Radial distribution function (RDF) associated with the inorganic framework of MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, obtained from CP simulations; (upper panel) RDF of three structural models for the tetragonal MA β1, β2 and β3, characterized by a different starting orientation of the MA cations, compared with the experiment. The theoretical intensity is normalized with respect to the intensity of the I–I peak at 4.5 Å; (central panel) theoretical RDF for the cubic, MA α perovskite; (lower panel) theoretical RDF of the cubic, FA α. Experimental RDF from ref. 60, adapted with permission from J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Structure of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Within Mesoporous Titanium Dioxide: Active Material in High Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle for a cubic crystal, characterized by a null rotation of the PbI6 octahedra (a0a0a0 in the Glazer notation);63 (b) I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angle for a tetragonal crystal, characterized by an “out-of-phase” rotation of the PbI6 octahedra along the c-axis (a0a0c− in the Glazer notation);63 (c) distribution of the values assumed by all the I–Pb–Pb–I dihedral angles within the cell during the AIMD simulations, for the MA α and FA α structures (left panel) and the MA β1,2,3, (right panel). The distributions are reported for the crystallographic directions corresponding to the pseudo-cubic axes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Radial distribution function of the hydrogen atoms of the ammonium group and the iodine atoms for the five investigated structures: MA β1,2,3 (top panel), MA α (central panel) and FA α (lower panel).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Description of the orientation of the organic cation in MAPbI3 using the Tait–Bryan angles, θ and φ; (b) time evolution of the orientation (θ and φ) of one of the rotating MA cations in MA β3.	 


Tetragonal
MA	β1	180	8	57	−26	6	53
β2	136	10	55	1	7	49
β3	177	16	89	−2	9	55


Cubic
MA	α	163	65	349	−26	32	132
FA	α	177	86	355	0	38	161

 	Fig. 6  Evolution of the band gap during the CPMD simulations, for the tetragonal MA β1,2 and 3 and for the FA α structure. SR- and SOC-DFT calculated band-gaps are reported in red and black colors, respectively.	 

SR-DFT
MA	β1	1.66	1.49 × 10−2	0.07	1.70	1.63
β2	1.61	3.51 × 10−2	0.20	1.73	1.53
β3	1.79	2.83 × 10−2	0.15	1.85	1.70
FA	α	1.75	3.90 × 10−2	0.20	1.84	1.64


SOC-DFT
MA	β2	0.59	2.94 × 10−2 (−10%)	0.13 (−10%)	0.65	0.52
FA	α	0.66	4.79 × 10−2 (+23%)	0.22 (+8%)	0.77	0.55

 	Fig. 7  Surface plot of the density of states of the valence and conduction states for the various layers within the reference cell, for the MA β3 structure, for two consecutive geometries (0.06 ps time difference). The corresponding structure is reported on the right. The arrows indicate the spatial localization of the valence band (VB) and conduction (CB) edge.	 
qi(t) = DOSi(t,E = LUMO) − DOSi(t,E = HOMO)

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of the qi(t) parameter (i.e. the difference between the number of states calculated at the LUMO and HOMO energy) for the MA β1,2,3, and FA α structures. The arrows between 0–2 ps represent the starting orientation of the MA cations, for the MA β1,2,3 structures.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp00599j
‡ For the FA α, we chose the (111) planes, which are orthogonal to one of the pseudo-cubic axes.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
