On global energy scenario, dye-sensitized solar cells and the promise of nanotechnology  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP55448A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP55448A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6838-6858On global energy scenario, dye-sensitized solar cells and the promise of nanotechnology

        
          
            K. Govardhan 
            Reddy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            T. G. 
            Deepak
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            G. S. 
            Anjusree
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sara 
            Thomas
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sajini 
            Vadukumpully
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            K. R. V. 
            Subramanian
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shantikumar V. 
            Nair
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            A. Sreekumaran 
            Nair
          
        
      *b
aAmrita School of Engineering, Amritapuri Campus, Kollam, Kerala, India
bAmrita Centre for Nanoscience & Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Science, AIMS Ponekkara PO, Kochi 682041, Kochi, Kerala, India. E-mail: sreekumarannair@aims.amrita.edu
Received 
      26th December 2013
    , Accepted 23rd January 2014First published on 24th January 2014AbstractOne of the major problems that humanity has to face in the next 50 years is the energy crisis. The rising population, rapidly changing life styles of people, heavy industrialization and changing landscape of cities have increased energy demands, enormously. The present annual worldwide electricity consumption is 12 TW and is expected to become 24 TW by 2050, leaving a challenging deficit of 12 TW. The present energy scenario of using fossil fuels to meet the energy demand is unable to meet the increase in demand effectively, as these fossil fuel resources are non-renewable and limited. Also, they cause significant environmental hazards, like global warming and the associated climatic issues. Hence, there is an urgent necessity to adopt renewable sources of energy, which are eco-friendly and not extinguishable. Of the various renewable sources available, such as wind, tidal, geothermal, biomass, solar, etc., solar serves as the most dependable option. Solar energy is freely and abundantly available. Once installed, the maintenance cost is very low. It is eco-friendly, safely fitting into our society without any disturbance. Producing electricity from the Sun requires the installation of solar panels, which incurs a huge initial cost and requires large areas of lands for installation. This is where nanotechnology comes into the picture and serves the purpose of increasing the efficiency to higher levels, thus bringing down the overall cost for energy production. Also, emerging low-cost solar cell technologies, e.g. thin film technologies and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) help to replace the use of silicon, which is expensive. Again, nanotechnological implications can be applied in these solar cells, to achieve higher efficiencies. This paper vividly deals with the various available solar cells, choosing DSCs as the most appropriate ones. The nanotechnological implications which help to improve their performance are dealt with, in detail. Additionally, the economic and ecological aspects of using nanotechnology are briefly introduced.
I. Introduction
A. Present power scenario of the world
Energy is a fundamental demand for humankind. With increases in technological advances, the demand for energy is rapidly increasing. The total primary energy production of the world was 1.02 × 105 TW h in 1990, 1.16 × 105 TW h in 2000 and 1.49 × 105 TW h in 2010.1 The extrapolated statistics indicate figures of around 1.68 × 105 TW h in 2015, 1.81 × 105 TW h in 2020, 2.11 × 105 TW h in 2030 and 2.25 × 105 TW h in 2035, with an average annual percentage change of 1.6%2 (Fig. 1). From these statistics, at least by the year 2050, the world energy consumption is expected to double the current usage, leaving a challenging deficit of 12 TW. Renewable energy contributes only 22% of the global electricity production, amounting to 4.3 × 106 kW h as of 2011.3 The remaining 78% is provided by non-renewable energy, which includes coal, natural gas and nuclear. In renewable energies, hydro provides a major share of 16.6%, followed by 3.2% by wind, 1.4% by biomass, 0.5% by solar PV (photovoltaics) and 0.4% by geothermal.3 As indicated by the present statistics, the major share in electricity supply is accomplished by coal, natural gas and nuclear (Fig. 2 and 3, respectively).
 Fig. 1  A plot showing the past, present and future (anticipated) world energy demand. Data taken from ref. 1 and 2 were plotted to obtain this diagram. 
 Fig. 2  Role of fossil fuels and renewables for the present and future (anticipated) energy scenarios.4 
 Fig. 3  Share of renewable energy in global electricity production. Data from ref. 3 were plotted to obtain this diagram.3 
B. Why solar energy?
Coal and natural gas reserves are limited and will become extinct in due course (Fig. 2).4 Also, these source cause various environmental hazards, such as the emission of CO2, which is the major cause of global warming and the depletion of the ice layers in the polar regions, in addition to air pollution and diseases.5 There is an urgent need to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels by augmenting it with supplies from cleaner, renewable sources of energy. Nuclear energy is a highly matured technology. The waste disposal and reuse of the nuclear material are major concerns, which can be carefully handled with advances in technology. However, the cost of the installation and maintenance of a nuclear power plant is not insignificant, which many developing countries cannot afford. Furthermore, to meet the 12 TW challenge, it is estimated that a 12 GW nuclear power plant has to be constructed every day for the next 50 years, which is impossible. Hence, coal, natural gas and nuclear pose as unreliable technologies to address the energy crisis and meet future energy demands.
Biofuel is a good, but limited alternative.6 Huge areas of land have to be allotted for the cultivation of crops, keeping aside the regular agricultural crops, to meet the rapidly growing demand for automobiles and airplanes.7 Hydro and wind seem to be a promising clean energy sources, but they are also limited. Hydro-generation is nearing saturation. Dams are built on many possible locations, and many of them are facing water scarcity. Wind energy is rapidly maturing now-a-days. However, it has many limitations, e.g. the availability of locations, reliability to meet the future energy demand, seasonal change in electricity production, etc.1,8
Other renewable energy sources, like geothermal and tidal are available, but also have similar limitations to their counterparts. Geothermal energy, although sounding feasible and compatible, involves huge investments and a thorough, expert research of the land form, to assess the feasibility of setting up a geothermal plant. Also, it has issues such as poisonous gas escape into the atmosphere, earthquakes and land slides, etc. The installation of tidal energy devices can threaten the peaceful life of marine animals. Considering all the above mentioned facts and figures, solar energy is the best alternative clean renewable energy source. The Sun continuously irradiates the Earth, with an energy intensity of 1.2 × 105 TW, whereas the current worldwide energy consumption is just 12 TW, which is only 0.001% of the energy that we receive from the Sun.9,10 The Sun provides the Earth in one hour with as much energy as all mankind uses in one year.9,10 Solar energy availability dwarfs all the other energy resources, whether they are renewable or non-renewable (Fig. 4). The annual average solar energy density lies in a range from 100–250 W m−2 for most locations around the globe (Fig. 5). So, there is sufficient solar energy available to meet all our demands.
 Fig. 4  World's primary energy resources. Solar energy dwarfs all other energy resources whether they are non-renewable or renewable (image from http://www.hessen-nanotech.de/mm/NanoEnergy_web.pdf). 
 Fig. 5  Worldwide variation in the mean annual solar irradiance.5 
Solar energy is the cleanest energy source, as there is no carbon cost associated with it. Once installed, the maintenance cost of solar plants is very low. They are eco-friendly, safely fitting into our society without any sort of chemical and noise pollution, hence causing no ecological disturbances. Only a safe, efficient and cost-effective method of harvesting solar energy is required.
C. Challenges faced by solar power
Though solar energy is bountiful, free and green, solar power faces major problems, which await further innovations in material science and technology. Solar power plants require more land than other power plants for the same amount of power produced. The disposal of solar cells at the end of their life time has also to be considered. Some materials used in solar cells may be poisonous to the soil and environment. If disposed of without proper processing and neutralization of harmful materials, they may mix with water bodies and cause serious health problems.11 Solar cells using silicon pose dangerous threats, which are due to the processing complexities of silicon.12
The initial installation cost for solar power is high. The cost per kW h of electricity produced by solar power is still higher than conventional sources, like coal and nuclear.13 Over the past 20 years, the price per kW h of electricity produced by photovoltaics has reduced from around $500 to $5 (Fig. 6). However, this is still more than the electricity produced from other sources, namely nuclear, coal and natural gas.13 This needs great attention for the widespread commercialization of solar cell technologies.
 Fig. 6  Reduction in the costs of photovoltaic devices.5 The balance of system (BOS) includes all the components of a solar PV system, except the module. 
II. Photovoltaic electricity production from solar energy – the present scenario
Electricity generation from solar energy basically can be done by two methods, which are photovoltaics and concentrated solar power system.4 Photovoltaics (PV), as the name indicates, refers to the production of a voltage or electricity from the photons of sunlight. It is a direct method, in which a semiconductor substrate generates the electrons, upon excitation with photons of sufficient energy. A concentrated solar power system is an indirect method, in which a large portion of sunlight is focused into a small beam, to generate large amounts of concentrated heat. This concentrated heat is used to heat the working fluid in a conventional power plant.
The present trend of using photovoltaics for electricity generation is increasing steadily all over the world. The global total of solar PV was roughly 67 GW at the end of 2011, to be compared with just 1.5 GW in 2000.4,14 However, this is still an insignificant figure compared to the energy from sources like coal, nuclear and natural gas. Solar photovoltaics share an insignificant amount, of 0.5%, in the global electricity production (see Fig. 3). The main reason for the lack of an effective, commercialized use of solar power is attributed to many factors, as discussed above. Extensive research is ongoing all over the world, to improve this technology and make it available to the common man.
III. Solar cell technologies
Becquerel, a French physicist, demonstrated the photoelectrochemical effect in 1839.15 This is the basic principle for the working of a solar cell. Over the years, solar cells have seen many improvements by imbibing newer technologies. Broadly, solar cells can be classified into three generations. The first generation, consists of silicon-based substrates, primarily the monocrystalline and polycrystalline forms of silicon. The second generation replaces the use of silicon by other semiconductors, like cadmium telluride (CdTe), gallium arsenide (GaAs), copper indium/gallium selenide (CIS/CIGS), etc.16 This is enhanced by the thin film technology, as thin films of these semiconductor materials are used as the substrates. The third generation replaced the CdTe, GaAs and CIS/CIGS semiconductors by using wide band-gap semiconductors, such as metal oxides, like TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, etc. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) fall into this category.17–20 Nanotechnology/nanomaterials have a considerable say in the overall performance of these solar cells. The third generation solar cells aim for a low-cost and high performance using nanomaterials/nanotechnology (Fig. 7). We will be looking at these aspects in more detail in this paper.
 Fig. 7  Areal cost of three generations of photovoltaic technologies. Broken lines indicate contours of constant price per watt capacity ($/W).5 
A. First generation solar cells
Chaplin, Fuller and Pearson, from Bell Laboratories Ltd., are credited with the development of the first practical silicon (Si) solar cell in 1954.21 They used p–n junction silicon strips to convert solar light to electricity and achieved an efficiency of 4%. Later on, they improved this design by bringing the p–n junction close to the surface, so that most photons are utilized and also doping the positive side with phosphorous, instead of lithium. The first generation solar cells, using a Si semiconductor as the substrate material, are the most widely used solar cells, mainly due to the high efficiency, long life time (over 20 years) and availability in the market. The highest efficiency reached by a monocrystalline Si solar cell was 24%.22 Polycrystalline Si shows a lower efficiency, of around 19.5%. The reason for the lower efficiency in polycrystalline solar cells compared to monocrystalline solar cells is attributed to the crystal defects. The probability of an electron injection to the anode electrode reduces after multiple collisions in the crystal lattice and the crystal defects act as recombination centres. The band gap of silicon is 1.1 eV, which makes it good for solar cell applications. According to Planck's equation;E = hc/λthe light photons are absorbed in the visible and infrared regions. This is one of the main reasons for the improved efficiency of Si solar cells. However, the Shockley–Queisser limit inhibits the maximum efficiency that can be reached by a Si solar cell to 33.7% under AM 1.5.23 So, a further increase in the efficiency with the first generation technology is not possible.
Though the efficiency is sufficient and the manufacturing technology is widely prevalent, the use of Si incurs a huge cost, which is due to its processing and manufacturing costs. This inhibits a reduction in the cost of solar cells (Fig. 7). Also, the electricity consumption for Si processing is pretty high, thus burdening the Si solar cell with an energy pay-back time of around 1 year or so. Also, there are environmental hazards for the processing of Si.24 The large scale application of Si solar cells requires huge amounts of Si, increasing the chemical hazards to the environment released during Si processing. Hence, the second generation solar cells were designed mainly with the goal of replacing silicon.
B. Second generation solar cells
The second generation solar cells use thin film technologies. The most popular thin film technology in use today is amorphous Si (a-Si). Carlson and Wronski of RCA Laboratories, USA are credited with the fabrication of the first a-Si solar cell.25 a-Si has a band-gap of 1.7 eV and can therefore deliver more voltage than a c-Si solar cell. Other promising semiconductor materials for thin film technologies include cadmium telluride (CdTe), gallium arsenide (GaAs) or copper indium (gallium) selenide (CIS/CIGS), etc. Thin film technologies use small amounts of material (generally 1–2 μm thick) and they can be grown/deposited sequentially on cheap substrates, like glass/plastics, etc.
The band-gap of CdTe is 1.44 eV at 300 K.26 This corresponds to a minimum photon of wavelength 863 nm to excite the electron to the conduction band of the semiconductor, according to the Planck's equation. This suggests that this solar cell will be transparent to energies of radiation extending in the infrared and far-infrared regions. The band-gap of the other two materials namely CIS and GaAs are 1 eV and 1.43 eV, respectively. Thin films of these materials are used, which have drastically increased and improved the properties compared to the bulk materials. The thickness range of these films varies between nanometers to a few micrometers. Hence, they open a way for multi-junction devices, where several p–n junctions can be formed, with varying substrate materials, harvesting light in a wider range of energies, thus increasing the cell efficiency. Thus, the semiconductor material consumption is less in thin film solar cells.27 The cost of second generation solar cells is lower than that based on c-Si (Fig. 7).
However, CdTe has serious disposal problems.28 It is highly poisonous (heavy metals) and hence is an environmental hazard. CIGS contains indium, which is a rare earth metal, whose reserves are very limited in the Earth's crust. Hence, the third generation solar cells were designed to replace CdTe and CIGS, with cheaper wide band-gap metal oxide semiconductors, like TiO2, ZnO, Nb2O5, SnO2, etc.
C. Third generation solar cells
The third generation solar cells are powered by nanomaterials. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) are the two major variants in this approach. The working principle and manufacturing technologies vary greatly from Si solar cells. Though third generation solar cells have not reached the practical efficiency levels of Si solar cells, they possess great potential with the use of nanotechnology. Advanced research is being carried out all over the world, with the aim of the effective commercialisation of these solar cells. Third generation solar cells aim for a further reduction in the cost and a higher efficiency in comparison to the first and second generation solar cells (Fig. 7). A thorough discussion of these interesting technologies is dealt with in this paper, from a basic insight of nanotechnology.
IV. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs)
A dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) is a promising, recently developed technology for a low-cost, high efficiency solar energy-to-electricity conversion.29 It can offer high both a flexibility and environmental friendliness. Although the solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiencies recorded for DSCs are lower than those measured for Si-based solar cells, there is the potential for the improvement of their efficiency, with the implications of nanotechnology. The key idea of this technology is mimicking natural photosynthesis in a low-cost, environmental friendly and easily manufacturable way. The construction and working principle of a DSC is quite different to the conventional first and second generation solar cells.
A. Components of DSCs
DSCs are composed of five major components (Fig. 8), namely a transparent conductive substrate, a nanostructured n-type semiconductor, a dye-sensitizer to absorb light, an electrolyte, which creates the interface with the semiconductor and a counter electrode, facilitating the transfer of electrons between them and a counter electrode carrying an electrocatalyst to facilitate the electron transfer from the external load to the counter electrode.17,18,29
 Fig. 8  Schematic showing the main components of a dye-sensitized solar cell (from Y. Jiao, F. Zhang and S. Meng, Dye Sensitized Solar Cells Principles and New Design, Solar Cells – Dye-Sensitized Devices, Prof. Leonid A. Kosyachenko (ed.), InTech, 2011, ISBN: 978-953-307-735-2). 

A.1 Transparent conducting substrate. 
Clear conducting glass substrates are commonly used as the base substrate for DSCs. The properties of an ideal substrate are a high transparency in the visible, infrared and far-infrared regions, stability even at high temperatures around 500 °C and being chemically inert, so as not to react with the chemicals and electrolyte system of the DSC. The bottom part of the glass substrate, facing away from the Sun, is coated with a transparent conductive layer, usually indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) or fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). ITO is chemically less stable to the electrolyte and also, its sheet resistance increases with higher temperatures. Additionally, indium is a rare-earth metal, which is very limited in availability. Hence, FTO is mostly preferred. This layer is crucial, since it controls the amount of sunlight penetrating the cell, while conducting electron carriers to the outer circuit i.e., the external load.
Plastic has been widely studied as an alternative, to produce flexible substrates.30,31 This allows producing flexible DSCs, that can be widely used in many applications, like windows, laptop bags, etc. However, a plastic substrate is thermally unstable during the sintering process at 450–500 °C. Spray deposition and mechanical compression of nanoparticle films on plastic substrates have therefore been developed. However, the conversion efficiency is only 2.8% at 100 mW cm−2.32 Structural imperfections in the compressed films, due to the low temperature deposition method, are the main cause for this lower efficiency. A mechanical press method used for TiO2 deposition, has been validated for a laboratory scale preparation, with a conversion efficiency of 7.6% for a 1.1 cm2 plastic substrate DSC.33 The press conditions, thickness of the TiO2 layer and the surface treatment of plastic substrate have a major impact on the efficiency.


A.2 Semiconductor material. 
A variety of metal oxides, such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5, etc. can be used as the semiconductor material.34 These are wide band-gap semiconductors. The photon energy required to excite an electron to the conduction band (CB) in these semiconductors is more than that for Si. The most commonly used semiconductor material is TiO2, because of its advantages over other materials, mainly an excellent thermal stability. It is impervious to the chemicals or electrolytes used in DSCs and is non-toxic. Other benefits include its cost-effectiveness and abundance. The common crystalline form used in application to solar cells is the anatase form. The anatase form shows a higher electron conductivity compared to the rutile form.35 The sintering temperature for the anatase form is around 450 °C, while that of the rutile form is higher than 600 °C.36,37 The CB of TiO2 is lower in energy, compared to the LUMO of the dye molecule. This facilitates the injection of an electron from the dye LUMO level into the CB of the TiO2 through the chemical bonding between them (ester or cyclic ester bonds).38
The band-gap of anatase TiO2 is 3.2 eV. The minimum energy required for the excitation of an electron from the valence band (VB) to the conduction (CB) band falls in the UV region of the electromagnetic spectrum, which is only approximately 5% of the entire solar spectrum. This means that only a small fraction of the entire solar spectrum is utilized for the electron excitation. This requires the use of dye molecules to sensitize the semiconductor material in the visible and infrared regions.


A.3 Dye-sensitizer. 
The dye plays the important role of sensitizing the semiconductor to allow absorption in the visible and infrared regions of the solar spectrum. For this reason, several requirements have to be met at the same time, such as broad absorption spectrum, good stability, non-toxicity, good matching of the HOMO and LUMO levels of the dye with the semiconductor's VB and CB edges, respectively, and the chemical potential of the redox system of the electrolyte. An ideal sensitizer has to absorb all the light below a threshold wavelength. Moreover, it should have a strong bonding with the TiO2 nanoparticles (or strong coupling of orbitals) for an effective electron injection into the CB of TiO2, with a quantum yield close to unity.
Upon absorption of a photon of a particular energy, a dye molecule adsorbed to the surface of, say a nanostructured TiO2, becomes oxidized and the excited electron is injected into the CB of the semiconductor through the interfacial bonds between the dye and the TiO2. The electron from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is excited to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), from where it is transferred to the CB of the semiconductor. For this to happen efficiently, the LUMO of the dye must be sufficiently high in energy for an efficient charge injection into the TiO2, and the HOMO must be sufficiently low in energy for the efficient regeneration of the oxidized dye by the hole-transporting medium (HTM).
Ruthenium-based dyes are usually referred as a family of complexes bearing the chemical formula [{(4,4′-CO2H)2(bipy)}2RuX2] (bipy = 2,2′-bipyridyl; X = Cl, Br, I, CN, NCS). These were the first dyes investigated for DSCs.39 With X = NCS, we have the N3 dye [{(4,4′-CO2H)2bipy}2Ru(NCS)2] and the doubly deprotonated analogue is N719. The use of a terpyridyl ligand led to the so-called “black dye”, which was found to be equally/slightly more efficient than the N3 dye. The chemical structure of the N3, N719 and the black dyes are shown in Fig. 9. As is evident from Fig. 9, the Ru–polypyridyl complexes are transition metal coordinated compounds, involving a metal-to-ligand charge transfer and then s transfer to the semiconductor via the chemical bond between them. These sensitizers have s strong visible absorption, long excitation lifetime and efficient metal-to-ligand charge transfer.40 However, the high cost of Ru dyes is one important factor hindering the large-scale implementation of DSCs. Although highly effective, with the current maximum cell level efficiency of 11.2%, the costly synthesis and undesired environmental impact of those prototypes calls for cheaper, more simple and safer dyes, as alternatives.
 Fig. 9  Structures of the widely used commercial dyes in DSCs.43 
The charge separation in a dye molecule plays an important role in controlling the kinetics of the electron transfer.41,42 Upon absorption of photons by the dye molecules, the metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) transition occurs (usually on the femtosecond time scale) that places the excited electrons on the functional group which is directly attached to the TiO2 (–COOH or –NH2 groups as the case may be). This facilitates an ultrafast charge transfer to TiO2 (usually in the picosecond regime).41,42 The positive charge density that remains on the dye is distributed over the metal and also to some extent over the NCS ligands. This results in a spatial separation of the positive charge density on the dye and the injected electrons, which has the crucial effect of retarding the rate of charge recombination between the injected electrons and the dye cation, which is a key loss mechanism.
Although Ru-based dyes show good efficiencies, for commercial use in DSCs, Ru is a rare earth metal and also toxic. Hence, investigations for the use of cheaper and eco-friendly dyes have been made. Metal-free organic dyes, metal-complex porphyrin dyes and natural dyes come into the picture in this category. Metal-free organic dyes include the hemicyanin dye, polyene–diphenyline dye, thienylfluorine dye, phenothiazine dye, thienothiophene–thiophene-derived dye, phenyl-conjugated polyene dye, N,N-dimethylaniline-cyanoacetic acid, oligothiophene dye, coumarin dye, indoline dye, oligo-phenylenevinylene dye, etc.43
Metal-complex porphyrin dyes have also been used, with significant efficiencies. Porphyrin is a large π aromatic molecule, with a good light harvesting capability. Zinc porphyrin dyes were reported to show a conversion efficiency of 7.1%.44
Naturally occurring dyes that can be derived from plant or fruit extracts also serve this purpose. These dyes are the lowest cost, non-toxic and easily available. Organic dyes, including natural pigments and synthetic organic dyes, have a donor–acceptor structure, called a push–pull architecture, thus improving the short circuit current density by improving the absorption in the red and infrared region. Natural pigments, like chlorophyll, carotene, and anthocyanin are freely available in plant leaves, flowers, and fruits and fulfil these requirements.
The advantages of organic dyes are:
(1) They exhibit a high absorption coefficient (abundant π → π* within molecules).
(2) It is easy to design dyes with various structures and adjust the absorption wavelength range.
(3) Use no metal and they have no limitation of resources.
(4) Lower cost than organic metal dyes and enable synthesis.
The disadvantages of organic dyes are:
(1) Lower efficiency than organic metal dyes.
(2) Short post-absorption excited states (π*) lifetime.
(3) Narrow absorption spectrum wavelength in the visible range, making it difficult to absorb light from all the visible/NIR range.
The development of new dyes with a strong absorption in the visible and NIR regions will hold great potential for further improving the efficiency of DSCs, from the current 11.2%. An extensive coverage on dyes for DSCs is not appropriate for this Perspective article. However, within the current framework of the dyes, extensive research efforts have focussed on enhancing the blocking effect of the sensitizers, reducing the complexation between the dye and the I− species, increasing the electron injection depth in TiO2, reducing the charge recombinations between the oxidized sensitizer and injected electrons in the TiO2 CB, reducing molecular aggregation, increasing the molecular overlap between the TiO2 and the sensitizer LUMO, etc. Readers are directed to excellent reviews in the field for further information.43
Perovskites as sensitizers: As an alternative to organic dyes and inorganic quantum dots, scientists have used perovskite materials, such as CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3.45 These have a unique electrical conductivity, optical absorption and excitonic properties and are composed of earth abundant materials (C, N, Pb and halogens). The pioneering work by Kojima et al., used nanoparticles of the above sensitizers in combination with TiO2 nanoparticles, to get an efficiency of 3.8%.45a Further research along these lines resulted in several materials and modifications45b–d for organic–inorganic hybrid devices, the most notable being the use of mesoporous TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3 along with a polymeric hole–conductor (poly-triarylamine). Under AM1.5 test conditions, the solar cell of the combination produced the photovoltaic parameters as Jsc of 16.5 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.997 V and a fill-factor of 0.727, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 12.0%. There were several strides in the field, with the most promising jump being a recent re-engineering of the fabrication steps by Grätzel et al.45c In comparison to the deposition of the perovskites onto thin films of TiO2, known hitherto, Grätzel et al. adopted a sequential deposition route, in which the TiO2 film is first saturated with a solution of PbI2 and subsequently converted into the perovskite by exposing it to CH3NH3I. This resulted in the saturable absorption of the perovskite sensitizer to the TiO2, resulting in a high efficiency of ∼15% (Fig. 10). It is expected that such devices may rival thin film solar cells in terms of the efficiency and stability.45c
 Fig. 10  A cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite-sensitized solar cell (A) and its photovoltaic response (B).45c 


A.4 Electrolyte. 
The electrolyte is one of the key components in a DSC, facilitating the electron transfer mechanism and kinetics. The electrons passing through the external circuit are collected at the counter electrode. These electrons are conducted to the excited dye molecules to bring them back to the ground state by the electrolyte. The kinetics of the charge transfer determines the extent of the recombination losses occurring. The electrolyte has an important role to play in the regulation of the electron transfer kinetics, thus affecting the overall cell efficiency.
This medium can be broadly classified into three types; liquid electrolyte, solid electrolyte and quasi-solid electrolyte. The first DSC reported by Grätzel in 1991 used an organic liquid electrolyte containing LiI/I2, giving an overall light conversion efficiency of 7.1%.39 The organic solvents that can be used are acetonitrile (AcN), ethylene carbonate (EC), 3-methoxypropionitrile (MePN), propylenecarbonate (PC), γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), etc.46 These solvents have high dielectric constants, low viscosity and are highly volatile.
A liquid electrolyte is basically a I−/I3− redox couple in a volatile organic solvent, like acetonitrile, propionitrile, methoxyacetonitrile, and methoxypropionitrile, which provide a high ion conductivity, high dielectric constant, and dissolvability of theelectrolyte. The efficiency obtained by using the liquid electrolyte of I−/I3− in a volatile organic solvent is higher. The cationic size also plays an important role in the efficiency of the cell. Small cations, such as Li, show a better performance. The diffusion of electrons in the CB of TiO2 is an ambipolar process, involving ion diffusion associated with electron transport. Small radii cation can penetrate deeply into the mesoporous dye-coated nanocrystalline TiO2 film and form an ambipolar Li+–e− with the electrons in the CB of TiO2, increasing the transport speed of the electrons and enhancing the Jsc of the DSC. However the volatility of these substances hinders their long term use in DSCs.
Non-volatile organic solvents, like 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide show good chemical and thermal stability, and non-flammability. However, these have a higher viscosity than the volatile organic solvents, thus the conductivity of the electrons is less efficient. Though the liquid electrolyte gives a good efficiency, there are problems with sealing and leakage, hindering the large scale manufacturing and long term utilization of DSCs. Hence, although a liquid electrolyte gives a good efficiency, solid and quasi-solid electrolytes have been investigated.
A solid electrolyte can be classified into two types; one using the hole-conducting medium, the other containing an iodide/triiodide redox couple as the medium. SiC and GaN are the common large band-gap hole-conducting media. However, these cannot be used, as they are unstable at the high temperatures used during the sintering process of TiO2. Copper-based compounds like CuI and CuSCN exhibit good conductivity properties. The cell efficiency using CuI as a solid electrolyte is 2.4% under irradiation of AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2).47 However, the stability of these cells is not appreciable. Unlike the inorganic CuI, the organic hole-conducting media have advantages like the ease of availability and preparation, and the low cost.
Spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 11) is an efficient solid organic hole-conducting medium, with the chemical name 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine) 9,9′-spirobifluorene.48a The highest achieved efficiency using this material is 3.2%. The poorer efficiencies of solid electrolytes, compared to liquid electrolytes, are attributed to the low intrinsic conductivity, lower electron transfer between the dye molecule and hole conducting medium, due to the poor penetration of the solid electrolyte into the pores of the mesoporous TiO2 and a faster recombination of electrons from TiO2 to the hole-conducting medium. Recent developments related to redox electrolytes can be found in two reviews.48b,c
 Fig. 11  Structure of Spiro-OMeTAD (from Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14099–14109). 


A.5 Counter electrode. 
The main function of the counter electrode, in addition to finishing the cell fabrication, is to collect the electrons from the external load and efficient reduction of the redox electrolyte, or the collection of holes from the hole-conducting medium in the case of a solid electrolyte.48 It is coated with a conductive film, which acts as the electrocatalyst, enhancing the transport of the electrons into the cell. Platinum (Pt) is usually used as the conducting film. However due to high cost of Pt, other conductive materials, like graphite, graphene, activated carbon, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), polypyrrole, and polyaniline can also be used as good alternatives, though with a little decrease in the efficiency. A stainless steel electrode, coated with carbon-black, has also been used as a low-cost counter electrode.48
Metal counter electrodes, such as steel and nickel, have the problem of corrosiveness to the I−/I3− redox couple in the electrolyte. However, this problem can be resolved with the proper covering of the metal electrode with a conductive film, such as carbon, F-doped SnO2, etc. As the sheet resistance of the metal substrates is less, they can give a higher fill-factor. A graphite counter electrode, coated with carbon black, showed an efficiency of 6.7%.49

B. Working of DSCs
All photovoltaic devices involve two important steps to convert sunlight into electrical energy:
(1) Radiation absorption with electron excitation.
(2) Charge carriers separation.
The way in which radiation is absorbed and the carriers are separated is quite different in DSCs, compared to classical p–n junction solar cells. In classical solar cells, both the processes of radiation absorption and charge carrier separation are performed by the semiconductor material itself. The charge separation is effected by the potential developed across the depletion layer on the p–n junction. On the contrary, in a DSC, light absorption is carried on by the dye molecules bonded to the semiconductor material. Charge separation is taken care of by the electron transfer kinetics at the dye–TiO2 interface. For the very same reason, the solar cells based on a p–n junction are called minority carrier devices, while the DSCs are called majority carrier devices. The potential difference produced by the cell is determined by the energy separation between the electrolyte chemical potential (Eredox) and the Fermi level (EF) of the TiO2 layer, provided that recombination reactions do not occur (Scheme 1). Otherwise, the overall potential will be that from subtracting the recombination losses also. The photocurrent level, or the shot-circuit current level (Jsc), depends on the quantum yield i.e., the efficiency of electron injection upon absorption of a photon by the dye molecule. This is analogous to the band-gap energy (Eg) of inorganic semiconductors. The conceptual working of the DSC (shown in Fig. 12) is similar to the natural photosynthesis process occurring in plants. The dye molecules replace the chlorophyll in functioning as a light absorber. However, unlike chemical energy that is produced during photosynthesis in plants, an electric potential is developed in DSCs. The photo-electrochemical processes in a DSC occur in a particular sequence, which can be expressed as in the following sections.
 Scheme 1  Light and dark reactions in a DSC. 
 Fig. 12  A schematic of the operating principle of a DSC (from author's work). 

B.1 Sunlight absorption and electron excitation in dye molecule. 
Photons of different energies, usually between 0.5 eV to 3.5 eV, striking the top of the solar cell, penetrate the dye layer since both the transparent conductive film on the glass substrate and the TiO2 nanocrystals are transparent to visible and infrared light. Photons of energy equal to, or more than the energy gap of the dye molecule, namely, the energy difference between the HOMO and LUMO, produce an effective excitation of an electron in the dye molecule. This promotes an electron from the HOMO to the LUMO. The electrons in the LUMO state are less bound to the dye molecule. Thus, the photon absorption by the dye molecule depends on the energy difference between these two energy levels. Photons below the minimum threshold energy do not cause an effective excitation, whereas photons of a higher excitation produce hot carriers, or multiple electron excitations. Hot carriers are named so because their temperatures will be high compared to the corresponding lattice temperature.


B.2 Electron injection to TiO2 and the charge separation. 
The excited electron in the LUMO state of the dye is now injected to the CB of the semiconductor through the interfacial bonds between the dye and the TiO2 (interfacial electron transfer). For effective charge injection with a quantum yield close to one, there must be effective coupling of the respective orbitals of the Ti4+ and the dye. The collected electrons in the CB of each TiO2 should then be transported all along the semiconductor film effectively, without recombination to the electrolyte or other dye molecules. For this transport to occur without any losses, a process called ‘necking’ is done to the nanoparticles' assembly in the TiO2 film (additionally by the so-called TiCl4 treatment). After transportation, the electrons are finally collected by the transparent conductive film on the electrode (the photoelectrode). On the other hand, the hole generated by photon excitation remains on the molecule during this process, since the HOMO of the dye is separated from all the other energy levels of the device.
Also, for the electrons to be injected into the CB of TiO2 from the LUMO of the dye molecule, it is required that the LUMO of the dye molecule should be higher in energy than the CB. The charge separation is taken care of by the kinetic competition of the electron transfer. At the various dye–TiO2 interfaces, the timescale of excited electron injection ranges from the order of femtoseconds to picoseconds.42,44 The electrons injected into the conduction band are collected at the conductive film of the anode electrode on the micro to millisecond scale. The oxidized dye is regenerated back in the range of nanoseconds. The time difference in the various processes occurring is referred to as the kinetic competition of electron transfer, which drives the cell forward reaction. The electrons are transported by the diffusion process, as the electric field is negligible in the TiO2 film. Unlike conventional p–n junction solar cells, only one charge type i.e., an electron, is present in a DSC. The kinetic competition between electron transport and recombination is determined by the effective carrier diffusion length Leff, given by Leff = [Deffτ]1/2 where Deff is the effective electron diffusion length (DL), or effective diffusivity and τ is the electron lifetime due to the charge recombination reaction.50–52Deff strongly depends on the position of the quasi Fermi level in the semiconductor and therefore, on the light intensity. Typical values at 1 Sun are 1.5 × 10−2 cm2 s−1.50–52 Since diffusion is the only driving force for electron transport, the diffusion length must be at least as long as the thickness of the TiO2 electrode. Deff generally increases with light intensity, while τ proportionally decreases. As a consequence, the diffusion length is independent of the light intensity. Typical values for the diffusion length are 5–20 μm.


B.3 Redox reaction by the electrolyte and at the counter electrode. 
The oxidized dye molecules bonded to the TiO2 nanoparticles have no energy channels to diffuse into the TiO2 photoanode. These are immediately reduced by the electrolyte, in the order of nanoseconds. Consider the typically used I−/I3− redox couple in organic solvent electrolytes. The reduction of the oxidized dye by iodide produces triiodide. The triiodide diffuses to the counter electrode and accepts electrons from the external load, regenerating iodide. On the whole, the electrons flowing from the transparent conductive film on the anode to the external load are collected back at the counter electrode.
The potential difference across the cell ideally depends on the Fermi level and electrolyte redox potential. Hence, the open-circuit voltage, Voc is theoretically determined by the difference between the CB bottom and the electrolyte anion energy level, typically around 0.5–0.7 V. However, with a loaded condition, the electrode potential is lower than the theoretical Voc. The short-circuit current is one more factor that determines the performance of the cell. It is affected by many factors, like the light harvesting efficiency, charge separation efficiency and charge collection efficiency. The quantum efficiency of a DSC is nearly unity, which suggests that the cell performance is only slightly effected by the charge separation. Light harvesting and charge collection efficiencies greatly determine the overall efficiency.


B.4 Recombination. 
The probability of photoelectrons recombining back with the electrolyte, or dye molecule, is determined by the recombination reactions.53,54 These reactions reduce the output electric power of a DSC. These reactions usually occur during the transport of electrons in the CB of TiO2, to the adjacent TiO2 in the semiconductor layer. The mesoporous nanocrystalline TiO2 can accommodate the liquid electrolyte between the pores. The photo-injected electrons in the TiO2 have two possible recombination pathways: direct recombination with the oxidized dyes or with the I3− in the electrolyte, both of which happen at the TiO2-dye–elecrolyte interface.53,54 The recombination to dye molecules is in the range of micro to milliseconds, whereas the recombination to the electrolyte is in the order of millisecond to seconds. The latter process is more dominant compared to the dye molecule. It can be reduced by depositing a thin TiO2 film between the FTO and the nanocrystalline porous TiO2 layer,55 because the interface between the FTO and the electrolyte is an important recombination route.

V. Concepts and implications of nanotechnology to third generation solar cells
A. Higher surface area
As the size of the material reduces from the bulk to nano sized (10−9 m), the surface area increases drastically for the same volume of a given material56,57 (Fig. 13). As a result, the nanoparticles exhibit interesting physical and chemical properties, initially unseen in the bulk material.58 The chemical reactivity increases as the size of the reactants decreases, particularly at the nano-level. Nanoparticles of materials are highly unstable compared to the corresponding bulk material. The surface atoms are less coordinated to their neighbouring atoms, compared to the internal atoms. This implies that the surface atoms have higher energies. For a nanostructure, the number of surface atoms is large, which increases the chemical reactivity of the nanomaterials.58
 Fig. 13  A cartoon showing the variations in the surface-to-volume ratio of bulk vs. nano (adapted from http://chemspace.wordpress.com/nano-properties/capture1/). 
Adsorption is the adhesion of atoms, ions, or molecules onto a surface. With a larger surface area of nanoparticles, there are more active centres for the adsorption of a material. This property of the higher surface area of nanostructures is widely used in many applications, like chemical catalysis, storage devices, solar cells, etc.57,58
Nanomaterials can be synthesized in different sizes and shapes and thus offer the possibility for tailoring their properties. Nanomaterials with different sizes and shapes have different properties, a summary of which is given below.
B. Tunability of band-gap
Individual molecules may be in sizes ranging around 10–500 Å. Nanoparticles are made of a few atoms/molecules, together. In fact, nanoparticles can be termed ‘artificial atoms/molecules’. The energy levels and electronic probabilities in a nanoparticle/nanostructure can be explained by quantum mechanics. The size of the nanoparticle determines the quantum confinement of the electron, which impacts the minimum threshold energy to be supplied to it for excitation. Thus, the wavelength of the light that is absorbed can be tuned by changing the size of the nanoparticles. A typical example is in the case of quantum dots (QDs), below.
C. Better electrical conductivity of 1-D nanostructures
One-dimensional (1-D) nanostructures, like nanotubes and nanowires, show very high electrical conductivity, due to the unidirectional flow of charge, reducing the electron collisions with other lattice elements, etc.59 A detailed account on the possibility of 1-D nanostructures in DSCs is given below.
VI. Nanotechnology implications to DSCs
A DSC has five different components and the efficiency of the whole can be increased by individually improving each of the components. Nanotechnology plays a vital role in improving the cell efficiency in many ways.
A. Nanostructures of semiconductive oxide materials
Nanostructures have many advantages over bulk materials for use as semiconductor materials. As the nanostructures have a higher surface area compared to the bulk materials, their dye adsorption capacity is enhanced greatly. A greater dye adsorption results in better light harvesting, thus increasing the solar cell efficiency. Nanostructures of semiconductor materials used in DSCs can be classified into two main types, namely nanoparticles and 1-D nanostructures. However, a few other anisotropic nanostructures also exist.

A.1 Nanoparticles. 
Nanoparticles can offer a larger surface area for dye adsorption. Hence, greater dye adsorption corresponds to better light harvesting. The efficiency of the cell can be greatly enhanced by using the nanoparticle TiO2 instead of the bulk material.60 Thus, the cell performance is dependent on the structure and morphology of the nanoporous layer.61–63 Several methodologies are available for fabricating very high surface area TiO2 nanoparticles. Amongst these, the hydrothermal route is the most promising.58,64 A recently invented methodology for producing high surface area and phase pure TiO2 is by the molten salt method (MSM).65,66 Surface areas as high as 200 m2 g−1 are achievable by this method. A SEM image of the MSM TiO2 nanoparticles is given in Fig. 14A. The material could act as a dual function material (i.e. a material which can function as both the active and scattering layers) because of the presence of spherical aggregates of ∼250–400 nm sizes. A DSC of 0.25 cm2 area showed an efficiency of 7.5% more than that from P-25 TiO2 (Fig. 14B and C). Another notable development in the field was the fabrication of highly ordered TiO2 photonic crystals (Fig. 15A) through template-directed/self-assembly approaches.67,68 The TiO2 inverse opals are produced by the colloidal self-assembly of polystyrene spheres having infiltrated the organic layer-coated TiO2 nanoparticles. The methodology helps in producing non-aggregated, transparent, multi-layered TiO2 layers, having a high packing density for DSC applications. Mesoporous spherical TiO2 microbeads have also been developed to obtain dual-function materials for DSCs.69 Though overall micron sized, the specific surface area was high (∼90 m2 g−1) because the microstructures were actually made up of small spherical particles of ∼5–10 nm sizes (Fig. 16A). This resulted in a high surface area of ∼90 m2 g−1. DSCs employing these dual-function microbeads showed an efficiency over 10% (Fig. 16B), more than that of P-25 (P-25 cannot have the dual functionality because of its smaller size of ∼25 nm).69 The development of dual function materials helps in eliminating the need for a separate scattering layer in DSCs. Although a separate scattering layer helps in improving the efficiency through scattering the red part of the solar spectrum, these are technologically complicated and results in a loss of optical transparency for the DSC, which may affect its prospects in building-integrated photovoltaics.
 Fig. 14  (A) A SEM image of TiO2 nanoparticles synthesized by molten salt method (from author's work). (B) and (C) I–V and IPCE traces of a DSC employing MSM TiO2vs. that from P-25. 
 Fig. 15  Picture of a TiO2 inverse opal showing different colours (violet when dry and green when wet with ethanol) due to Bragg diffraction (a).67b SEM images of the TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals used as active layer for DSCs: (b) large area view, (c) cross-sectional view and (d) photovoltaic properties as a function of TiO2 obtained from different sized PS templates.67a 
 Fig. 16  TEM (inset: large area view) and SEM image (inset TEM image) of dual function bead-shaped TiO2 nano/mesostructures.69 
Though mesoporous spherical TiO2 particles are generally employed in DSCs as the active/scattering layers, they suffer from ‘excited electron recombinations’, due to the presence of grain boundaries in the nanoparticles.53 Entire electrons in the CB of TiO2 are not transferred to the counter electrode without recombination. Charge recombination occurs from the CB of the TiO2 to the adjacent electron acceptors in the electrolyte as it fills the spaces in the mesoporous nanoparticle TiO2 layer (a major recombination pathway in DSC), or with the oxidized dye molecules. As mentioned in the working principled, an electric field to drift the electron transfer, as in the case of conventional p–n junction solar cells, is absent in a DSC. The electron transfer occurs by diffusion along the film.
One way of reducing the charge recombination is to create an outer energy barrier around the TiO2 nanoparticle, to avoid the conduction band electrons “leaking” out into the electrolyte. Nanotechnology helps in this scenario as well. This is done by coating TiO2 nanoparticles with a different metal oxide (e.g. ZnO), thus forming a core–shell structure.70 The metal oxides generally used for coating the TiO2 are ZnO, CaCO3, Nb2O5, SrTiO3, MgO and Al2O3. Hence, the core of the nanoparticle will be TiO2 and the outer shell contains any of these metal oxides. Two approaches of making a core–shell structure for DSCs have been developed (Fig. 17). One method is by synthesising the core–shell nanoparticles initially and then employing them as a photoanode film. In this approach, the energy barrier is formed not only between the nanoparticle–electrolyte interfaces, but also between the individual nanoparticles. This inhibits the transportation of electrons through the photoanode film to the transparent conductive film on the electrode (Fig. 17A). Another method is to form the shell layer after deposition of the photoanode film and the necking process is done. This method is more advantageous for electron transport (Fig. 17B). If organic dyes are used, an increased basicity of the metal oxide compared to the TiO2 ensures that the carboxylic groups on the dye surface are better adsorbed on to the surface.71
 Fig. 17  Two possible core–shell configurations for preventing charge recombination by protecting the TiO2 nanoparticles by coating with another semiconductor. (A) Making individual core–shell nanostructures and subsequently using them in a DSC, (B) coating the TiO2 photoanode film with an outer coating of semiconductor.72 
In the case of Nb2O5, the coating forms a surface energy barrier, reducing the recombination reactions. The other shell materials form a surface dipole layer that shifts the conduction band potential of the core TiO2. The direction and magnitude of change in the conduction band potential depend on the dipole parameters, which are induced by the shell acidity or electron affinity properties of the two materials at the core–shell interface.72


A.2 1-Dimensional (1-D) nanostructures. 
A photoanode is mainly the efficiency determining component of a DSC, due to the combination of electron transport and recombination process occurring. The TiO2 nanoparticles used in DSCs are usually a random network of crystallographically misaligned crystallites, and lattice mismatches at the grain boundaries could influence electron scattering and act as an electron trap. This inhibits the electron transport, reducing the electron lifetime.
1-Dimensional (1-D) nanostructures like nanofibers, nanowires and nanotubes show an enhanced electric conductivity.73 This is due to the fact that electrons have a direct pathway, thus having a larger diffusion length than that in nanoparticles. The grain boundary is reduced in a 1-D nanostructure, which can act as a single crystal. The recombination rate in TiO2 nanotubes is found to be 10 times slower than that in nanoparticles.74 The penetration of a liquid electrolyte into the 1-D TiO2 lattice is less, as it has a lower surface area compared to the nanoparticles.
Randomly oriented 1D metal oxides. 
Electrospinning offers a facile methodology for fabricating randomly oriented metal oxide and polymer nanofibers in various configurations, such as solid, hollow, core–shell, etc.75 While polymer nanofibers are made by electrospinning polymer solutions of a suitable viscosity, metal oxide nanofibers are fabricated by electrospinning a polymer solution containing a metal oxide precursor (e.g. TiO2) and the subsequent sintering of the polymer, to obtain the metal oxide nanofibers. Fig. 18a shows a SEM image of randomly oriented electrospun TiO2 nanofibers. Though traditionally electrospinning is employed to fabricate nanofibers, it is also possible to create a structural anisotropy for the metal oxide, by hot-pressing before sintering (Fig. 18b) and tuning the chemistry between the polymer and metal oxide. Typical examples of these are the fabrication of rice-shaped (Fig. 19)75c and leaf-shaped TiO275d by electrospinning. When used in DSCs; the electrospun TiO2 fibers show an efficiency of ∼4.6%, while the anisotropic one showed ∼9% (Fig. 18c and d, respectively). Random TiO2 nanotubes/nanowires could also be synthesized by the titanate route from the conventional spherical particles.76
 Fig. 18  A SEM image of TiO2 nanofibers (a) and fibers whose surface is decorate with fibrils (b) fabricated by electrospinning. Figures c and d shows the respective photovoltaic parameters.75e,f 
 Fig. 19  A SEM image of rice-shaped TiO2 obtained by electrospinning (from author's work). 
A TiO2 nanotube structures as a photoanode film can overcome the electron transport limitation of nanoparticles. A facile one-step hydrothermal method to synthesize TiO2 nanotubes produced 100 nm long nanotubes, with an outer diameter of 8 nm, showing a specific surface area of 270 m2 g−1 (Fig. 20A).77 A schematic of the DSC construction is shown in Fig. 20B. However, the efficiency shown is only 2.9% (Fig. 20C) which is less than that of the nanoparticles. This can be due to a decrease in the specific surface area, because the dye adsorption ability is less, thus affecting the light harvesting efficiency. Also, the random orientation of nanotubes could result in the lower diffusion of the redox electrolyte, resulting in the poor regeneration of the dye molecules. Hence, the TiO2 nanotube structures should possess a high dispersion and crystallization to improve the photoelectrochemical properties.
 Fig. 20  A – SEM image of highly ordered TiO2 nanotubes obtained by anodization process. B – A schematic showing the construction of a DSC using the nanostructures.77 C – The PV parameters out of the DSC.77 
Vertically aligned metal oxides. 
Apart from providing a direct vertical pathway for electron transport, thus minimizing the electron losses during diffusion process, vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube structures can accommodate more sensitizer and electrolyte for further increasing the efficiency. A highly ordered 360 nm long TiO2 nanotube array, used as a photoanode, showed a short circuit current of 7.87 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage of 0.75 V and an overall conversion efficiency of 2.9%.78a The lower conversion efficiency can be attributed to the low surface area for dye-loading and thus, the low light harvesting efficiency. This may be overcome by increasing the length of the nanotube structures. Ultralong TiO2 nanotubes, of length over 200 μm, delivered a significantly improved DSC efficiency of 6.89%.78b The synthesis of these ultra-long nanotube structures require more time and involves fabrication difficulties, with no increase in the efficiency levels beyond the mesoporous nanoparticle TiO2. This is mainly due to insufficient dye loading, although the highly ordered TiO2 shows an excellent electron transport and increased electron lifetime. Vertically oriented TiO2 and SnO2 nanowires have been fabricated by electrospinning,79 however, the photovoltaic parameters needed to be improved further, through post-treatments. Fig. 21 shows a pioneering effort on DSC construction (Fig. 21a) using vertically oriented ZnO nanowires grown on FTO substrates (Fig. 21b)80 by a seed-mediated approach. The DSC constructed out of the material showed an efficiency of 1.5% under a full Sun (Fig. 21c). Fig. 21d shows a comparison of the transient mid-infrared spectra of the DSCs made from ZnO nanowires (black trace) and ZnO nanoparticles (red trace) showing that in wires the electron injection is complete after 5 picoseconds but continues for nearly 100 picoseconds in the particle case. Vertically oriented TiO2 forests, nanowires and hollow nanotubes (Fig. 22 and 23, respectively) have been used in DSCs, however, the efficiency of the devices has been moderate (4–7%, Fig. 22c).81
 Fig. 21  (a) A schematic showing the construction of a DSC using vertically oriented ZnO nanostructures. (b) SEM image of vertically grown ZnO nanowires.80 (c) PV parameters of the DSC with two different thicknesses and the inset shows the IPCE spectrum of the large cell (0.8 cm2). (d) A comparison of the transient mid-infrared absorption traces of the DSCs made from the ZnO nanowires (black trace) and ZnO nanoparticles (red trace). 
 Fig. 22  SEM image of vertically oriented TiO2 nanoforests (a) and hollow nanotubes (b). Figure (c) shows the thickness dependent PV parameters from the DSCs made out of the TiO2 nanotubes.81a,b 
 Fig. 23  Ordered TiO2 nanotubes fabricated by anodization process.81c 
Other 1-D and 2-D nanostructures, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphenes, also play a great role in the efficiency of DSCs.82–86 Single- and multiwall CNTs/graphenes were used in combination with TiO2 for improving the efficiency.82–86 These were also explored for use in counter electrodes, as a possible alternative to the costly Pt; both of these aspects will be summarized below.
As we have stated earlier, the efficiency of a DSC is mainly determined by the competition between the electron transport through the porous TiO2 layer and the recombination of electrons with the I3− species at the TiO2–electrolyte interface. Thus, promoting a smooth electron transport through the TiO2 network becomes essential to enhance the collection efficiency and hence the overall efficiency of a DSC device. The basic idea of using the carbon nanostructures (mainly CNTs and graphenes) in combination with TiO2, is to facilitate a hassle-free electron transport through the TiO2 network by opening additional electron transport channels and to reduce the resistance of the electrodes.82 Though there is no general agreement in the literature reports on the extent of efficiency enhancement and the optimum amount of carbon needed in the TiO2, an efficiency enhancement of up to 30% has been reported for a carbon content of up to 0.3 wt% in the case of TiO2–CNT composites.82–84 Commercial CNTs are a mixture of both semiconducting and metallic forms, and the latter is shown to be not ideal for DSC applications.86 Therefore, the isolation of semiconducting CNTs may be necessary for solar cell applications. For graphenes also, the scenario is nearly the same. A schematic, representing the role of CNTs/graphenes in the efficiency enhancement, is shown in Fig. 24.
 Fig. 24  A schematic showing the molecular grafting of TiO2 on CNTs (A).84b (B) and (C) TiO2 coated CNTs.82a,84b (D) Mechanism of enhancement of photovoltaic parameters by adding small amounts of CNTs into TiO2 (from author's work).83 

B. Carbon and Pt nanostructures as electrocatalysts on the counter electrode
Nanomaterials also have implications in the counter electrodes of a DSC. A Pt-coated FTO is generally used as the counter electrode in DSCs. FTO–Pt is used for two reasons: (a) as the electrocatalyst, it helps in the regeneration of I− from I3−, and (b) for the conduction of electrons collected from the external load to the electrolyte. However, platinum is a very expensive metal and this needs to be replaced, or its usage minimized, for the eventual commercialization of DSCs on a large scale. Hence, carbon-based materials, like activated carbon, carbon black, carbon nanotubes, graphite, carbon black, and graphene were investigated as novel substitutes for replacing/minimizing platinum, with comparable efficiencies. If there is a need for maintaining the optical transparency for the counter electrode for backside illumination, graphene can be a good substitute for it, since it can form transparent, conductive, stretchable thin film electrodes.87,88 The electrochemical activity of graphene is reported to be increased with an increase in active edge sites, or with defects.89 Kavan et al. demonstrated that graphene nanoplatelets, drop-cast in the form of optically transparent thin films on FTO, exhibit a high electrocatalytic activity toward a I3−/I− redox couple in ionic liquid based electrolytes.90a Graphene nanosheets with a 3-D honeycomb like morphology (Fig. 25) exhibited an excellent catalytic performance towards I3− reduction, showing an efficiency of 7.8%, which was comparable to that of Pt.90b Several research groups succeeded in replacing the bulk Pt in the counter electrode with Pt nanoparticles (NPs)/carbon nanostructures incorporated into the conducting/non-conducting polymer matrix. The efficiency of the DSC was also found to depend on the exposed crystal facet of the Pt nanoparticles. Pt nanoparticles with different exposed facets ((100), (411) and (111)) were prepared by wet chemical approaches (Fig. 26).91 A joint theoretical and experimental investigation found that the Pt(111) facet is the most desired one for DSC applications and that the chemical reactivity follows the order: Pt(111) > Pt(411) > Pt(100). A combination of Pt NPs and MWCNTs in an imide-functionalized polymer (PtNP/MWCNTs/FTO) was found to be superior to the bare FTO/Pt as the short-circuit current density (∼18 mA cm−2vs. ∼14.5 mA cm−2 for the FTO/Pt) and efficiency (∼8% vs. 6.9 for the FTO/Pt), respectively, were higher for the former because of the higher surface area/roughness produced by the nanostructures and hence the higher catalytic activity.91 Similar effects have been reported with Pt NPs/graphene also.92,93Fig. 27A shows a SEM image of Pt nanoparticles grown on an exfoliated graphene flake, for use as a counter electrode in a DSC. A carbon black-based counter electrode was used in the DSC with an efficiency of 9% under a 1 Sun illumination.94 Carbon nanostructures are a promising species in this regard, as they show a superior electrochemical catalytic activity.95 Polymer nanoparticles alone, such as those of polypyrrole (on FTO), were also found to be useful as counter electrodes in DSCs. Fig. 27B shows a DSC counter electrode fabricated by polypyrrole deposition on FTO.
 Fig. 25  SEM (A) and TEM (B) image of the honeycomb-like graphene and the photovoltaic performance when used as counter electrode in DSCs (C).90b 
 Fig. 26  Morphologies and exposed facets of Pt nanoparticles.91 
 Fig. 27  (A) SEM image of a DSC counter electrode consisting of Pt NPs dispersed on graphene sheets. (B) SEM image of a polypyrrole-coated counter electrode.94 
C. Quantum dots replacing dyes
Quantum dots (QDs) show peculiar optical properties, which can be tuned over a range of wavelengths just by tuning their size (Fig. 28).96 QDs can be synthesized in a variety of sizes and shapes, using colloidal or self-assembly routes.97 The size of the QDs used determines the energy barrier for the electron to become excited. QDs of InP, CdSe, CdS and PbS can be used as sensitizers, replacing dyes.98,99 These QDs can be adsorbed onto the semiconductor nanoparticles through a physical or chemical means. ‘Physical’ means involving a chemical bath deposition (CBD) or successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR).100 ‘Chemical’ means involving linking the QDs to the metal oxide surface using chemical bifunctional linkers (e.g.: mercaptopropionic acid, mercaptosuccinic acid, etc.).101,102 Also, quantum yields higher than one are possible with these quantum dots, by an inverse augment process, which was not possible with DSCs. The quantum yield refers to the ejection of one electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor, with the absorption of one photon. Multiple exciton generation and hot carrier capture are the additional benefits that can be utilized in quantum dot solar cells.103,104
 Fig. 28  Effect of QD sizes on their band-gaps and hence optical absorption (from Semiconductor II–VI Quantum Dots with Interface States and Their Biomedical Applications T. Torchynska and Y. Vorobiev, (ed.) DOI: 10.5772/20628). 
The Shockley–Queisser limit states that the maximum efficiency that can be reached by a single p–n junction solar cell at 1.34 eV (using 1.5 AM solar spectrum) is 33.7%23 and the efficiency decreases with an increase or decrease of the band-gap. However, with quantum dots, these limits can be overcome, to produce remarkably higher efficiencies. However, this still remains as a possibility and has not been demonstrated in practice, yet. The materials used for quantum dots are short band-gap semiconductors. A matching of the conduction band and the valence band of both the semiconductor materials can cause the accumulation of the electrons and holes in two separate particles. Mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) was used as a linker molecule for bonding TiO2 nanoparticles and CdSe quantum dots.101,102 When excited, these quantum dots are capable of injecting electrons into the conduction band of TiO2, which can thus be transported to the electrode. The native quantization property of CdSe nanocrystals is retained even after their binding to the TiO2 surface. The penetration ability of small size CdSe quantum dots into the porous network within the TiO2 film gives a high coverage of these quantum dots on the TiO2 surface.
Quantum dots can show a highly efficient multiple exciton generation (MEG), whereby multiple excitons can be generated upon absorption of a single photon.103,104 The fabrication of one QD over the other (nano engineering of QDs) offers exciting possibilities in surface passivation and manipulation of the exciton state dynamics, etc. which may have a favourable influence in QD-sensitized solar cells.105
In 2008, Kamat et al. proposed the idea of constructing rainbow solar cells by arranging different sized QDs, each tuned to a specific wavelength of light absorption, on TiO2 particles and nanotubes using bifunctional linker molecules.20,106b The maximum IPCE values obtained for 3 nm CdSe QDs on a nanoparticulate and tubular TiO2 morphology was 35% and 45%, respectively. By organizing different sized QDs in a periodic manner in a solar cell, so that light in the visible and near-infrared regions could be efficiently trapped, and coupling these phenomena with the advantages of the MEG effect, the realization of highly efficient, low-cost rainbow cells may become a reality. Fig. 29 shows a schematic of one such approach, showing the flow of photo-excited electrons from the CB of the QD to the CB of TiO2.
 Fig. 29  Modulation of light absorption by size control of the QDs and the flow of electrons from QDs to the TiO2 because of the favourable CB level alignment.20 
QDs may also help in overcoming the limits associated with low absorbing dye monolayers and the low efficiency of multilayer dye absorption in DSCs. One such approach is to sequentially deposit both QDs and dyes as sensitizers, separated by a thin amorphous layer of TiO2 in the DSC design (Fig. 30).105 Upon solar irradiation, electrons are injected into the nanocrystalline TiO2 from the QDs and to the amorphous TiO2 (which is in contact with the crystalline TiO2 layer) from the dyes. After charge separation, the electrons are transported to the contact and holes remain in the dyes. The DSCs fabricated out of the bi-sensitizer configuration showed an efficiency which was ∼250% times higher than that with QD monolayer alone.105
 Fig. 30  (A) A cartoon showing the working of a dye and QD combination for solar cell application (A). B shows the mechanism of electron injection.105 
D. Metal nanoparticles and DSCs
Nanotechnology provided solutions for the size- and shape-selective synthesis of metal NPs. The well-known tuneable absorption feature of metal NPs (generally of Ag, Au and Cu) is due to their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect, which arises due to the coherent oscillation of the conduction band electrons when subjected to the influence of an applied electromagnetic field. The metal nanoparticles could enhance the light absorption in the solar cell, either by scattering light, thus enabling a longer optical path-length, or by near-field coupling between the surface plasmon polariton (SPP) and the excited dye state (a cartoon showing the effect of NPs as plasmonics light harvesting antennae is shown in Fig. 31A).106–108 For DSCs, LSPR has a specific influence, in that the charge separation (whose time scale is ∼3 fs) due to the photoexcitation of the dyes matches very well that of the damping oscillation of the plasmons (∼6 fs).106 The plasmonic effect in DSCs is ‘distance dependent’, such that as the distance between the dye and the metal nanoparticle increases, the plasmon enhanced extinction of the dye decreases, due to the decay of the electromagnetic field.109 There are reports on the enhanced light harvesting efficiency (plasmon-induced enhanced photocarrier generation) by the incorporation of oxide-protected (usually SiO2) Au nanoparticles into the TiO2 matrix. For a 1.1 μm thick DSC device, an efficiency enhancement from 1% to 1.6%, when Au@SiO2 nanoparticles were uniformly incorporated into the TiO2, was reported.106 Recently, an impressive efficiency enhancement, from 7.8% to 9%, with the addition of 0.1 wt% Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles into TiO2 has been reported, and this methodology also helped in reducing the photoanode thickness by ∼25% (Fig. 31C and D). It is claimed that the plasmon-induced DSCs require ∼60% less material to maintain the same efficiency as that of a conventional DSC (Fig. 31B).110
 Fig. 31  (A) A cartoon showing the coupling of surface plasmon resonance absorption of metal NPs with the absorption of dye-anchored TiO2.108 (B) A schematic showing reduction in the overall thickness of the photoanode by using plasmonics.110 (C) Current density (solid lines) and power conversion efficiency (PCE, dashed lines) of the most efficient Ag nanoparticle plasmonic DSC (0.1 wt%). (D) Thickness-dependent PCE of Ag nanoparticle plasmonic DSC and TiO2 only DSC. 
E. Nanotechnology for photon management strategies
In high performing DSCs, the active TiO2 layer consists of small spherical particles, of ∼20 nm size. A DSC made out of such a dyed TiO2 will be optically transparent and hence visible light is not scattered (especially at the red part of the solar spectrum). The photons that are not absorbed by the TiO2 are either captured by the electrolyte or lost through the counter electrode. Photon management is about confining light in the DSC for better absorption by the dye molecules. This is achieved by multiple scattering and reflection methods. The development of diffuse scattering layers, capable of use as incoherent back mirrors for the incoming light passing through the cell, is beneficial for the reuse of light, which otherwise is lost without absorption by the dye (Fig. 32A and B). Nanotechnology also helps in this area. Larger particles of metal oxides (say of TiO2, ZrO2, etc.), in the size range 100–1000 nm, are usually employed as a scattering layer, either in combination with the TiO2 active layer (mixed) or as a separate layer on top of the active layer (generally called the double-layer configuration).55,61,111,112 Electrospun TiO2 nanofibers, other anisotropic TiO2 nanostructures such as doughnut- (Fig. 32C)- and rice-shaped ones, hollow and core–shell nanostructures, also find use as effective scattering layers.113,114
 Fig. 32  (A) and (B) A schematic showing the role of scattering layer in a DSC. (B) Doughnut-shaped TiO2 nanostructures used as scattering layer in DSC.113a C shows schematic of the enhanced scattering in a core–shell nanostructure.113d SEM images of the spherical ZnO (D) and TiO2 (E) aggregates, doughnut- (F) and spindle-shaped TiO2 used as effective scatterers are also shown (from ref. 113c,e,f). 
A late entry into this category is the TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystal (TiO2 PC).115–118 Coupling a low refractive index TiO2 PC with a high refractive index nanocrystalline TiO2 (Nc-TiO2) creates a standing wave in the Nc-TiO2 region, thus enhancing the spectral response of the DSC in the red part of the solar spectrum.117,118 The introduction of the PC layer helped in the light scattering at the PC layer, which led to an increase in the IPCE of the device. The Voc was also enhanced by 20–50 mV. However, what seems to be ideal for the way forward could be the fabrication of dual function materials, capable of doing the functions of both the active and scattering layers. Such materials would help in avoiding the double layer configuration, which is expensive and technologically complicated for the commercialization of DSCs.
VII. Conclusions and prospects
Solar energy is the best renewable source of energy. Solar energy generation through photovoltaic technologies has been of great research and industrial interest over many decades. Photovoltaics has seen three generations of developments, the latest being the third generation solar cells (mainly dye-sensitized solar cells, DSCs) mainly encompassing nanomaterials, which promise a reduction in the cost of solar cell manufacturing. Nanotechnology possesses scope for improving the efficiency of DSCs, as it offers synthetic strategies for the size and shape selective synthesis of nanomaterials showing remarkable properties. Metallic nanoparticles, novel carbon nanostructures, such as CNTs/graphenes, 1-D metal oxide semiconductor nanostructures, new low-cost dyes, and QDs are promising nanomaterials for the efficiency enhancement for DSCs. The efficiency of DSCs is approaching the level needed for commercialized use. A realistic assessment of phenomena, such as the MEG effect of QDs and enhanced and semi-directional transport through novel 1-D nanostructures, may offer promising ways for highly efficient and low-cost DSC technologies. For the commercialization of DSCs, cost-effective and large scale manufacturing processes of DSCs should be found from low-cost materials (such as the TiO2–perovskite combination) showing such remarkable properties.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Govt. of India for financial support.
Notes and references

  (a) J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Lewis, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 808 CrossRef ; 
  (c) V. S. Arunachalam and E. L. Fleischer, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 264 CrossRef CAS .

          www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/pdf/0484(2011).pdf, International Energy Outlook 2011 – EIA.

          www.nrel.gov/docs/fy130sti/54909.pdf, National Renewable Energy Laboratory – Energy Analysis.

          http://www.wbgu.de/en/flagship-reports/fr-2003-energy/, World in Transition-Towards Sustainable Energy Systems.

          https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/climatechange/public/pdfs/GranthamJune.pdf, Solar energy for heat and electricity: the potential for mitigating climate change.
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hill, E. Nelson, D. Tilman, S. Polasky and D. Tiffany, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11206–11210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Burton, N. Jenkins, D. Sharpe and E. Bossanyi, Wind Energy Hand Book, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2011, pp. 595–609 Search PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Moskowitz and V. M. Fthenakis, Sol. Cells, 1990, 29, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Moskowitz and V. M. Fthenakis, Sol. Cells, 1991, 31, 513–525 CrossRef CAS .
C. del Canizo, G. del Coso and W. C. Sinke, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 199–209 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.iea.org/aboutus/faqs/renewableenergy/
        .
A. E. Becquerel, C. R. Acad. Sci., 1839, 9, 14 Search PubMed .

  (a) M. Kaelin, D. Rudmann and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 749–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. W. Schock and R. Noufi, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2000, 8, 151–160 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Niki, M. Contreras, I. Repins, M. Powalla, K. Kushiya, S. Ishizuka and K. Matsubara, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 453–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
D. M. Chaplin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676–677 CrossRef PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
        .
W. Schockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Alsema and M. J. de Wild, MRS Symp. Proc., 2005, 895, 0895-G03-05 Search PubMed .

          http://www1.eere.energy.gov/solar/pdfs/solar_timeline.pdf
        .
R. H. Bube, Phys. Rev., 1955, 98, 431–433 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Aberle, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Fthenakis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2746–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 RSC ; 
  (c) L. M. Gonçalves, V. d. Z. Bermudez, H. A. Ribeiro and A. M. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 655–667 RSC ; 
  (d) T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. V. Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 RSC .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, N. L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004–4006 RSC .
H. Janne, J. Saarinen and P. Lund, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 887–899 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto, T. Nagai and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 812–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ovenstone and K. Yanagisawa, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2770–2774 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8981–8987 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Reynal, A. Forneli and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 805–812 RSC .
B. O'regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 20056–20062 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538–547 CrossRef .

  (a) Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1170–1181 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 842–857 RSC ; 
  (c) X.-F. Wang and H. Tamiaki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 94–106 RSC ; 
  (d) Z. Jin, H. Masuda, N. Yamanaka, M. Minami, T. Nakamura and Y. Nishikitani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2618–2623 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CAS .

  (a) A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Il Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, S. Hao, P. Li, J. Lin, M. Huang, L. Fang and Y. Huang, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2241–2258 CAS .
K. Tennakone, V. P. S. Perera, I. R. M. Kottegoda and G. R. R. A. Kumara, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1999, 32, 374–379 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Wang, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9394–9405 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Cong, X. Yang, L. Kloob and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9180–9194 RSC .
T. N. Murakami and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Andreas and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef .
L. Dloczik, O. Ileperuma, I. Lauermann, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Redmond, N. J. Shaw and I. Uhlendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10281–10289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and V. S. Vikhrenko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2313–2322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278–17290 CAS .
S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthorl, A. J. Nozik, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945–14953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Gratzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Tétreault and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8506–8516 RSC .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. S. Nair, Z. Peining, V. J. Babu, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21248–21261 RSC .
J. Desilvestro, M. Gratzel, L. Kavan, J. Moser and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2988–2990 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, H. Kawauchi, T. Kashima and H. Arakawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1381–1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Cass, F. L. Qiu, A. B. Walker, A. C. Fisher and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Bwana, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 483–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peining, W. Yongzhi, M. V. Reddy, A. S. Nair, P. Shengjie, N. Sharma, V. K. Peterson, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5123–5126 RSC .
P. Zhu, M. V. Reddy, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Yang, A. S. Nair, K. P. Loh, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10865–10867 RSC .

  (a) E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .

  (a) F. Sauvage, D. Chen, P. Comte, F. Huang, L.-P. Heiniger, Y.-B. Cheng, R. A. Caruso and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4420–4425 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Huang, D. Chen, X. L. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301–1305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2930–2935 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grinis, S. Kotlyar, S. Rühle, J. Grinblat and A. Zaban, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 282–288 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diamant, S. Chappel, S. G. Chen, O. Melamed and A. Zaban, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. Hiura, J. W. Bennet, H. F. Ghaemi and T. Thio, Nature, 1996, 382, 54–56 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Zhai, X. Fang, M. Liao, X. Xu, H. Zeng, B. Yoshio and D. Golberg, Sensors, 2009, 9, 6504–6529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R89 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Sahay, P. S. Kumar, R. Sridhar, J. Sundaramurthy, J. Venugopal, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12953–12971 RSC ; 
  (c) A. S. Nair, Y. Shengyuan, Z. Peining and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7421–7423 RSC ; 
  (d) G. S. Anjusree, A. Bhupathi, A. Balakrishnan, S. Vadukumpully, K. R. V. Subramanian, N. Sivakumar, S. Ramakrishna, S. V. Nair and A. S. Nair, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16720–16727 RSC ; 
  (e) A. S. Nair, R. Jose, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) B. H. Lee, M. Y. Song, S.-Y. Jang, S. M. Jo, S.-Y. Kwak and D. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21453–21457 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E Prakasam, S. Yoriya, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 065707–065711 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. Xu, P. H. Shin, L. Cao, J. Wu and D. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Krishnamoorthy, M. Z. Tang, A. Verma, A. S. Nair, D. Pliszka, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2166–2172 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Krishnamoorthy, V. Thavasi, G. S. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2807–2812 RSC .

  (a) M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Sauvage, F. Di Fonzo, A. Li Bassi, C. S. Casari, V. Russo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, C. E. Bottani, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2562–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T.-S. Kang, A. P. Smith, B. E. Taylor and M. F. Durstock, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601–606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Y. Lee, P. S. Alegaonkar and J. B. Yoo, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5131–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1145–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. Y. Yang, S. J. Peng, N. K. Elumalai and S. Ramakrishna, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 231, 9–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Liu, Y.-T. Kuo, K. J. Klabunde, C. Rochford, J. Wu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y.-H. Jang, X. Xin, M. Byun, Y. J. Jang, Z. Lin and D. H. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. N. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. J. Peng, S. Y. Yang and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 581–585 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. B. He, Y. L. Cao, G. D. Yuan, H. S. Song, L. M. Chen, L. B. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Chen, B. Li, J. Zheng, J. Zhao and Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14848–14856 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Dang, H. Yi, M.-H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Dang, H. Yi, M.-H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Chen, B. Li, J. Zheng, J. Zhao and Z. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14848–14856 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Muellen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 165–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Wang, K. Sun, F. Tao, D. J. Stacchiola and Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9210–9214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Hou, S. Yang, X. H. Yang, J. H. Zhong, J. Liu, H. F. Wang, P. Hu, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1836,  DOI:10.1038/srep01836 .
J. Wu, Q. Li, L. Fan, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and S. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 172–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bajpai, S. Roy, P. Kumar, P. Bajpai, N. Kulshrestha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3884–3889 CAS .
K.-C. Huang, Y.-C. Wang, R.-X. Dong, W.-C. Tsai, K.-W. Tsai, C.-C. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, R. Vittal, J.-J. Lin and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4067–4073 RSC .

  (a) T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2255–A2261 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 RSC .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
Y. Shengyuan, A. S. Nair, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2010–2014 Search PubMed .
R. E. Bailey, A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Phys. E., 2004, 25, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Shen and Y.-L. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 045602–045606 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Franceschetti, J. M. An and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2191–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Sudhagar, J. H. Jung, S. Park, Y.-G. Lee, R. Sathyamoorthy, Y. S. Kang and H. Ahn, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2220–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shalom, J. Albero, Z. Tachan, E. Martinez-Ferrero, A. Zaban and E. Palomares, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1134–1138 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hägglund, M. Zäch and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113–013116 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407–8409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hore, C. Vetter, R. Kern, H. Smit and A. Hinsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1176–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Usami, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 277, 105–108 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Hore, C. Vetter, R. Kern, H. Smit and A. Hinsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1176–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. Son, S. H. Hwang, C. Kim, J. Y. Yun and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4815–4820 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) G. Zhu, L. Pan, J. Yang, X. Liu, H. Sun and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24326–24329 RSC ; 
  (f) H.-J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Chuangchote, T. Sagawa and S. Yoshikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033310 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Zhu, A. S. Nair, S. Yang, S. Peng and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12210–12212 RSC .
B. Mandlmeier, J. M. Szeifert, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, H. Amenitsch and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17274–17282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CAS .
S. Foster and S. John, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2972–2983 CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A plot showing the past, present and future (anticipated) world energy demand. Data taken from ref. 1 and 2 were plotted to obtain this diagram.	 

 	Fig. 2  Role of fossil fuels and renewables for the present and future (anticipated) energy scenarios.4	 

 	Fig. 3  Share of renewable energy in global electricity production. Data from ref. 3 were plotted to obtain this diagram.3	 

 	Fig. 4  World's primary energy resources. Solar energy dwarfs all other energy resources whether they are non-renewable or renewable (image from http://www.hessen-nanotech.de/mm/NanoEnergy_web.pdf).	 

 	Fig. 5  Worldwide variation in the mean annual solar irradiance.5	 

 	Fig. 6  Reduction in the costs of photovoltaic devices.5 The balance of system (BOS) includes all the components of a solar PV system, except the module.	 

 	Fig. 7  Areal cost of three generations of photovoltaic technologies. Broken lines indicate contours of constant price per watt capacity ($/W).5	 
E = hc/λ

 	Fig. 8  Schematic showing the main components of a dye-sensitized solar cell (from Y. Jiao, F. Zhang and S. Meng, Dye Sensitized Solar Cells Principles and New Design, Solar Cells – Dye-Sensitized Devices, Prof. Leonid A. Kosyachenko (ed.), InTech, 2011, ISBN: 978-953-307-735-2).	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of the widely used commercial dyes in DSCs.43	 

 	Fig. 10  A cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite-sensitized solar cell (A) and its photovoltaic response (B).45c	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of Spiro-OMeTAD (from Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14099–14109).	 

 	Scheme 1  Light and dark reactions in a DSC.	 

 	Fig. 12  A schematic of the operating principle of a DSC (from author's work).	 

 	Fig. 13  A cartoon showing the variations in the surface-to-volume ratio of bulk vs. nano (adapted from http://chemspace.wordpress.com/nano-properties/capture1/).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) A SEM image of TiO2 nanoparticles synthesized by molten salt method (from author's work). (B) and (C) I–V and IPCE traces of a DSC employing MSM TiO2vs. that from P-25.	 

 	Fig. 15  Picture of a TiO2 inverse opal showing different colours (violet when dry and green when wet with ethanol) due to Bragg diffraction (a).67b SEM images of the TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals used as active layer for DSCs: (b) large area view, (c) cross-sectional view and (d) photovoltaic properties as a function of TiO2 obtained from different sized PS templates.67a	 

 	Fig. 16  TEM (inset: large area view) and SEM image (inset TEM image) of dual function bead-shaped TiO2 nano/mesostructures.69	 

 	Fig. 17  Two possible core–shell configurations for preventing charge recombination by protecting the TiO2 nanoparticles by coating with another semiconductor. (A) Making individual core–shell nanostructures and subsequently using them in a DSC, (B) coating the TiO2 photoanode film with an outer coating of semiconductor.72	 

 	Fig. 18  A SEM image of TiO2 nanofibers (a) and fibers whose surface is decorate with fibrils (b) fabricated by electrospinning. Figures c and d shows the respective photovoltaic parameters.75e,f	 

 	Fig. 19  A SEM image of rice-shaped TiO2 obtained by electrospinning (from author's work).	 

 	Fig. 20  A – SEM image of highly ordered TiO2 nanotubes obtained by anodization process. B – A schematic showing the construction of a DSC using the nanostructures.77 C – The PV parameters out of the DSC.77	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A schematic showing the construction of a DSC using vertically oriented ZnO nanostructures. (b) SEM image of vertically grown ZnO nanowires.80 (c) PV parameters of the DSC with two different thicknesses and the inset shows the IPCE spectrum of the large cell (0.8 cm2). (d) A comparison of the transient mid-infrared absorption traces of the DSCs made from the ZnO nanowires (black trace) and ZnO nanoparticles (red trace).	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM image of vertically oriented TiO2 nanoforests (a) and hollow nanotubes (b). Figure (c) shows the thickness dependent PV parameters from the DSCs made out of the TiO2 nanotubes.81a,b	 

 	Fig. 23  Ordered TiO2 nanotubes fabricated by anodization process.81c	 

 	Fig. 24  A schematic showing the molecular grafting of TiO2 on CNTs (A).84b (B) and (C) TiO2 coated CNTs.82a,84b (D) Mechanism of enhancement of photovoltaic parameters by adding small amounts of CNTs into TiO2 (from author's work).83	 

 	Fig. 25  SEM (A) and TEM (B) image of the honeycomb-like graphene and the photovoltaic performance when used as counter electrode in DSCs (C).90b	 

 	Fig. 26  Morphologies and exposed facets of Pt nanoparticles.91	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) SEM image of a DSC counter electrode consisting of Pt NPs dispersed on graphene sheets. (B) SEM image of a polypyrrole-coated counter electrode.94	 

 	Fig. 28  Effect of QD sizes on their band-gaps and hence optical absorption (from Semiconductor II–VI Quantum Dots with Interface States and Their Biomedical Applications T. Torchynska and Y. Vorobiev, (ed.) DOI: 10.5772/20628).	 

 	Fig. 29  Modulation of light absorption by size control of the QDs and the flow of electrons from QDs to the TiO2 because of the favourable CB level alignment.20	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) A cartoon showing the working of a dye and QD combination for solar cell application (A). B shows the mechanism of electron injection.105	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) A cartoon showing the coupling of surface plasmon resonance absorption of metal NPs with the absorption of dye-anchored TiO2.108 (B) A schematic showing reduction in the overall thickness of the photoanode by using plasmonics.110 (C) Current density (solid lines) and power conversion efficiency (PCE, dashed lines) of the most efficient Ag nanoparticle plasmonic DSC (0.1 wt%). (D) Thickness-dependent PCE of Ag nanoparticle plasmonic DSC and TiO2 only DSC.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) and (B) A schematic showing the role of scattering layer in a DSC. (B) Doughnut-shaped TiO2 nanostructures used as scattering layer in DSC.113a C shows schematic of the enhanced scattering in a core–shell nanostructure.113d SEM images of the spherical ZnO (D) and TiO2 (E) aggregates, doughnut- (F) and spindle-shaped TiO2 used as effective scatterers are also shown (from ref. 113c,e,f).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
