Role of humidity on indium and tin migration in organic photovoltaic devices  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CP02203A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CP02203A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4381-4387Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsRole of humidity on indium and tin migration in organic photovoltaic devices

        
          
            Anirudh 
            Sharma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gunther 
            Andersson
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            David A. 
            Lewis
          
        
      
Flinders Centre for NanoScale Science and Technology, Flinders University, PO Box 2100, Adelaide SA 5001, Australia. E-mail: gunther.andersson@flinders.edu.au
Received 
      19th October 2010
    , Accepted 14th December 2010First published on 24th January 2011AbstractThe stability of a common interface used in organic photovoltaic cells, between the transparent electrode of Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) and a buffer layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is strongly influenced by the presence of humidity during processing, leading to significant migration of indium and tin species into the PEDOT:PSS layer. The interface was studied using neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), to determine migration of indium and tin into the polymer layer. It was found that the migration starts almost instantly after spin coating of the aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution and it reaches a saturation level within twenty four hours. The indium and tin were found always uniformly distributed over the sampling depth of almost one-third of the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer. Exposure to humidity following annealing resulted in the highest concentration (1.8 × 10−3 mol cm−3) of indium or tin species, corresponding to about one indium or tin moiety per 4.7 monomer units in the PEDOT:PSS. The maximum bulk concentration of indium is about two orders of magnitude higher after exposure to humid conditions compared to vacuum dried conditions. XPS measurements confirm the presence of both indium and tin in the PEDOT:PSS and the formation of salts with the metal ions as cations.
1. Introduction
In the last few decades, the development of electronically conductive organic materials and the synthesis of inorganic–organic assemblies have enabled the design of next generation photovoltaic cells.1 Polymer-based hetero-junction solar cells can be a key alternative to the existing silicon-based cells due to their potential to be flexible, semi-transparent, light weight and financially viable.2 The promise of low cost and ease of fabrication of such cells has generated significant research and commercial interest around the world.
Organic solar cells with power conversion efficiency of 8.1% have been realised,3 but still their efficiency and their lifetime need to be further increased in order to make them commercially viable.
The structure of an organic cell consists of a polymeric active layer sandwiched between the metallic electrodes. The interfaces between metals and organic substances are typically not atomistically sharp with some inter-diffusion caused by metals migrating into the polymers,4 which can cause leakage currents,5 influence the charge transport properties of the polymer6,7 and can also affect the lifetime of the photovoltaic device.8,9
ITO is commonly used as the transparent electrode in opto-electronic devices such as hetero-junction solar cells and polymer light emitting diodes (p-LED) due to its optical and electrical transport properties, but the ITO–polymer interface is known to not be stable with indium migrating into the organic layer.10 X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) used to study an ITO–poly(2-methoxy-5-2(2′-ethyl-hexyloxyl)-p-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) interface also confirms the presence of indium throughout the 100 nm thick polymer layer.11 Jong et al. have even reported an increase in indium migration into poly(phenylenevinylene) with increased annealing time.12 Migration of indium into the active layer has been found to have an adverse effect on the quantum efficiency of the device.13
In order to overcome the problems at the interface between the hetero-junction polymer and ITO described above, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is commonly used as a buffer layer. Adding the PEDOT:PSS layer also improves the electronic properties like the open circuit voltage,14 power conversion efficiency,15 and lifetime of the device.16
However, Norrman et al. recently found that the performance of devices using PEDOT:PSS as a buffer layer significantly decreases in the first 10 hours when exposed to humid conditions. Humidity dependence of the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films has also been observed.17 In a further study, Norrman et al. used TOF-secondary ion mass spectroscopy to investigate various interfaces of a polymer cell and found water being present at the ITO–PEDOT:PSS interface. Also, particle formation at the hetero-junction–PEDOT:PSS interface was observed involving at least carbon, sulfur and indium suggesting that ITO and PEDOT:PSS play a role in particle formation.18 Though the effect of particle formation was not studied as a function of device performance.
In particular it was found that the ITO–PEDOT:PSS interface is not stable as indium is found in the PEDOT:PSS layer as contamination.19 The cleaning of the ITO surface with plasma treatment,20 exposure of ITO–PEDOT:PSS sample to air,21 and annealing treatments22 have been found to enhance the migration process.
Different approaches to reduce the migration of metal ions have been suggested such as the introduction of a thin diamond like carbon layer,19 or a self-assembled monolayer of alkylsiloxanes23 between the ITO–PEDOT:PSS interface. However, these extra interfacial layers make the system more complex and potentially increase the overall series resistance of the cell. Therefore, it is imperative to understand the migration process and the rate of migration for developing methods to stabilise the interface through device processing and appropriate surface treatments.
However, the nature of the migrated species remains controversial19,22 and the parameters that influence the migration are not yet known. Until these issues are better understood it is difficult to control the composition and thus the properties of the PEDOT:PSS layer, resulting in significant process unknowns and risks in durability and device lifetime limiting the commercialisation of this technology.
In this paper, important process parameters that influence the stability of the ITO–PEDOT:PSS interface, including surface cleaning, annealing and exposure to humidity, are examined to understand the time dependent changes in the concentration of migrating species and to determine their role in indium and tin migration. Concentration depth profiles of the migrated indium and tin in the PEDOT:PSS layer are obtained by Neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS) and XPS measurements were employed to confirm the nature of the migrated indium and tin. The results of this paper have important implications on the understanding of OPV properties.
2. Experimental
ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 15 ohms per square were purchased from Kintek. Pyroneg was supplied by Johnson Diversey. Pyroneg forms a caustic solution in water. DeconexPA neutral detergent was supplied by Borer. PEDOT:PSS (CLEVIOS P VP AL4083) was purchased from H.C. Starck and was used as received without any dilutions. Copper sulfate pentahydrate with 99.5% purity was supplied by Chem Supply. Sodium bromide was supplied by Sigma Aldrich.
A standard procedure was followed to clean the ITO-coated glass. The glass was cleaned by standing it in a solution of 5% pyroneg at 50 °C for 20 min or 5% deconex PA neutral detergent at 90 °C for 20 min. Samples were rinsed in deionized (DI) water followed by successive sonication for 10 min each in DI water, acetone and iso-propanol. An ozone treatment was performed using an exposure to UV radiation (G8W SYLVANIA UV lamp) for 20 min. Samples were placed approximately 2.5 cm away from the lamp inside a covered chamber. The cleaned substrates were stored in wafer containers supplied by Kintek, when transported to the spin coater, or to the vacuum chamber of the analyser.
The PEDOT:PSS solution was filtered using a 0.2 micron RC filter supplied by Sartorius. The PEDOT:PSS was deposited on the substrates by spin coating (PWM 32 spinner, from Headway Research, Inc.) the solution at 5000 rpm for 1 min. This procedure results in approximately 40 nm thick polymer films. After depositing PEDOT:PSS, the samples were annealed in air on a pre-heated aluminium block inside an oven at 145 °C for 10 min. Controlled humidity chambers were assembled in a desiccator using a saturated solution of sodium bromide (NaBr) for 56% relative humidity (RH) and hydrated copper sulfate (CuSO4·5H2O) for 95% RH. RH was measured using data logger U12-011 supplied by HOBO and shown to vary by less than 2% when opened for a short time and required around 100 min to recover to the standard RH.
The design of the NICISS equipment is described in ref. 24. NICISS is a technique able to obtain the concentration depth profiles of the elements of soft matter surfaces up to a depth of about 20 nm and a resolution of a few Å in the surface-near area.24,25 In a NICISS experiment the target is bombarded with a pulsed beam of inert gas ions—mostly helium ions—with a kinetic energy of several keV.24 The energy of the projectiles backscattered from the atoms in the target is determined by their time of flight from the target to the detector. The projectiles lose energy during the backscattering process, and the energy transfer depends on the mass of the target atom. This first type of energy loss is used to identify the element from which a projectile is backscattered. The projectiles also lose energy on their trajectory through the bulk due to small angle scattering and electronic excitations of the molecules constituting the target (stopping power).26 This energy loss is used to determine the depth of the atom from which a projectile is backscattered. In combination, these two types of energy losses are used to determine the concentration depth profiles of the elements. The data evaluation to obtain the concentration depth profiles is described in detail in ref. 27.
For the NICISS measurements shown here, helium ions with an energy of 3 keV were used as projectiles. The samples were mounted on a rotating disc. The surface of the samples was investigated in concentric circles with a total surface area of about 1 cm2. The ion dose was kept below 2 × 1013 ions cm−2.
XPS measurements were performed with the UHV equipment built by SPECS. The instrument is equipped with a source for meta-stable helium atoms and UV light, with an X-ray source for Al Kα and Mg Kα and with an ion source for rare gas ions with a kinetic energy of 1 to 5 keV. The instrument is equipped with a sample holder for solid samples and a sample holder for liquid samples. Solid samples can be cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature and heated to 800 °C. For the analysis of insulating samples with ionising radiation a facility for charge compensation can be used. High resolution XP spectra were obtained to identify elements and their chemical state in the surface near region of the PEDOT:PSS layers.
3. Results/discussion
A typical TOF spectrum of PEDOT: PSS obtained using NICISS is given in Fig. 1(a). The spectra of the PEDOT:PSS spin-coated on a silicon wafer show signals due to the constituents of PEDOT:PSS, namely sulfur, oxygen and carbon. The arrows indicate the onset of the signals from the different elements. The steps with onsets at 4.7, 6.1 and 7.3 μs correspond to the back-scattering of helium from sulfur, oxygen and carbon, respectively. A slight step in the TOF spectra around 5.2 μs is due to traces of residual sodium present in the PEDOT:PSS. These elemental steps are superimposed on a broad background of sputtered hydrogen atoms. Fig. 1(b) was recorded from a sample with a thin film of PEDOT:PSS spin-coated on an ITO substrate. The sample was annealed in air at 145 °C for 10 minutes followed by exposure to a 56% RH environment for 48 hours. A new step with an onset at 3.9 μs is found showing the presence of indium/tin in the polymer layer. Due to the large difference in atomic mass between the incident helium ion and both In and Sn, NICISS cannot distinguish between these species and techniques such as XPS are necessary. Therefore, the notation indium/tin (In/Sn) is used.
 Fig. 1  NICISS spectra of PEDOT:PSS spin coated on (a) silicon substrate and (b) on ITO and exposed to 56% RH for 48 hours. To the spectrum of PEDOT:PSS on ITO an offset is added for clarity. 
The contribution of different elements in spectra of Fig. 1 is converted to a concentration depth profile and is shown in Fig. 2. The procedure is described by Andersson et al.27 However, there is a concentration gradient over the first 2 nm for In/Sn and sulfur (Fig. 2A) with a constant increase in concentration up to the constant bulk concentration. It must be noted here that the slope of the In/Sn profiles is not due to the depth resolution of the method but due to the concentration depth profile of In/Sn. The concentration depth profiles thus show a reduced In/Sn concentration in the outermost layer and a constant concentration in the bulk. These profiles are different to those of carbon and oxygen shown in Fig. 2(B). The slope of carbon and oxygen profiles is only due to the energy resolution, i.e. deconvolution of these profiles with the energy resolution of the method would result in a step function of the concentration depth profile. A higher concentration of carbon could be due to adventitious carbon. However, this is unlikely given the fact that all polymers have low surface energies. So far the different gradient for oxygen and sulfur is not understood, as both PEDOT and PSS are the only organic species present and both have oxygen and sulfur in the same monomer unit. The gradient in the In/Sn concentration profile over this range corresponds closely to the sulfur profile over the same range.
 Fig. 2  Concentration depth profiles of (A) indium/tin and sulfur (B) oxygen and carbon (C) indium/tin migrated into the PEDOT:PSS thin film. The PEDOT:PSS film was spin coated on ITO and exposed to 56% RH for 48 hours. 
Beyond the top 2 nm, the In/Sn concentration is constant for up to 12 nm (Fig. 2C), before the onset of spectral interference in the TOF due to the presence of other elements. The measurement depth is almost one-third of the total thickness of the approx 40 nm PEDOT:PSS layer, giving clear evidence of a lack of concentration gradient of In/Sn through the PEDOT:PSS layer that would be consistent with a conventional diffusion limited migration process.
Importantly, the concentration depth profile remains constant at all sampling times and under all processing conditions (with the concentration changing), with the apparently rapid diffusion of species throughout the 40 nm PEDOT:PSS film suggesting that the generation/liberation of mobile species at the ITO interface is the rate determining step in the migration process.
Using the constant concentration region of the depth profile between 2 nm and 12 nm to define the concentration of In/Sn species observed under a range of conditions, In/Sn was observed at some concentration in PEDOT:PSS coated onto ITO in all cases, regardless of surface treatment, annealing conditions and exposure to humidity. The concentration depth profiles were also similar to Fig. 2 in all cases, indicating that these conditions did not significantly alter the underlying mechanism of migration, however, the amount of In/Sn found was strongly dependent on processing conditions.
The NICISS measurements show that In/Sn is found in a concentration of up to about 1.8 × 10−3 mol cm−3 or 1 metal ion per 4.7 monomer units of the polymers. The error bar for the In/Sn concentration is given in all cases by the uncertainty in evaluating the step height of the In/Sn step in the NICISS spectra.
The time dependence of migration is shown in Fig. 3 under three humidity conditions and with various surface cleaning treatments. A summary of the combinations of humidity conditions and surface treatments is listed in Table 1. In all cases, the time dependence of migration was similar with a non-zero concentration observed initially, which increased over the following 20 hours while stored at room temperature. Subsequently the concentration remained constant for a period of at least a week, while the sample was stored under the same conditions.
 Fig. 3  Time dependence of indium/tin migration into thin PEDOT:PSS films. The concentration shown is the bulk concentration in the PEDOT:PSS film. In (A) the concentrations of films stored under vacuum are shown, in (B) of samples exposed to 56% RH. In (C) the bulk concentrations of samples exposed to various RH are compared. 
Table 1 Summary of various NICISS experiments performed to study the effect of different processing conditions on the migration process




Set no.
Relative humidity
Cleaning agent
Annealing




A1
0% (Vacuum drying)
Pyroneg at ∼50 °C
∼145 °C


A2
0% (Vacuum drying)


Without annealing


A3
0% (Vacuum drying)
Without pyroneg
∼145 °C


A4
0% (Vacuum drying)


Without annealing


B1
56%
Pyroneg at ∼50 °C
∼145 °C


B2
56%


Without annealing


B3
56%
Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C
∼145 °C


C1
95%
Pyroneg at ∼50 °C
∼145 °C


D1
56%
Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C
∼145 °C


D2
95%
Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C
∼145 °C




When the PEDOT:PSS coated ITO was stored in vacuum at room temperature immediately following annealing (see Set A, Table 1), the saturation concentration of In/Sn in the upper 12 nm was 1.3 × 10−4 mol cm−3 or 1 metal ion per 64 monomer units. Considering the magnitude of the error bars, it can be concluded that the effect of detergent cleaning and the annealing of the sample after spin coating does not affect the migration process when the samples are stored in vacuum.
When exposed to higher humidity levels following annealing, the saturation level of In/Sn increases to 1.5 × 10−3 mol cm−3 of In/Sn (1 metal ion per 5.6 monomer units) for exposure at 56% relative humidity (see Set B, Table 1) at room temperature (Fig. 3(B)) and to 1.8 × 10−3 mol cm−3 of In/Sn ions (1 metal ion per 4.7 monomer units) following exposure to 95% RH (see Set C, Table 1) at room temperature (Fig. 3(C)). These concentrations are about a factor of 10 to 15 higher than in the case when the samples were stored in vacuum.
As can be seen in Fig. 3(B), the cleaning agent, either the caustic solution or deconex (neutral detergent), is benign and does not have a significant influence on the overall In/Sn migration.
Compared to the 56% RH exposure both the migration of In/Sn is faster and the maximum bulk concentration is higher in the case of 95% RH. In Table 2 the bulk concentration of In/Sn is summarised for the various sample treatments.
Table 2 Summary of bulk concentrations of indium/tin measured after different treatments




Set No.
A1
A2
A3
A4
B1
B2
B3
C1
D1
D2




Conc/mol cm−3
1.3 × 10−4
8.2 × 10−5
9.0 × 10−5
9.9 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−3
1.2 × 10−3
1.6 × 10−3
1.8 × 10−3
3.9 × 10−4
6.0 × 10−4




Measuring the concentration of In/Sn in the PEDOT:PSS layer after various treatments of the samples shows that exposure to humidity has the largest influence on the migration of the metal ions from the ITO into the polymer layer. All results can be grouped according to the level of humidity: the larger the humidity the stronger and faster is the migration. Choosing a detergent for cleaning the ITO or not, varying the detergent and varying the annealing of the samples are of secondary importance.
The migrating moiety could be clusters of ITO that have been etched from the surface, since ITO has a granular structure, or it could be individual atoms or ions. ITO is known to be etched in acid.28 Since PEDOT:PSS has a pH of about 2 in solution, it can be assumed that the PEDOT:PSS solution is etching the surface of the ITO.
To understand the role of humidity at a much later stage after the fabrication, two samples were vacuum dried for twenty-four hours (see Set D, Table 1). One sample was then exposed to 95% relative humidity and the other to 56% relative humidity.
NICISS measurements were obtained for both the samples before and after they were stored in humid conditions. After each NICISS measurement, samples were immediately replaced in their respective controlled humidity setup. Fig. 4 shows the time dependence of the migration process after twenty four hours of vacuum drying. It can be seen that considering the magnitude of errors in Fig. 3A, the concentration under vacuum conditions agrees well with that found in the Set A of the experiment, which shows the reproducibility of the measurements. It can also be seen that similar to Set A, B and C measurements, the concentration of migrated indium/tin in the PEDOT:PSS film reaches a constant level within approximately 20 hours following the exposure to humid atmosphere, irrespective of the humidity levels and then becomes constant. It must also be noted that even after vacuum drying the samples immediately after annealing, the concentration of migrated indium and tin is non-zero, however by introducing an initial vacuum drying step, the overall concentration of the migrated indium/tin into the PEDOT:PSS reaches only 6.0 × 10−4 mol cm−3 (in the case of 95% RH ) and 4.0 × 10−4 mol cm−3 (in the case of 56% RH) as compared to 1.3 × 10−3 mol cm−3 in Set B and 1.8 × 10−3 mol cm−3 in Set C of the experiments. This finding could potentially be important for the fabrication of OPVs.
 Fig. 4  Time dependence of the indium/tin migration into PEDOT:PSS thin films after the films have been dried for 24 hours in vacuum. 
Due to the presence of indium/tin in the PEDOT:PSS layer immediately after the spin-coating, irrespective of the humidity levels, it can be assumed that the ITO surface is etched with the acidic PEDOT:PSS while the spin-coating process. It is found that humidity plays a significant role in the migration process and vacuum drying can be a potential way to control the indium/tin migration into the PEDOT:PSS film.
It must be noted that atmospheric oxygen can diffuse into the devices and possibly affect the ITO–PEDOT:PSS interface. Therefore the role of oxygen in the indium/tin migration process cannot be excluded but is not within the scope of this paper.
In order to determine whether both indium and tin migrate into the polymer layer and in what chemical state they are present in the polymer layer, we investigated the polymer films with XPS. Fig. 5 shows spectra of indium and tin both as components of ITO and after migration into the PEDOT:PSS layer. The XP spectra were referenced to the C1s peak which is due to adventitious hydrocarbons adsorbed on the ITO in the case of the bare ITO. For the PEDOT:PSS coated ITO, the C1s is due to the C–C bond in the backbone of the polymer.
 Fig. 5  XP spectra of (A) indium at the surface of pristine ITO and (B) indium found in a PEDOT:PSS film spin-coated on ITO and exposed to 56% RH. The pristine ITO has a large peak at 444.7 eV and a small peak at 446.0 eV. In the spectrum of the PEDOT:PSS film the peak at 444.7 eV has disappeared and only a peak at 446.3 eV is found. In (C) XP spectra of tin of pristine ITO (broken line spectrum) and of tin in the PEDOT:PSS (bold line spectrum) are shown. The count rate of the tin spectra is much lower due to the lower concentration in ITO compared to indium. Thus no fits to the spectra are shown. However, a shift in the peak position of tin can clearly be identified. 
The XP spectra show that both indium and tin are migrating into the PEDOT:PSS, which is contrary to some of the previous reports.22 The signal due to tin is small with low signal to noise ratio, which may explain why it has not been observed in some cases previously.
The ratio of indium to tin for bare ITO is 10.7 ± 0.5, which is consistent with suppliers specifications, however, the ratio of indium to tin in PEDOT:PSS is 16 ± 2.The change in ratio indicates a slight preference for indium to migrate to the upper half of the polymer layer.
The indium peak for bare ITO has two components, with the main indium 3d(5/2) peak found at 444.7 eV and the tin 3d(5/2) peak found at 486.9 eV corresponding to the characteristic lines of In2O329 and SnO30 respectively. A second and smaller indium peak is found at 446.0 eV. The peak positions for both indium and tin in the polymer layer are different to that of the bare ITO, whereas the peak shape of indium was found to change as well. It must be noted that the major component of In3d5/2 is not found at 444.7 eV as in the case of bare ITO. Instead, there is only one component at 446.3 eV.
The peak position in the XP spectrum of indium in the polymer layer at 446.3 eV corresponds to indium ions in a salt. For example, the binding energy found for indium in indium(III) trifluoride is 446.2 eV31 and in indium(III) chloride is 446 eV.32 The XPS peak position of tin 3d(5/2) in the polymer layer was found at 487.8 eV. It corresponds to a tin salt as for example, the binding energy reported for tin in pyrazil tin tetrachloride[Sn(C4H4N2)Cl4] is 487.8 eV,33 and in trichlorophenyl(pyrazine-N1)tin [SnCl3(C6H5)(C4H4N2)] is 487.9 eV.34
It can therefore be concluded that the In/Sn observed in the PEDOT:PSS layer is in the form of individual metal ions which form salts in the polymeric layer. The most likely counter ion is the sulfonate functionality in PSS as this is the only anion present in the polymer layer, although there is no direct evidence to support this.
The proposed reaction scheme occurring at the surface can be represented as eqn (1), below.RSO3H + H2O → RSO−3 + H3O+ In2O3 + 6RSO−3 + 6H3O+ → 2(RSO3)3In + 9H2O(1)
For tin a reaction equation applies accordingly. In this proposed reaction, water absorbed from the atmosphere by the hygroscopic PSS component plays a key role in the initial liberation of indium and tin from the ITO and the concentration can be expected to be highly dependent on the humidity of the atmosphere surrounding the sample. Since PEDOT:PSS is spin-coated from water, it can also be expected that some reaction will occur almost immediately, consistent with the observations in the time dependence.
Once the indium and tin salts are formed at the ITO surface, the ions can subsequently diffuse relatively rapidly throughout the 40 nm thick polymer layer.
The implications for the OPV devices are twofold. Firstly, the presence of indium and tin ions can influence the charge transport through the PEDOT:PSS buffer layer. Salt ions can act as traps for the charges and decrease the charge transport. Indium and tin ions also could further migrate into the hetero-junction layer in a photovoltaic device and affect the charge separation and charge transport in this layer. Since previous studies have shown conformational changes in the PEDOT:PSS films and phase separation of PEDOT:PSS,17,35 it can be speculated that the formation of a salt with the PSS could possibly cause changes in conformation of the PEDOT:PSS and hence influence the charge transport also in this way. Even though the reaction affects in first instance only the PSS and not the PEDOT as the actual charge transporting polymer, this can have influence on the charge transport; PSS is used in this polymer blend as the matrix for the PEDOT. The separation of PEDOT and PSS could generate islands of PEDOT polymer molecules and thus interrupt the pathway for hopping charge carriers. It must be emphasized, however, that from the findings here there is no evidence for either of these effects on the charge transport. The influence on the charge transport will have to be investigated separately. Whether or not the change of the PSS deteriorates or improves the performance of OPVs will have to be investigated separately. The second implication relates to the surface properties of ITO. The work function of ITO will always be changed when spin coating of PEDOT:PSS on ITO from an aqueous solution as the PEDOT:PSS solutions chemically reacts with the ITO through etching. As a consequence, the work function of ITO measured before spin coating the PEDOT:PSS is not representative for the work function of the ITO in an OPV.
In a real device, the reactions at the interface found here could continue after finalising the photovoltaic device and cause deterioration over time.
4. Conclusion
Indium and tin from ITO have been found to migrate into PEDOT:PSS when the polymer is spin coated onto the transparent metal oxide electrode. Both indium and tin migrate into the polymer in ionic form and appear to form a salt, probably with the sulfonate group in poly(styrenesulfonic acid). The concentration depth profiles show that a constant concentration of the metal ions is found in the upper 12 nm of a 40 nm thick polymer layer in all cases, with no evidence of concentration gradients that would be expected for a diffusion controlled process. The cleaning procedure of the substrate had no significant effect on the level or rate of migration, while humidity has a very strong influence on migration. This implies that the surface reaction to liberate In and Sn is the rate determining step, with water and the subsequent acid generation from the PSS playing a significant role in the initial liberation of ions from the ITO surface. The combination of this reaction and subsequent migration of the salt throughout the 40 nm thick film appears to cease after approx 20 hours, where the concentration of In and Sn in the polymer layer becomes constant.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences of Flinders University and by a grant of the Australian research council (LE0989068). The authors would like to acknowledge Dr Gerry Wilson and Dr Scott Watkins of CSIRO for fruitful discussions and providing substrates. The authors would also like to acknowledge and thank the CSIRO Future Manufacturing Flagship and the CSIRO Collaboration Fund for financial support of this research.
References
W. Cai, X. Gong and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94(2), 114 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94(10), 1553 CrossRef CAS .
Solarmer Energy Inc. Breaks Psychological Barrier with 8.13% OPV Efficiency www.solarmer.com (accessed 08.09.2010).
F. C. Krebs and K. Norrman, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 697 CAS .
K. Suemori, M. Yokoyama and M. Hiramoto, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99(036109), 1 .
H. H. P. Gommans, M. Kemerink, G. G. Andersson and R. M. T. Pijper, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2004, 69, 155216 CrossRef .
H. H. P. Gommans, A. W. D. van der Gon, G. G. Andersson, L. J. van Ijzendoorn, R. M. T. Pijper and H. H. Brongersma, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94(9), 5756 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, A. J. Morfa, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, G. Rumbles and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 746 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686 CrossRef .
A. R. Schlatmann, D. W. Floet, A. Hilberer, F. Garten, P. J. M. Smulders, T. M. Klapwijk and G. Hadziioannou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69(12), 1764 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Nguyen, P. L. Rendu and S. A. D. Vos, Synth. Met., 2003, 138, 113 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. de Jong, D. P. L. Simons, M. A. Reijme, L. J. van Ijzendoorn, A. W. D. van der Gon, M. J. A. de Voigt, H. H. Brongersma and R. W. Gymer, Synth. Met., 2000, 110, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Lee, Z. Q. Gao and L. S. Hunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75(10), 1404 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aernouts, W. Geens, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, S. Borghs and R. Mertens, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson and D. D. C. Bradley, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Berntsen, Y. Croonen, C. Liedenbaum, H. Schoo, R.-J. Visser, J. Vleggaar and P. van de Weijer, Opt. Mater. (Amsterdam), 1998, 9, 125 Search PubMed .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1(1), 102 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, S. M. Jeong, W. H. Koo, S. J. Jo, H. K. Baik, S.-J. Lee, K. M. Song and D. W. Han, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 483, 351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, C. S. Kim, J. B. Kim, S. Y. Ryu, J. H. Noh, H. K. Baik, Y. S. Kim and S.-J. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103(114502), 1 .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J. A. de Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77(14), 2255 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Nguyen, P. L. Rendu, P. D. Long and S. A. D. Vos, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2004, 180–181, 646 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Wong, H. L. Yip, Y. Luo, K. Y. Wong, W. M. Laua, K. H. Low, H. F. Chow, Z. Q. Gao, W. L. Yeung and C. C. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(15), 2788 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Surf. Sci., 1998, 405, 138 CrossRef CAS .
G. Anderssson, H. H. Brongersma, A. W. D. van der Gon, L. J. van Ijzendoorn, M. P. de Jong and M. J. A. de Voigt, Synth. Met., 2000, 113, 245 CrossRef .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1999, 155(4), 357 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson, T. Krebs and H. Morgner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 136 RSC .
C. A. Huang, K. C. Li, G. C. Tu and W. S. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 3599 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faur, M. Faur, D. T. Jayne, M. Goradia and C. Goradia, Surf. Interface Anal., 1990, 15(11), 641 CrossRef CAS .
H. Willemen, D. F. Van De Vondel and G. P. Van Der Kelen, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1979, 34, 175 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wagner, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1975, 60, 291 RSC .

          C. D. Wagner, Handbook of X-Ray and Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Ch. 7 ed. D. Briggs,  1977 Search PubMed .
M. Camalli, F. Caruso and G. Mattogno, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1990, 170(2), 225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Furlani, G. Mattogno, G. Polzonetti, R. Barbieri, E. Rivarola and A. Silvestri, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1981, 52, 23 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vitoratos, S. Sakkopoulos, E. Dalas, N. Paliatsas, D. Karageorgopoulos, F. Petraki, S. Kennou and S. A. Choulis, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 61 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  NICISS spectra of PEDOT:PSS spin coated on (a) silicon substrate and (b) on ITO and exposed to 56% RH for 48 hours. To the spectrum of PEDOT:PSS on ITO an offset is added for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 2  Concentration depth profiles of (A) indium/tin and sulfur (B) oxygen and carbon (C) indium/tin migrated into the PEDOT:PSS thin film. The PEDOT:PSS film was spin coated on ITO and exposed to 56% RH for 48 hours.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time dependence of indium/tin migration into thin PEDOT:PSS films. The concentration shown is the bulk concentration in the PEDOT:PSS film. In (A) the concentrations of films stored under vacuum are shown, in (B) of samples exposed to 56% RH. In (C) the bulk concentrations of samples exposed to various RH are compared.	 

A1	0% (Vacuum drying)	Pyroneg at ∼50 °C	∼145 °C
A2	0% (Vacuum drying)	
	Without annealing
A3	0% (Vacuum drying)	Without pyroneg	∼145 °C
A4	0% (Vacuum drying)	
	Without annealing
B1	56%	Pyroneg at ∼50 °C	∼145 °C
B2	56%	
	Without annealing
B3	56%	Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C	∼145 °C
C1	95%	Pyroneg at ∼50 °C	∼145 °C
D1	56%	Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C	∼145 °C
D2	95%	Neutral detergent (deconex) at 90 °C	∼145 °C

Conc/mol cm−3	1.3 × 10−4	8.2 × 10−5	9.0 × 10−5	9.9 × 10−5	1.5 × 10−3	1.2 × 10−3	1.6 × 10−3	1.8 × 10−3	3.9 × 10−4	6.0 × 10−4

 	Fig. 4  Time dependence of the indium/tin migration into PEDOT:PSS thin films after the films have been dried for 24 hours in vacuum.	 

 	Fig. 5  XP spectra of (A) indium at the surface of pristine ITO and (B) indium found in a PEDOT:PSS film spin-coated on ITO and exposed to 56% RH. The pristine ITO has a large peak at 444.7 eV and a small peak at 446.0 eV. In the spectrum of the PEDOT:PSS film the peak at 444.7 eV has disappeared and only a peak at 446.3 eV is found. In (C) XP spectra of tin of pristine ITO (broken line spectrum) and of tin in the PEDOT:PSS (bold line spectrum) are shown. The count rate of the tin spectra is much lower due to the lower concentration in ITO compared to indium. Thus no fits to the spectra are shown. However, a shift in the peak position of tin can clearly be identified.	 
RSO3H + H2O → RSO−3 + H3O+
In2O3 + 6RSO−3 + 6H3O+ → 2(RSO3)3In + 9H2O	(1)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
