Arylamine organic dyes for dye -sensitized solar cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS35372A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS35372A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3453-3488Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsArylamine organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Mao 
            Liang†
ab and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, People's Republic of China
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (KLAEMC) (Ministry of Education), Chemistry College, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-22-23509571;   Tel: +86-22-23506808
Received 
      5th September 2012
    First published on 11th February 2013AbstractArylamine organic dyes with donor (D), π-bridge (π) and acceptor (A) moieties for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have received great attention in the last decade because of their high molar absorption coefficient, low cost and structural variety. In the early stages, the efficiency of DSCs with arylamine organic dyes with D–π–A character was far behind that of DSCs with ruthenium(II) complexes partly due to the lack of information about the relationship between the chemical structures and the photovoltaic performance. However, exciting progress has been recently made, and power conversion efficiencies over 10% were obtained for DSCs with arylamine organic dyes. It is thus that the recent research and development in the field of arylamine organic dyes employing an iodide/triiodide redox couple or polypyridyl cobalt redox shuttles as the electrolytes for either DSCs or solid-state DSCs has been summarized. The cell performance of the arylamine organic dyes are compared, providing a comprehensive overview of arylamine organic dyes, demonstrating the advantages/disadvantages of each class, and pointing out the field that needs to reinforce the research direction in the further application of DSCs.
Mao Liang
Mao Liang was born in Sichuan, China, in 1976. He received his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Jun Chen from Nankai University in 2007. He is presently an associated professor at the Department of Applied Chemistry, Tianjin University of Technology. He is also a visiting professorial scholar at KLAEMC. His current research interest is focused on the design and synthesis of dye sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs).
Jun Chen
Jun Chen was born in Anhui, China, in 1967. He obtained his BSc and MSc degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD from Wollongong University (Australia) in 1999. He held the NEDO fellowship at National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. He was appointed the specially-appointed Professor of Energy Materials Chemistry at Nankai University in 2002, the Outstanding Young Scientist from NSFC in 2003, Cheung Kong Scholar from Ministry of Education in 2005, and the Chief Scientist of the National Nano Key Science Research in 2010. He is the director of KLAEMC. He was awarded the National Natural Science Award (2nd prize) in 2011. His research expertise is energy conversion and storage with solar cells, fuel cells, and batteries.
1. Introduction
Fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas have generated most of the energy consumed globally for over a century, paving the way for continued advancement and new inventions. However, the fossil fuel age has also created two significant issues for the world to deal with: climate change mitigation and the security of energy supply. To solve these problems, there has been recently a trend towards the increased commercialization of various renewable energy sources. In particular, solar cells are one of the most favorable ways to convert solar energy into electricity and have received considerable attention. As a new type of photovoltaic technology, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been considered to be a credible alternative to conventional inorganic silicon-based solar cells, because of their easy fabrication, high efficiency and low cost, since the pioneering report by O'Regan and Grätzel.1 To date, a 12.3% efficiency of DSCs has been achieved by employing a combination of a zinc porphyrin dye (YD2–o–C8) and an organic dye (Y123) in conjunction with a tris(2,2′-bipyridine)cobalt(II/III) redox couple,2 speeding up the large-scale practical application of DSCs.
Typically, a DSC contains the following key components: (1) a conductive mechanical support such as fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) over layer, (2) a mesoporous semiconductor metal oxide (such as nanocrystalline TiO2) film, (3) a sensitizer (dye), (4) an electrolyte/hole transporter, and (5) a counter electrode, which is usually made of noble-metal platinum or carbon on FTO, as schematically shown in Fig. 1. In the DSCs system, light is absorbed by the dye anchored on the TiO2 surface and then electrons from the excited dye inject into the conduction band (CB) of the TiO2, generating an electric current, while the ground state of the dye is regenerated by the electrolyte to give efficient charge separation. The iodide is regenerated in turn by the reduction of triiodide at the counter electrode and the circuit is completed via electron migration through the external load. The voltage generated under illumination corresponds to the difference between the Fermi level of the electron in the solid and the redox potential of the electrolyte.3 Thus, the device generates electric power from light continuously. A unique feature of DSCs compared with the other solar cell technologies is that they separate the function of light absorption from charge carrier transport,4 allowing optimization of the device by careful screening of the light absorber and charge transport materials.
 Fig. 1  Schematic working principle of a DSC. 
The sensitizer, which acts as the light harvesting antennae, is essential for efficient light harvesting and electron generation/transfer. Generally, the ideal photosensitizer should fulfill the following essential characteristics: (1) the dye displays a very broad absorption spectrum with a high molar extinction coefficient (ε) to enable efficient light harvesting with thinner TiO2 films, namely panchromatic absorption; (2) the dye shows appropriate steric properties to suppress charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface and dye aggregation, both of which have an adverse effect on the photocurrent and photovoltage; (3) the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the dye should be more negative than the conduction band of TiO2 (−0.5 V vs. NHE), to provide sufficient driving forces (at least 0.2 eV5) for electron injection; (4) the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the dye should be more positive than the energy level of the redox mediator, to provide sufficient driving forces (at least 0.15 eV6) for the efficient regeneration of the oxidized dye; (5) the dye should have suitable anchoring groups, such as carboxylates or phosphonates, for grafting the dye on the semiconductor surface, to ascertain the intimate electronic coupling between the excited state wave function and the conduction band manifold of the semiconductor;7 (6) the photo- and heat-stability of the dye should be high enough to ensure a long lifetime of DSCs.
Based on these requirements, many different photosensitizers, including metal complexes, porphyrins, phthalocyanines and metal-free organic dyes, have been designed and applied to DSCs in the past two decades.8 In particular, N719 (Bu4N)2[Ru(dcbpyH)2(NCS)2] possesses a superior photovoltaic performance to other metal complexes.8 On the other hand, metal-free organic dyes have received great attention for their low cost, high molar absorption coefficient, high efficiency and easy synthesis. Generally, metal-free organic sensitizers are constituted by donor (D), π-bridge (π) and acceptor (A) moieties, so called D–π–A character. This push–pull structure can induce the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) from subunit A to D through the π-bridge when a dye absorbs light (Fig. 2), which is important for light harvesting. Moreover, it is easy to tune the absorption spectra as well as the HOMO and LUMO levels of the dyes by variation of the D, π and A moieties. By this way, hundreds of metal-free organic dyes with tailor-made photophysical, electrochemical, and other properties have been obtained and successfully adopted to act as sensitizers for DSCs over the past ten years. Among the metal-free organic dyes, the arylamine organic dyes, holding the record for validated efficiency of over 10.3%, are promising candidates for highly efficient DSCs.9
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the D–π–A structure of an organic dye. 
Arylamine derivatives are well known electron-rich compounds that are widely used in hole transporting materials and light emitters in the field of optoelectronics, such as in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field-effect transistors, non-linear materials and organic solar cells.10 The family of arylamines has also many favorable properties such as redox, ion transfer processes, and photoelectrochemical behavior as well as their excellent electronic properties.11 In recent years, it has been found that the arylamine derivatives are desirable for organic sensitizers. As shown in Fig. 3, representative arylamine donors, including triphenylamine (TPA),21–52 substituted TPA,53–98 triarylamine (fluoren-substituted aniline,110–128 naphthalene-substituted aniline129–136 and truxene-substituted aniline137–142), indoline,143–162N,N-dialkylaniline,163–166 tetrahydroquinoline,167–169 phenothiazine (PTZ)/phenoxazine (POZ)171–188 and carbazole,189–201 have been developed as organic dyes for DSCs.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structure of arylamine donors. 
Like metal complexes, porphyrins and other organic dyes, arylamine organic dyes also suffer from a series of scientific problems with respect to higher efficiency. The main issues include: (1) lack of absorption in the near-infrared region, (2) charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface, (3) dye aggregation on the TiO2 film, and (4) the energy level mismatch between the dye, TiO2 and electrolyte.
The bathochromic shift of the absorption maxima is one of the most important challenges to improve the DSCs performance. Snaith proposed that with the loss-in-potential of the present state-of-the-art DSCs (0.75 eV), a maximum efficiency of 13.4% is achievable employing a sensitizer with an absorption onset at 840 nm.12 Reducing the loss-in-potential to that of the least “lossy” DSC reported to date (0.66 eV) results in a maximum efficiency of 15.1% with an absorption onset at 920 nm. The first issue could be fulfilled by the introduction of electron-donating groups onto the donors, introduction of electron-rich and electron-withdrawing groups onto the π-bridges, or incorporation of a longer conjugated segment in the push–pull system. Moreover, co-sensitization using multiple dyes, to have complementary absorption features, is also an efficient approach, which is beyond the scope of this review. For the second and third issue, an efficient strategy is the introduction of sterically hindered substituents (bulky groups) such as long alkyl chains and aromatic units onto the donors or π-bridges. On the other hand, co-adsorbents such as deoxycholic acid (DCA) have been successfully utilized to avoid the charge recombination and dye aggregation. As for the final issue, a typical case is the potential mismatch between the I−/I3− redox potential and the HOMO level of the photosensitizer. In other words, a more negative potential of the I−/I3− redox couple strongly leads to a reduction in photovoltage value.13 To avoid the efficiency loss in DSCs, the HOMOs and LUMOs of dyes should match the conduction band edge of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte, respectively. This could be realized by chemical modification of each component.
It is necessary to point out that the aforementioned issues are closely related to each other. In other words, it is easy to deal with one or two problems, but difficult to control all of them. In this context, much effort has been dedicated to the design and synthesis of different types of arylamine organic dyes and the investigation of structure–function relationships.
Herein, we intend to review the fundamentals and the most recent and significant scientific progress made in the fields relevant to arylamine-based organic dyes, with emphasis placed on the structure–function relationships. The survey of intensively investigated arylamine organic dyes, and the discussion of the design and optimization of molecular structure will be sequentially presented in the following sections with the final conclusion remarks being on future challenges and perspectives. The aim is to provide promising design principles for the future development of new organic molecules for the dyes of DSCs.
2. Photovoltaic parameters of DSCs
There are two widely used techniques for photovoltaic characterisations: current–voltage measurements under simulated sunlight (producing J–V curves) and monochromatic light generated current measurements (producing incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra). The photovoltaic parameters including short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be obtained by the current–voltage measurements.3,4 Generally, the standard solar spectrum used for the efficiency measurements of solar cells is AM 1.5 irradiation, corresponding to the irradiance of 100 mW cm−2, namely, Pin = 100 mW cm−2. A typical J–V curve is shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  A typical J–V curve of a DSC. 
The JSC is the photocurrent per unit area (mA cm−2) when the applied bias potential is zero. When no current is flowing through the cell, the potential equals the VOC. The FF is defined as the maximum power output (Jmax × Vmax) divided by the product of JSC and VOC: FF = (Jmax × Vmax)/(JSC × VOC). The FF quantifies the quality of the DSCs, it is the ratio between the areas of the two rectangles shown in Fig. 4. The PCE can be calculated from eqn (1). (1)To better evaluate the JSC, another important parameter, the IPCE, has to be taken into account. The IPCE value corresponds to the photocurrent density that is produced in the external circuit under monochromatic illumination of the cell divided by the photon flux that strikes the cell.8 A typical IPCE spectrum is shown in Fig. 5. Generally, a low IPCE value results in low JSC.
 Fig. 5  A typical IPCE curve of a DSC. 
The IPCE is expressed by the product of the absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiency (APCE) and the light harvesting efficiency (LHE):14,15 IPCE (λ) = APCE × LHE = Φinj × ηcol × LHE(2)where APCE should be divided into two terms: the overall charge collective efficiency (ηcol) and the overall electron injection efficiency (Φinj). The LHE at the maximum absorption wavelength can be estimated using the following equation: LHE = 1–10−A,16 where A is the absorbance of the dye on TiO2 at the maximum wavelength. Therefore, IPCE is determined by the light harvesting ability, the amount of adsorbed dyes on the TiO2 surface, the overall charge collective efficiency and the overall electron injection efficiency. It is noted that the maximum IPCEs for DSCs generally should be smaller than 90% because of the reflection and absorption loss due to the FTO glass.
On the other hand, the value of VOC is determined by the potential difference between the Fermi-level of TiO2 (EF,n) and the Fermi-level of a redox electrolyte (EF,redox) as shown in Fig. 6. The VOC and EF,n can be expressed as:17 VOC = EF,redox − EF,n(3) (4)where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (293 K in this work), nc is the free electron density and Nc is the density of accessible states in the conduction band.18 Considering that EF,redox would not change strongly in DSCs with a fixed redox electrolyte, VOC is intimately correlated to the ECB and nc. The ECB is determined by the surface charge of the TiO2 and the nc is determined by the balance between electron injection (process 2 in Fig. 6) and electron recombination (processes 3 and 4 in Fig. 6). Therefore, dyes affect the conduction band edge position of TiO2 differently, since any change in the surface charge will shift the conduction band edge position.19 Furthermore, any change of the surface blocking of the dyes on the TiO2 surface leads to different amounts of electron recombination (process 4 in Fig. 6). Finally, electrolyte–dye interactions may lead to enhancing the electron recombination. Therefore, the dyes have an important impact not only on both the JSC and VOC, but also on the performance of the devices.
 Fig. 6  Simple energy level diagram and basic electron transfer processes for a DSC. 
It is also pointed out that the use of the iodide/triiodide electrolyte as a redox shuttle limits the attainable VOC to 0.7 to 0.8 V. To further improve the VOC, and hence the PCE of DSCs, alternative redox couples such as the Co-complex based redox couples have been explored, enabling the attainment of high photovoltages (Fig. 6). The exploration of arylamine organic dyes for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes will be discussed in detail in Section 11.
3. The developing map of arylamine organic dyes
As mentioned above, arylamine derivatives are promising materials for electron donors. The donor groups can not only affect the absorption spectra but also adjust the energy levels of the sensitizers. Therefore, choosing a suitable donor group in the D–π–A system is very critical to balance between photovoltage, driving forces and spectral response for the preparation of high efficiency dyes.20 To enhance the donor ability of TPA and suppress the charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface and dye aggregation, substituted TPA dyes were developed.53–98 To engineer the organic sensitizers with an enhanced stability and a reduced tendency toward aggregation, a successful approach was introduced by incorporating a triarylamine moiety into the organic framework. As demonstrated, triarylamine dyes not only suppress the aggregation but also increase the molar extinction coefficient of the organic sensitizer and retard the charge recombination.110,113,141 On the other hand, PTZ/POZ is a well-known heterocyclic compound with electron-rich sulfur and nitrogen heteroatoms.170 The PTZ/POZ ring is nonplanar with a butterfly conformation in the ground state, which can impede the molecular aggregation and the formation of intermolecular excimers.180 To red-shift the maximum absorption band to a longer wavelength, arylamines with alkyl substituents such as N,N-dialkylaniline20,166 and indoline20 were introduced as donors for the organic dyes. Like TPA, carbazole was utilized as an electron donor due to its stronger electron-donating ability and excellent hole-transporting ability.188–193 Thus, minor changes in the geometry of the donor structure could result in interesting photophysical, electrochemical, and other properties.
4. TPA and substituted TPA dyes
4.1 TPA dyes
The TPA unit is well-known for its strong electron-donating ability and hole-transport properties. A very large number of triarylamine dyes with a variation of π-bridges have been developed and most of them have shown good power conversion efficiencies in DSCs.21–52
Originally, double bonds and triple bonds were introduced as spacers for the expansion of the π-conjugated system (Fig. 7). Yanagida and co-workers first introduced the TPA unit as an electron donor in organic dyes and obtained a PCE of 3.3% and 5.3% for dyes 1 and 2, respectively (for reference: N719, 7.7%).21 The bathochromic shift of the absorption spectrum of 2 was achieved by increasing the number of methine units, thus leading to higher efficiency. Yang, Wang, Sun and co-workers further synthesized two TPA dyes (4, PCE = 4.3% and 6, PCE = 5%) with triple bonds as π-spacers. Two TPA dyes (3, PCE = 5.73% and 5, PCE = 6.25%) with double bonds were applied in DSCs to study the influence of triple bonds as π-spacer units on their photoelectrochemical properties and DSCs performance.22 In comparison to the DSCs performance of reference dyes without a triple bond, the introduction of the triple bond improved the PCE slightly because of a slight enhancement of JSC, but the introduction of a double bond could improve the PCE dramatically because of a large enhancement of JSC. The lower JSC of the DSCs sensitized by the dyes with a triple bond was attributed to their narrower absorption spectra than that of the dyes with a double bond. In spite of that, it does not mean that the double bond is always better than the triple bond. For example, when organic dyes were bridged by anthracene-containing π-conjugations, a higher PCE was obtained for the DSC sensitized by 8 (PCE = 6.78%) than that by 7 (PCE = 5.14%).23 With the appearance of a triple bond and a double bond, the dihedral angles in 8 and 7 are 0° and 48.4°, respectively. Better molecular planar conjugation of 8 than that of 7 leads to a broader absorption spectrum and thus a higher JSC and PCE of the DSC sensitized by 8. This result revealed that suitable planar conjugation was essential for high JSC realization.
 Fig. 7  Representative TPA dyes 1–14. 
To further design and develop more efficient TPA dyes with a phenylene bridge, Yang, Hagfeldt, Sun and co-workers reported a series of TPA dyes (3, PCE = 5.73%; 9, PCE = 4.36%; 10, PCE = 3.86%; 11, PCE = 0.44%; and 12, PCE = 3.49%) consisting of the phenylene with different substitutes.24 Compared to 3, the introduction of different electron-withdrawing substitutes on the phenylene units (9, 10 and 11) used as the π-spacers, to act as the electron acceptor in the molecular structures, can give bathochromic shifts of the absorption spectra. However, a negative effect on the DSCs performance was observed because the electron-withdrawing units on the π-spacers suppressed the electron injection from the LUMO level to the TiO2 CB. On the other hand, the relatively low photovoltaic performance of 12 was attributed to its narrow range of visible spectrum response. In contrast, when methoxy was introduced as an electron-donating group (13, PCE = 6.49%), an improved PCE was reported by Park, Kim and co-workers.25,26
Considering the stability of the chromophores is less affected than that of polyene linkers,27 Hagfeldt, Sun and co-workers further optimized the TPA dye by introducing thiophene to extend the number of π-conjugations,28 based on dye 5.29 The dyes (1, PCE = 1.55%; 5, PCE = 3.08%; and 14, PCE = 2.73%) show satisfactory efficiencies on thin TiO2 films (3 μm), demonstrating the advantage of chromophores with higher extinction coefficients. By increasing the π-conjugation of the linker, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels were tuned. The longer linker conjugation gave an enhanced spectral response but increased the recombination of electrons to the triiodide (e.g.5vs.14), leading to lower IPCEs.
In a study on the VOC of DSCs using the three dyes (1, 710 mV; 5, 640 mV; 14, 585 mV), Mori, Hagfeldt and co-workers discussed the factors that affect the VOC and electron lifetimes.19 They claimed that the surface blocking of the dye layer could be improved by reducing the dye size. Good surface blocking means a high VOC and long electron lifetimes. They also pointed out that there was an interaction between the 14 dye molecular structure and I3− and/or I2. This finding demonstrated that enhancing the efficiency of the dyes by simple expansion of the π-conjugated system through increasing the number of electron-rich segments (such as thiophene) was not an effective strategy, because the halogen bonding between iodine and some electron-rich segments of the dye molecules could cause a larger charge recombination rate at the titania/electrolyte interface.
In parallel with the studies on double bonds and triple bonds, efforts were made to explore more utilizable thiophene derivatives (Fig. 8). With the goal of developing simple organic dyes based on TPA, Chi, Chou and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of TPA dyes (15–17) containing thiophene derivatives,30 such as 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) or 3,4-bis[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]thiophene (BMEET). Dyes 16 (λmax = 426 nm) and 17 (λmax = 420 nm) showed a bathochromic shift compared with 15 (λmax = 410 nm) due to the strong electron-donating ability of the alkoxy group. Relative to 15 and 17, the higher PCE of 16 (7.3%) was attributed to a broader spectral response, higher molar absorption coefficient and higher amounts of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 films. The side chain of 17 suppressed the dark current from the free TiO2 conduction-band to the counter electrolyte, while the long side chain also led to less dye-uptake and hence a low JSC. The same research group also prepared dyes 18–20 containing EDOT plus various functionalized phenylenes as spacers.31 These organic sensitizers exhibited much higher molar extinction coefficients than the parent 16 dye, as well as revealing a remarkable fluorine substituent effect. 20, with fluoro substitution at the meta position relative to cyanoacrylic acid, possesses a lower S0–S1 gap and weaker coupling with the TiO2 electrode (cf.18 and 19). Conversely, due to the resonance effect with respect to cyanoacrylic acid, the ortho-F-substituted 20 has a larger energy gap but stronger TiO2 affinity. As a result, 20 showed better DSC performance with JSC = 15.58 mA cm−2, VOC = 787 mV, FF = 0.67 and PCE = 8.22%.
 Fig. 8  Representative TPA dyes 15–29. 
As discussed above, the complex formation between dye molecules and I2 or I3− is a determining factor for the VOC of DSCs. In order to alleviate the strong interaction between sensitizers and acceptor species in the electrolyte, our attempts to develop high-efficiency TPA dyes focus on the retardation of charge recombination by introducing appropriate steric hindrance to the sensitizer backbone, namely, the passivation of the sensitizers rather than the entire TiO2 surface. The three-dimensional (3D) branched structures of the functionalized 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) not only disfavor π–π packing but also block other molecules (e.g., I3−) from approaching.32 As a result, the VOC of 22 (VOC = 797 mV, PCE = 5.3%) is much higher than that with a thiophene congener 21 (VOC = 720 mV, PCE = 4.36%) under similar conditions. This finding provides a novel strategy for the multifunctionalization of organic dyes, as well as for the retardation of charge recombination in DSCs.
Mori, Yamashita and co-workers proposed a new strategy to improve the VOC of TPA dyes with a long π-conjugation unit, namely, increasing steric hindrance by attaching obstacle units to the π-linker without a significant increase of polarizability.33 Their studies showed that the addition of an alkyl chain to the dyes increased the electron lifetime. Further increase of the electron lifetime was obtained by introducing a twisted structure. Compared with 24 (VOC = 720 mV, JSC = 11.9 mA cm−2, PCE = 6.3%), the two hexyl groups introduced to the opposable 3,3′-positions of a bithiophene spacer in 23 (VOC = 750 mV, JSC = 10.1 mA cm−2, PCE = 5.7%) successfully realized an increase in VOC by 30 mV. They also suggested that the twisted structure is not essential, but having a 3D structure to increase the distance between the dyes and acceptors is important to increase the electron lifetime.
However, the twisted spacer structure may interrupt the conjugation system and weaken the ICT interactions, resulting in a hypsochromic shift of the maximum absorption band as well as low JSC. Interestingly, the adverse impact of a twisted spacer structure on the absorption of dye is still distinct, even inserting a quinoxaline unit into the opposable 3,3′-positions of a bithiophene spacer. For example, the DSCs based on 25 (VOC = 676 mV, JSC = 14.6 mA cm−2, PCE = 7.4%) showed an improved light harvesting efficiency and therefore photogenerated current due to its much broader absorption spectra in comparison to that of 26 (VOC = 735 mV, JSC = 5.70 mA cm−2, PCE = 3.2%).34 As the inserting spacer changes from quinoxaline to dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene (DTT), this effect arises from the two 3-hexylthiophenes attenuation. Dye 27 (VOC = 697 mV, JSC = 14.4 mA cm−2, PCE = 7.3%) in CH2Cl2 showed a strong broad absorption maximum around 490 nm.35
In addition to the 3-alkyl-thiophene moieties, 3,4-dialkyl-thiophene rings also enable high steric hindrance and thus decrease the dye aggregation and enhance the tolerance towards water in the electrolyte. The introduction of a 3,4-dibutyl-thiophene ring into dyes 28 and 29 reduced the sensitizer aggregation and allowed the preparation of solar cells with PCEs of 7.17% and 6.27% without the use of coadsorbant agents.36
Fluorene derivatives have been used as the spacer in organic dyes (Fig. 9) because of their electron-rich nature, good stability and the suppressing of the charge recombination and intermolecular interaction ability. Dye 31 (λmax = 510 nm) provided a more red shifted value than that of 30 (λmax = 443 nm), though both of them possess a similar π-conjugation length.37 This result can be understood by considering their molecular geometries. The increased twist angle between the fluorene entity and the EDOT ring led to a less effective π-conjugation length and, consequently, blue shifted λmax. Nevertheless, the efficiency of 31 (PCE = 4.4%) is lower than that of 30 (PCE = 5.8%) because of strong charge recombination. In contrast, spirobifluorene was found to be less efficient due to low JSC and VOC.38,39
 Fig. 9  Representative TPA dyes 30–36. 
Considering the furan ring with smaller resonance energy (furan, 16 kcal mol−1; thiophene, 29 kcal mol−1; benzene, 36 kcal mol−1) can provide more effective conjugation, Lin, Yeh and co-workers incorporated a furan ring between a TPA donor and a cyanoacrylic acid acceptor to yield 32 and 33.40 The cells based on the two dyes exhibited high conversion efficiencies (7.36 and 6.3%, respectively), reaching ∼96% of a N719-based DSC (PCE = 7.69%). A comparison is also made between 32 and the thiophene congener (PCE = 6.09%), suggesting the superiority of furan.
To develop and evaluate the potential of pyrroles-based sensitizers, Lin, Hsu and co-workers reported a series of organic dyes with pyrrole in the spacer.41 Among these dyes, 34 and 35 exhibited PCEs of 4.77% and 4.79%, respectively. An advantage of the pyrrole moieties in the spacer is better charge separation in the excited states, arising from less interaction with its neighboring aromatic units. Li and coworkers developed a series of “H” type dye sensitizers with pyrrole as the conjugated bridge.42 Two N-arylpyrrole-based organic dye moieties were linked through various aromatic rings. The solar cell based on dye 36 with carbazole as the isolation group exhibited 5.22% conversion efficiency under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Moreover, coadsorption of CDCA did not improve the conversion efficiency of the devices, indicating that the “H” type dyes nearly did not aggregate on the TiO2 surface.
Besides the electron-rich moieties (benzene, thiophene, fluorene, furan and pyrrole) mentioned above, electron-deficient blocks were also tested as effective fragments for organic dyes (Fig. 10).43–52 Benzothiadiazole or benzoselenadiazole fragments were first exploited for DSCs by Lin, Ho and co-workers.43 The lower extinction coefficient of 38 compared to the benzothiadiazole counterpart (37) was attributed to the larger size and smaller electronegativity of Se when compared to S, which lead to less electron density on Se and thus diminished aromaticity for the benzoselenadiazole. Despite the moderate PCEs of 37 and 38 (3.77 and 2.91%, respectively; N3, 5.3%), this design opened up the possibility of preparing new dye molecules for DSCs utilizing low band gap building blocks. Later, they further developed the benzothiadiazole unit by the introduction of alkoxy chains.44 Dye 39, containing a 5,6-bis-hexyloxy-benzo[2,1,3]thiadiazole entity in the conjugated spacer, gave a PCE of 6.72%, reaching 92% of the standard N719 device.
 Fig. 10  Representative TPA dyes 37–47. 
Recently, the design of a conjugated bridge using low band gap building blocks plus long alkyl chains has become popular. Clearly, the low band gap building blocks could extend the spectral response region. On the other side, the introduction of alkyl chains would not only make the dyes more soluble and reduce aggregation in devices, but also suppress charge recombination in DSCs.
Dye 40, showing a wide coverage of the solar spectrum, was synthesized by Jiang, Pei and co-workers.45 The absorption onset of 40 red-shifted from about 710 nm in solution to about 800 nm in the solid state. The absorption features in thin films covered nearly the whole visible range, namely, from 300 nm to 800 nm. Such a broad absorption is greatly beneficial to the improvement of photocurrent density and power-conversion efficiency. The devices fabricated from 40 showed PCE as high as 6.04%, which is close to that of the classical dye N3 under the same conditions. A similar phenomenon was observed by Zhou and co-workers.46 They introduced a thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine derivative unit into the conjugated backbone of 41 and 42 to tune the absorption spectra. The extended conjugation of the additional acceptor from thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine (42, λmax = 596 nm) to acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno-[3,4-e]pyrazine (41, λmax = 625 nm) bathochromically shifted the absorption peak significantly. They compared the absorption spectra of the terthiophene based dyes and proposed that increasing the thiophene number is not an effective way to bathochromically shift the maximum absorption of the sensitizers significantly (e.g. λmax > 600 nm). It is impressive that the IPCE onsets are located at around 900 nm for the two dyes, which is comparable to that for the black dye. However, 41 and 42 exhibit low VOC values (below 500 mV), which partially compensate for the positive effect of the near infrared (NIR) IPCE response, resulting in moderate PCEs of 5.3 and 3.66%, respectively.
Shi et al. developed TPA dyes containing an 11,12-bis(hexyloxy)dibenzo[a,c]phenazine (BPz) unit. They demonstrated that the intermolecular aggregations can be suppressed in a large degree by the addition of the BPz unit in the π-conjugated spacer, which would avoid the unnecessary energy loss by the molecular interactions. Dye 43 showed a PCE of 5.3%.47
Hua, Tian and co-workers studied a series of TPA dyes containing bithiazole moieties.48,49 Despite the long π-bridge of the dye, a remarkably high VOC of 810 mV was achieved by 44-sensitized solar cells with thick TiO2 films (double layers: 10 μm + 4 μm). Under the same conditions, 45 and 46 showed high VOC of 778 and 789 mV (N719, 672 mV), respectively. This feature can be attributed to the retarded charge recombination by two hexyl chains with substituted bithiazole. Compared with 46 (12.47 mA cm−2), 45 (15.69 mA cm−2) has an improved JSC due to its higher molar extinction coefficient and broader photocurrent action spectra. These results indicated that thiophene is superior to benzene in terms of light harvesting and response of photocurrent, but inferior to the latter in terms of photovoltage. 44 displayed the best overall light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 7.51% under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). The same group also reported a series of TPA dyes containing isoindigo as an auxiliary electron-withdrawing unit. Compared with 44 (λmax = 457 nm), 47 (λmax = 563 nm) exhibited a broad absorption in the near NIR region. However, the power conversion efficiency of 47 is limited by the low VOC (559 mV).50
In summary, the incorporation of both electron-rich moieties and electron-deficient blocks into the π-bridge are effective ways to tune the performance of TPA dyes. However, the performance of this type of system is still behind the ruthenium dyes owing to lower JSC and VOC. To achieve high JSC, improving the electron-donating ability of TPA and designing new push–pull systems for broader and higher IPCE response is necessary. Meanwhile, suppressing charge recombination and dye aggregation remain key factors for this issue, as these are intimately correlated with the ultimate power output of a DSC. This recognition has translated into massive efforts in designing new classes of substituted TPA dyes.
4.2 Substituted TPA dyes
Thanks to its starburst structure, TPA can be engineered to meet the requirements of ideal donors (with a strong electron-donating ability and contribution to suppressing charge recombination and dye aggregation). Up to now, a variety of 4-substituted TPA derivatives and 4,4′-disubstituted TPA derivatives have been explored and these have become classic classes of electron donors.53–98
To enhance the electron-donating ability of TPA, our group reported a family of TPA dyes (Fig. 11) with the introduction of electron-rich groups to an adjacent phenyl ring, which was proved to be an effective way to improve the dye performance.15,53–60 For example, dye 49 (PCE = 5.8%), with a CH2CH– substituted TPA electron-donating group, exhibits a superior performance when related to the corresponding dye (48, PCE = 4.3%) without the CH2CH– substitution.53 Later, diphenylvinylsubstituted TPA as the electron donor was employed, and dye 50 achieved a power conversion efficiency of 6.3% (AM 1.5 irradiation) and exhibited good stability under one sun irradiation for 20 days.56 The all-solid-state solar cell with this electrolyte and the organic dye 53 shows a PCE of 2.70% and 4.12% under the illumination intensities of 100 and 10 mW cm−2, respectively.57
 Fig. 11  Representative substituted TPA dyes 48–60. 
In our development of TPA-based organic sensitizers, we noticed an interesting trend in which sensitizers incorporating cyanoacrylic acid (CA) as the acceptor/anchoring group always gave higher VOC values than the corresponding dyes bearing identical donors and π-bridges but a different acceptor of rhodanine-3-acetic acid (RA).15 This phenomenon was also observed by other groups.24,30,61 From analysis of the transient absorption traces in the NIR region, Wiberg et al. concluded that the RA dyes facilitate recombination by injecting electrons to short-lived surface trap states, suffering from their specific electronic structures.61 Our theoretical investigation based on density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT (TDDFT) have shown that the cyanoacrylic acid anchor favors better photoelectrochemical properties of DSCs than those of the rhodanine-3-acetic acid anchor via providing more shift of the TiO2 conduction band toward the vacuum energy levels and more favorable conjugation with titanium.62 Moreover, we systematically investigated the relationship between the dye adsorption behavior and VOC of DSCs based on four TPA-based organic sensitizers (50, 631 mV; 51, 534 mV; 52, 715 mV; 53, 692 mV).1552 and 53 with cyanoacetic acid as an anchoring group adopt a standing adsorption mode and exert a larger surface dipole potential on TiO2 than their counterparts bearing rhodanine-3-acetic acid (50 and 51), which lie along the surface. As illustrated in Fig. 12, 50 exhibited a greater extent of charge recombination than 53 because of the low surface-blocking efficiency of the dye layer and the intimacy between the I3−-bound dyes and the TiO2, leading to lower VOC values.15 This work made an important proposal that dyes with a standing absorption mode should be a preferred choice in the future development of organic sensitizers.
 Fig. 12  Graphical illustration of the geometries of the adsorbed dyes and the dye–I3− interaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Dihexyloxy-substituted TPA (DHO–TPA), a typical 4,4′-aryl-substituted TPA derivative, has been identified as a good donor in the construction of amphiphilic organic sensitizers. The dihexyloxy groups not only slow down the titania/electrolyte interface charge recombination kinetics, contributing to a high open-circuit photovoltage, but also provide strong electron-donating ability, enhancing the light harvesting capacity of the dyes. Remarkable progress has recently been made in the field of DHO–TPA organic dyes. Wang and co-workers reported about fifty DHO–TPA organic dyes,63–72 holding the record of validated efficiency of 10.3%.68 They focused on adjusting the conjugated bridge with different thiophene derivatives to increase the molar extinction coefficient, suppress dye aggregation on the semiconductor, and optimize the redox potential of the photosensitizer (Fig. 11).
Using the thienothiophene (TT) to replace the thiophene unit, 55 (PCE = 7.5%) showed an improved efficiency related to that of 54 (PCE = 6.88%).64,65 With the motivation to further enhance the light-harvesting capacity and get an insight into the optoelectronic properties of bisthienothiophene, compound 56 (containing bisthienothiophene as the π conjugated unit) was synthesized, giving an efficiency of 8.0% measured under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2).66 In conjunction with a solvent-free ionic liquid electrolyte, the device based on 56 (PCE = 6.5%) showed an excellent stability under thermal and light-soaking dual stress. Along with the increase of the conjugation length, the charge-transfer transition absorption was not only bathochromic but also enhanced, leading to a high JSC of 15.2 mA cm−2. Nevertheless, the bisthienothiophene possessed by 56 (λmax = 524 nm) dye shifts the absorption peak bathochromically only 8 nm compared to the thienophene of 55 (λmax = 516 nm). In contrast, when a binary spacer of the orderly conjugated EDOT and thienothiophene was employed, the absorption peak of 57 (λmax = 552 nm) is red-shifted by 36 nm compared with that of 55.66 In a 7 + 5 μm double layer TiO2 film, this dye exhibited an IPCE of greater than 90% in the range 440–590 nm, with the absorption onset at 800 nm. The TiO2 electrode was stained by immersion into a dye solution containing 150 mM 57, 300 mM tetrabutylammonium hydroxide, and 1 mM 3a,7a-dihydroxy-5b-cholic acid in a mixed solvent of acetonitrile, tetrahydrofuran and chlorobenzene (1:1:2 v/v/v) for 72 h. DSCs based on 57 and an iodine electrolyte consisting of 1.0 M 1,3-dimethylimidazolium iodide (DMII), 50 mM LiI, 30 mM I2, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine (TBP), and 0.1 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GNCS) in acetonitrile–valeronitrile (85:15 v/v) generated an impressive efficiency of 9.8%. It is noted that apart from a high JSC (16.1 mA cm−2) related to good light-harvesting, compound 57 exhibited a high VOC (803 mV) and FF (0.738). Interestingly, they claimed that when other solvents are used in the 57 staining the cells present a much lower performance, mainly owing to fast charge recombination at the titania/electrolyte interface. Moreover, the stability and high efficiency of a solvent-free DSC based on 57 has been demonstrated. This finding proved that the exploration of fused ring building blocks to construct a wide-spectral response organic chromophore for DSCs is an effective strategy.
After that, they employed a 4,4-dihexyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene (CPDT) segment as a conjugated spacer to construct the organic chromophore 59 for DSCs, exhibiting a high power conversion efficiency of 8.95% measured under irradiation of AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2).6759 displayed an impressive maximum molar absorption coefficient of 62.7 × 103 M−1 cm−1 at 555 nm, which is about 2 times higher than 58 (33.8 × 103 M−1 cm−1 at 525 nm). Interestingly, experiments showed that the two side chains of CPDT themselves do not form an effective barrier to attenuate the interfacial tunneling electron transfer. They supposed that the two aliphatic chains tethered to the conjugated backbone of 59 through the tetrahedral sp3 carbon endow more uncovered titania after dye-coating, which, however, could subsequently interact with TBP and GNCS very efficiently. The resultant compact layer coassembled with 59 and the electrolyte components (mainly TBP and GNCS) on titania not only reduces the surface states of nanocrystals but also prolongs the electron lifetime considerably.
In 2010, the same group utilized a binary π-conjugated spacer of EDOT and dihexyl-substituted dithienosilole (DTS) to construct another promising sensitizer 60, which is characteristic of an intramolecular charge-transfer band peaking at 584 nm measured in chloroform.68 The IPCE exceeds 90% from 500 to 590 nm, reaching a maximum of 95% after coating the cells with an antireflection film. In comparison with the standard ruthenium sensitizer Z907, this metal-free chromophore 60 endowed a nanocrystalline titania film with an evident light-harvesting enhancement, leading to a remarkably high efficiency of 10.0–10.3% (JSC = 17.94 mA cm−2, VOC = 770 mV, FF = 0.730) at the AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) for DSCs, although a highly volatile iodine electrolyte was used. A solvent-free ionic liquid cell with 60 as the sensitizer showed an impressive efficiency of 8.9% under a low light intensity of 14.39 mW cm−2, making it very favorable for the indoor application of flexible dye-sensitized solar cells.
Based on the DTS, Wong, Wu and co-workers designed and synthesized a DHO–TPA dye 61 containing coplanar diphenyl-substituted dithienosilole as the central linkage for high-performance DSCs (Fig. 13).73 By incorporating the diphenyl-substituted DTS core, 61 exhibited the enhanced light-capturing abilities and suppressed dye aggregation. A solar-cell device based on the sensitizer 61 yielded a high overall conversion efficiency up to 7.6%, reaching ∼96% of the ruthenium dye N719-based reference cell under the same conditions.
 Fig. 13  Representative substituted TPA dyes 61–76. 
As mentioned above, exploring new fused ring building blocks for organic dyes has proved to be an effective strategy for enhancing the light-harvesting capacity, leading to impressive performances under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Recently, our group developed new benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene (BDT)-containing organic dyes with single or binary π-conjugated spacers.74 The length of the π-conjugated spacers has a strong impact on the electro-optical properties of these dyes. The fabricated DSC from 62 (Fig. 13, PCE = 5.68%) exhibited high efficiency reaching ∼73% of the standard cell using N719 (PCE = 7.73%) as the sensitizer, indicating that the BDT unit is a promising candidate in organic sensitizers. Longhi et al. introduced two isomeric BDT as π-spacers for photosensitizers (63 and 64, Fig. 13). In particular, 63 showed a high PCE of 5.14%.75
Gao et al. reported a series of metal-free organic dyes exploiting different combinations of (hetero)cyclic linkers (benzene, thiophene, and thiazole) and bridges (CPDT and another isomer of BDT, benzo[1,2-b:4,3-b′]-dithiophene) as the central π-spacers.76 They found that the absorption spectrum of the dyes containing CPDT were red-shifted compared with the dyes containing benzo[1,2-b:4,3-b′]-dithiophene. Such absorption characteristics indicate that the electron density on CPDT is richer than that of benzo[1,2-b:4,3-b′]-dithiophene. The performance of the dye 59 (Fig. 11, JSC = 15.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 756 mV, FF = 0.76) cell surpassed that fabricated with dye 65 (Fig. 13, JSC = 9.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 810 mV, FF = 0.74) under the same conditions.76
Zhu et al. demonstrated that a carbon-bridged phenylenevinylene (CPV)-linked dye serves as an efficient sensitizer (66, Fig. 13) for DSCs.77 This robust and bulky linker helps to reduce the recombination, which resulted in the high VOC values. The octyl side chains protruding laterally from the sensitizer hamper contact between the donor moiety and the TiO2 surface and suppress the charge recombination to achieve high FF values. The cells show PCEs of up to 7.12%, and high VOC reaching close to 0.8 V based on the iodide/triiodide electrolyte.
Aiming to improve the spectral response of organic dyes in the far-red and NIR regions, Wu and co-workers developed two DHO–TPA dyes,7867 and 68 (Fig. 13), where the electron-rich EDOT or bithiophene conjugated fragment was used to link, unconventionally, a squaraine core and a hexyloxyphenyl amino group. The corresponding photovoltaic devices exhibited an attractively panchromatic response and also converted a portion of the NIR photons into electricity. The IPCE onset was red-shifted for both dyes to 950 nm. Unfortunately, moderate efficiencies (2.61% and 2.34%, respectively) were observed for 67 and 68, which was primarily as a result of the worse VOC values (422 and 432 mV, respectively). In fact, a survey of the literature also revealed that the efficiencies of DSCs based on ionic dyes fell well behind those based on nonionic ones, mainly because the VOC values of DSCs based on the former dyes (300–600 mV) are generally lower than those based on the latter ones (600–800 mV).79 As part of our systematic development of triphenylamine-based organic sensitizers, we prepared two ionic dyes (69 and 70, Fig. 13) and investigated the origin of such a VOC disadvantage.80
We calculated the electrostatic potentials of 69 and 70, which are plotted in Fig. 14.80 In the case of 69, the positive charge in the indolium unit could directly attract I3−, thus augmenting charge recombination. This feature should, at least in part, be responsible for the generally low VOC values for ionic dyes because of the enhanced recombination reaction. Interestingly, 70 has a negatively charged squaraine core in the π-bridge, which is usually immediately connected to the positive charge center. I3− would simultaneously feel the coulombic attraction from the indolium as well as the repulsion from the squaraine unit. In other words, the electrostatic interaction between 70 and I3− would be relatively weak. In spite of that, through photovoltaic measurements, an electrochemical impedance investigation, recombination reaction monitoring, electrostatic potential analysis, and dipole moment calculation, we concluded that the electronic distribution over the ionic dye molecules is intrinsically not ideal for the construction of efficient sensitizers, although the introduction of a squaraine unit in the dye backbone can, to some extent, alleviate such a situation. Our studies suggested that in the future design of NIR/panchromatic sensitizers, strongly electron-withdrawing nonionic (rather than ionic) moieties would be interesting candidates as building blocks. Nevertheless, this does not mean that ionic sensitizers such as squaraine dyes are not suitable for DSCs. The key issue is to make the most of the advantage of ionic sensitizers (e.g. absorption in the NIR region) but avoid their VOC defects. One effective approach is to employ ionic sensitizers together with nonionic sensitizers in cosensitized solar cells.81,82 More importantly, a panchromatic response in the visible region can be realized by DSCs based on the co-sensitization of organic dyes.
 Fig. 14  Electrostatic potential plots of 69 and 70. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
For the purpose of extending the absorption range to enhance the photocurrent response, Bäuerle and co-workers prepared two DHO–TPA dyes (71 and 72, Fig. 13) by implementing the electron-deficient benzothiadiazole unit into the bridging framework of D–π–A molecules.83 They found that a subtle structural change in the sensitizer induced a significant influence on the DSCs performance. The incorporation of a BTDA unit close to the anchoring acceptor group in 71 (λmax = 570 nm) led to a bathochromic shift of the CT bands in the UV-vis spectra in comparison to 72 (λmax = 515 nm), in which the two acceptor units are decoupled by a phenyl ring. However, the efficiency of 72 (PCE = 8.21%) was raised by a factor of 6.5 compared to 71 (PCE = 1.24%). Photophysical investigations revealed that the insertion of the phenyl ring blocks the back electron transfer of the charge separated state. This slows down the recombination processes by over 5 times, while maintaining efficient electron injection from the excited dye into the TiO2-photoanode.
Recently, we obtained a sensitizer with strongly electron-withdrawing nonionic moieties by modifying DTT, namely, dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]thiophene-4,4-dioxide (DTTO).84 Two push–pull organic dyes (73 and 74, Fig. 13) incorporating DTT and DTTO as units of binary spacers have been synthesized and used as sensitizers for DSCs. Compared to the DTT counterpart, the introduction of DTTO into the binary spacer is advantageous to the light harvesting in terms of both the maximum absorption (red-shifted 17 nm) and the molar extinction coefficients. Importantly, this bridge alteration not only evokes an enhancement of JSC but concomitantly prompts a VOC improvement, leading to a higher conversion efficiency (73, PCE = 4.18%; 74, PCE = 5.19%). The results revealed that the electron-deficient fused thiophene is a promising candidate for contrasting efficient organic dyes.
From the structure–function relationships point of view, the dihexyloxy-substitution on the TPA is undoubtedly successful. To improve the efficiency of DSCs based on DHO–TPA dyes further, a remarkable increase in the VOC of these cells in combination with iodine-free redox couples is necessary, which will be discussed in Section 11.
As a result of the strategic structural modification of organic sensitizers, a new family of interesting substituted triphenylamine dyes was reported by Sun, Hagfeldt and co-workers.85–87 As shown in Fig. 13, the TPA donor was functionalized at the adjacent phenyl rings of the TPA core with either butoxyl groups (75) or short dimethylamine groups (76). Despite the red-shift (37 nm) in the absorption spectrum, the 76 (PCE = 4.83%) dye showed a comparatively low performance related to 75 (PCE = 6.0%).85 The prominent feature of 75 is the free rotation of the phenyl rings containing four long butoxyl chains in ortho and para positions, which are connected to the TPA core by single bonds. They proposed that the protection by the butoxyl chains produces surface blocking through steric hindrance, preventing electrons in TiO2 from recombining with the redox species and yielding a high VOC, which is the essential reason for higher DSCs performance based on the 75 sensitizer.86 Moreover, the protection by the butoxyl chains was proven to be more efficient as compared to the co-adsorption of CDCA under the examined conditions.
Tian and co-workers developed several starburst triarylamine based dyes with a D–D–π–A structure (Fig. 15).88–90 The introduction of a starburst triarylamine group to form the D–D–π–A configuration brought about superior performance over the simple D–π–A configuration, in terms of bathochromically extended absorption spectra, enhanced molar extinction coefficients and better thermo-stability. Dye 79 has a conversion efficiency as high as 6.02% (VOC = 0.63 V, JSC = 13.8 mA cm−2; FF = 0.69) under 1 sun illumination.88 It is noted that dye 80 showed a good efficiency in quasi-solid-state devices, which was performed over 1200 h in full sunlight at 50 °C.89 This result means that carbazole is a photostable hole-transporting moiety for use in dye-sensitized solar cells. Recently, Jia, Lin and co-workers demonstrated the possibility of phenothiazine units as antennas in D–D–π–A dyes.91,92 Under the same conditions, an increase of about 39% was obtained from 82 (PCE = 4.54%) to 81 (PCE = 3.26%).91
 Fig. 15  Representative substituted TPA dyes 77–86. 
Considering that heterocyclic groups with lone pair electrons may effectively delocalize the positive charges after the photooxidation of dyes, Zhang et al. predicted that using suitable heterocyclic groups to modify the structures of triarylamine units may improve their electron-donating ability (Fig. 15). They demonstrated that adopting heterocyclic (2-thienyl, 83; 1-pyrazolyl groups, 84) substituted triarylamine units as the electronic donor moieties led to the improved performance of dyes.93 The PCE of 83 and 84 are 5.2% and 4.9%, respectively.
Shi and co-workers incorporated the tetraphenylethylene (TPE) units as antennas in D–D–π–A dyes. The TPE moieties were employed to suppress charge recombination and aggregation. DSCs based on 85 (Fig. 15) with 10 mm CDCA showed a high PCE of 6.77% (JSC = 14.69 mA cm−2, VOC = 740 mV, FF = 0.62).94 Unlike the D–D–π–A dyes, reports on the A–D–A type of substituted TPA dyes are limited. Singh et al. synthesized dye 86 (Fig. 15), which contains TPA as an electron donor and both cyanovinylene 4-nitrophenyl and carboxylic (anchoring) units as electron acceptors. The PCE of 86 with DCA addition is 4.4%.95
Further tuning the structure of the substitutes to construct new D–D–π–A or A–D–A dyes could lead to even better cell performance in the future.
4.3 Planar TPA dyes
Ko and co-workers developed a novel type of organic sensitizers incorporating a planar TPA unit (Fig. 16).99 The planar donor units show evidence of intermolecular interactions on TiO2 films, which provide a significantly red-shifted spectra and photovoltaic response. As a result, the dye 87 (JSC = 15.2 mA cm−2, VOC = 720 mV, PCE = 7.8%) based DSC gave a higher JSC compared to the TPA congener (dye 21, JSC = 13.0 mA cm−2, VOC = 660 mV, PCE = 6.0%) under the same conditions. Dye 88 achieved over 8.71% power conversion efficiency, indicating that incorporating a planar amine with bulky substituents is effective for increasing the life of the charge-separated state and inhibiting the dye aggregation.
 Fig. 16  Representative planar TPA dyes 87–90. 
After that, Cai et al. proposed planar TPA dyes (89 and 90) containing a bridged triphenylamine with t-butyl substituents as donors.100 Planarization of the donor and the use of an alkene linkage have proven extremely powerful in extending the red light response of the sensitizer, leading to a significant enhancement in JSC of the DSCs. A high efficiency of 7.51% (JSC = 15.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 651 mV, FF = 0.75) was obtained with DSCs based on 89. The PCE and JSC of 90 were improved to 8.0% and 16.1 mA cm−2, respectively, with the spacer alteration from EDOT to CPDT.
4.4 Branched TPA dyes
Chemists had placed a lot of hope on branched TPA dyes (Fig. 17, 91–103 and Fig. 18, 104–111) because of the antenna effect of branches. To avoid aggregation of the organic dyes and recombination, Sun, Hagfeldt, Nazeeruddin and co-workers synthesized branched TPA dyes with two arylamine moieties at the donor part.101 The disubstituted donor moieties in 92 not only evoked an enhanced higher extinction coefficient, but also prevented the triiodide in the electrolyte from recombining with injected electrons in the TiO2 conduction band, leading to an increased VOC when compared to the 91 sensitizer (91, VOC = 694 mV; 92, VOC = 744 mV). 92-sensitized solar cells yielded a PCE of 7.20% under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). For thin-film solid state solar cells based on these organic dyes, 92 showed a PCE of 3.25%. In the meantime, Lin, Ho, Chow and co-workers reported a new class of organic dyes featuring a dendritic structure at the donor part (95–97). Similar features as mentioned above were observed for these dyes when compared to 93 and 94.102
 Fig. 17  Representative branched TPA dyes 91–103. 
 Fig. 18  Representative branched TPA dyes 104–111. 
In fact, when compared to those of linear TPA dyes with one arylamine moiety, the advantage of the branched TPA dyes with two arylamine moieties is not obvious in terms of the PCE values. For example, the PCE of 91 is 6.9%, which is comparable to that of 92. However, when two arylamine moieties are replaced by two alkyl chains, the PCE advantage of branched TPA dyes is clear. For instance, 98 (PCE = 4.68%) and 100 (PCE = 5.13%) achieved better photovoltaic performances over 99 (PCE = 4.01%) and 101 (PCE = 2.52%), respectively.103,104 This was ascribed to the effectively retarded charge recombination between the electrons at the TiO2 and the oxidized dyes by incorporation of the dendritic structure.
Chang et al.105 and Li et al.106 reported the influence of the π-bridge on the performance of branched TPA dyes. Between dyes 102 and 103 that were tested, a better PCE was obtained with 103 (PCE = 5.67%) because of both broader and stronger light absorption from the sensitizers.105105, bearing EDOT as an electron linker, showed a significant red shift in the long-wavelength band compared with that of dye 104, resulting in an increase of JSC and, hence, higher efficiency (PCE = 5.63%).106
Abbotto et al. introduced a novel design based on tribranched organic sensitizers (106 and 107), carrying two donors, two acceptors, three π spacers, and two anchoring points.107 This approach led to significantly different optical properties and enhanced stability with respect to the related di- and monobranched dyes and yielded PCE of up to 5.05% (106).
Han and co-workers reported an aggregation-free branch-type organic dye, 108, for DSCs, which was developed by means of a twisting π-conjugation strategy.108 In comparison with the analogue planar dye 109, the twisting dye showed excellent potential as a new aggregation-free organic dye for DSCs. It produced the higher PCE of 5.35% with an IPCE maximum of about 80%, and the photovoltaic performance was almost unchanged by co-adsorption with DCA.
Wang and co-workers obtained a thiophene bridged double D–π–A dye 111 (JSC = 11.2 mA cm−2, VOC = 770 mV, PCE = 6.6%), which has a much stronger π–π* electron transition band than its monobranched analogue dye 110 (JSC = 7.1 mA cm−2, VOC = 670 mV, PCE = 3.4%).109 The advantage of the cross structure of 111 includes: (i) reducing intermolecular interaction, which is thus favorable for electron injection; (ii) blocking triiodides approaching the TiO2 surface, which means the electron lifetime is enhanced remarkably at the same charge density. As a consequence, the PCE of 111 is enhanced about 2-fold.
Although these branch-type organic dyes were less efficient than TPA or substituted TPA dyes, rational design of the molecular structure could trigger the development of optimized systems through the incorporation of appropriate new branches.
5. Triarylamine dyes
5.1 Fluorene based triarylamine dyes
The fluorene based triarylamine dyes (Fig. 19, 112–122) were developed as photosensitizers by Ko and co-workers for the first time.110–122 The tailored dialkylfluoreneaniline moieties in dyes ensure greater resistance to degradation when exposed to light and high temperatures, as compared to simple arylamines. In addition, the nonplanar structure of the dialkylfluoreneaniline suppressed aggregation, disfavoring molecular stacking.110
 Fig. 19  Representative fluorene based TPA dyes 112–122. 
In an attempt to increase the molar extinction coefficient of the dye, in 2006, dyes 112 and 113 with bridging thiophene units were reported.110 The IPCE spectrum of 113 is red-shifted by about 30 nm compared with that of 112 as a result of extended π-conjugation, which contributed to the high JSC of 113 (14.0 mA cm−2). Under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2), dyes 112 and 113 gave efficiencies of 7.2% and 8.0%, respectively. Inspired by the success of these two dyes, great efforts in structural modification of the π-bridge have been made to obtain red-shifted absorption spectra and increase the extinction coefficient. A representative example was the introduction of a fused-heterocyclic ring spacer such as [bis(9,9-dimethylfluoren-2-yl)amino]benzo[b]furan111 and [bis(9,9-dimethylfluoren-2-yl)amino]benzo[b]thiophene112 in 114 and 115, respectively. The maximum absorption spectrum of 114 and 115 in ethanol are 463 and 456 nm, respectively, which is red shifted related to that of 112 (λmax = 436 nm). This structure design can also be found in 118113 and 120,114 which is beneficial to the light harvesting of dyes and hence the efficiency. Typically, the photosensitizer transformation from 117 to 118 has caused a PCE enhancement of 1.2%.
Recently, they introduced 4,4-dimethyl-4H-indeno[1,2-b]thiophene, in which a 2-phenylthiophene was bridged by a dimethylmethylene at the 2′,3-position,115 showing enlargement of the π-conjugation of the indeno[1,2-b]thiophene unit because the methylene bridge renders the indeno[1,2-b]thiophene coplanar. The IPCE of 116 exceeded 70% in a broad spectrum range from 420 to 620 nm, reaching a maximum of 86%. A big JSC enhancement of 116 relative to that of 113 was observed owing to the high molar extinction coefficient and the red shift in the absorption spectrum of 116 relative to 113. Of particular importance is the 40 mV increase in the VOC of the 116 cell, which was regarded as the result of an upward shift of the TiO2 band edge. Consequently, the device based on the sensitizer 116 gave an overall conversion efficiency of 8.2%.
To enhance the interface and the tolerance towards water in the electrolytes, a successful approach was introduced in 117 and 118 by incorporating thiophene units with aliphatic chains as the π-bridge.113 Under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2), the 118-based DSC exhibited a JSC of 17.45 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.664 V, and a FF of 0.742, which corresponds to a PCE of 8.60%. Using solvent-free ionic-liquid electrolytes, the 118 sensitizer yielded a high conversion efficiency of 7%. Particularly, the long term stability of the device is remarkable because the initial efficiency of 6.82% was slightly increased to 7.03% during the 1000 h light soaking test under light soaking at 60 °C. The enhanced stability of the two dyes can be attributed to the bis-dimethylfluorenyl-amino moiety coupled to the substituted hexyl chains, which prevents water-induced dye desorption from the TiO2 surface.
Although dye 118 afforded a high PCE value, the light harvesting ability of 118 is not ideal (e.g. λmax = 430 nm). Dyes 119 and 120 consisting of a dimethylfluorenylamino-appended thienothiophene-vinylene-thienothiophene unit with aliphatic chains to maintain the planar geometry of the conjugated linker were synthesized.114 This type of structure not only increased the light harvesting ability of the sensitizer by extending the π-conjugation of the bridging linker (119, λmax = 480 nm; 120, λmax = 490 nm), but also augmented its hydrophobicity, increasing the stability under long-term light soaking and thermal stress. Under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2), the 120-sensitized cell gave a JSC of 17.61 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.71 V, and a FF of 0.72, corresponding to a PCE of 9.1%. A 120-based solar cell fabricated with a solvent free ionic liquid electrolyte displayed a high conversion efficiency of 7.9% and showed excellent stability under light soaking at 60 °C for 1000 h.
Structural modification of dye 121 was performed through introducing hexyloxy chains into fluorene,116 yielding dye 122. The 122 (λmax = 466 nm) sensitizer incorporating the hexyloxy unit exhibited a red-shifted absorption relative to its counterpart 121 (λmax = 450 nm) containing non-substituted fluorenyl. In particular, incorporating hexyloxy also minimized charge recombination, realizing a significant increase in VOC by 130 mV. Consequently, the power conversion efficiency of 122 (PCE = 8.70%) is higher than that of 121 (PCE = 5.43%).
Wang and co-workers reported a series of bisfluorenylaniline based dyes (123–126, Fig. 20) by employing dithienothiophene, thienothiophene, and EDOT as the conjugation bridge and volatile acetonitrile based electrolytes, showing efficiencies in the range of 7.8–8.3%.123–125 In combination with a solvent-free ionic liquid electrolyte, these dyes exhibited excellent stabilities during long-term accelerated tests under light-soaking and thermal dual stress.
 Fig. 20  Representative fluorene based TPA dyes 123–130. 
To obtain panchromatic fluorene based triarylamine dyes, 127 and 128 were synthesized, in which the unsymmetrical squaraine unit was incorporated as the conjugation bridge.126,127 Both dyes showed a broad absorption that extended throughout the visible and nearinfrared region. Unfortunately, cells based on these dyes suffered from low VOC values, and therefore exhibited moderate efficiencies (5.20–6.29%) relative to the aforementioned fluorene based triarylamine dyes. In contrast, the introduction of low-band gap chromophores such as the benzothiadiazole unit in the bridging framework seems to be a good choice. With this molecular design, power conversion efficiencies of 7.51% and 8.19% were achieved with 129- and 130-based DSCs, respectively.128
5.2 Naphthalene based triarylamine dyes
Chow and co-workers showed a series of dipolar compounds containing N,N-diphenylnaphthalen-1-amine as an electron donor (Fig. 21, 131–146). The performance of the N,N-diphenylnaphthalen-1-amine based dyes, in general, was slightly better than that of the TPA type. For example, DSCs based on dye 131 gave 7.08% efficiency, and dye 132 showed 5.25% efficiency under the same measurement conditions.129 This was ascribed partly to the higher absorptivity of the former compounds, and partly to a better resonance effect provided by the naphthalene moiety. Moreover, the larger size of the naphthalene group may also effectively hinder self-aggregation of the dyes on the TiO2 surface. Similar results were observed by Thomas and co-workers. Four examples of these dyes are 133–136.130,131 They proposed that the one containing the naphthylphenylamine segment showed better device characteristics, attributable to the higher HOMO energy level, which probably facilitates the regeneration of the dye and effective suppression of the back reaction of the injected electrons with the I3− in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 21  Representative naphthalene based TPA dyes 131–146. 
To further improve the performance and tune the absorption spectra of the naphthalene based triarylamine dyes, Chow and co-workers investigated the effects of substituents on the phenyl group ortho to the cyanoacrylate acceptor of the dyes 137–140.132 They found that the presence of an electron-withdrawing group (–F, –CF3 and –CN) located on the acceptor side can stabilize the charge-separated excited state and thus reduce the rate of charge recombination. Such an effect can be evidenced by the high VOC (around 690 mV) values of both compounds 138 and 139, whilst an electron-donating group (–OCH3) may improve the charge injection efficiency toward the TiO2 conducting electrode. The compound 137 thus exhibited the highest JSC (17.04 mA cm−2) value of all. An exception was found for compound 140, which exhibited a low absorption on the CT transition and a small value of JSC (8.32 mA cm−2). The best performance was observed for the device made with 139, which displayed a JSC value of 15.16 mA cm−2, a VOC value of 0.68 V, and a FF value of 0.68. The PCE was estimated to be 7.0%.
The same group also developed several novel naphthalene based TPA dyes through the structural modification of a spacer, adopting a planarity strategy.82,133,134 Dye 142 contains a 2-phenylindene moiety with the central double bond locked in transoid geometry.133 The performance of 142 (PCE = 5.27%) behaved better than 141 (PCE = 4.46%), as a result of restricting the trans → cis isomerization of the CC bond as a major channel of non-radiative decay. Dye 143, containing a 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene entity in the conjugated spacer, yielded a more planar configuration, which allows better electronic communication between the arylamine and electron excessive heteroaromatic ring.82 Consequently, this exhibited a better JSC than its biphenyl counterpart. In particular, dye 143 was used in combination with a squaraine dye for cosensitized DSCs, yielding a high efficiency record of 8.14% among cosensitized systems with all metal-free sensitizers.82
Olivier et al. reported a series of organic “push–pull” dyes that contain naphthyl units at various positions.135 The naphthyl unit attached to the bi-thiophenyl p conjugated spacer (145) achieved a cell performance with a PCE of 6.6%. Nevertheless, the 146 dye containing naphthyl groups at terminal positions showed a lower VOC, FF, and therefore PCE value (PCE = 6.2%). Interestingly, in recent work by Lin, Yao and co-workers, a contrary result was reported. That is, dye 144 containing a naphtha-1,4-diyl unit in the conjugated bridge was inferior to dye 15 containing a phenyl unit in the conjugated bridge.136 This result highlighted the importance of the molecular engineering of the sensitizer.
5.3 Truxene based triarylamine dyes
Starburst truxene, which is recognized as a potential starting material for organic semiconductors, liquid crystalline compounds, and fullerenes,137 has attracted increasing interest for the design of photosenzitizers because of the prominent advantages of a bulky rigid conjugation structure, the facile introduction of alkyl chains, and outstanding thermal stability.138 Truxene based triarylamine dyes have now stood out as a new class of attractive organic dyes. Representative dyes (147–158) are shown in Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  Representative truxene based TPA dyes 147–158. 
Originally, Tian and co-workers reported three truxene-based dyes with 2-cyanoacrylic acid as the acceptor and starburst triarylamine as the donor (147, 148, and 149).139 It was found that the π–π aggregation is significantly reduced by the addition of long alkyl substituents on the middle of the starburst shaped sensitizers. Moreover, a compact sensitizer layer was molecular interfacially engineered on the TiO2 surface. As a result, the approach of the electrolyte to the TiO2 surface is blocked significantly by the compact sensitizer layer formed, and the charge recombination in the DSCs is proved to be prohibited effectively. A tremendously improved VOC was observed for the dye 148- and 149-sensitized solar cells, with comparable or higher VOC values than N719 under the same conditions (148, 731 mV; 149, 752 mV; N719, 728 mV). Compared to the hexyl counterpart (148), a VOC attenuation of 42 mV (689 vs. 731 mV) can be noted upon the substitution with the ethyl group (147), highlighting that the aryl chains need to be sufficiently long to allow a more compact sensitizer blocking wall on the TiO2 surface. Unfortunately, the relatively low JSC (6.86–7.89 mA cm−2) precluded high PCE values (3.61–4.27%). The photocurrent intensity of these dyes was limited by their narrow IPCE conversion region, which was mainly due to their narrower absorption profile.
Considering that the ortho–para-branched isotruxene core allows strong electronic couplings among the donors and the acceptor, leading to red-shifted absorption profiles with significant charge-transfer character, a series of isotruxene dyes (150 to 153) were designed by Lin, Yang and co-workers.140 The DSCs fabricated with the coneshaped organic dyes exhibited high VOC (0.67–0.76 V) and FF (0.67–0.72) with a PCE up to 5.45%, which is 80% of PCE for the ruthenium dye N719-based standard cell fabricated and measured under the same conditions.
Both truxene- and isotruxene-based dyes have VOC and FF comparable or superior to N719, but their JSC are unsatisfactory. Overall, the PCE for truxene- and isotruxene-based dyes is lower than that for N719. Although the light harvesting in the region of 550–600 nm for isotruxene-based dyes (ca. 40%) is more efficient than that for truxene- based dyes (ca. 10%) in terms of the IPCE profiles, it is still valuable to note that the use of isotruxene did not fundamentally solve the light harvesting problem.
Our group developed a new kind of truxene-based dye (154–156) with six propyl chains attached to truxene.141 The noteworthy feature of these dyes, different from dyes 147–153, is that the functionalized-truxene unit acts as the electron donor moiety but not the linker. This slight structure modification not only significantly red-shifted the absorption spectra of the dyes but also induced a high-absorption coefficient. For example, the λmax of 154 (λmax = 486 nm, ε = 65 000 M−1 cm−1) in CH2Cl2 showed a 66 nm red shift in the visible absorption band compared with that of 148 (λmax = 420 nm, ε = 24 600 M−1 cm−1), which contributed to the higher JSC (9.8 mA cm−2) of 154. The power conversion efficiencies for 154 and 155 are 4.92% and 5.26%, respectively. 156, bearing EDOT as the electron linker, gave a JSC of 11.5 mA cm−2, a VOC of 772 mV, and a FF of 0.68, corresponding to a PCE of 6.04%. As shown in Fig. 23, the bulky structure of the propyl-functionalized truxene unit blocks the I3− or cation approaching the TiO2 surface, decreases the I3− concentration at the vicinity of the TiO2, and increases the electron lifetimes. Respectable high VOC values (745–772 mV) in DSCs based on the three dyes are thus achieved. Following this work, we investigated the performance of dyes 157 and 158 containing bis-hexapropyltruxeneamino.142 The nonplanar structure of bis-hexapropyltruxeneamino is introduced for the suppression of dye aggregation. With CDCA addition (3 mM), the DSCs based on the two dyes afforded a slight increase in power conversion efficiency, indicating that the aggregation of the two dyes on the TiO2 surface was not obvious. As expected, the two dyes located well above the TiO2 surface, resulting in a good blocking effect and hence high VOC values (754–765 mV). DSCs based on 158 showed a JSC of 11.8 mA cm−2, a VOC of 772 mV and a FF of 0.68, yielding a PCE of 6.18%.
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the bulky structure of truxene units, which block the I3− ions approaching the TiO2 surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
Though the power conversion efficiency from truxene based triarylamine dyes is moderate at the current stage, there is much room left for further enhancement by increasing the light harvesting ability to improve the JSC.
6. Indoline dyes
Indoline dyes143–162 were first reported by Horiuchi and Uchida (159–165, Fig. 24). A PCE of 6.1% was achieved with 159 (λmax = 494 nm, ε = 61 000 M−1 cm−1) employing an electrolyte of 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M 1,3-dimethyl-3-imidazolinium iodide in 3-methoxypropionitrile, compared to 6.3% for the N3 dye under the same experimental conditions.143 In addition to high efficiency, this dye was observed to be stable to redox process by cyclic voltammogram (CV) tests. They found that the molecular design of the rhodanine ring contributed to the red shift in the absorption spectrum and the enhanced performance. To further improve the DSC performance, a series of novel indoline dyes containing two or three rhodanine frameworks were therefore designed and synthesized (160–163).144,145
 Fig. 24  Representative indoline dyes 159–165. 
The light absorption spectra of 160, 161, and 162 in tert-butyl alcohol/acetonitrile (1:1) revealed peaks at 526, 532 and 532 nm, respectively. 163 has a slightly red-shifted absorption spectra peak in comparison to 160–162 since it has three rhodanine rings. A high JSC of 18.75 mA cm−2 was achieved with 160 by employing an iodine electrolyte (0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.6 M DMPII in 3-methoxypropionitrile) without TBP addition. This high photocurrent was also attributed to the high absorption coefficient of the 160 dye (ε = 68 700 M−1 cm−1) that is five times higher than that of the conventional high-efficiency Ru dye (N719, ε = 13 900 M−1 cm−1 at 541 nm). Unfortunately, the 160-sensitized cell exhibited low VOC (645 mV) and FF (0.538). To alleviate this problem, 1 mM CDCA was used as a coadsorbent and a 0.05 M concentration of TBP was added to the electrolyte for optimizing the electrolyte composition. As a result, 160 generated an improved PCE of 8.0%, mainly benefiting from a significant improvement of VOC (693 mV) and FF (0.624).144 Later, Grätzel and co-workers scrutinized the effect of the film thickness of nanocrystalline TiO2 films on the photovoltaic performance of the 160-sensitized cell employing acetonitrile- and ionic-liquid-based electrolytes. The optimized thickness of the 160-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 layers for the acetonitrile- and ionic-liquid-based electrolytes were 6.3 and 12.6 μm, respectively, with conversion efficiencies of 6.67 and 9.03%, respectively.145
In order to control the aggregation between indoline dye molecules, dye 164 was designed by elongating the end alkyl chains on the rhodanine ring of 160 for use in DSC. It was significant that the combination of CDCA and the n-octyl chain (164) improved the VOC up to 717 mV, leading to a progressive PCE of 9.52%,146 which is the highest efficiency obtained so far among DSCs based on an indoline dye under AM 1.5 radiation (100 mW cm−2). This dye gave a 7.2% conversion efficiency using an ionic–liquid electrolyte.147
Recently, Matsui's group reported a novel idoline dye (165, PCE = 5.55%) for a zinc oxide dye-sensitized solar cell, having a dimethylfluorene-substituted indoline donor and a dicyanovinylidene-introduced rhodanine acceptor, which gave a higher efficiency than 164 (PCE = 4.92%).148 This result was attributed to the bathochromic shift (567 nm vs. 554 nm in chloroform) based on the introduction of the electron- withdrawing dicyanovinylidene moiety into the terminal rhodanine ring and the reduced aggregate formation from the dimethylfluorenyl group.
Unfortunately, these indoline derivatives containing rhodanine-3-acetic acid as the acceptor and anchoring unit have been pointed out to maintain short-term stability as a result of desorption. To avoid this problem, Tian, Wang, Zhu and co-workers developed a series of D–A–π–A organic sensitizers (Fig. 25, 166–182),150–156 and a remarkable progress has been made on the utilization of low bandgap and strong electron-withdrawing units for indoline dye-based DSCs. They proposed several favorable characteristics of this type of dyes in the areas of light-harvesting and efficiency: (i) optimized energy levels, resulting in a large responsive range of wavelengths into the NIR region; (ii) a very small blue-shift in the absorption peak on thin TiO2 films with respect to that in solution; (iii) an improvement in the electron distribution of the donor unit to distinctly increase the photo-stability of the synthetic intermediates and final sensitizers.150 For example, the maximum absorption peak of 167 (λmax = 533 nm, ε = 16 700 M−1 cm−1) is red-shifted by about 47 nm compared with that of 166 (λmax = 486 nm, ε = 21 000 M−1 cm−1) as a result of the introduction of a benzothiadiazole unit into the molecular frame, which distinctly decreased the bandgap between the HOMO and the LUMO. Simultaneously, the IPCE of 167 showed a high plateau at the visible region until 720 nm, extending the onset to the NIR region at about 850 nm. They found that 167 co-adsorption with DCA evoked a remarkable enhancement of the JSC (from 12.9 to 17.7 mA cm−2), which was attributed to the break-up of dye aggregates upon co-adsorption. Finally, a 167-based DSC with a volatile electrolyte yielded an overall conversion efficiency of 8.7%. Importantly, 167 with an ionic-liquid electrolyte showed good stability with the overall efficiency remaining at 94% of the initial value after 1000 h of visible-light soaking.150
 Fig. 25  Representative indoline dyes 166–182. 
To alleviate the dye aggregation on the TiO2 film and charge-recombination in the DSC, they further developed coadsorbent-free 167-like D–A–π–A sensitizers (168 and 169) via attaching alkyl chains.151 The attached n-hexyl chains in both dyes are effective to suppress the charge recombination, resulting in a decreased dark current and enhanced VOC. Without DCA coadsorption, the power-conversion efficiency of 168 (PCE = 7.76%, JSC = 15.0 mA cm−2, VOC = 672 mV, FF = 0.77) on a 16 μm thick TiO2 film device is 45% higher than that of 167 (PCE = 5.31%, JSC = 12.9 mA cm−2, VOC = 604 mV, FF = 0.68) under the same conditions. In contrast, the additional n-hexylthiophene in 169 extends the photoresponse to a panchromatic spectrum but causes a low IPCE. Following this work, a more efficient dye, 170, was obtained.152 This dye showed a strong anti-aggregation ability, and always exhibited a high performance regardless of the coadsorbent and dye bath solvent. Without DCA coadsorption, the power-conversion efficiency of 170 (PCE = 8.15%, JSC = 16.99 mA cm−2, VOC = 689 mV, FF = 0.71) on a 8 + 5 μm double layer TiO2 film device is 12.8% higher than that of 167 (PCE = 7.22%, JSC = 16.25 mA cm−2, VOC = 618 mV, FF = 0.72) under the same conditions. Following coadsorption with 20 mM CDCA, the photovoltaic performance of the 170 device was further improved, reaching 9.04% with a high JSC of 18.00 mA cm−2 and VOC of 696 mV. Moreover, the 170-based DSC device with an ionic liquid redox electrolyte was stable under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) for at least 500 h.
Apart from the benzothiadiazole, other electron-withdrawing units such as benzotriazole, phthalimide and diketopyrrolopyrrole have also been incorporated into the D–A–π–A configuration to design indoline sensitizers. The advantages of the benzotriazole153 unit as the conjugation bridge in 171 and 172 include: (i) the strong electron-withdrawing properties of benzotriazole to essentially facilitate the electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor/anchor; (ii) a facile structural modification on the 2-position in the benzotriazole unit to tailor their solar cell performance; (iii) the absence of a sulfur site in benzotriazole, which is prone to form dye–iodine complexes that are available for serious charge recombination, being probably favorable for high VOC;154 and (iv) the nitrogen-containing heterocyclic group of benzotriazole is expected to improve VOC. Replacing the methyl group (172) with an octyl group (171) brings about significant changes in the DSCs performance. The octyl group suppressed the charge recombination rate constant by 4-fold as compared to the methyl group. As a result, without any coadsorption, the 171-based DSC achieved a PCE of 8.02% with a significant improvement of VOC by 100 mV with respect to 172. Note that, because of the incorporation of the benzotriazole unit into the dye skeleton, a VOC as high as 780 mV was obtained. Obviously, the benzotriazole is superior to benzothiadiazole in terms of the VOC performance. Interestingly, the absorption spectra of dyes 171 and 172 displayed maximum absorption wavelengths at 495 and 496 nm in CH2Cl2 solution, respectively, which is clearly blue shifted related to that of 167 (λmax = 533 nm) in CHCl3:CH3OH = 4:1, even not considering the solution effect (usually, CH3OH leads to a blue shift of λmax compared to CH2Cl2 or CHCl3). In view of this, benzothiadiazole is preferred for light harvesting in D–A–π–A sensitizers.
With a very similar D–A–π–A feature but changing the additional acceptor from a benzotriazole (171) to a phthalimide (173) unit, the photovoltaic efficiency based on 173 was only 5.11% (JSC = 10.06 mA cm−2, VOC = 748 mV, FF = 0.68), it decreased by 39% mainly due to its lower photocurrent.155 The twist conformation formed between phthalimide and its neighboring groups in 173 not only led to a significant hypso-chromic shift in the absorption spectra of 173 (λmax = 442 nm in CH2Cl2) but also broke the molecular conjugation, which is unfavorable to the charge migration from donor to acceptor. In contrast, dye 174, incorporating a diketopyrrolopyrrole unit with a branched alkyl chain as the additional acceptor and furan as the linker, showed a high conversion efficiency of 7.43% (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) with a JSC of 13.40 mA cm−2, a VOC of 760 mV, a FF of 0.73 and an excellent stability.156 A broad IPCE response from 350 to 625 nm with a maximum value of 80% in the plateau region accounts for the increased JSC related to 173.
According to the results from 168–174, it can be found that the strategy of introducing alkyl chains to indoline dyes is quite successful in achieving high VOC values. Another approach to obtain this effect is to introduce conjugation bridges such as fluorene and dibenzosilole units.157,158 The VOC values of dyes 175–177 are in the range of 727–772 mV. The dibenzosilole-containing dye (177 PCE = 4.64%) showed a higher PCE compared to the fluorine-based dye 176 (PCE = 2.88%). DFT calculations showed that the torsion angle across the biphenyl linkage in 177 is smaller than that in the silicon-free dye (176), which contributed to better charge separation and enhancements in the total efficiency of 177.158
Funabiki et al. designed NIR-absorbing indoline dyes containing asymmetric squaraine for DSCs with Pt-free electrodes.159 Dye 178, without the introduction of linker groups such as phenyl, thienyl or pyrrole groups, was quite efficiently sensitized on TiO2 with the long-wavelength visible and NIR region (up to 800 nm) of the spectrum. Like other squaraine dyes discussed above, this dye also suffers from the drawback of low ionic moiety, resulting in a low VOC of 480 mV.
Besides the works dealing with spacers, other fundamental research of indoline dyes focuses on further increasing the electron-donating ability of the donor part to optimize the light harvesting capability. Successful results have been achieved by introducing second donors (i.e. 4-methoxyphenyl, 4-methylphenyl, fluorene and carbazole) into the indoline group to form a donor–donor structure, which allowed connection with the π-linker and acceptor to form a D–D–π–A system. Akhtaruzzaman et al. reported dye 179, bearing a phenylenevinylene-conjugated system and a 4-methoxyphenyl substituted indoline donor.160 Furthermore, the DSC based on 179 showed panchromatic TiO2 sensitization (the onset of the IPCE spectra is close to 800 nm) with a high overall conversion efficiency of 6.2% under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2).
Liu et al. reported three D–D–π–A indoline dyes 180, 181 and 182 by the introduction of 4-methylphenyl, fluorene and carbazole as the second donors, respectively.161 They found that the introduction of an additional donor (D–D moiety) with a large π conjugation into the indoline unit is helpful to both red-shifting in the absorption spectra and enhancing the molar extinction coefficient. For example, compared with the 180 dye containing a 4-methylphenyl group, the λmax of 181 and 182 was red-shifted by about 13 and 32 nm, respectively. Moreover, there is around a 25% enhancement in the molar extinction coefficient with respect to 180. Particularly, the IPCE action spectrum of 182 keeps an extraordinarily high plateau in the visible region till around 700 nm, and the onset wavelength extends from 780 to about 860 nm in NIR region along with the increase of the electron-donating ability of the donor. Upon coadsorption with DCA (30 mM), 182 achieved a performance with a JSC of 18.53 mA cm−2, a VOC of 649 mV, and a FF of 0.71, corresponding to a PCE of 8.49%.
An obvious advantage of the indoline dyes is their impressive JSC. However, their VOC values are just comparable to or lower than those of substituted TPA dyes, which limits their improvement in efficiency. Further works should focus on how to improve the VOC values.
7. 
        N,N-dialkylaniline dyes
The N,N-dialkylaniline (DMA) moieties were used as donors for organic dyes because of their simpler structures and stronger electron-donating ability than the coumarin moiety. Representative dyes (183–192) are shown in Fig. 26. Arakawa, Hara, and co-workers developed a series of N,N-dialkylaniline dyes (183–186) by employing oligoene or thienyl as the π-bridge and cyanoacrylic acid as the electron acceptor.163,164185 showed a maximum PCE of 6.8% under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with JSC = 12.9 mA cm−2, VOC = 710 mV, and FF = 0.74. After that, Yanagida and co-workers also demonstrated the high performance of N,N-dialkylaniline dyes as photosensitizers in DSCs.21 In 2006, Yang's group developed two N,N-dialkylaniline dyes featuring thienothiophene- and thiophene-bridging structures (187 and 188, respectively).165 A PCE of 6.23% was achieved from the DSC based on dye 187 (JSC = 15.23 mA cm−2; VOC = 560 mV; FF = 0.73). Despite the larger π-conjugation system, 188 gave much lower PCE (3.87%) compared to 187.
 Fig. 26  Representative N,N-dialkylaniline dyes 183–192. 
To further understand the role of the N,N-dialkylaniline as donors, several groups compared the performance of DSCs sensitized with N,N-dialkylaniline dyes and triphenylamine dyes (e.g.189vs.190;20191vs.192166). Clearly, the N,N-dimethylaniline are superior to the TPA in terms of the light harvesting. For example, 189 and 191 showed a shift of the absorption peak bathochromically 14 and 30 nm compared to 190 and 192, respectively. However, this light harvesting advantage did not always result in a higher efficiency because the steric hindrance of the N,N-dimethylaniline is not enough for the retardation of the charge recombination. In addition, studies also suggested that the electron-donating ability of N,N-dialkylaniline is inferior to that of indoline, which limited the JSC of this type of dyes. Further tuning the structure of the N,N-dialkylaniline dyes should focus on these two issues.
8. Tetrahydroquinoline dyes
Like DMA moieties, tetrahydroquinoline was used as a donor due to its prominent electron-donating ability. Yang, Sun and co-workers have reported new tetrahydroquinoline dyes (193–196, as shown in Fig. 27) containing different lengths of thiophene-containing conjugation moieties (thienyl, thienylvinyl, and dithieno[3,2-b;2′,3′-d]thienyl) as electron spacers.167 The bathochromic shift and increase of the molar extinction coefficient of the absorption spectrum are achieved by the introduction of more thiophene units. The elimination of the CC bond and adoption of suitable electron spacers in dye structures are useful for getting higher PCE values of DSCs based on these dyes. A maximum PCE value of 4.53% is achieved under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with a DSC based on the 194 dye (VOC = 597 mV, JSC = 12.00 mA cm−2, FF = 0.63).
 Fig. 27  Representative tetrahydroquinoline dyes 193–198. 
Aiming to tune the HOMO–LUMO level (absorption spectra) in an easier way by modifying the structure of the acceptor units, Yang, Hagfeldt, Sun and co-workers proposed a new strategy for the design of organic dyes, in which the anchoring group is separated from the acceptor groups of the dyes.168 By using this strategy, a new class of D–π–A organic dyes for sensitization in the NIR region was successfully synthesized. The 197 dye gave a maximum IPCE value of 86% at 660 nm and overall 3.7% solar energy to electricity conversion efficiency.168 Unfortunately, this dye suffers from a strong tendency to aggregate on TiO2. To alleviate this problem, 198 with flexible long carbon chains was introduced, leading to higher JSC and VOC values and an improved PCE of 5.1%.169
9. Phenothiazine and phenoxazine dyes
Phenothiazine (PTZ) and phenoxazine (POZ) are well-known heterocyclic compounds with electron-rich sulfur–oxygen and nitrogen heteroatoms.170 Organic sensitizers containing phenothiazine or phenoxazine171–187 (199–210 shown in Fig. 28 and 211–231 shown in Fig. 29) have recently attracted considerable research interests on account of their unique excellent hole-transporting ability, rigid structure and large π conjugated system.
 Fig. 28  Representative PTZ dyes 199–210. 
 Fig. 29  Representative PTZ dyes 211–231. 
In 2007, Yang, Hagfeldt, Sun and co-workers reported organic dyes based on the phenothiazine chromophore (199 and 200), which are simple in structure and easy to synthesize.171 Dye 199 (PCE = 5.5%), containing a cyanoacrylic anchor group, has a much better DSC performance than dye 200 (PCE = 1.9%), containing a rhodanine-3-acetic acid group, owing to a better orbital overlap (LUMO) with the TiO2 conduction band. To obtain a panchromatic metal-free dye, they employed phenoxazine (donor), thiophene (π-bridge) and co-rodanmine (acceptor) to construct a D–π–A “black dye” 201.172 When the dye was fabricated to DSCs, a broader IPCE spectrum over the whole visible range of solar spectrum extending into the NIR region up to 920 nm was obtained. However, the 201 dye did not obtain a higher PCE value than 3.0%, mainly owing to poor VOC (390 mV). Recently, Meyer et al. reported a series of new phenothiazinyl rhodanylidene acetic acid merocyanine dyes.173 The VOC was largely increased due to the introduction of a phenothiazine and decyltetradecyl substituent at the 7-position and 10-position of the PTZ, respectively. 202 displayed a high VOC of 698 mV.
After that, Park et al. also found the adverse effects of the rodanmine ring as an acceptor for PTZ dyes. In addition, their results suggested that the dyes with double electron acceptor moieties are promising for getting higher PCE in DSCs. The DSC based on 204 showed a better efficiency (6.8%) than that based on 203 (5.6%).174
Further progresses in efficiency performance were obtained by the introduction of five-membered heteroaromatic linkers (such as EDOT, thiophene and furan). A solar cell employing the 205 dye was fabricated and the photovoltaic performance showed a JSC of 15.18 mA cm−2, a VOC of 645 mV, and a FF of 0.69, corresponding to an overall conversion efficiency of 6.72% under 100 mW cm−2 irradiation.175 Xie et al. found that dye 207 (PCE = 2.8%), containing an additional donor moiety, deteriorated the performance of the DSCs because of serious dye aggregation.176 In contrast, the DSC sensitized by the 206 dye achieved a promising conversion efficiency of 6.17% under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). To study the effect of conjugated linkers on device performance, Kim et al. synthesized a group of PTZ derivatives with various conjugated linkers (208, 209 and 210).177 Interestingly, they found that the torsion angles arising from the butterfly conformations of PTZ were closely correlated with the VOC values. The PTZ-torsion angles of the dyes were ranked: 208 (26.53°) < 210 (26.61°) < 209 (42.65°), which is consistent with the sequence of VOC values (208, 724.5 mV; 210, 745.7 mV; 209, 771.7 mV) in the devices fabricated with CDCA (10 mM). They proposed that an increased torsion angle could reduce molecular aggregation through steric hindrance and improve the VOC. Moreover, lower resonance energy of the furan linker (16 kcal mol−1) was thought to be favorable for high JSC. Thus, the highest solar energy-to-electricity conversion efficiency was achieved by a cell fabricated with 209 (PCE = 6.58%, JSC = 12.18 mA cm−2, VOC = 771.7 mV, FF = 70.02%).
The D–D–π–A types of triphenylamine dyes and indoline dyes as discussed in the former sections have shown superior performance over the corresponding dyes with simple D–π–A configuration. PTZ dyes with a D–D–π–A configuration were also developed. 211 and 212 (Fig. 29), containing electron-rich 10-butyl-(2-methylthio)-10H-phenothiazine as a donor and cyanoacrylic acid as an acceptor, were synthesized by Grätzel's group.178 Extending the π-conjugated linker by the introduction of a vinyl thiophene group has helped to vastly enhance the optical properties of the resulting compound. The bathochromic shift of the absorption peak exhibited by 212 (λmax = 478 nm) in the solution is 27 nm, and the onset of the absorption has been pushed much further. The cell sensitized with this dye has a greatly improved IPCE, which in turn translated to an enhanced photocurrent (JSC = 15.2 mA cm−2). The PCE of the device based on 212 under standard AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) conditions reached 7.3% with a volatile electrolyte.
Hua, Tian and co-workers found that the introduction of a triphenylamine group as the electron-donor brought about improved photovoltaic performance in comparison with 1,1,2-triphenylethene for phenothiazine dyes.179 A PCE of 4.41% (JSC = 10.84 mA cm−2, VOC = 592 mV, FF = 0.69) under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with a DSC based on 214 was obtained. The long-term stability of the DSCs with 213 and 214 under 1000 h light-soaking was demonstrated.
In a study of PTZ dyes, Chow and co-workers investigated the effects of hexyl and triphenylamino groups at the N(10) of PTZ.180215, containing a hexyl substituent (PCE = 5.6%, JSC = 13.66 mA cm−2) at the N(10), performs better than 216, possessing a TPA substituent (PCE = 5.22%, JSC = 11.65 mA cm−2). To examine the influence of a thiophenylene group at different positions, 217 and 218 were synthesized. 217, with thiophenylene at the C(7) position, displayed a JSC of 14.42 mA cm−2, a VOC of 690 mV, and a FF of 0.63, corresponding to a PCE of 6.22%. In contrast, inserting a thiophene between the phenothiazine and the cyanoacrylate anchoring group reduced the loading amount of the dyes, as well as the morphology of the films. Thus, both JSC (5.99 mA cm−2) and VOC (570 mV) of 218 decreased.
Chi, Kuang and co-workers observed that phenothiazine dyes with end-capped structures that are slightly different from diphenylethylene to tetraphenylethylene (219–221) can increase the PCE and VOC values.181 The introduction of twisted structures with increasing sizes onto the end of the organic dyes was thought to reduce more effectively the recombination of injected electrons at the interface or in the electrolyte. For this reason, the electron lifetime and VOC in the DSCs increased in the following order: 219 (759 mV), 220 (789 mV), 221 (804 mV). By comparison, the performance efficiencies of the DSCs based on 219 (PCE = 5.84%), 220 (PCE = 6.29%), and 221 (PCE = 5.76%) were better than those of their parent-compound-sensitized counterpart 199 (VOC = 712 mV, PCE = 5.5%), suggesting that the introduction of phenylethylene groups can increase the performance of the DSCs. Further modifications of 220 have been performed through the introduction of the triphenylethylene carbazole (222) and triphenylethylene phenothiazine (223) units.182 Afterwards, 223, containing a more twisted triphenylethylene phenothiazine unit, achieved a further increase in performance of the DSC (PCE = 6.55%, JSC = 12.18 mA cm−2, VOC = 826 mV, and FF = 0.64). These results were ascribed to the increase of the twisted non-planar structure in the organic dyes.
Chang et al. have prepared and tested a series of organic dyes containing oligo-phenothiazine.183 They found that the phenothiazine moiety functions both as an electron donor and as a π-bridge. The performance of the dimer system, i.e., 224, was better than the trimers (225). The high VOC values reached a level of >0.83 V, and a conversion efficiency of 7.78% was obtained in 224 (JSC = 14.3 mA cm−2, VOC = 830 mV, FF = 0.65).
Cao et al. developed a novel class of PTZ dyes (227–229) that contained double D–A branches.184 They considered that more light-harvesting units are preferred for light harvesting and high efficiency. In fact, the molar extinction coefficients of these double D–A branched dyes (DBD) are nearly twice as high as that of 226 because of the two donor–acceptor units of DBD. Importantly, the number of light-harvesting units adsorbed on TiO2 for DBD is higher than that of 226. Thus, the JSC and PCE of the DSCs (JSC = 6.98–8.27 mA cm−2, PCE = 3.56–4.22%) were effectively enhanced in comparison with the corresponding single D–A PTZ dye 226 (JSC = 6.13 mA cm−2, PCE = 2.91%). Based on this finding, they synthesized a POZ dye (231) containing two asymmetric D–π–A chains.185 An improved PCE of 6.06% was obtained for the 231-sensitized solar cells as a result of its longer electron lifetime and higher IPCE related to 230.
Recent developments of POZ dyes (Fig. 30, 232–236) have been highlighted by Sun and co-workers.186–188 A comparison between POZ- and PTZ-based sensitizers showed that the POZ-based dye 232 gave an efficiency of 6.7% and the structurally similar PTZ-based 199 showed an efficiency of 5.5% under similar conditions.186 Due to the electron-donating properties, the introduction of a 2,4-dibutoxyphenyl substituent at the 7-position of the POZ (233, 234) lifts both the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the dyes relative to unsubstituted 232 (λmax = 448 nm). The shift is larger for the HOMO, which resulted in a red shifted absorption due to the smaller energy-level gap. At the same time, the extinction coefficient was also enhanced. The JSC of the DSCs based on 233 was therefore increased greatly due to the advantageous absorption properties compared to 232. The VOC of the 233-based DSCs (780 mV) is slightly higher than those based on 232 (760 mV) because of the enhanced surface protection caused by the presence of a large substituent at the end of the molecule.
 Fig. 30  Representative POZ dyes 232–236. 
In the case of 234, an interesting molecular configuration was presented by DFT study. The hexyloxy-substituted benzene ring at the N(10) is almost perpendicular to the POZ core, which leads to poor orbital overlap and inefficient conjugation. Not surprisingly, the absorption spectrum of 234 (λmax = 500 nm) is slightly blue shifted compared to 232 (λmax = 506 nm). In addition, the presence of the relatively large hexyloxy-phenyl unit decreased the dye loading on the TiO2 surface. These two factors contributed to the relatively lower JSC (13.09 mA cm−2) of 234. Despite that, 234 achieved an efficiency of 7.4% under 100 mW cm−2 light illumination because of its higher VOC (800 mV) and FF (0.7). This result suggested that bulky substituents attached to the end or the middle of a molecule are necessary for the suppression of the charge recombination. Dye 235 (VOC = 800 mV), showing a PCE of 7.0% under the same conditions, proved this strategy.187 Apart from the 2,4-dibutoxyphenyl, TPA was also demonstrated as an appropriate energy antenna for constructing the POZ dyes. Under the optimized fabrication conditions, 236 achieved a PCE of 7.7%, with JSC = 14.7 mA cm−2, VOC = 733 mV and FF = 0.71.188 Note that, Sun and co-workers claimed that 236 is inferior to 234 in terms of PCE because the former showed a 7.3% efficiency under the same working conditions as for the latter.186
Therefore, structural modification of PTZ or POZ dyes has been performed through introducing substituents at the N(10) and C(7) positions, and changing the π bridge. Further tuning the structure at different positions may lead to the synthesis of interesting photosenzitizers.
10. Carbazole dyes
Based on the concept of the interface engineering of a dye-adsorbed TiO2 surface, Koumura, Hara and co-workers reported efficient carbazole sensitizers with n-hexyl-substituted oligothiophenes as a π-conjugated system (237–246, Fig. 31).189–194 They found that the photovoltaic performance of the DSCs markedly depended on the molecular structures of the dyes in terms of the number and position of n-hexyl chains and the number of thiophene moieties. Retardation of charge recombination caused by the existence of n-hexyl chains that are linked to the thiophene groups resulted in an increase in the electron lifetime. As a consequence, an improvement of VOC and hence the PCE of the DSCs was achieved. For example, the VOC for DSCs based on 237 (750 mV) and 238 (690 mV) were higher than that for 239 (670 mV) under the same conditions due to longer electron lifetimes.189,190 However, a large amount and/or thick aggregate of adsorbed dyes decreased the FF and JSC seriously because the dye layer suppressed the diffusion of redox species through the nanoporous TiO2 electrode. Such a problem was solved by increasing the iodine content in the redox electrolyte. A DSC consisting of a 238 sensitized TiO2 electrode (16 μm) produced a PCE of 7.6% (JSC = 14.20 mA cm−2, VOC = 740 mV, FF = 0.72) with an electrolyte of 0.6 M DMPImI + 0.1 M LiI + 0.05 M I2 + 0.5 M TBP in acetonitrile. The PCE dramatically went up to 8.3% (JSC = 15.22 mA cm−2, VOC = 730 mV, FF = 0.75) when the iodine content was increased from 0.05 to 0.2 M.190 The 238-based DSCs showed a long-term stability under white-light irradiation at 80 °C under dark conditions.191
 Fig. 31  Representative carbazole dyes 237–247. 
Following this work, they further synthesized hexyloxyphenyl substituted carbazole dyes (240, 241) for DSCs and demonstrated that a hexyloxyphenyl substituent at the end of the dye increased the electron lifetime, and consequently gave a higher VOC.192 A better performance was observed for the device made with 240 (PCE = 8.1%), which exhibited a JSC value of 16 mA cm−2, a VOC value of 710 mV, and a FF value of 0.71. Later they reported a new class of thieno[3,2-b]indole-based organic dyes (242–244) with high molar extinction coefficient and long-term stability for DSCs application.193 The ε at the maximum absorption of the three dyes in toluene ranged from 43000 to 46000 M−1 cm−1, which is a little higher than those of carbazole dyes (42100 M−1 cm−1 for 237 and 42600 M−1 cm−1 for 238 in toluene). These dyes suffered from a shorter electron lifetime compared to conventional carbazole dyes, resulting in PCEs ranging from 7.3 to 7.8%. By using the 5,11-dioctylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole to replace the carbazole unit, other efficient organic dyes such as 245 and 246 were obtained, exhibiting PCEs of 7.3 and 6.7%, respectively, under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2).194
Unlike dyes 237–246, dye 247 inhibited dye aggregation and charge recombination in a different way.195 Fang and co-workers proposed that the designed molecules have an interesting twisted structure and a zigzag-shape, in which the dihedral angles between two carbazole units were near 40°. The DSCs based on 247 showed a high VOC (796 mV) and PCE (6.33%), indicating that a combination of alkyl side chains and a twisted linked backbone in a dye molecule is an effective way for the suppression of dye aggregation and charge recombination.
Attempts on structural optimization of carbazole-based dyes have also been made by replacing the alkyl chains with 9,9-dimethylfluoren or tert-butylbenzene. PCEs ranging from 3.62 to 6.7% have been achieved with 248 to 251 (Fig. 32).196–198 Dye 250, containing a bulky tertbutylphenylene-substituted carbazole donor group, showed a PCE of 6.70%. Chow and co-workers proposed that the presence of a tertbutyl group not only enhanced the electron-donating ability of the donor, but also suppressed the intermolecular aggregation.197
 Fig. 32  Representative carbazole dyes 248–255. 
Dyes 252–255 (Fig. 32) featuring 3,6-disubstituted carbazole were investigated by several groups.199–201252 gave a PCE of 4.10% with an iodine electrolyte containing 0.6 M DMPII, 0.06 M LiI, 0.04 M I2, and 0.4 M TBP in dried CH3CN solutions. Surprisingly, a remarkably high VOC (0.939 V) with a better PCE of 5.22% was achieved with a Br−/Br3−-containing electrolyte of 0.9 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-butylimidazolium bromide (DMBIBr), 0.08 M Br2, and 0.5 M TBP electrolyte in dried CH3CN solution.199 Ko, Hong and co-workers found that the presence of a TPA unit in the 254 and 255 dyes as a donor increased not only the charge generation and injection but also the electron lifetime, improving VOC and JSC, and ultimately the PCE. Under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2), a device using dye 255 exhibited a JSC of 13.7 mA cm−2, a VOC of 680 mV, a FF of 0.70, and a calculated efficiency of 6.52%.201 This performance is comparable to that of a reference cell based on N719 (7.30%) under the same conditions. After 1000 hours of visible light soaking at 60 °C, the overall efficiency remained at 95% of the initial value.
11. Arylamine organic dyes for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes
Arylamine organic dye-sensitized DSCs employing iodine electrolytes have reached power conversion efficiencies as high as 10–11%, comparable to those of Ru complexes. However, some disadvantages of the iodide/triiodide redox couple limited the performance of the DSCs with the following points. (i) The relatively high overpotential for dye regeneration has led to a noticeable potential loss.202 (ii) The halogen bonding between iodine and some electron-rich segments of dye molecules could cause a larger charge recombination rate at the titania/electrolyte interface.203–205 (iii) Competitive light absorption by the triiodide has led to a light harvesting loss.206,207 (iv) The large-scale manufacturing of DSCs remains a challenge due to the corrosiveness of the iodide/triiodide redox couple toward most metals and sealing materials.208,209 To achieve a breakthrough in the development of highly efficient DSCs, alternative redox couples, including metal complexes, hole conductors, halogens and pseudohalogens and some redox active organic compounds have been explored for DSCs to avoid the problems mentioned above.13 Researchers have made astonishing progress in this area in recent years, especially regarding polypyridyl cobalt redox shuttles. The following section summarizes recent progress in arylamine organic dyes for DCSs employing cobalt electrolytes.
An advantage of the cobalt electrolytes over the iodide/triiodide redox couple is that very high VOC can be realized but without sacrificing short circuit photocurrent or fill factor. However, simply replacing the iodide/triiodide couple in the DSCs by cobalt redox couples may lead to poorly performing devices with low photovoltages and photocurrents,207,210–212 which has been attributed to slow mass transport and increased recombination of the injected electrons with oxidized redox species in the electrolyte. To overcome the mass transport limitation associated with the polypyridyl cobalt redox shuttles, a relatively thin titania film is always needed. Additionally, to meet the requirements of effective light harvesting and retard the rate of interfacial back electron transfer from the conduction band of the nanocrystalline titanium dioxide film to the Co(III) ions, photosensitizers with high extinction coefficients, suitable electronic structures and steric properties are warranted.
Recent developments have been highlighted by several groups. Boschloo and co-workers found that the recombination and mass-transport limitations can be avoided by matching the properties of the dye and the cobalt redox mediator.208,209 Recombination was reduced further by introducing insulating butoxyl chains on the substituted TPA-based dye 75 (Fig. 13) rather than on the cobalt redox mediator. This enables redox couples with higher diffusion coefficients and a more suitable redox potential to be used, simultaneously improving the photocurrent and photovoltage of the device. Optimization of DSCs sensitized with dye 75 in combination with tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)cobalt(II/III) yielded solar cells with a PCE of 6.7% and VOC of more than 0.9 V under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2).208 Encouraged by the work done by Boschloo and co-workers, Wang and co-workers explored a series of DHO–TPA dyes (256–268, Fig. 33) for DSCs employing the cobalt redox shuttles.18,213–218 Many encouraging results were presented, giving confidence that the cobalt DSCs can afford power conversion efficiencies comparable to those of the iodine DSCs. In a comparative study of the influences of arylamine electron donors on the optoelectronic features of thin-film DSCs employing a (Co(II/III)(phen)3) (phen = 1,10-phenanthroline) redox electrolyte, they found that 256–258 based cells (7.6 to 8.4%) present lower PCE values than their 59 counterpart (9.3%), primarily owing to relatively low photocurrents.213 Photovoltaic characterization evidently demonstrated the superiority of DHO–TPA over the other three electron donors (diphenothiazinyl- or di-tert-butylphenylsubstituted TPA and N-hexyl-carbazole) when applied in CPDT-cyanoacrylic acid organic dyes. Note that, high VOC values (930–950 mV) were obtained by 59-, 256- and 257-sensitized DSCs employing a cobalt electrolyte composed of 0.25 M [Co(II)(phen)3](B(CN)4)2, 0.05 M [Co(III)(phen)3](B(CN)4)3, 0.5 M TBP and 0.1 M lithiumbis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) in acetonitrile. Comparisons of four DHO–TPA dyes (259, 260, 59 and 261) with the di(3-hexylthiophene), dihexyldithienosilole, CPDT and N-hexyldithienopyrrole linkers have revealed that dyes with rigidified dithiophene (59, 260, 261) presented notable red-shifts of the λmax by 82–88 nm and over five times enhancement of the maximum molar visible absorption coefficient, leading to higher JSC values.214 Meanwhile, the rigidification of the conjugated dithiophene linkers generally diminished the VOC in the range from 60 to 190 mV. For example, the dithienopyrrole dye (261) exhibited a 190 mV reduction in VOC compared to its di(3-hexylthiophene) counterpart (259), which stems mainly from a remarkable downward displacement of the titania conduction band edge. Among the four dyes, 59 displayed a better cell efficiency, proving the superiority of CPDT as the conjugated spacer.
 Fig. 33  Representative arylamine organic dyes 256–270 for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes. 
One of the most astounding findings in arylamine organic dye-sensitized DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes is the increment of the cell photovoltage concomitant with an extension of the π-conjugated linker in organic dyes, which is in prominent contrast to the traditional iodine electrolyte system. For example, along with an elongation of the π-conjugated linker from 262 to 263, the VOC in the case of the iodine electrolyte was actually decreased by 43 mV (795 mV vs. 752 mV), whilst that of the cobalt electrolyte was augmented by 22 mV (815 mV vs. 837 mV).215 The dye–iodine interaction was thought to evoke a higher iodine concentration in the vicinity of titania anchored with the 263 dye, rationalizing its faster interfacial charge recombination kinetics. On the other side, the larger steric hindrance of the bulky cobalt(III) complex and the longer π-conjugated spacer contributed to slow the interception of photoinjected electrons with cobalt(III) ions. On the basis of this finding, dye 264 was synthesized, displaying a PCE of 9.4% in a cobalt cell measured at AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2).216
Through elongating the end or side alkyl chains of dye molecules, dyes 265–268 were obtained.217 Upon alternation of the ethyl side chains with n-dodecyl, the corresponding 266 dye displayed a significantly enhanced VOC of 930 mV, leading to a remarkably high PCE of 10.1%. A similar phenomenon was also perceived when the end alkyl chains are elongated. The 268 dye generated a cell efficiency of 10.1% with a JSC of 14.55 mA cm−2, a VOC of 930 mV and a FF of 0.743, mainly benefiting from a significant improvement of VOC by 100 mV with respect to the 267 dye bearing two ethyl end chains. This study revealed that either the end or the side alkyl chains of dye molecules play a pivotal role in the attenuation of interfacial charge recombination, which is one key photovoltage determinant.
Meanwhile, promising results have been reported by Nnazeeruddin and Grätzel.219–221 Dye 269 (Fig. 33), containing a CPDT bridging unit in the D–π–A structure, exhibited a JSC that is 40% higher than 75, reaching almost 15 mA cm−2 under full sunlight and an unprecedented PCE of up to 9.6% with the [Co(II)(bpy)3](B(CN)4)2/[Co(III)(bpy)3](B(CN)4)3 (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) redox couple.219 Later they improved the result by using a tridentate cobalt [Co(II)(bpy-pz)2](PF6)2/[Co(III)(bpy-pz)2](PF6)3 (bpy-pz = 6-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-2,2′-bipyridine) complex as a redox mediator. Dye 269 yielded a power conversion efficiency of over 10% at 100 mW cm−2 with an unprecedented output voltage exceeding 1000 mV owing to its high oxidation potential of 0.86 V versus NHE.220
Han and co-workers developed a novel 4,4-ethylenedioxy-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene-based D–π–A organic dye (270, Fig. 33) and introduced it into a DSC with a [Co(II)(bpy)3](PF6)2/[Co(III)(bpy)3](PF6)3 based redox system.222 It is noteworthy that the IPCE response of the 270-based cell extended to 820 nm. Finally, 270-sensitized DSC with a cobalt electrolyte showed an overall conversion efficiency of 4.04%, which was 1.65 times that observed with an iodine electrolyte.
In our development of truxene-based dyes, we noticed that these dyes pose high extinction coefficients apart from their retarding charge recombination, benefiting from the steric hindrance of the hexapropyltruxene group. These features are necessary for organic dyes used in DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes. It is therefore expected that this type dye could show interesting performance in the cobalt redox couple system. Five truxene-based dyes were designed and synthesized (271–275, Fig. 34). 272 (ε = 8.9 × 104 M−1 cm−1; VOC = 865 mV) with 2(D–π–A) structure and 273 (ε = 10.7 × 104 M−1 cm−1; VOC = 870 mV) with D–2(π–A) structure confer an enhanced light absorption coefficient of a stained TiO2 film and provide an improved VOC in DSCs employing a cobalt redox electrolyte in comparison to 271 (ε = 6.4 × 104 M−1 cm−1; VOC = 830 mV) with a D–π–A structure.223 However, the 271-sensitized cell exhibited a higher efficiency with respect to those of 272 and 273, which is primarily due to its superior IPCE. Optimization of DSCs sensitized with 271 in combination with a cobalt electrolyte (0.25 M [Co(II)(phen)3](PF6)2, 0.05 M [Co(III)(phen)3](PF6)3, 0.5 M 4-tertpyridine (TBP) and 0.1M LiTFSI in acetonitrile) yielded a DSC with a PCE of 7.2% under AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). This work illustrated the importance of introducing sterically bulky groups on the dyes that block the TiO2 surface from Co(III) species in the electrolyte in DSCs.
 Fig. 34  Representative arylamine organic dyes 271–275 for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes. 
We also found that organic dyes with thiophene derivates as linkers are suitable for cobalt DSCs. Dye alteration from 274 to 275 in the iodine cells caused a PCE attenuation of 0.5% (6.1% vs. 5.6%), sharply contrasting the 1.4% enhancement (5.5% vs. 6.9%) in the cobalt cells (with 0.5 M TBP).224 Under the optimized conditions, the cobalt electrolyte containing 0.8 M TBP gave the highest efficiency. The lower rate of electron recapture by [Co(III)(phen)3] for the 275-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 film allows a high VOC to be realized, with this sensitizer reaching a value of 900 mV in full sunlight without sacrificing JSC or FF. The cumulative increases of JSC or FF gave rise to an efficiency of 7.6% at AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Our results strongly indicate that the application of truxene-based organic dyes as the photosensitizers in DSCs employing a cobalt electrolyte is promising. Though the efficiency from truxene-based dyes is not satisfying at the current stage, there is much space left for further improvement by enhancing the light harvesting ability to increase the JSC and finding more appropriate cobalt electrolytes to increase the VOC.
12. Exploiting new acceptors for arylamine organic dyes
The acceptor part of a dye behaves as both an electron acceptor, in the charge transfer process from the donor, and as an anchoring group to adsorb onto the TiO2 surfaces, which is essential for the efficient electron injection from the dye into the TiO2.225 Typical acceptors includes cyanoacrylic acid, rhodamine-, and thiazolidinorhodamine-N-carboxylic acid moieties. Interesting works to exploit new anchoring groups with strong electron-withdrawing ability have been carried out,225–233 but they are still limited.
Harima and co-workers have designed and synthesized fluorescent dyes 278–280 (Fig. 35) with a pyridine ring as the electron-withdrawing anchoring group of these new D–π–A dye sensitizers for DSCs.226,227 The JSC (5.63 to 7.04 mA cm−2) and PCE (1.84 to 2.35%) of DSCs based on the three dyes are greater than those of the conventional D–π–A dye sensitizers 276 (JSC = 2.96 mA cm−2; PCE = 0.91%) and 277 (JSC = 3.07 mA cm−2; PCE = 0.97%) with a carboxyl group as the electron-withdrawing anchoring group. It was demonstrated that the formation of coordinate bonds between the pyridine ring of dyes 278–280 and the Lewis acid sites of the TiO2 surface leads to an efficient electron injection owing to the good electron communication between them, rather than the formation of an ester linkage between dyes 276 and 277 and the Brønsted acid sites of the TiO2 surface. This work suggested that the pyridine ring acted not only as the electron-withdrawing anchoring group but also as the electron-injecting group in a D–π–A dye.
 Fig. 35  Representative arylamine organic dyes 276–288 with new acceptors. 
Han and co-workers have developed a new method to introduce various electron-withdrawing groups as the acceptor part of D–π–A dyes for the free exploration of acceptor designs. 281, 282 and 283 (Fig. 35) displayed absorption maxima at around 420 nm with strong extinction coefficients. The DSCs fabricated with these three dyes exhibited efficiencies of 2.51% to 4.05%.225
Katono et al. designed and synthesized a series of new organic sensitizers with cyano substituted benzoic acid as an acceptor/anchoring group (284–286, Fig. 35).228 They found that the cyano substituent showed an improved DSC performance. The DSC device based on 286, with a para-cyano benzoic acid as the acceptor/anchoring group, revealed a performance with a maximum IPCE of 80% and a PCE of 4.5% at AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2).
Yang, Sun and co-workers have successfully synthesized a series of iso-quinoline cationic organic dyes in the absence of a vinyl group for DSCs.229 The dye 287 (Fig. 35, JSC = 14.4 mA cm−2, VOC = 684 mV and FF = 0.74) showed an efficiency of 7.3% while N719 yielded an efficiency of 7.9%. Unlike other ionic sensitizers (such as 67 and 68), 287 did not suffer from low VOC. This indicates that long alkyl chains are indispensable for ionic sensitizers.
Importantly, Hua, Tian and co-workers demonstrated that the electron acceptor 2-(1,1-dicyanomethylene) rhodanine is a promising alternative anchoring group to cyanoacrylic acid for sensitizing dyes.230 The formation of coordinate bonds between the O and N in the middle acceptor rhodanine of 288 (Fig. 35) tautomers and the Lewis acid sites of the TiO2 surface guarantees an efficient electron injection from the dyes to TiO2. 288 based DSCs have obtained a PCE of 7.11%, which is considerably higher than the dye with cyanoacrylic acid as the electron acceptor (54, PCE = 6.39%).
Besides the development of new methods to introduce various electron-withdrawing groups as the acceptor part of D–π–A dyes, it is valuable to note that computational chemistry has been used to introduce an element of design in the systematic exploration. Labat et al. proposed that model systems containing only the relevant anchoring group and the semiconductor can be used to screen the different adsorption modes of the dye on the surface at low computational cost, since in most cases the anchoring group is electronically and geometrically decoupled from the rest of the dye.231
Recently, Troisi and co-workers developed a computational procedure to screen the many different anchoring groups used or usable to connect a dye to the semiconducting surface in a dye-sensitized solar cell. The procedure led to a clear identification of the anchoring groups that bind strongly to the surface and facilitate the electron injection at the same time, providing clear-cut indications for the design of new dyes.232
13. Arylamine organic compounds as solid-state hole transport materials (HTMs)
As discussed in Section 11, some disadvantages of the iodide/triiodide redox couple have limited the performance of DSCs. In an effort to address these issues, solid-state HTMs with optimized HOMO levels have been the focus of many recent reports. To date, the best performance in such solid-state DSCs (ssDSCs) is based on the HTM termed 2,2′,7,-7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, 289, Fig. 36)234 with an efficiency up to 6.1% using custom synthesized dyes.235
 Fig. 36  Representative arylamine organic compounds as solid state hole transport materials. 
Sellinger and co-workers synthesized two new HTMs (290 and 291, Fig. 36) for application in ssDSCs.236 The new HTMs have low glass transition temperatures, low melting points, and high solubility, which makes them promising candidates for increased pore filling into mesoporous titania films. The experimental data demonstrated the superior performance of one of the new HTMs (291, PCE = 2.3%) in thicker ssDSCs (6 μm) compared to 289 (PCE = 2.1%).
Johansson et al. showed that a small hole-conductor molecule (292, Fig. 36) can be used to regenerate the dye molecules in a thick mesoporous electrode of TiO2.237 They found that the device efficiency could be improved by employing a combination of 292 and a conducting polymer (P3HT). This addition was thought to enable better transport of the charges to the contact and to reduce recombination and, therefore, increase the photocurrent. They proposed that this device construction with a small hole-conductor regenerating the dye molecules in the small pores and a larger conducting polymer that conducts the holes to the silver contact is promising for further improvement of the ssDSCs.
Metri et al. developed five star-shaped π-conjugated molecules (293–297, Fig. 36) with a TPA core and various conjugated linkers such as thiophene and thieno[3,2-b]–thiophene–C9H19.238 They proposed that the compounds 295, 296 and 297 possess interesting hole-transporting properties and could be good candidates for use in hybrid solar cells.
14. Summary of performance
In summary, we have outlined the development and accomplishments of major types of arylamine-based organic dyes for DSCs. The photophysical properties and cell performance of these sensitizers are summarized for comprehensive comparison, as well as to provide an overview of the field. Detailed cell parameters are summarized in Table 1 (DSCs employing iodine electrolytes) and Table 2 (DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes).
Table 1 Arylamine organic dyes tested in DSCs employing liquid iodine electrolytes




Dye

λ
max/nm

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/mV
FF
PCE(%)
Ref.





1

386
6.3
770
0.67
3.3

21




2

417
11.1
730
0.66
5.3

21




3

438
10.39
702
0.785
5.73

22




4

438
7.72
694
0.803
4.3

22




5

490
12.41
663
0.760
6.25

22




6

457
9.60
671
0.776
5.0

22




7

418
8.78
726
0.807
5.14

23




8

464
11.7
766
0.756
6.78

23




9

441
9.4
668
0.69
4.36

24




10

444
8.1
704
0.68
3.86

24




11

500
1.3
480
0.70
0.44

24




12

425
8.1
630
0.68
3.49

24




13

433
13.83
677
0.692
6.49

26




14

—
11.1
585
0.59
3.86

19




15

410
12.8
620
0.66
5.20

30




16

426
15.5
690
0.683
7.30

30




17

420
10.7
750
0.668
5.36

30




18

420
14.73
754
0.65
7.25

31




19

440
15.78
735
0.60
7.00

31




20

420
15.58
787
0.67
8.22

31




21

472
9.38
720
0.64
4.36

32




22

503
10.33
797
0.64
5.30

32




23

435
10.1
750
0.75
5.7

33




24

465
11.9
720
0.73
6.3

33




25

525
5.70
735
0.78
3.27

34




26

362
14.6
676
0.75
7.40

34




27

489
14.4
697
0.73
7.3

35




28

477
14.2
765
0.66
7.17

36




29

465
13.5
715
0.65
6.27

36




30

443
13.97
670
0.62
5.8

37




31

510
12.66
610
0.56
4.4

37




32

469
16.59
690
0.64
7.36

40




33

456
14.16
680
0.66
6.30

40




34

437
13.47
600
0.59
4.77

41




35

472
14.20
570
0.60
4.79

41




36

425
11.29
710
0.65
5.22

42




37

491
10.44
546
0.66
3.77

43




38

502
8.35
524
0.67
2.91

43




39

501
15.2
670
0.66
6.72

44




40

557
16.46
545
0.67
6.04

45




41

625
16.24
480
0.68
5.30

46




42

596
11.29
470
0.69
3.66

46




43

504
11.79
680
0.65
5.30

47




44

457
11.78
810
0.60
5.73

48




45

470
15.69
778
0.61
7.51

49




46

433
12.47
789
0.61
6.01

49




47

563
9.89
559
0.64
3.52

50




48

458
13.0
564
0.59
4.32

53




49

461
18.2
563
0.57
5.84

53




50

486
9.01
631
0.72
4.11

15




51

510
9.89
534
0.66
3.49

15




52

444
8.12
715
0.68
3.94

15




53

486
11.40
692
0.72
5.70

15




54

514
11.88
775
0.747
6.88

65




55

516
13.9
731
0.740
7.54

64




56

524
15.2
720
0.733
8.02

66




57

552
16.1
803
0.759
9.8

66




58

525
13.81
714
0.721
7.11

67




59

555
15.84
769
0.735
8.95

67




60

521
17.94
770
0.730
10.1

68




61

511
13.39
810
0.70
7.60

73




62

472
11.9
713
0.67
5.68

74




63

502
10.65
710
0.68
5.14

75




64

489
7.97
670
0.68
3.63

75




65

459
9.4
810
0.74
5.6

76




66

510
11.59
791
0.76
7.12

77




67

691
11.12
422
0.557
2.61

78




68

650
9.40
432
0.578
2.34

78




69

602
3.61
448
0.63
1.03

80




71

570
3.40
489
0.74
1.24

83




72

515
18.47
640
0.69
8.21

83




73

497
11.42
600
0.61
4.18

84




74

514
13.52
620
0.62
5.19

84




75

445
12.96
750
0.61
6.00

85




76

482
12.00
670
0.60
4.83

85




77

487
13.6
615
0.69
5.77

88




78

522
9.05
567
0.56
2.87

88




79

480
13.8
632
0.69
6.02

88




80

411
8.70
710
0.70
4.30

89




81

424
7.3
603
0.74
3.26

91




82

422
9.2
625
0.79
4.54

91




83

425
11.61
766
0.586
5.21

93




84

440
11.71
709
0.592
4.92

93




85

487
14.69
740
0.62
6.77

94




86

576
9.2
660
0.72
4.37

95




87

455
15.2
720
0.72
7.87

99




88

463
16.8
750
0.70
8.71

99




89

558
15.37
651
0.75
7.51

100




90

569
16.09
671
0.74
8.00

100




91

462
14.00
694
0.71
6.90

101




92

458
13.90
744
0.70
7.23

101




93

473
16.0
630
0.61
6.15

102




94

480
15.2
610
0.58
5.41

102




95

462
14.5
680
0.61
5.95

102




96

465
15.6
650
0.60
6.04

102




97

462
11.4
610
0.59
4.11

102




98

426
12.21
650
0.59
4.68

103




99

413
9.68
690
0.60
4.01

103




100

400
10.21
700
0.71
5.07

104




101

413
5.51
630
0.726
2.52

104




102

384
6.56
700
0.75
3.46

105




103

386
10.78
710
0.74
5.67

105




104

489
8.85
639
0.76
4.34

106




105

511
10.45
701
0.77
5.63

106




106

478
10.9
641
0.725
5.05

107




107

480
9.65
662
0.706
4.51

107




108

485
10.34
715
0.722
5.35

108




109

468
6.87
687
0.678
3.20

108




110

495
7.13
670
0.71
3.4

109




111

480
11.25
770
0.76
6.6

109




112

436
12.20
764
0.77
7.20

110




113

452
14.0
753
0.77
8.01

110




114

463
14.39
700
0.66
6.65

111




115

456
15.33
740
0.66
7.43

112




116

480
13.84
790
0.75
8.2

115




117

430
16.13
641
0.718
7.42

113




118

430
17.45
664
0.742
8.60

113




119

480
15.7
690
0.74
8.0

114




120

490
17.6
710
0.72
9.1

114




121

450
13.02
570
0.72
5.34

116




122

466
17.49
700
0.70
8.70

116




123

525
14.33
734
0.76
8.0

123




124

514
13.35
777
0.749
7.8

125




125

525
13.58
708
0.760
7.31

124




126

544
14.85
696
0.736
7.61

124




127

669
13.92
610
0.74
6.29

126




128

662
12.17
509
0.7936
4.91

127




129

534
17.10
610
0.72
7.51

128




130

468
14.80
740
0.74
8.19

128




131

422
16.81
740
0.57
7.08

129




132

427
15.36
690
0.50
5.25

129




133

409
12.28
730
0.67
6.0

130




134

424
11.28
700
0.66
5.23

130




135

441
10.5
595
0.70
4.36

131




136

447
10.4
571
0.69
4.11

131




137

458
17.04
650
0.61
6.72

132




138

460
15.48
690
0.65
6.87

132




139

458
15.16
680
0.68
7.00

132




140

442
9.32
580
0.70
3.37

132




141

433
10.55
660
0.65
4.46

133




142

437
11.34
700
0.67
5.27

133




143

430
14.16
650
0.65
5.95

82




144

414
7.16
640
0.67
3.04

136




145

517
14.0
627
0.745
6.6

135




146

500
13.9
618
0.717
6.2

135




147

406
7.75
689
0.73
3.90

139




148

420
7.89
731
0.74
4.27

139




149

430
6.86
752
0.70
3.61

139




150

383
10.13
750
0.72
5.45

140




151

383
7.31
760
0.66
3.64

140




152

398
9.71
690
0.69
4.62

140




153

388
5.53
670
0.67
2.48

140




154

486
9.8
750
0.67
4.92

141




155

498
10.7
745
0.66
5.26

141




156

506
11.5
772
0.68
6.04

141




157

498
10.4
763
0.67
5.32

142




158

519
11.8
771
0.68
6.18

142




159

491
17.76
604
0.57
6.1

143




160

526
18.75
645
0.538
6.51

144




161

532
17.50
584
0.538
5.50

144




162

531
17.38
628
0.513
5.60

144




163

—
19.56
569
0.533
5.93

144




164

532
18.56
717
0.716
9.52

146




165

567
13.07
660
0.65
5.55

148




166

486
10.58
650
0.69
4.72

155




167

533
17.7
650
0.76
8.70

150




168

547
14.3
639
0.75
6.85

151




169

557
10.4
629
0.71
4.64

151




170

536
18.00
696
0.72
9.04

152




171

496
13.18
780
0.78
8.02

153




172

495
13.39
680
0.74
6.74

153




173

442
10.06
748
0.68
5.11

155




174

526
13.40
760
0.73
7.43

156




175

433
8.23
727
0.71
4.26

157




176

385
5.10
772
0.732
2.88

158




177

386
8.23
767
0.735
4.64

158




178

643
13.64
480
0.57
3.75

159




179

440
15.1
640
0.63
6.20

160




180

491
11.63
639
0.68
5.08

161




181

504
15.29
627
0.72
6.84

161




182

523
18.53
649
0.71
8.49

161




183

454
10.4
710
0.74
5.5

163




184

465
9.9
740
0.74
5.4

163




185

501
12.9
710
0.74
6.8

163




186

469
12.5
680
0.69
5.9

163




187

488
15.23
560
0.73
6.23

165




188

513
10.64
520
0.70
3.87

165




189

464
12.33
642
0.64
5.08

20




190

450
11.46
643
0.66
4.93

20




191

521
13.7
606
0.69
5.7

166




192

491
15.2
605
0.68
6.3

166




193

468
8.48
583
0.64
3.17

167




194

441
11.20
600
0.67
4.49

167




195

462
12.00
597
0.63
4.53

167




196

455
10.00
537
0.64
3.44

167




197

610
11.76
464
0.674
3.7

168




198

615
13.35
519
0.73
5.1

169




199

452
10.9
712
0.71
5.5

171




200

481
4.8
532
0.74
1.9

171




201

568
14.4
390
0.54
3.0

172




202

472
3.87
698
0.65
1.8

173




203

462
12.52
675
0.693
7.3

174




204

469
14.96
675
0.682
6.8

174




205

473
15.18
645
0.69
6.72

175




206

496
11.69
708
0.653
5.4

176




207

508
7.14
706
0.556
2.80

176




208

442
12.18
771.7
0.7002
5.29

177




209

448
12.05
724.5
0.7233
6.32

177




210

466
11.68
745.7
0.6995
6.09

177




211

451
11.2
768
0.75
6.53

178




212

478
15.2
691
0.70
7.44

178




213

449
10.84
592
0.69
4.41

179




214

450
7.39
505
0.66
2.48

179




215

453
13.66
670
0.61
5.60

180




216

474
11.65
710
0.63
5.22

180




217

442
14.42
690
0.63
6.22

180




218

463
5.99
570
0.60
2.04

180




219

471
11.82
759
0.65
5.84

181




220

474
12.62
789
0.63
6.29

181




221

474
11.41
804
0.63
5.76

181




222

462
10.76
793
0.64
5.51

182




223

466
12.18
826
0.65
6.55

182




224

495
14.33
830
0.65
7.78

183




225

496
13.33
830
0.62
6.87

183




226

439
6.13
709
0.67
2.91

184




227

433
7.86
740
0.71
4.13

184




228

435
8.27
750
0.68
4.22

184




229

439
6.98
740
0.69
3.56

184




230

513
9.13
679
0.71
4.40

185




231

511
12.75
691
0.69
6.06

185




232

491
12.25
760
0.72
6.70

186




233

506
14.38
0.78
0.64
7.17

186




234

500
13.09
800
0.70
7.40

186




235

482
13.7
800
0.63
7.0

187




236

517
14.7
733
0.71
7.7

188




237

480
9.90
750
0.67
4.97

190




238

480
10.67
690
0.68
5.01

190




239

485
10.56
670
0.63
4.46

190




240

483
16.0
710
0.71
8.1

192




241

480
14.5
730
0.69
7.3

192




242

502
13.8
700
0.77
7.4

193




243

496
14.6
700
0.76
7.8

193




244

490
15.0
660
0.74
7.3

193




245

492
15.4
710
0.67
7.3

194




246

501
15.5
700
0.62
6.7

194




247

444
11.67
796
0.68
6.33

195




248

411
9.83
740
0.70
5.02

196




249

435
11.50
680
0.66
5.15

196




250

428
14.63
685
0.67
6.70

197




251

465
10.02
570
0.64
3.62

198




252

429
8.76
621
0.754
4.1

199




253

468
10.9
400
0.57
2.48

200




254

386
13.0
630
0.75
6.14

201




255

441
13.7
680
0.70
6.52

201




276

374
1.99
516
0.59
0.60

226




277

376
1.80
517
0.60
0.56

226




278

394
5.80
540
0.60
1.89

226




279

396
5.63
548
0.60
1.84

226




280

396
7.04
568
0.59
2.35

227




281

430
8.57
540
0.72
3.28

225




282

416
9.91
580
0.70
4.05

225




283

422
7.03
520
0.69
2.51

225




284

437
7.04
682
0.691
3.32

228




285

432
5.78
688
0.718
2.87

228




286

443
8.05
756
0.733
4.50

228




287

485
14.4
684
0.74
7.3

229




288

519
13.94
746
0.68
7.11

230





Table 2 Arylamine organic dyes tested in DSCs employing liquid cobalt electrolytes




Dye

λ
max/nm

J
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/mV
FF
PCE(%)
Ref.





75

—
10.7
920
0.68
6.7

208




59



13.3
950
0.74
9.3

214




256

497
10.54
950
0.77
7.7

213




257

504
12.05
930
0.75
8.4

213




258

503
11.41
870
0.77
7.6

213




259

429
6.91
1050
0.76
5.5

214




260

514
12.17
990
0.75
9.0

214




261

511
12.92
860
0.72
8.0

214




262

—
7.99
815
0.76
5.0

215




263

—
12.98
837
0.74
8.0

215




264

—
15.31
850
0.73
9.4

216




265

—
14.86
840
0.753
9.4

217




266

—
14.81
930
0.730
10.1

217




267

—
14.67
830
0.750
9.1

217




268

—
14.55
930
0.743
10.1

217




269

—
13.06
998
0.774
10.08

220




270

488
8.38
747
0.648
4.04

222




271

498
12.0
830
0.72
7.2

223




272

520
9.0
865
0.71
5.5

223




273

501
11.2
870
0.71
6.9

223




274

498
9.6
870
0.70
5.8

224




275

500
11.9
900
0.71
7.6

224





DSCs based on arylamine organic dyes have reached PCE values over 10%, comparable to those of Ru complexes (PCE = 10–11%). The best PCE values of DSCs based on the arylamine-based organic dyes mentioned in this review are as follows: TPA dyes (8.22% for 20,31 iodine electrolyte), substituted TPA dyes (10.3% for 60,63 iodine electrolyte; over 10% for 266, 268 and 269,217 cobalt electrolyte), branched TPA dyes (7.2% for 92,101 iodine electrolyte), fluorene based triarylamine dyes (9.1% for 120,114 iodine electrolyte), naphthalene based triarylamine dyes (7.08% for 131,129 iodine electrolyte), truxene based triarylamine dyes (6.18% for 158,142 iodine electrolyte; 7.6% for 275,224 cobalt electrolyte), indoline dyes (9.52% for 164146 and 9.04% for 170,152 iodine electrolyte), N,N-dialkylaniline dyes (6.8% for 185,163 iodine electrolyte), tetrahydroquinoline dyes (5.1% for 198,169 iodine electrolyte), phenothiazine dyes (7.78% for 224,183 iodine electrolyte), phenoxazine dyes (7.4% for 234,186 iodine electrolyte), and carbazole dyes (8.3% for 238,190 iodine electrolyte). These results proved that the rational design of the molecular structure contributes significantly to the performance of arylamine organic dyes. It is thus that some basic guidelines and strategies are outlined for the future design of higher performance sensitizers.
1. Strategies for extending the spectral response region of the sensitizer include the following points. (i) Multiple strongly electron-donating substituents at the arylamine core could induce a bathochromic shift in the absorption spectrum due to the increasing donation from the amino moieties.50,53,77,88,141,161,186 (ii) Planarization of the donor has proven powerful in extending the red light response of the sensitizer.20,99,100,150 (iii) The extension of a conjugated bridge by the introduction of strong electron-donating units22,30,66–68,177 (e.g., thiophene derivatives) or electron-withdrawing units34,45,46,50,83,84,150 (e.g., benzothiadiazole) significantly contributes to a red shift in the absorption spectra. However, we should bear in mind that organic dyes with an elongation of the π-conjugated linker are liable to experience dye aggregation through strong intermolecular π–π interactions and charge recombination, which will bring down the electron injection efficiency and electron lifetime. It is very critical to balance between the light harvesting and cell performance of dyes. In addition, electron-donating and electron-withdrawing units as spacers have a profound effect on the molar extinction coefficient. Generally, the former evokes an improved ε, but the latter bring a lower ε.150 (iv) A successful approach to obtain a panchromatic response in the visible region is to employ ionic units such as squaraines.78,80,126,127,159 The key issue to make the most of the advantage of ionic sensitizers is to avoid their VOC defects.81,82 (v) An anchoring group with a strong electron-withdrawing ability is effective for bathochromic shift of the absorption spectra.55,144,230
2. Apart from the good spectral response, the suppression of charge recombination and dye aggregation are necessary for achieving high JSC. DCA or CDCA have been proven to prevent aggregation and hence to improve the photovoltaic performance by means of improving both JSC and VOC.86,150 However, improved dye design incorporating the properties of a coadsorbent into the dye structure is important for the future economization of cost and simplification of the coadsorbent-free DSCs assembly process.86 Thus, the strategic structural modification of organic sensitizers through the introduction of sterically hindered substituents (bulky groups) such as long alkyl chains and aromatic units onto the donors68,86,99,116,137–142,182,183,186 or π-bridges67,77,113,114,146,152,153,173,189–194 are indispensable. It is necessary to point out that having a 3D structure to increase the distance between dyes and acceptors is important to increase the electron lifetime and, hence, VOC. A twisted structure on the spacer may induce a blue-shift of the absorption maximum because a larger energy is necessary to undergo an intramolecular charge transfer. In contrast, a twisted structure on the end of dyes is preferred because a high VOC can be realized without sacrificing light harvesting and, hence, JSC. Furthermore, D–π–A branched dyes are favorable to reduce intermolecular interaction and retard charge recombination.101–109
3. The exploration of arylamine organic dyes for iodine-free DSCs brought forth a new opportunity for the efficiency enhancement of DSCs. Photosensitizers with high extinction coefficients, suitable electronic structures and steric properties are warranted.208–224
15. Conclusions
The development of arylamine organic dyes for DSCs including triphenylamine (TPA) dyes, substituted TPA dyes, triarylamine dyes (fluoren-substituted aniline dyes, truxene-substituted aniline dyes and naphthalene-substituted aniline dyes), N,N-dialkylaniline dyes, tetrahydroquinoline dyes, indoline dyes, phenothiazine (PTZ)/phenoxazine (POZ) dyes and carbazole dyes has been summarized. Some basic design rationales of arylamine organic dyes and information about the relationship between the chemical structures and photovoltaic performance of DSCs have also been presented. Arylamine organic dyes have exhibited an especially excellent performance and are regarded as one of the most promising classes of organic sensitizers. It should be noted, however, that it is still challenging for arylamine organic dyes to achieve higher efficiency. The further investigations include: (1) the discovery of panchromatic arylamine organic dyes possessing broad absorption characteristics extending throughout the visible and NIR regions; (2) the exploration of arylamine organic dyes to match suitable iodine-free redox couples; (3) a deeper understanding of the essential processes based on experiments and computational chemistry. New breakthroughs would be expected through the design of new photosensitizers with high extinction coefficients, suitable electronic structures and steric properties based on fundamental insights into the interface processes.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National MOST (2011CBA00702, 2011CB935900, 2012AA051901), NSFC (21003096), and 111 Project (B12015).
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 597–606 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenger, P. A. Bouit, Q. Chen, J. Teuscher, D. Di Censo, R. Humphry-Baker, J. E. Moser, J. L. Delgado, N. Martin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5164–5169 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, Md. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 842–857 CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, M. Zhang, F. Wang, Y. Pan and P. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, P. Lee, N. R. Armstrong, A. Graham, G. A. Evmenenko, P. Dutta and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3172–3183 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, Y. C. Nah, J. T. Hwang, J. Ghim, D. Vak, J. M. Yuna and D. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2380–2385 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Tian and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC .
X. F. Wang, H. Tamiaki, L. Wang, N. Tamai, O. Kitao, H. S. Zhou and S. I. Sasaki, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6320–6327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, B. Peng and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10992–10998 CAS .
Z. S. Wang, T. Yamaguchi, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4272–4276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Usami, S. Seki, Y. Mita, H. Kobayashi, H. Miyashiro and N. Sol. Terada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 840–842 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Q. Yu, N. Cai, Y. Bai, Y. Wang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2030–2034 CAS .
T. Marinado, K. Nonomura, J. Nissfolk, M. K. Karlsson, D. P. Hagberg, L. C. Sun, S. Mori and A. Hagfeldt, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2592–2598 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, W. H. Zhu, Q. Zhang, W. J. Wu, M. Xu, Z. J. Ning, Y. S. Xie and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1766–1768 RSC .
T. Kitamura, M. Ikeda, K. Shigaki, T. Inoue, N. A. Anderson, X. Ai, T. Q. Lian and S. Yanagida, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS .
C. Teng, X. C. Yang, C. Yang, H. N. Tian, S. F. Li, X. N. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11305–11313 CAS .
C. Teng, X. C. Yang, C. Yang, S. F. Li, M. Cheng, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9101–9110 CAS .
H. N. Tian, X. C. Yang, R. K. Chen, R. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11023–11033 CAS .
S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, C. Park, H. Lee, C. Kim, C. Park, M. H. Lee, W. Lee, J. Park, K. Kim, N. G. Park and C. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4887–4889 RSC .
H. Im, S. Kim, C. Park, S. H. Jang, C. J. Kim, K. Kim, N. G. Park and C. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1335–1337 RSC .
K. Hara, M. Kurashige, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 783–785 RSC .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, K. Nonomura, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9550–9556 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Edvinsson, T. Marinado, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2245–2247 RSC .
W. H. Liu, I. C. Wu, C. H. Lai, C. H. Lai, P. T. Chou, Y. T. Li, C. L. Chen, Y. Y. Hsu and Y. Chi, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5152–5154 RSC .
B. S. Chen, D. Y. Chen, C. L. Chen, C. W. Hsu, H. C. Hsu, K. L. Wu, S. H. Liu, P. T. Chou and Y. Chi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1937–1945 RSC .
Y. Liang, B. Peng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1204–1207 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Nishida, T. Masuko, Y. Cui, K. Hara, H. Shibuya, M. Ihara, T. Hosoyama, R. Goto, S. Mori and Y. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17920–17925 CAS .
X. Lu, Q. Feng, T. Lan, G. Zhou and Z. S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3179–3187 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Kwon, V. Armel, A. Nattestad, D. R. MacFarlane, U. Bach, S. J. Lind, K. C. Gordon, W. H. Tang, D. J. Jones and A. B. Holmes, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 4088–4093 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kozma, I. Concina, A. Braga, L. Borgese, L. E. Depero, A. Vomiero, G. Sberveglieri and M. Catellani, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13785–13788 RSC .
C. G. Wu, M. F. Chung, H. H. G. Tsai, C. J. Tan, S. C. Chen, C. H. Chang and T. W. Shih, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 832–843 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shen, Y. H. Tang, S. H. Jiang, H. J. Chen, X. Y. Zheng, X. Y. Wang, B. Zhao and S. T. Tan, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, N. Pschirer, J. C. Schoneboom, F. Eickemeyer, M. Baumgarten and K. Mullen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1808–1815 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Lin, P. C. Chen, Y. S. Yen, Y. C. Hsu, H. H. Chou and P. M. C. Yeh, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 97–100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yen, Y. C. Hsu, J. T. Lin, C. W. Chang, C. P. Hsu and D. J. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12557–12567 CAS .
Q. Q. Li, J. Shi, H. Y. Li, S. Li, C. Zhong, F. L. Guo, M. Peng, J. L. Hua, J. G. Qina and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6689–6696 RSC .
M. Velusamy, K. R. J. Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y. C. Hsu and K. C. Ho, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 1899–1902 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Chou, Y. C. Chen, H. J. Huang, T. H. Lee, J. T. Lin, C. T. Tsai and K. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10929–10938 RSC .
Z. M. Tang, T. Lei, K. J. Jiang, Y. L. Song and J. Pei, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1911–1917 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Lu, G. Zhou, H. Wang, Q. Y. Feng and Z. S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4802–4809 RSC .
J. Shi, J. N. Chen, Z. F. Chai, H. Wang, R. L. Tang, K. Fan, M. Wu, H. W. Han, J. G. Qin, T. Y. Peng, Q. Q. Li and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18830–18838 RSC .
J. X. He, W. J. Wu, J. L. Hua, Y. H. Jiang, S. Y. Qu, J. Li, Y. T. Long and H. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6054–6062 RSC .
J. X. He, F. L. Guo, X. Li, W. J. Wu, J. B. Yang and J. L. Hua, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7903–7915 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ying, F. Guo, J. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Wu, H. Tian and J. Hua, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4215–4224 CAS .
J. S. Song, F. Zhang, C. H. Li, W. L. Liu, B. S. Li, Y. Huang and Z. S. Bo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13391–13397 CAS .
D. W. Chang, H. J. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. Y. Park, S. M. Park, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3880–3883 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, W. Xu, F. S. Cai, P. Q. Chen, B. Peng, J. Chen and Z. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4465–4472 CAS .
W. Xu, B. Peng, J. Chen, M. Liang and F. S. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 874–880 CAS .
W. Xu, J. Pei, J. F. Shi, S. J. Peng and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 792–798 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pei, S. J. Peng, J. F. Shi, Y. L. Liang, Z. L. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 620–626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, L. Wang, Y. Liang, S. Peng, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6814–6821 CAS .
J. Shi, S. Peng, J. Pei, Y. Liang, F. Cheng and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 944–950 CAS .
M. Liang, X. Zong, H. Han, C. Chen, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1331–1333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Liang, X. Liu, H. Han, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 496–503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wiberg, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, L. C. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and B. J. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3881–3886 CAS .
B. Peng, S. Yang, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 034305 CrossRef .
M. F. Xu, R. Z. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, D. Shi, J. Guo, Z. H. Yi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19770–19776 CAS .
G. L. Zhang, Y. Bai, R. Z. Li, D. Shi, S. Wenger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 92–95 CAS .
R. Z. Li, X. J. Lv, D. Shi, D. F. Zhou, Y. M. Cheng, G. L. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7469–7479 CAS .
G. L. Zhang, H. Bala, Y. M. Cheng, D. Shi, X. J. Lv, Q. J. Yu and P. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2198–2200 RSC .
R. Z. Li, J. Y. Liu, N. Cai, M. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 4461–4464 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, M. Zhang, F. Wang, C. Pan and P. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liu, R. Z. Li, X. Y. Si, D. F. Zhou, Y. S. Shi, Y. H. Wang, X. Y. Jing and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1924–1928 CAS .
J. Y. Liu, D. F. Zhou, F. F. Wang, F. Fabregat-Santiago, S. G. Miralles, X. Y. Jing, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14425–14430 CAS .
J. Y. Liu, D. F. Zhou, M. F Xu, X. Y. Jing and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3545–3551 CAS .
D. F. Zhou, N. Cai, H. J. Long, M. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3163–3171 CAS .
L. Y. Lin, C. H. Tsai, K. T. Wong, T. W. Huang, L. Hsieh, S. H. Liu, H. W. Lin, C. C. Wu, S. H. Chou, S. H. Chen and A. I. Tsai, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 4778–4785 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, M. Liang, X. Cheng, X. Pian, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5424–5427 CrossRef CAS .
E. Longhi, A. Bossi, G. Di Carlo, S. Maiorana, F. De Angelis, P. Salvatori, A. Petrozza, M. Binda, V. Roiati, P. R. Mussini, C. Baldoli and E. Licandro, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 84–94 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, H. N. Tsao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 4330–4333 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, H. Tsuji, A. Yella, A. S. Chauvin, M. Grätzel and E. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 582–584 RSC .
J. Y. Li, C. Y. Chen, C. P. Lee, S. C. Chen, T. H. Lin, H. H. Tsai, K. C. Ho and C. G. Wu, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 5454–5457 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liang, F. Y. Cheng, J. Liang and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15842–15848 CAS .
J. H. Yum, S. R. Jang, P. Walter, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, S. Kim, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4680–4682 RSC .
R. Y. Y. Lin, Y. S. Yen, Y. T. Cheng, C. P. Lee, Y. C. Hsu, H. H. Chou, C. Y. Hsu, Y. C. Chen, J. T. Lin, K. C. Ho and C. Tsai, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 3612–3615 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haid, M. Marszalek, A. Mishra, M. Wielopolski, J. Teuscher, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1291–1302 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, M. Liang, S. Y. Sun, Y. B. Shi, Z. J. Ma, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 5375–5385 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, X. Jiang, E. Gabrielsson, M. Linder, T. Marinado, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldtbd and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7232–7238 RSC .
X. Jiang, T. N. Marinado, E. Gabrielsson, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2799–2805 CAS .
X. Jiang, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, E. M. J. Johansson, M. Quintana, M. Karlsson, L. C. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2944–2952 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Ning, Q. Zhang, W. J. Wu, H. C. Pei, B. Liu and H. Tian, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, J. Hua, W. Wu, J. Li, Z. Jin, Y. Long and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1736–1745 CAS .
J. Tang, W. Wu, J. Huan, J. Li, X. Li and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 982–990 CAS .
Z. Q. Wan, C. Y. Jia, Y. D. Duan, L. L. Zhou, J. Q. Zhang, Y. Lin and Y. Shi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4507–4514 RSC .
Z. Q. Wan, C. Y. Jia, J. Q. Zhang, Y. D. Duan, Y. Lin and Y. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 426–431 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Zhang, H. Pan, X. H. Ju, Y. J. Ji, L. Qin, H. G. Zheng and X. F. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2809–2815 RSC .
J. Shi, J. Huang, R. Tang, Z. Chai, J. Hua, J. Qin, Q. Li and Z. Li, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 5248–5255 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Singh, M. S. Roy, K. R. J. Thomas, S. Balaiah, K. Bhanuprakash and G. D. Sharma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5941–5950 CAS .
H. Han, M. Liang, K. Tang, X. Cheng, X. Zong, Z. Sun and S. Xue, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 217, 169–176 CrossRef .
J. H. Yum, D. P. Hagberg, S. J. Moon, K. M. Karlsson, T. Marinado, L. C. Sun, A. Hagfeldt, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 48, 1576–1580 CrossRef .
L. Alibabaei, J. H. Kim, M. Wang, N. Pootrakulchote, J. Teuscher, D. Di Censo, R. Humphry-Baker, J. E. Moser, Y. J. Yu, K. Y. Kay, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1757–1764 CAS .
K. Do, D. Kim, N. Cho, S. Paek, K. Song and J. Ko, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, H. N. Tsao, W. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Xue, M. Grätzel and B. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201200435 .
D. P. Hagberg, J. H. Yum, H. Lee, F. D. Angelis, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, R. Humphry-Baker, L. C. Sun, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6259–6266 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. J. Thomas, Y. C. Hsu, J. T. Lin, K. M. Lee, K. C. Ho, C. H. Lai, Y. M. Cheng and P. T. Chou, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1830–1840 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Tsai, Y. C. Hsu, J. T. Lin, H. C. Chen and C. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18785–18793 CAS .
H. J. Chen, H. Huang, X. W. Huang, J. N. Clifford, A. Forneli, E. Palomares, X. Y. Zheng, L. P. Zheng, X. Y. Wang, P. Shen, B. Zhao and S. T. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3280–3286 CAS .
D. W. Chang, H. N. Tsao, P. Salvatori, F. D. Angelis, M. Grätzel, S. M. Park, L. Dai, H. J. Lee, J. B. Baek and M. K. Nazeeruddin, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6209–6215 RSC .
G. Li, Y. F. Zhou, X. B. Cao, P. Bao, K. J. Jiang, Y. Lin and L. M. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2201–2203 RSC .
A. Abbotto, V. Leandri, N. Manfredi, F. D. Angelis, M. Pastore, J.-H. Yum, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 6195–6205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Numata, A. Islam, H. Chen and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8548–8552 CAS .
X. Ren, S. Jiang, M. Cha, G. Zhou and Z. S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3493–3499 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J. H. Yum, S. Frantacci, F. D. Angelis, D. D. Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701–16707 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jung, J. K. Lee, K. H. Song, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 3652–3658 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, J. K. Lee, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 3115–3121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, C. Baik, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, M. S. Kang, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 327–330 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, I. Raabe, D. Kim, F. Teocoli, C. Kim, K. Song, J. H. Yum, J. Ko, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1193–1201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lim, C. Kim, J. Song, T. Yu, W. Lim, K. Song, P. Wang, N. N. Zu and J. Ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22640–22646 CAS .
S. Paek, H. Choi, H. Choi, C. W. Lee, M. S. Kang, K. Song, M. K. Nazeeruddin and J. Ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14646–14653 CAS .
S. Kim, D. Kim, H. Choi, M. S. Kang, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4951–4953 RSC .
C. Kim, H. Choi, S. Kim, C. Baik, K. Song, M. S. Kang, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 7072–7079 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, J. K. Lee, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 3115–3121 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, H. Choi, D. Kim, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 9206–9212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ko, H. Choi, M. S. Kang, H. H. wang, H. Ji, J. Kim, J. Ko and Y. J. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2391–2399 RSC .
S. Q. Fan, C. Kim, B. Fang, K. X. Liao, G. J. Yang, C. J. Li, J. J. Kim and J. Ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7747–7754 CAS .
H. Qin, S. Wenger, M. Xu, F. Gao, X. Jing, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9202–9203 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Xu, S. Wenger, H. Bala, D. Shi, R. Z. Li, Y. Z. Zhou, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2966–2973 CAS .
M. K. Wang, M. F. Xu, D. Shi, R. Z. Li, F. F. Gao, G. L. Zhang, Z. H. Yi, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4460–4463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paek, H. Choi, C. Kim, N. Cho, S. So, K. Song, M. K. Nazeeruddinc and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2874–2876 RSC .
H. Choi, J. J. Kim, K. Song, J. Ko, Md. K. Nazeeruddinc and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3280–3286 RSC .
J. J. Kim, H. Choi, J. W. Lee, M. S. Kang, K. Song, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5223–5229 RSC .
Y. J. Chang and T. J. Chow, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 4726–4734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baheti, P. Tyagi, K. R. J. Thomas, Y. C. Hsu and J. T. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8541–8547 CAS .
A. Baheti, P. Singh, C. P. Lee, K. R. J. Thomas and K. C. Ho, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 4910–4920 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chang and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9523–9531 RSC .
Y. D. Lin and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14907–14916 RSC .
K. F. Chen, Y. C. Hsu, Q. Y. Wu, M. C. P. Yeh and S. S. Sun, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 377–380 CrossRef CAS .
C. Olivier, F. Sauvage, L. Ducasse, F. Castet, M. Grätzel and T. Toupance, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 731–736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, Y. H. Chen, H. H. Chou, S. Chaurasia, Y. S. Wen, J. T. Lin and C. F. Yao, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 1074–1084 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Cao, W. B. Zhang, J. L. Wang, X. H. Zhou, H. Lu and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12430–12431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Xiao, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Pei, G. Yu and D. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 818–822 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, H. Pei, J. Luan, C. Lu, Y. Cui and H. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10307–10313 CAS .
S. H. Lin, Y. C. Hsu, J. T. Lin, C. K. Lin and J. S. Yang, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 7877–7886 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, M. Lu, Q. Wang, W. Chen, H. Han, Z. Sun and S. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1657–1664 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, M. Liang, H. Han, Z. Sun and S. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 274–281 CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura and S. Uchida, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3036–3037 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska, R. Charvet, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. Takata, H. Miura, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1202–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, H. Miura, S. Uchida, M. Takata, K. Sumioka, P. Liska, P. Comte, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5194–5196 RSC .
D. Kuang, S. Uchida, R. Humphry-Baker, S. K. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1923–1927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Higashijima, Y. Inoue, H. Miura, Y. Kubota, K. Funabiki, T. Yoshida and M. Matsui, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2721–2724 RSC .
M. Matsui, T. Fujita, Y. Kubota, K. Funabiki, J. Jin, T. Yoshida and H. Miura, Dyes Pigm., 2010, 86, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y. Wu, S. Wang, W. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, Z. S. Wang and H. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wu, X. Zhang, W. Q. Li, Z.-S. Wang, H. Tian and W. H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wu, M. Marszalek, S. M. Zakeeruddin, Q. Z. H. Tian, M. Grätzel and W. H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8261–8272 CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Wu, X. Lu, X. Zhang, G. Zhou, F. B. Miapeh, W. Zhu and Z. S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4394–4401 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, Y. Fu and H. Tian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1170–1181 CAS .
W. Q. Li, Y. Z. Wu, Q. Zhang, H. Tian and W. H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1822–1830 CAS .
S. Y. Qu, C. J. Qin, A. Islam, Y. Z. Wu, W. H. Zhu, J. L. Hua, H. Tian and L. Y. Han, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6972–6974 RSC .
W. Q. Li, Y. Z. Wu, X. Li, Y. S. Xie and W. H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1830–1837 CAS .
M. Akhtaruzzaman, Y. Seya, N. Asao, A. l. Islam, E. Kwon, A. E. Shafei, L. Y. Han and Y. Yamamoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10771–10778 RSC .
K. Funabiki, H. Mase, Y. Saito, A. Otsuka, A. Hibino, N. Tanaka, H. Miura, Y. Himori, T. Yoshida, Y. Kubota and M. Matsui, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 1246–1249 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akhtaruzzaman, A. Islam, F. Yang, N. Asao, E. Kwon, S. P. Singh, L. Y. Han and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12400–12402 RSC .
B. Liu, Q. B. Liu, D. You, X. Y. Li, Y. Naruta and W. H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13348–13356 RSC .
B. Liu, W. J. Wu, X. Y. Li, L. Li, S. F. Guo, X. R. Wei, W. H. Zhu and Q. B. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 8985–8992 RSC .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, M. Murai, M. Kurashige, S. Ito, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, M. Kurashige, S. Ito, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2003, 252–253 RSC .
S. L. Li, K. J. Jiang, K. F. Shao and L. M. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2792–2794 RSC .
X. B. Cheng, S. Y. Sun, M. Liang, Y. B. Shi, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 92, 1292–1299 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, X. Yang, H. Tian, X. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, X. Yang, J. Cong, H. Tian, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4031–4033 RSC .
Y. Hao, X. C. Yang, M. Z. Zhou, J. Y. Cong, X. N. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1601–1605 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Cho, J. H. Park, S. K. Lee, J. Lee and H. K. Shim, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, Y. Pan, L. Li, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3741–3743 RSC .
H. N. Tian, X. C. Yang, R. K. Chen, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 674–677 CAS .
T. Meyer, D. Ogermann, A. Pankrath, K. Kleinermanns and T. J. J. Müller, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 3704–3715 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Park, Y. S. Won, Y. C. Choi and J. H. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3732–3736 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Tsao, T. Y. Wu, H. P. Wang, I. W. Sun, S. G. Su, Y. C. Lin and C. W. Chang, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Xie, A. Midya, K. P. Loh, S. Adams, D. J. Blackwood, J. Wang, X. J. Zhang and Z. k. Chen, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2010, 18, 573–581 CAS .
S. H. Kim, H. W. Kim, C. Sakong, J. W. Namgoong, S. W. Park, M. J. Ko, C. H. Lee, W. I. Lee and J. P. Kim, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5784–5787 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marszalek, S. Nagane, A. Ichake, R. Humphry-Baker, V. Paul, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 889–894 RSC .
W. J. Wu, J. B. Yang, J. N. Hua, J. Tang, L. Zhang, Y. T. Long and H. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1772–1779 RSC .
C. J. Yang, Y. J. Chang, M. Watanabe, Y. S. Hon and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4040–4049 RSC .
C. J. Chen, J. Y. Liao, Z. G. Chi, B. J. Xu, X. Q. Zhang, D. B. Kuang, Y. Zhang, S. W. Liu and J. R. Xu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7788–7797 RSC .
C. J. Chen, J. Y. Liao, Z. G. Chi, B. J. Xu, X. Q. Zhang, D. B. Kuang, Y. Zhang, S. W. Liu and J. R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8994–9005 RSC .
Y. J. Chang, P. T. Chou, Y. Z. Lin, M. Watanabe, C. J. Yang, T. M. Chin and T. J. Chow, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21704–21712 RSC .
D. Cao, J. Peng, Y. Hong, X. Fang, L. Wang and H. Meier, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 1610–1613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. Y. Liao, D. Cao, X. Zang, D. B. Kuang, L. Wang, H. Meier and C. Y. Su, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 8015–8021 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Karlsson, X. Jiang, S. K. Eriksson, E. Gabrielsson, H. Rensmo, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6415–6424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, I. Bora, X. Jiang, E. Gabrielsson, K. M. Karlsson, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12462–12472 RSC .
H. Tian, X. C. Yang, J. Y. Cong, R. K. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Hao, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6288–6290 RSC .
N. Koumura, Z. S. Wang, S. Mori, M. Miyashita, E. Suzuki and K. Hara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14256–14257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, N. Koumura, Y. Cui, M. Takahashi, H. Sekiguchi, A. Mori, T. Kubo, A. Furube and K. Hara, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3993–4003 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, Z. S. Wang, Y. Cui, A. Furube and N. Koumura, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1109–1114 CAS .
N. Koumura, Z. S. Wang, M. Miyashita, Y. Uemura, H. Sekiguchi, Y. Cui, A. Mori, S. Mori and K. Hara, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4829–4836 RSC .
X. H. Zhang, Y. Cui, R. Katoh, N. Koumura and K. Hara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18283–18290 CAS .
X. H. Zhang, Z. S. Wang, Y. Cui, N. Koumura, A. Furube and K. Hara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13409–13415 CAS .
H. Lai, J. Hong, P. Liu, C. Yuan, Y. X. Li and Q. Fang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2427–2432 RSC .
D. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 1913–1922 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chang, P. T. Chou, S. Y. Lin, M. Watanabe, Z. Q. Liu, J. L. Lin, K. Y. Chen, S. S. Sun, C. Y. Liu and T. J. Chow, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 572–581 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duan, K. Fan, C. Zhong, T. Y. Peng, J. G. Qin and X. G. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7081–7086 RSC .
C. Teng, X. Yang, C. Yuan, C. Li, R. Chen, H. Tian, S. Li, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 5542–5545 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, C. Zafer, B. Gultekin, B. Aydin, S. Koyuncu, S. Icli, F. F. Santiago and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19840–19848 CAS .
W. Lee, N. Cho, J. Kwon, J. Ko and J. I. Hong, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, J. Albero, A. Morandeira, E. Palomares, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2906–2907 CrossRef CAS .
T. Marinado, K. Nonomura, J. Nissfolk, M. K. Karlsson, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, S. Mori and A. Hagfeldt, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 2592–2598 CrossRef CAS .
M. Planells, L. Pellejà, J. N. Clifford, M. Pastore, D. Angelis, F. López, N. Marder and S. R. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1820–1829 CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nusbaumer, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 3756–3763 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, G. Wang, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21500–21507 CAS .
H. Nusbaumer, J. E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10461–10464 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Wang, P. G. Nicholson, L. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14300–14306 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18847–18855 CAS .
M. Xu, D. Zhou, N. Cai, J. Liu, R. Li and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4735–4742 CAS .
M. F. Xu, M. Zhang, M. Pastore, R. Z. Li, F. D. Angelis and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 976–983 RSC .
M. Zhang, J. Y. Liu, Y. H. Wang, D. F. Zhou and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1401–1406 RSC .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11442–11445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Cao, N. Cai, Y. L. Wang, R. Z. Li, Y. Yuan and P. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8282–8286 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Zhang, M. Xu, D. Zhou, X. Jing and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3021–3029 CAS .
H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, T. Moehl, J. H. Yum, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 591–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Mmoehl, S. Ahmad1, T. Bessho, A. Mmarchioro, E. Ghadiri, J. E. Mmoser, C. Y. Yi, M. K. Nnazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631–638 CrossRef .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N. Lê Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, W. Peng, K. Zhang, A. Islam and L. Han, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 2532–2535 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Zong, M. Liang, C. R. Fan, K. Tang, G. Li, Z. Sun and S. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11241–11250 CAS .
X. P. Zong, M. Liang, T. Chen, J. N. Jia, L. N. Wang, Z. Sun and S. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6645–6647 RSC .
Y. Numata, I. Ashraful, Y. Shirai and L. Han, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6159–6161 RSC .
Y. Oyama, S. Inoue, T. Nagano, K. Kushimoto, J. Ohshita, I. Imae, K. Komaguchi and Y. Harima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7429–7433 CrossRef .
Y. Ooyama, T. Nagano, S. Inoue, I. Imae, K. Komaguchi, J. Ohshita and Y. Harima, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14837–14843 CrossRef CAS .
M. Katono, T. Bessho, M. Wielopolski, M. Marszalek, J. E. Moser, R. H. Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16876–16884 CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Yang, M. Cheng, S. Li, X. Wang and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2441–2446 CAS .
J. Mao, N. He, Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, F. Guo, L. Chen, W. Wu, J. Hua and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9873–9876 CrossRef CAS .
F. Labat, T. Le Bahers, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1268–1277 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ambrosio, N. Martsinovich and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1531–1535 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivas, K. Yesudas, K. Bhanuprakash, V. J. Rao and L. Giribabu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20117–20126 CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cai, S. J. Moon, N. L. Cevey-Ha, T. Moehl, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1452–1456 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, I. K. Ding, T. Giovenzana, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee and A. Sellinger, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1455–1462 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, L. Yang, E. Gabrielsson, P. W. Lohse, G. Boschloo, L. Sun and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18070–18078 CAS .
N. Metri, X. Sallenave, C. Plesse, L. Beouch, P.-H. Aubert, F. Goubard, C. Chevrot and G. Sini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3765–3772 CAS .

Footnote† M.L. is a visiting professorial scholar at KLAEMC.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Mao Liang
	Mao Liang was born in Sichuan, China, in 1976. He received his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Jun Chen from Nankai University in 2007. He is presently an associated professor at the Department of Applied Chemistry, Tianjin University of Technology. He is also a visiting professorial scholar at KLAEMC. His current research interest is focused on the design and synthesis of dye sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs).

Jun Chen
	Jun Chen was born in Anhui, China, in 1967. He obtained his BSc and MSc degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD from Wollongong University (Australia) in 1999. He held the NEDO fellowship at National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. He was appointed the specially-appointed Professor of Energy Materials Chemistry at Nankai University in 2002, the Outstanding Young Scientist from NSFC in 2003, Cheung Kong Scholar from Ministry of Education in 2005, and the Chief Scientist of the National Nano Key Science Research in 2010. He is the director of KLAEMC. He was awarded the National Natural Science Award (2nd prize) in 2011. His research expertise is energy conversion and storage with solar cells, fuel cells, and batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic working principle of a DSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the D–π–A structure of an organic dye.	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structure of arylamine donors.	 

 	Fig. 4  A typical J–V curve of a DSC.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  A typical IPCE curve of a DSC.	 
IPCE (λ) = APCE × LHE = Φinj × ηcol × LHE	(2)
VOC = EF,redox − EF,n	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Simple energy level diagram and basic electron transfer processes for a DSC.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representative TPA dyes 1–14.	 

 	Fig. 8  Representative TPA dyes 15–29.	 

 	Fig. 9  Representative TPA dyes 30–36.	 

 	Fig. 10  Representative TPA dyes 37–47.	 

 	Fig. 11  Representative substituted TPA dyes 48–60.	 

 	Fig. 12  Graphical illustration of the geometries of the adsorbed dyes and the dye–I3− interaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Representative substituted TPA dyes 61–76.	 

 	Fig. 14  Electrostatic potential plots of 69 and 70. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Representative substituted TPA dyes 77–86.	 

 	Fig. 16  Representative planar TPA dyes 87–90.	 

 	Fig. 17  Representative branched TPA dyes 91–103.	 

 	Fig. 18  Representative branched TPA dyes 104–111.	 

 	Fig. 19  Representative fluorene based TPA dyes 112–122.	 

 	Fig. 20  Representative fluorene based TPA dyes 123–130.	 

 	Fig. 21  Representative naphthalene based TPA dyes 131–146.	 

 	Fig. 22  Representative truxene based TPA dyes 147–158.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the bulky structure of truxene units, which block the I3− ions approaching the TiO2 surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  Representative indoline dyes 159–165.	 

 	Fig. 25  Representative indoline dyes 166–182.	 

 	Fig. 26  Representative N,N-dialkylaniline dyes 183–192.	 

 	Fig. 27  Representative tetrahydroquinoline dyes 193–198.	 

 	Fig. 28  Representative PTZ dyes 199–210.	 

 	Fig. 29  Representative PTZ dyes 211–231.	 

 	Fig. 30  Representative POZ dyes 232–236.	 

 	Fig. 31  Representative carbazole dyes 237–247.	 

 	Fig. 32  Representative carbazole dyes 248–255.	 

 	Fig. 33  Representative arylamine organic dyes 256–270 for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 34  Representative arylamine organic dyes 271–275 for DSCs employing cobalt electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 35  Representative arylamine organic dyes 276–288 with new acceptors.	 

 	Fig. 36  Representative arylamine organic compounds as solid state hole transport materials.	 


1
	386	6.3	770	0.67	3.3	
21


2
	417	11.1	730	0.66	5.3	
21


3
	438	10.39	702	0.785	5.73	
22


4
	438	7.72	694	0.803	4.3	
22


5
	490	12.41	663	0.760	6.25	
22


6
	457	9.60	671	0.776	5.0	
22


7
	418	8.78	726	0.807	5.14	
23


8
	464	11.7	766	0.756	6.78	
23


9
	441	9.4	668	0.69	4.36	
24


10
	444	8.1	704	0.68	3.86	
24


11
	500	1.3	480	0.70	0.44	
24


12
	425	8.1	630	0.68	3.49	
24


13
	433	13.83	677	0.692	6.49	
26


14
	—	11.1	585	0.59	3.86	
19


15
	410	12.8	620	0.66	5.20	
30


16
	426	15.5	690	0.683	7.30	
30


17
	420	10.7	750	0.668	5.36	
30


18
	420	14.73	754	0.65	7.25	
31


19
	440	15.78	735	0.60	7.00	
31


20
	420	15.58	787	0.67	8.22	
31


21
	472	9.38	720	0.64	4.36	
32


22
	503	10.33	797	0.64	5.30	
32


23
	435	10.1	750	0.75	5.7	
33


24
	465	11.9	720	0.73	6.3	
33


25
	525	5.70	735	0.78	3.27	
34


26
	362	14.6	676	0.75	7.40	
34


27
	489	14.4	697	0.73	7.3	
35


28
	477	14.2	765	0.66	7.17	
36


29
	465	13.5	715	0.65	6.27	
36


30
	443	13.97	670	0.62	5.8	
37


31
	510	12.66	610	0.56	4.4	
37


32
	469	16.59	690	0.64	7.36	
40


33
	456	14.16	680	0.66	6.30	
40


34
	437	13.47	600	0.59	4.77	
41


35
	472	14.20	570	0.60	4.79	
41


36
	425	11.29	710	0.65	5.22	
42


37
	491	10.44	546	0.66	3.77	
43


38
	502	8.35	524	0.67	2.91	
43


39
	501	15.2	670	0.66	6.72	
44


40
	557	16.46	545	0.67	6.04	
45


41
	625	16.24	480	0.68	5.30	
46


42
	596	11.29	470	0.69	3.66	
46


43
	504	11.79	680	0.65	5.30	
47


44
	457	11.78	810	0.60	5.73	
48


45
	470	15.69	778	0.61	7.51	
49


46
	433	12.47	789	0.61	6.01	
49


47
	563	9.89	559	0.64	3.52	
50


48
	458	13.0	564	0.59	4.32	
53


49
	461	18.2	563	0.57	5.84	
53


50
	486	9.01	631	0.72	4.11	
15


51
	510	9.89	534	0.66	3.49	
15


52
	444	8.12	715	0.68	3.94	
15


53
	486	11.40	692	0.72	5.70	
15


54
	514	11.88	775	0.747	6.88	
65


55
	516	13.9	731	0.740	7.54	
64


56
	524	15.2	720	0.733	8.02	
66


57
	552	16.1	803	0.759	9.8	
66


58
	525	13.81	714	0.721	7.11	
67


59
	555	15.84	769	0.735	8.95	
67


60
	521	17.94	770	0.730	10.1	
68


61
	511	13.39	810	0.70	7.60	
73


62
	472	11.9	713	0.67	5.68	
74


63
	502	10.65	710	0.68	5.14	
75


64
	489	7.97	670	0.68	3.63	
75


65
	459	9.4	810	0.74	5.6	
76


66
	510	11.59	791	0.76	7.12	
77


67
	691	11.12	422	0.557	2.61	
78


68
	650	9.40	432	0.578	2.34	
78


69
	602	3.61	448	0.63	1.03	
80


71
	570	3.40	489	0.74	1.24	
83


72
	515	18.47	640	0.69	8.21	
83


73
	497	11.42	600	0.61	4.18	
84


74
	514	13.52	620	0.62	5.19	
84


75
	445	12.96	750	0.61	6.00	
85


76
	482	12.00	670	0.60	4.83	
85


77
	487	13.6	615	0.69	5.77	
88


78
	522	9.05	567	0.56	2.87	
88


79
	480	13.8	632	0.69	6.02	
88


80
	411	8.70	710	0.70	4.30	
89


81
	424	7.3	603	0.74	3.26	
91


82
	422	9.2	625	0.79	4.54	
91


83
	425	11.61	766	0.586	5.21	
93


84
	440	11.71	709	0.592	4.92	
93


85
	487	14.69	740	0.62	6.77	
94


86
	576	9.2	660	0.72	4.37	
95


87
	455	15.2	720	0.72	7.87	
99


88
	463	16.8	750	0.70	8.71	
99


89
	558	15.37	651	0.75	7.51	
100


90
	569	16.09	671	0.74	8.00	
100


91
	462	14.00	694	0.71	6.90	
101


92
	458	13.90	744	0.70	7.23	
101


93
	473	16.0	630	0.61	6.15	
102


94
	480	15.2	610	0.58	5.41	
102


95
	462	14.5	680	0.61	5.95	
102


96
	465	15.6	650	0.60	6.04	
102


97
	462	11.4	610	0.59	4.11	
102


98
	426	12.21	650	0.59	4.68	
103


99
	413	9.68	690	0.60	4.01	
103


100
	400	10.21	700	0.71	5.07	
104


101
	413	5.51	630	0.726	2.52	
104


102
	384	6.56	700	0.75	3.46	
105


103
	386	10.78	710	0.74	5.67	
105


104
	489	8.85	639	0.76	4.34	
106


105
	511	10.45	701	0.77	5.63	
106


106
	478	10.9	641	0.725	5.05	
107


107
	480	9.65	662	0.706	4.51	
107


108
	485	10.34	715	0.722	5.35	
108


109
	468	6.87	687	0.678	3.20	
108


110
	495	7.13	670	0.71	3.4	
109


111
	480	11.25	770	0.76	6.6	
109


112
	436	12.20	764	0.77	7.20	
110


113
	452	14.0	753	0.77	8.01	
110


114
	463	14.39	700	0.66	6.65	
111


115
	456	15.33	740	0.66	7.43	
112


116
	480	13.84	790	0.75	8.2	
115


117
	430	16.13	641	0.718	7.42	
113


118
	430	17.45	664	0.742	8.60	
113


119
	480	15.7	690	0.74	8.0	
114


120
	490	17.6	710	0.72	9.1	
114


121
	450	13.02	570	0.72	5.34	
116


122
	466	17.49	700	0.70	8.70	
116


123
	525	14.33	734	0.76	8.0	
123


124
	514	13.35	777	0.749	7.8	
125


125
	525	13.58	708	0.760	7.31	
124


126
	544	14.85	696	0.736	7.61	
124


127
	669	13.92	610	0.74	6.29	
126


128
	662	12.17	509	0.7936	4.91	
127


129
	534	17.10	610	0.72	7.51	
128


130
	468	14.80	740	0.74	8.19	
128


131
	422	16.81	740	0.57	7.08	
129


132
	427	15.36	690	0.50	5.25	
129


133
	409	12.28	730	0.67	6.0	
130


134
	424	11.28	700	0.66	5.23	
130


135
	441	10.5	595	0.70	4.36	
131


136
	447	10.4	571	0.69	4.11	
131


137
	458	17.04	650	0.61	6.72	
132


138
	460	15.48	690	0.65	6.87	
132


139
	458	15.16	680	0.68	7.00	
132


140
	442	9.32	580	0.70	3.37	
132


141
	433	10.55	660	0.65	4.46	
133


142
	437	11.34	700	0.67	5.27	
133


143
	430	14.16	650	0.65	5.95	
82


144
	414	7.16	640	0.67	3.04	
136


145
	517	14.0	627	0.745	6.6	
135


146
	500	13.9	618	0.717	6.2	
135


147
	406	7.75	689	0.73	3.90	
139


148
	420	7.89	731	0.74	4.27	
139


149
	430	6.86	752	0.70	3.61	
139


150
	383	10.13	750	0.72	5.45	
140


151
	383	7.31	760	0.66	3.64	
140


152
	398	9.71	690	0.69	4.62	
140


153
	388	5.53	670	0.67	2.48	
140


154
	486	9.8	750	0.67	4.92	
141


155
	498	10.7	745	0.66	5.26	
141


156
	506	11.5	772	0.68	6.04	
141


157
	498	10.4	763	0.67	5.32	
142


158
	519	11.8	771	0.68	6.18	
142


159
	491	17.76	604	0.57	6.1	
143


160
	526	18.75	645	0.538	6.51	
144


161
	532	17.50	584	0.538	5.50	
144


162
	531	17.38	628	0.513	5.60	
144


163
	—	19.56	569	0.533	5.93	
144


164
	532	18.56	717	0.716	9.52	
146


165
	567	13.07	660	0.65	5.55	
148


166
	486	10.58	650	0.69	4.72	
155


167
	533	17.7	650	0.76	8.70	
150


168
	547	14.3	639	0.75	6.85	
151


169
	557	10.4	629	0.71	4.64	
151


170
	536	18.00	696	0.72	9.04	
152


171
	496	13.18	780	0.78	8.02	
153


172
	495	13.39	680	0.74	6.74	
153


173
	442	10.06	748	0.68	5.11	
155


174
	526	13.40	760	0.73	7.43	
156


175
	433	8.23	727	0.71	4.26	
157


176
	385	5.10	772	0.732	2.88	
158


177
	386	8.23	767	0.735	4.64	
158


178
	643	13.64	480	0.57	3.75	
159


179
	440	15.1	640	0.63	6.20	
160


180
	491	11.63	639	0.68	5.08	
161


181
	504	15.29	627	0.72	6.84	
161


182
	523	18.53	649	0.71	8.49	
161


183
	454	10.4	710	0.74	5.5	
163


184
	465	9.9	740	0.74	5.4	
163


185
	501	12.9	710	0.74	6.8	
163


186
	469	12.5	680	0.69	5.9	
163


187
	488	15.23	560	0.73	6.23	
165


188
	513	10.64	520	0.70	3.87	
165


189
	464	12.33	642	0.64	5.08	
20


190
	450	11.46	643	0.66	4.93	
20


191
	521	13.7	606	0.69	5.7	
166


192
	491	15.2	605	0.68	6.3	
166


193
	468	8.48	583	0.64	3.17	
167


194
	441	11.20	600	0.67	4.49	
167


195
	462	12.00	597	0.63	4.53	
167


196
	455	10.00	537	0.64	3.44	
167


197
	610	11.76	464	0.674	3.7	
168


198
	615	13.35	519	0.73	5.1	
169


199
	452	10.9	712	0.71	5.5	
171


200
	481	4.8	532	0.74	1.9	
171


201
	568	14.4	390	0.54	3.0	
172


202
	472	3.87	698	0.65	1.8	
173


203
	462	12.52	675	0.693	7.3	
174


204
	469	14.96	675	0.682	6.8	
174


205
	473	15.18	645	0.69	6.72	
175


206
	496	11.69	708	0.653	5.4	
176


207
	508	7.14	706	0.556	2.80	
176


208
	442	12.18	771.7	0.7002	5.29	
177


209
	448	12.05	724.5	0.7233	6.32	
177


210
	466	11.68	745.7	0.6995	6.09	
177


211
	451	11.2	768	0.75	6.53	
178


212
	478	15.2	691	0.70	7.44	
178


213
	449	10.84	592	0.69	4.41	
179


214
	450	7.39	505	0.66	2.48	
179


215
	453	13.66	670	0.61	5.60	
180


216
	474	11.65	710	0.63	5.22	
180


217
	442	14.42	690	0.63	6.22	
180


218
	463	5.99	570	0.60	2.04	
180


219
	471	11.82	759	0.65	5.84	
181


220
	474	12.62	789	0.63	6.29	
181


221
	474	11.41	804	0.63	5.76	
181


222
	462	10.76	793	0.64	5.51	
182


223
	466	12.18	826	0.65	6.55	
182


224
	495	14.33	830	0.65	7.78	
183


225
	496	13.33	830	0.62	6.87	
183


226
	439	6.13	709	0.67	2.91	
184


227
	433	7.86	740	0.71	4.13	
184


228
	435	8.27	750	0.68	4.22	
184


229
	439	6.98	740	0.69	3.56	
184


230
	513	9.13	679	0.71	4.40	
185


231
	511	12.75	691	0.69	6.06	
185


232
	491	12.25	760	0.72	6.70	
186


233
	506	14.38	0.78	0.64	7.17	
186


234
	500	13.09	800	0.70	7.40	
186


235
	482	13.7	800	0.63	7.0	
187


236
	517	14.7	733	0.71	7.7	
188


237
	480	9.90	750	0.67	4.97	
190


238
	480	10.67	690	0.68	5.01	
190


239
	485	10.56	670	0.63	4.46	
190


240
	483	16.0	710	0.71	8.1	
192


241
	480	14.5	730	0.69	7.3	
192


242
	502	13.8	700	0.77	7.4	
193


243
	496	14.6	700	0.76	7.8	
193


244
	490	15.0	660	0.74	7.3	
193


245
	492	15.4	710	0.67	7.3	
194


246
	501	15.5	700	0.62	6.7	
194


247
	444	11.67	796	0.68	6.33	
195


248
	411	9.83	740	0.70	5.02	
196


249
	435	11.50	680	0.66	5.15	
196


250
	428	14.63	685	0.67	6.70	
197


251
	465	10.02	570	0.64	3.62	
198


252
	429	8.76	621	0.754	4.1	
199


253
	468	10.9	400	0.57	2.48	
200


254
	386	13.0	630	0.75	6.14	
201


255
	441	13.7	680	0.70	6.52	
201


276
	374	1.99	516	0.59	0.60	
226


277
	376	1.80	517	0.60	0.56	
226


278
	394	5.80	540	0.60	1.89	
226


279
	396	5.63	548	0.60	1.84	
226


280
	396	7.04	568	0.59	2.35	
227


281
	430	8.57	540	0.72	3.28	
225


282
	416	9.91	580	0.70	4.05	
225


283
	422	7.03	520	0.69	2.51	
225


284
	437	7.04	682	0.691	3.32	
228


285
	432	5.78	688	0.718	2.87	
228


286
	443	8.05	756	0.733	4.50	
228


287
	485	14.4	684	0.74	7.3	
229


288
	519	13.94	746	0.68	7.11	
230



75
	—	10.7	920	0.68	6.7	
208


59
	
	13.3	950	0.74	9.3	
214


256
	497	10.54	950	0.77	7.7	
213


257
	504	12.05	930	0.75	8.4	
213


258
	503	11.41	870	0.77	7.6	
213


259
	429	6.91	1050	0.76	5.5	
214


260
	514	12.17	990	0.75	9.0	
214


261
	511	12.92	860	0.72	8.0	
214


262
	—	7.99	815	0.76	5.0	
215


263
	—	12.98	837	0.74	8.0	
215


264
	—	15.31	850	0.73	9.4	
216


265
	—	14.86	840	0.753	9.4	
217


266
	—	14.81	930	0.730	10.1	
217


267
	—	14.67	830	0.750	9.1	
217


268
	—	14.55	930	0.743	10.1	
217


269
	—	13.06	998	0.774	10.08	
220


270
	488	8.38	747	0.648	4.04	
222


271
	498	12.0	830	0.72	7.2	
223


272
	520	9.0	865	0.71	5.5	
223


273
	501	11.2	870	0.71	6.9	
223


274
	498	9.6	870	0.70	5.8	
224


275
	500	11.9	900	0.71	7.6	
224

Footnote
† M.L. is a visiting professorial scholar at KLAEMC.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
