A universal approach for optimizing charge extraction in electron transporting layer-free organic solar cells via Lewis base doping   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10002D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10002D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25808-25817A universal approach for optimizing charge extraction in electron transporting layer-free organic solar cells via Lewis base doping†

        
          
            Rong 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Boxin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jianqiu 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuning 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Donghui 
            Wei
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobo 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Zhou
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China
cCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province 450001, P. R. China
Received 
      10th September 2019
    , Accepted 16th October 2019First published on 21st October 2019AbstractAlthough the improvement of power conversion efficiency (PCE) in organic photovoltaic cells (OSC) is due to the development of novel donors and non-fullerene acceptors, state-of-the-art devices commonly utilize charge transporting/extraction interlayers. Here we demonstrate a universal approach based on a series of tetraalkyl ammonium bromide (TXABr) Lewis bases as n-dopants for mediating electron extracting properties in a range of OSCs with non-fullerene or PCBM acceptors. Under optimal conditions, the TXABr-doped devices without electron transporting layers (ETLs) exhibit PCEs comparable to those of the ones based on a conventional device structure containing ETLs. We found that the doping efficiency of acceptors is intimately correlated with the chain length (Lchain) of dopants. In OSCs based on acceptors of ITIC derivatives (IT-4F, ITIC, ITM, and ITCC), similar Lchain-dependent doping efficiency and PCE modification are found, while for OSCs with acceptors bearing different structures in conjugated backbones or side chains, the selection rule of dopants to achieve the best performance enhancement is different. These correlations are explained by the mutual effects of electrostatic interaction in the dopants and steric hindrance between the dopants and acceptors, the latter of which is affected by the compatibility of side chains in the host and dopant. With TXABr doping, (quasi-)ohmic contacts for electrons are realized in these ETL-free devices, leading to expediting the charge sweepout with mitigated interfacial charge recombination. This work offers a promising pathway to realize high efficiency non-fullerene OSCs with simplified device architecture.
Introduction
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic photovoltaic cells (OSCs) has been promising due to their advantages of cost-friendly device processing, light weight, flexibility and optical transparency.1 Smart materials design and device engineering have led to considerable increases in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs that currently exceeds 16% based on non-fullerene (NF) acceptors.2,3 The impressive efficiency enhancements are primarily due to the capabilities of extending the absorption of NF-BHJs toward lower energy regimes while maintaining a relatively low energy loss.4,5 In order to realize the target photovoltaic performance, interfacial properties are of critical importance. In OSCs, the interface governs not only the extraction process of photo-generated charges but also the built-in potential (Vbi) used to drift the carriers toward the electrodes.6 It has been shown that non-ohmic charge extraction/injection can cause unfavourable space-charge effects (near the contact area) to reduce the Vbi and increase interfacial charge recombination, which impairs both the short-circuit current (Jsc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc).7–10 Therefore, considerable efforts have been devoted to the design of interfacial materials, aiming to improve interfacial charge extraction and contact properties in OSCs.11,12 Successful examples are the conjugated polyelectrolytes PFN and PFN-Br or insulating polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) that have been used to modify the work function (WF) of metal electrodes (e.g. Al) via interfacial dipole interactions to increase electron collection in the device.13,14 To realize the proposed mechanism, critical control of the ETL thickness is often required to minimize negative impacts related to the poor electrical conductivity in ETLs.15 Inorganic LiF or ZnO is also of choice for ETLs while disadvantages of instability (LiF) or high processing temperature (ZnO) tend to restrain their realistic application, especially for large-area device fabrication.16,17
Doping has been evidenced to be a powerful methodology for modulating the opto-electronic properties of organic semiconductors.10,18–20 In this regard interface doping enables the reduction of the space charge effect at the organic semiconductor/metal interface,21,22 which helps minimize interfacial charge accumulation and improve charge extraction in the OSCs.23 Commonly adopted practices to realize n-doping involve alkali metals,24,25 organometallic dimers (Ru(MeCps)2),22 Lewis bases (anionic n-dopants),26,27 self-doped small molecules (fulleropyrrolidinium iodides and PDI-OH) or organic salts (e.g. pyronin B and crystal violet).28 In the doping process, the reduction ability, molecular levels, and Lewis basicity of utilized dopants are all of concern.29 Although advantages and disadvantages are concomitantly present upon utilizing these different dopants, a general challenge remains on how to finely control the doping efficiency with simple solution processing to achieve the desired dopant results and modifications of device performance.30,31 Given the diversity of emerging NF-acceptors that have become the main driving force for the improvement of PCEs, fundamental insights into the selection rules for n-dopants are still lacking. For example, the correlations between acceptor and dopant structures–doping efficiency–device behaviour are not yet completely understood. Nonvalent anion–π interactions have been found in the chemistry of anion-recognition32 and in biological and chemical systems.33 This concept has enabled electron doping of conjugated systems through the process of anion-induced electron transfer (AIET).34 Generally, the electron transfer (ET) and resultant doping efficiency are related to the electrostatic components of π-systems and the electron-donating ability of anions.35 Also, the energy level of anion-dopants has an impact on the process of ET which can be promoted after thermal or photo-activation.21,36 According to the theory of AIET,31 halide anions with different basicity (e.g. F-, Cl-, Br-, or I-) tend to react with π-molecules with different efficiencies of charge transfer.27 With the current understanding of anion–π interactions, both theoretically37 and experimentally,38 there are a handful of anions that have been utilized to provide the n-doping effect in conjugated systems.23,39 However, AIET based charge transfer doping has rarely been applied for BHJ-OSCs. In our previous study, we demonstrated n-doping with a Lewis base (tetrabutylammonium acetate, TBAA) to realize electron transporting layer (ETL)-free OSCs using NF-acceptors that exhibited PCEs comparable to the ones achieved with a conventional device architecture with ETLs.21 Despite this progress, the factors governing the charge transfer between the Lewis base dopants and hosts are far from clear, which limits the application of AIET-based doping in OSCs toward enhanced photovoltaic performance.
In this work, based on a series of tetraalkyl ammonium bromide (TXABr) Lewis bases as n-dopants, we demonstrate a universal doping approach with solution processing for a range of NF- (or fullerene-)OSCs. Our investigation indicates that the doping efficiency through the process of AIET is tuned by the chain length (Lchain) of TXABr dopants. Therefore, by choosing an appropriate Lchain, the PCEs of a range of ETL-free OSCs can reach comparable values to those of OSCs with ETLs, due to the modified interface properties with (quasi-)ohmic contacts (e.g. a PCE of 13.18% and 15.34% are respectively achieved in TXABr-doped PBDBT-2F:IT-4F and PBDBT-2F:Y6 solar cells without ETLs). The tuning of the doping efficiency with these TXABr dopants has translated into effective modulation of the background carrier density and electron transport and collection in the solar cell, such that all the photovoltaic parameters are enhanced simultaneously. Of importance, insights into the selection rules for the TXABr dopants to achieve the best device performance are deepened by our investigations with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We show that when using NF-acceptors bearing similar structures, e.g. A–D–A type ITIC derivatives, the optimal Lchain of dopants is the same (pentyl) for the resultant OSCs. However, with acceptors bearing different conjugated backbones or side-chains (e.g. A–D–A–D–A type Y6 or fullerene PC71BM), the PCE displays distinct Lchain-dependent tendencies. The correlation between the Lchain of dopants and photovoltaic efficiency is explained by the interplay between intramolecular electrostatic potentials in the dopant, steric hindrance and molecular contact properties between TXABr dopants and acceptors.
Results and discussion
Materials structure and working process
In this study, we chose a family of TXABr salts with a moderate Lewis basicity of Br− anions containing different tetra-alkyl chains as the n-dopants (see the chemical structures in Fig. 1a). The host materials constitute a series of NF-electron acceptors based on ITIC derivatives.40 These acceptors share the same A–D–A type conjugated backbones but different end groups (Fig. 1b). As a result, the molecular levels are systematically tuned due to intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effects (see Fig. 1b and c). This feature is manifested by shifts in the absorption onset shown in Fig. 1c, with which the Jsc can be increased in the device using IT-4F which has a narrow bandgap. Of note, we found that the doping efficiency in these A–D–A type acceptors and resultant OSCs with TXABr dopants is independent of the ICT but affected by the Lchain of dopants. Fig. 1d schematically illustrates the process of AIET between a representative Lewis base TAABr and a NF-acceptor IT-4F. Upon coming into contact with one another, the electrons from the Br− anions in the dopant will transfer to the electron-deficient π center in IT-4F, leading to n-doping.26 As will be discussed, the efficiency of ET is mainly governed by the intramolecular electrostatic interactions in the dopants and steric hindrance between TXABr and acceptors related to Lchain. In order to apply n-doping to solar cells without negatively affecting the favoured nanomorphology, we introduced the TXABr dopants via an interfacial route by spin-casting the dopant solutions on top of the BHJ films with an orthogonal solvent (see Fig. 1e). By doing so, uniform distribution of dopants near the surface area of the BHJ was realized at low to moderate doping levels (0.5 mg mL−1), as indicated by the results of energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) microanalysis (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†), while at high doping concentrations (10 mg mL−1), visible aggregates, likely due to the crystallization of dopants, are observed (see the top-view SEM images in Fig. S2, ESI†). Thus, this doping condition should be avoided for solar cells because the surface smoothness and shunt resistance could be negatively affected. In addition, we found that at a low doping level (e.g. 0.5 mg mL−1), the intermolecular π–π stacking in the photoactive layer is only affected in the presence of TXABr dopants (see the GIWAXS images and line-cut profile in Fig S3, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the Lewis base TXABr with different tetraalkyl chains. (b) Studied non-fullerene (NF) acceptors based on ITIC derivatives with an A–D–A structure. Also depicted at the bottom are the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effects that enable the decrease of the energy levels in the acceptor. (c) Energy diagram of different NF-acceptors (left panel) and corresponding UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of solid films. (d) Illustration of anion–π interaction between a representative Lewis base (TBAA) and the NF-acceptor IT-4F. (e) Schematic illustration of the application of doping based on a Lewis base to the photoactive layer of solar cells with solution processing. 
To evaluate the effect of n-doping on the photovoltaic performance, we fabricated solar cells based on active layers of PBDB-T:ITCC, PBDB-T:IT-M, PBDB-T:ITIC, and PBDBT-2F:IT-4F in a conventional configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/TXABr/Al. By analyzing the solar cell efficiency as a function of dopant concentration based on the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells (see the results in Fig. S4, ESI†), the optimal concentration was established to be 0.5 mg mL−1. Fig. 2 displays the extracted photovoltaic device parameters of NF-OSCs based on ITIC derivatives doped with different TXABr Lewis bases (at the optimal doping concentration) without ETLs. The current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics and device parameters can be found in Fig. S5 and Table S1, ESI.† In the four compared devices, the Voc sharply increases with the increased chain length of dopants and saturates in the TAABr or THABr doped cells (Fig. 2a). A similar increasing tendency using different dopants was found for the fill factor (FF) while it adversely drops upon further increasing the Lchain (THABr, see Fig. 2c). The Jsc presents a weaker Lchain-dependence while the trend is roughly in line with that of the other two cell parameters (Fig. 2b). Given that the ETLs are absent in these devices, the losses in Voc or FF in the devices without doping are mainly caused by inefficient electron extraction at the cathode, such that interfacial charge recombination is increased, especially at low electric fields (F).41 As for the attenuated changes of Jsc in the pristine and TXABr-doped devices, the behavior can be interpreted from the nearly unaffected bandgap of BHJs with doping and the sufficiently large F for charge separation under short-circuit conditions. As a result, the sweepout of photo-generated carriers should not be significantly affected. Due to the enhancement of the three cell parameters after doping, the ultimate PCEs of doped solar cells are considerably boosted compared to those of the undoped ones and the efficiencies are all maximized in the devices doped with TAABr, as shown in Fig. 2d and in the PCE error bar graph shown in Fig S6.†
 Fig. 2  Photovoltaic parameters of NF-organic solar cells (OSCs) without electron transporting layers (ETLs) based on photo-absorbers of the polymer donor PBDBT-2F/PBDB-T blended with various NF-acceptors without doping (control) and doped with various Lewis bases. (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc), (b) short-circuit current (Jsc), (c) fill factor (FF), and (d) power conversion efficiency (PCE). 
To promote our understanding of the doping mechanism, we selected PBDBT-2F:IT-4F as the model system. We first performed UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy on the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blend films doped with different TXABr dopants (see Fig. 3a). To facilitate the analysis of the optical properties affected by doping, here a high dopant ratio (1:1) was applied. The increased absorbance around 400–500 nm in the doped films stems from the absorption of TXABr salts (see Fig. S7, ESI†). For the peak around 700 nm arising from the main optical transition of IT-4F, we do not observe any bleaching effect in the presence of dopants. This seems to be in contrast to the scenario of molecular doping where the bleaching of the main optical transition peak is often encountered.20 This feature with Lewis base doping is beneficial for retaining the desirable optical bandgap in the solar cell. With respect to the undoped sample, the main difference after doping lies in the red-shifted absorption onset from which the strength of doping could be assessed.42 With TAABr, we observe the most pronounced red-shift, followed by the doping with TBABr and then THABr. As will be discussed later, the degree of the red-shift is fully consistent with the change of carrier density induced by dopants. To confirm the variation in doping efficiency, we examined the photoluminescence (PL) quenching of IT-4F films. To do this, the film samples were prepared identically to the procedure used for solar cells with the dopants deposited atop the BHJ layer at an optimal concentration (0.5 mg mL−1, see the Experimental section). From the results in Fig. 3b, the most significant reduction in PL was found in the IT-4F/TAABr sample and this trend agrees with the degree of the red-shift. These observations indicate that the most efficient ET occurs between IT-4F and TAABr among the utilized dopants.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis-NIR absorption and (b) photoluminescence spectra of PBDBT-2F:NF-acceptor blend films without doping and doped with various dopants. (c and d) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra with peak deconvolution of core level Br (c) and N+ or neutral N (d) measured for IT-4F doped with different Lewis base dopants. (e) Calculated electron density distribution in different Lewis acid/base dopants using density functional theory (top left: TMABr, top right: TPABr, bottom left: TAABr, and bottom right: THABr). (f) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results of the IT-4F NF-acceptor doped with different Lewis bases. The insets show the determined work functions of IT-4F with different doping based on UPS data. 
To understand the impact of electrostatic interactions on doping, we performed XPS. Fig. 3c displays the high-resolution XPS spectra of core-level Br 3d (see XPS survey spectra in Fig. S8, ESI†) in TAABr-doped IT-4F films. Through peak deconvolutions, the paired peaks of Br 3d with a fixed separation of 1.05 eV were identified and the peak percentage of these doublet peaks was roughly maintained with different dopants. A notable feature is that the binding energy (BE) shifts toward lower values with the increase of Lchain of dopants (until the case with TAABr) and slightly upshifts with a further increase of Lchain with THABr. This phenomenon can be understood by the enhancement of electronegativity or Lewis basicity of Br− anions which in principle should promote the non-covalent interaction with IT-4F.30 The modulation of the Lewis basicity of Br− may be related to intramolecular electrostatic attraction between the Br− and N+ inside the dopants. Consistently, the order of the BE shifts is in accordance with that of PL quenching, indicative of different doping strengths modulated by Lchain. Concerning the mechanism of AIET doping, it will also be interesting to examine the electron density changes around the core of the dopants. For this purpose, we probed the BE of N 1s. As shown in Fig. 3d, the signals of both charge-neutral N and that carrying positive charges (denoted as N+) are well resolved through peak deconvolutions. Expectedly, the percentage of the peaks arising from N+ increases in the presence of dopants. Across different doping systems, we note that the evolution of the N+ peak percentage with Lchain occurs in an analogous fashion to that of Br− (Fig. 3c). For example, the film doped with TAABr presents the highest peak ratio of N+. This observation can be correlated with the promoted electron transfer from Br− anions, which effectively reduces the electrostatic interaction between Br− and N+ in the dopants. All these features are in line with the scenario where ET occurs most efficiently with TAABr. The vertical dopant distribution with interfacial doping is further examined by angle-resolved XPS measured for the IT-4F/TAABr films (see Fig. S9, ESI†). As shown, the signal of N+ at higher BEs becomes intensified with photoemissions detected at 60 degrees, corresponding to a smaller probing depth, while at a zero-degree detection angle (corresponding to the maximal probing depth), the N+ peak is observed to be weakened. This contrast is suggestive of a depth-dependent profile for dopant distribution. Given the X-ray penetration depth in organic films (∼10 nm),5 we expect a diffusion depth ≥10 nm for TXABr.
To attain further insights into the TXABr doping from a theoretical standpoint, we assessed the electron density distribution in the four dopants and IT-4F acceptor using DFT calculation. As shown in the contour picture of IT-4F (Fig. 1d), an electron-deficiency spread through the entire conjugated backbone is observed and the electron density is mainly located around the –CN and O groups. As a result, the electrons from the dopants will be primarily transferred to the π-center of IT-4F, becoming delocalized.31,38Fig. 3e shows the calculated electron density distribution in the dopants where the strongest and weakest electronegativities are found in the Br− anion and N+ cation sites, respectively. The alkyl side chain length and molecular size in different TXABr dopants were calculated as well (see the results in Table S2, ESI†). The electrostatic attraction between Br− and N+ is expected to play an important role in the electron-donating ability of Br− and resultant doping of solar cells. Based on the results of DFT calculation, the smallest electronegativity (Br−) and electropositivity (N+) are identified in TAABr, which possibly leads to a weaker coulombic interaction between the two ions. This feature could alleviate the restricted electron donation (from Br−cations) to the IT-4F acceptor, partially explaining the strongest doping with TAABr (Fig. 2). Apart from the electrostatic interaction, steric hindrance effects should be considered in the process of charge transfer between TXABr salts and the acceptor.43 It is reasonable that the repulsion between the tetraalkyl chains tends to increase with the increase of Lchain. As a result, it could be harder for the Br− anions to attack the acceptor molecule. It is the two influential factors of electrostatic interaction and steric effect that lead to the modulation on charge transfer. In our case, the most preferred Lchain is pentyl.
A straightforward physical assessment of the doping efficiency is performed by investigating the Fermi level (EF) shift.44 For this purpose, we determined the work function (WF) of IT-4F by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Fig. 3f shows the onset of photoemission, from which the WF or effectively EF of IT-4F can be assessed.45 In the TAABr doped sample, we observe the most prominent upshift of WF to 4.28 eV, followed by that of w/TPABr (to 4.53 eV), w/THABr (to 4.55 eV) and w/TMABr (to 4.62 eV). Such strongly shifted WFs in organic semiconductor films have been observed upon p-doping with MoOx at the organic/oxide interface.46 The UPS measurements provide unambiguous evidence that among these systems, the dopant-induced electron density (n0) should amount to the highest in the TAABr-doped sample.
Now, we turn to exploring the reason for the enhanced photovoltaic efficiency with TXABr doping in terms of device physics. We assessed the electron transport properties in the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blend films by single-carrier device measurements (see Fig. S10, ESI†). Based on the fitting with the well-established Mott–Gurney law, the determined electron mobility (μe) as a function of dopants is plotted in Fig. 4a. Clearly, the μe increases with the chain length of dopants from methyl to amyl, while it decreases with heptyl side chains. In all the doped devices, the electron mobility exceeds that without doping, mainly due to the modified electron injection/extraction. The highest μe was found in the TAABr-doped device, exhibiting a μe of 3.04 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, more than one order higher than that in the undoped device (μe = 1.86 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). The trend of the modulated electron mobility is consistent with the variation of doping efficiency. At a low ionization rate of dopants, the strong coulombic attraction between charge carriers and ionized dopants may negatively affect the electron transport,47 while at higher doping levels, it appears that the increased percolation induced by the increased disorder can facilitate electron transfer with reduced coulombic attraction.48 Another likely reason for the enhanced mobility could be the trap filling mechanism of dopant-induced electrons.48,49 The improved charge transport helps reduce charge recombination losses, such that a higher FF and PCE are obtained.
 Fig. 4  (a) Electron mobility (μe) in the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blend films as a function of dopants determined with single-carrier device measurements (see the utilized device architecture in the inset diagram). (b) Background carrier density (n0) in TXABr-doped PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blends determined by impedance spectroscopy. (c) Photocarrier density as a function of illumination intensities (Plight) in PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells doped with various dopants. (d) Vocversus Plight characteristics of PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells without doping and with doping. Also included are the determined slopes in units of thermal voltage (kBT/q) based on linear fitting. 
Next, we performed Mott–Schottky analysis (in the dark) based on the same photo-active layers to determine the density of dopant-induced background carriers (n0). As shown by the results in Fig. 4b, we observe analogous behaviour of the background electron density increasing when using longer chain dopants with the maximal n0 found in the TXABr-doped solar cell. These trends also agree with the results of UPS measurements (Fig. 3f). Due to the most pronounced increase of n0 with TXABr doping, the observed utmost Ef shift in the IT-4F acceptor can be explained. This feature promotes interfacial electron extraction between the photoactive layer and metal electrode.50
Clear evidence of the mitigation of charge recombination with doping was attained by directly analyzing the density of photo-generated carriers (Nd) in the solar cell under illumination. To determine Nd, we performed light intensity (Plight)-dependent impedance spectroscopy (IS). As shown in the Nyquist plot of IS in Fig. S11 (ESI†), the radius of the semi-circle incrementally changes with decreased Plight, a result of the enlarged recombination resistance at lower carrier concentrations.51 By integrating the chemical capacitance (C) over Voc, Nd was extracted with a method reported previously (see details in the ESI†).52Fig. 4c shows the determined Nd of various solar cells as a function of Plight. Consistently, the TAABr-doped device yields the largest number of photocarriers at different light intensities, e.g. the Nd under 1 sun irradiation increases by 1.71 fold, compared to that of the undoped cell. The values of Nd are also correlated with the Voc in respective devices, confirming that the suppression of the carrier losses via charge recombination is the key reason for the Voc enhancement in the doped devices. Another notable feature is that Nd in the presence of TXABr increases more sharply in the high Plight regime (near 1 sun). Taking the generally accepted notion that bimolecular recombination increases with carrier density,8 the introduced interfacial doping with TXABr favourably suppresses this recombination path, so that more photocarriers are retained in the device (under open-circuit conditions) near 1 sun.
In addition to recombination, the contact properties modified by doping should also play a role in the change of Voc.53 To affirm this, we measured temperature-dependent photovoltages (see Fig. S12, ESI†). In the solar cell with (quasi-)ohmic contacts, the Voc should linearly increase at reduced T in the regime where charge generation is thermally independent.5 We observe evident linearities for the doped devices between 150–300 K (see Fig. S12†), pointing to the formation of (quasi-)ohmic contacts at the doped-BHJ/Al interface, while in the device without doping, abnormal changes of Voc are noted which merely increase at lower T. This observation can be explained by the hindered thermionic emission process of charge extraction at lower T with poor interfacial contact.54
We further examined the recombination order by Plight-dependent Voc measurements (Fig. 4d). In general, the slope of Vocversus Plight characteristics provides an estimation of the diode ideality factor (IF).55 With significant trap-assisted recombination, the slope approaches 2kBT/q with IF = 2 (where kBT/q is the thermal voltage).9 If the bimolecular recombination is dominant, the IF is expected to be unity.9 As seen from the results in Fig. 4d, the slopes of both pristine and TAABr-doped devices roughly amount to one in a unit of thermal voltage. This indicates that photo-generated charges in both undoped and TXABr-doped solar cells recombine bimolecularly and therefore the recombination order is not significantly affected in the presence of dopants. Based on this argument, the possibility of the dopants serving as a recombination or trapping center can be ruled out.7
Our results so far all point to the modification of the photovoltaic behaviour by TXABr doping where the doping efficiency is subject to the effects of both electrostatic interaction/potential (ESP) and steric hindrance.56,57 To provide more fundamental insights into the selection of dopants in terms of structural properties of acceptors, we choose two additional acceptors based on fullerene (PC71BM) and emerging Y6 (see the chemical structures in Fig. 5a and b) and applied the same doping method to these solar cells.3 The extracted PCEs of PTB7-Th:PC71BM and PBDBT-2F:Y6 solar cells doped with various TXABr Lewis bases are shown in Fig. 5c. Different from the (doped) devices with ITIC derivatives, the best PCE of the PC71BM cells was found in the one doped with TMABr having the smallest size. Surprisingly, an exactly opposite trend is observed in the Y6-containing solar cells where doping with the largest THABr leads to the highest PCE of 15.34% without ETLs. This difference can be explained as follows: fullerene acceptors possess a sphere-like shape and their specific molecular packing in the BHJ films may preferentially accommodate small-sized dopant molecules. When using larger sized dopants, the disruption of the crystal lattice of fullerene can have detrimental effects on the device performance.58 In the aspect of electrostatic interactions, the electrostatic potential (ESP) difference of PC71BM shows a smaller ESP difference than that of IT-4F and the smaller ESP difference in PC71BM reduces the steric effect between dopants and the acceptor,7,59 which results in the relatively weak changes in the PCE with different dopants. Differently, Y6 has a ladder-like multi-fused ring structure with an electron-deficient core as a central unit and long alkyl side chains attached to the central unit, differing from the side chains with phenyl rings in ITIC derivatives.3,59 With this structural feature, the compatibility or alignment between the alkyl side chains in Y6 and TXABr can be improved, compared to that in TXABr doped IT-4F (or other ITIC derivatives). As a result, more intimate molecular contact between Y6 and long-chain dopants (e.g. THABr) may be realized which effectively reduces the steric effects. For the four compared ITIC derivatives (IT-4F, ITIC, ITM and ITCC) sharing the same side chains, the different electron withdrawing end groups in the conjugated backbones seem to not break the selection rule of dopants as the same side chains are attached in these A–D–A acceptors. In the doping of our studied NF-OSC systems, it appears that the side chain compatibility between the TXABr dopants and curved Y6 molecule could be better, especially for longer alkyl chain dopants. Therefore, we speculate that the doping of Y6 with THABr may yield the best doping result due to the more “intimate” contact. Regarding the doping of ITIC derivative-based devices, the slight drop in PCE with THABr doping is likely caused by the increased steric hindrance with respect to the phenyl-chain containing acceptors (note that the THABr-doped devices with ITIC derivatives still outperform the others except in the case of TAABr). Obtaining a full picture of the correlation between molecular structure–doping efficiency–device efficiency enhancement will call for further study. Our results highlight the importance of considering the molecular compatibility in terms of side chains to achieve the best doping efficiency and resultant modification of photovoltaic device performance.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Chemical structures of PC71BM and the emerging NF-acceptor Y6. (c) Photovoltaic efficiencies of PTB7-Th:PC71BM, PBDBT-2F:IT-4F and PBDBT-2F:Y6 solar cells doped with different Lewis bases in the absence of ETLs. Also included are the error bars for the determined PCE of each device. 
In our previous work,21 we found that the doping of NF-OSCs with a Lewis base containing acetate anions resulted in PCEs that were comparable to the ones obtained with the commonly used PFN-Br ETL. To better understand the impact of anions of dopants on the modification of device characteristics, we performed additional comparisons of the doping of PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells with different dopants having different anions or Lewis basicity (by maintaining the same chain length of pentyl). As shown by the results in Fig. S13 in the ESI,† the PCEs are quite comparable in these doped devices, suggesting that the efficiency of interfacially doped solar cells tends to not be significantly affected by the Lewis basicity of anions (Br−, I− and AcO−) in tetrabutyl ammonium-based dopants.
To demonstrate the universal applicability of TXABr doping for obtaining high-efficiency ETL-free OSCs, we fabricated (undoped) devices (based on acceptors of four ITIC derivatives and Y6) with the commonly used PFN-Br electron transporting layer. As seen from the results shown in Fig. S14 (ESI†), the efficiencies of the devices with PFN-Br and TXABr interfacial doping are very similar (except for the ITCC-based device showing a reduced efficiency with TXABr doping). On the basis of these results, it is evidenced that upon choosing appropriate dopants of TXABr Lewis bases, high-efficiency non-fullerene solar cells may be achieved without using electron-transporting layers, e.g. PFN-Br.
Conclusion
To summarize, we present a universal strategy with Lewis base doping based on a series of TXABr salts to achieve (quasi)-ohmic contact in a range of NF-OSCs without electron transporting layers. In the best cases, the doped devices (in the absence of ETLs) can produce PCEs that are comparable to the PCEs of those based on a conventional device structure containing ETLs, e.g. PCEs of 13.18% and 15.34% are achieved respectively in the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F and PBDBT-2F:Y6 solar cells with TXABr doping. We found that the doping efficiency and resultant PCE are well correlated with the side chains of TXABr dopants. The solar cells based on ITIC-derivatives exhibit an analogous Lchain-dependence of the modification of PCEs, showing the optimal doping and highest PCE using the pentyl TAABr, while for the OSC with the NF-acceptor Y6 that contains alkyl side chains, the PCE of doped solar cells tends to increase when using longer chain dopants. This trend is in contrast to that in doped PC71BM solar cells where doping with the shortest chain (TMABr) leads to the most pronounced PCE enhancement. The tunable doping with TXABr translated into the modulation of electron transport, charge extraction and bimolecular recombination in solar cell operation. Mechanistically, the difference in the doping efficiency can be related to the differences in intramolecular electrostatic interactions in TXABr dopants and steric effects between TXABr and acceptors. The latter is affected by the compatibility of side chains in the acceptor and dopants. The demonstrated results provide useful guidance for the selection rules of interfacial doping and provide a promising route to realize high efficiency non-fullerene organic solar cells with simplified device architecture.
Experimental
Materials
PBDBT-2F, PBDB-T, PTB7-Th, IT-4F, ITIC, ITM, ITCC and PC71BM were purchased from Solarmer Inc (Beijing). TXABr dopants were purchased from Aladdin Inc. All materials were used without purification.
Device fabrication
Organic photovoltaic devices were fabricated based on a structure of indium-tin-oxide(ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/BHJ layer/TXABr/Al. The BHJ layers were based on PBDBT-2F:IT-4F, PBDB-T:ITCC, PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:ITCC, PTB7-Th:PC71BM and PBDBT-2F:Y6 blends. The BHJ solutions were solubilized in chlorobenzene with a total concentration of 20 mg mL−1 (D/A weight ratio = 1:1 and 0.5% 1,8-diiodooctane solvent additive was added). First, PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layers were cast on UV-ozone treated ITO substrates pre-cleaned by sonication (in acetone and iso-propanol, sequentially) at 4000 rpm and annealed at 165 °C for 15 min in air. Then, the BHJ layers were spin-coated atop the PEDOT:PSS layer at a spin speed of ∼2000 rpm in a nitrogen-purged glovebox, resulting in a typical thickness of 120 nm. After this, the substrates were thermally annealed at 100 °C (for PBDBT-F:IT-4F) or 160 °C (for PBDB-T:ITCC and PBDBT:ITIC). To apply the dopant, TXABr solutions (0.5 mg mL−1 in methanol) were spin-cast on the BHJ films at 4000 rpm min−1. Lastly, 80 nm of Al was evaporated in a vacuum through shadow masks, resulting in an effective device area of 0.04 cm2.
Characterization
UV-Vis absorption spectra were measured by using a PerkinElmer Lambda-950 spectrometer. To prepare the doped samples for UV-Vis measurements, TXABr was dissolved in methanol (10 mg mL−1) and added into the IT-4F solution at a 1:1 weight ratio with sufficient stirring. Then, the doped solution was spin-coated atop the quartz glass substrates to form solid films. PL spectroscopy of pristine and interfacial doped IT-4F films (0.5 mg mL−1) was performed on a Horiba Jobin Yvon Nanolog fluorimeter under 550 nm excitation. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and angle-resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AR-XPS) were performed by using a Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250Xi surface analysis system. EDX mapping and SEM measurements were carried out by using a FEI Nova 200 NanoLab microscope system. J–V characteristics of solar cells were recorded by using a Keithley 2400 Sourcemeter under AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) provided using a Class AAA solar simulator coupled with a National Institute of Metrology (NIM, China) calibrated KG5-filtered silicon reference cell.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21875012 and 21674006). H. Zhou acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21773045), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600), and the Chinese Academy of Science (100 Top Young Scientists Program). Y. Z. acknowledges the “111” Project.
References
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Che, Y. Li, Y. Qu and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 422–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X. K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, W. M. Chen, O. Inganas, V. Coropceanu, J. L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, Y. Xia, Z. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705659 CrossRef .
S. Bi, X. Leng, Y. Li, Z. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1805708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juška and R. Österbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 677–696 CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, M. Kemerink, M. M. Wienk, K. Maturová and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1670–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuik, L. J. A. Koster, G. A. H. Wetzelaer and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 256805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shang, T. Heumueller, R. Prasanna, G. F. Burkhard, B. D. Naab, Z. Bao, M. D. McGehee and A. Salleo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601149 CrossRef .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, S. Zhang, C. J. Hages, D. Rothhardt, S. Albrecht, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, T. Unold and D. Neher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 847–854 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, R. Wang, H. Yao, S. Xie, Y. Zhang, J. Hou, H. Zhou and Z. Tang, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Z. Zhong, K. Zhang, Z. Hu, C. Song, F. Huang, J. Peng, J. Wang and Y. Cao, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e379 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 RSC .
Z.-G. Zhang, B. Qi, Z. Jin, D. Chi, Z. Qi, Y. Li and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1966–1973 RSC .
J.-l. Wu, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, B.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Hsiao, C.-Y. Chang, C.-T. Chen and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12811–12821 RSC .
Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S. J. Cho and H. Morkoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
W. Shi, T. Zhao, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12929–12938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Wei, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2004, 30, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, J. Seifter, L. Ying, A. Mikhailovsky, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 7038–7044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, D. Zhang, S. Xie, J. Wang, Z. Zheng, D. Wei, X. Sun, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. B. Kim, S. K. Mohapatra, Y. Qi, T. Sajoto, A. Kahn, S. R. Marder and S. Barlow, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 699–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, D. Khim, K.-J. Baeg, W.-T. Park, S.-H. Lee, M. Kang, Y.-Y. Noh and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7886–7894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Parthasarathy, C. Shen, A. Kahn and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 4986–4992 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Reed and R. D. Bolskar, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1075–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guha, F. S. Goodson, L. J. Corson and S. Saha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13679–13691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Li, C. C. Chueh, F. Ding, H. L. Yip, P. W. Liang, X. Li and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4425–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, A. Werner, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and X. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17076–17082 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Schottel, H. T. Chifotides and K. R. Dunbar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 68–83 RSC .
R. E. Dawson, A. Hennig, D. P. Weimann, D. Emery, V. Ravikumar, J. Montenegro, T. Takeuchi, S. Gabutti, M. Mayor, J. Mareda, C. A. Schalley and S. Matile, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Chifotides, B. L. Schottel and K. R. Dunbar, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 7360–7365 CrossRef .
Y. S. Rosokha, S. V. Lindeman, S. V. Rosokha and J. K. Kochi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4650–4652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Chifotides and K. R. Dunbar, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 894–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, C. Sun, S. Dong, X.-F. Jiang, S. Wu, H. Wu, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2004–2013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, M. Lira-Cantu, Y. Kim, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1258–1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jo, J. T. Nelson, S. Chang, V. Bulović, S. Gradečak, M. S. Strano and K. K. Gleason, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6399–6404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Giese, M. Albrecht and K. Rissanen, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8867–8895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Giese, M. Albrecht and K. Rissanen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1778–1795 RSC .
E. Poverenov, N. Zamoshchik, A. Patra, Y. Ridelman and M. Bendikov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5138–5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
S. Sarkar, M. Sudolská, M. Dubecký, C. J. Reckmeier, A. L. Rogach, R. Zbořil and M. Otyepka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1303–1308 CrossRef CAS .
H. Förster and F. Vögtle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1977, 16, 429–441 CrossRef .
M. Schwarze, B. D. Naab, M. L. Tietze, R. Scholz, P. Pahner, F. Bussolotti, S. Kera, D. Kasemann, Z. Bao and K. Leo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1340–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kahn, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 7–10 RSC .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H.-P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans, E. V. Emelianova and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045214 CrossRef .
P. Wei, J. H. Oh, G. Dong and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8852–8853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Naab, S. Himmelberger, Y. Diao, K. Vandewal, P. Wei, B. Lussem, A. Salleo and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4663–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Tietze, L. Burtone, M. Riede, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 035320 CrossRef .
I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, M. A. Vázquez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 678–686 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X.-D. Dang, C. Kim and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, K. Leo and M. Riede, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155201 CrossRef .
T. van Woudenbergh, P. W. M. Blom, M. C. J. M. Vissenberg and J. N. Huiberts, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1697–1699 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Wheeler and K. N. Houk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3126–3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Regan, S. L. Craig and J. I. Brauman, Science, 2002, 295, 2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haddon, A. F. Hebard, M. J. Rosseinsky, D. W. Murphy, S. J. Duclos, K. B. Lyons, B. Miller, J. M. Rosamilia, R. M. Fleming, A. R. Kortan, S. H. Glarum, A. V. Makhija, A. J. Muller, R. H. Eick, S. M. Zahurak, R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh and F. A. Thiel, Nature, 1991, 350, 320–322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, D. Qian, C. S. Ponseca Jr, A. Honarfar, Y. Xu, J. Xin, Z. Chen, L. Hong, B. Gao, R. Yu, Y. Zu, W. Ma, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, F. Gao and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7743–7750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10002dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the Lewis base TXABr with different tetraalkyl chains. (b) Studied non-fullerene (NF) acceptors based on ITIC derivatives with an A–D–A structure. Also depicted at the bottom are the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) effects that enable the decrease of the energy levels in the acceptor. (c) Energy diagram of different NF-acceptors (left panel) and corresponding UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of solid films. (d) Illustration of anion–π interaction between a representative Lewis base (TBAA) and the NF-acceptor IT-4F. (e) Schematic illustration of the application of doping based on a Lewis base to the photoactive layer of solar cells with solution processing.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photovoltaic parameters of NF-organic solar cells (OSCs) without electron transporting layers (ETLs) based on photo-absorbers of the polymer donor PBDBT-2F/PBDB-T blended with various NF-acceptors without doping (control) and doped with various Lewis bases. (a) Open-circuit voltage (Voc), (b) short-circuit current (Jsc), (c) fill factor (FF), and (d) power conversion efficiency (PCE).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis-NIR absorption and (b) photoluminescence spectra of PBDBT-2F:NF-acceptor blend films without doping and doped with various dopants. (c and d) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra with peak deconvolution of core level Br (c) and N+ or neutral N (d) measured for IT-4F doped with different Lewis base dopants. (e) Calculated electron density distribution in different Lewis acid/base dopants using density functional theory (top left: TMABr, top right: TPABr, bottom left: TAABr, and bottom right: THABr). (f) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results of the IT-4F NF-acceptor doped with different Lewis bases. The insets show the determined work functions of IT-4F with different doping based on UPS data.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electron mobility (μe) in the PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blend films as a function of dopants determined with single-carrier device measurements (see the utilized device architecture in the inset diagram). (b) Background carrier density (n0) in TXABr-doped PBDBT-2F:IT-4F blends determined by impedance spectroscopy. (c) Photocarrier density as a function of illumination intensities (Plight) in PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells doped with various dopants. (d) Vocversus Plight characteristics of PBDBT-2F:IT-4F solar cells without doping and with doping. Also included are the determined slopes in units of thermal voltage (kBT/q) based on linear fitting.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Chemical structures of PC71BM and the emerging NF-acceptor Y6. (c) Photovoltaic efficiencies of PTB7-Th:PC71BM, PBDBT-2F:IT-4F and PBDBT-2F:Y6 solar cells doped with different Lewis bases in the absence of ETLs. Also included are the error bars for the determined PCE of each device.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10002d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
