Tuning of electronic properties in IV–VI colloidal nanostructures by alloy composition and architecture  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR02141F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR02141F
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7724-7745Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTuning of electronic properties in IV–VI colloidal nanostructures by alloy composition and architecture

        
          
            Aldona 
            Sashchiuk
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Diana 
            Yanover
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Rubin-Brusilovski
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Georgy I. 
            Maikov
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard K. 
            Čapek
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Roman 
            Vaxenburg
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jenya 
            Tilchin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gary 
            Zaiats
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Efrat 
            Lifshitz
          
          
        
      *
      Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Solid State Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel. E-mail: ssefrat@technion.ac.il
Received 
      29th April 2013
    , Accepted 4th June 2013First published on 7th June 2013AbstractColloidal lead chalcogenide (IV–VI) quantum dots and rods are of widespread scientific and technological interest, owing to their size tunable energy band gap at the near-infrared optical regime. This article reviews the development and investigation of IV–VI derivatives, consisting of a core (dot or rod) coated with an epitaxial shell, when either the core or the shell (or both) has an alloy composition, so the entire structure has the chemical formula PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1). The article describes synthesis procedures and an examination of the structures' chemical and temperature stability. The investigation of the optical properties revealed information about the quantum yield, radiative lifetime, emission's Stokes shift and electron–phonon interaction, on the variation of composition, core-to-shell division, temperature and environment. The study reflected the unique properties of core–shell heterostructures, offering fine electronic tuning (at a fixed size) by changing their architecture. The optical observations are supported by the electronic band structure theoretical model. The challenges related to potential applications of the colloidal lead chalcogenide quantum dots and rods are also briefly addressed in the article.Aldona SashchiukAldona Sashchiuk received her Ph.D. in Semiconductors Physics from the Semiconductors Physics Institute, Lithuanian Academy of Sciences in Vilnius. Her research was focused on investigation of magnetic field influence on the electronic properties of Ge and Si semiconductors for microelectronic applications. She has received prizes as USSR Inventor, and at USSR Exhibition in Moscow. In 1998 she joined the opto-electronic laboratory of Prof. Efrat Lifshitz in the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology as Senior Researcher. She is a co-author of more than 80 scientific papers, 5 book chapters, 72 USSR Inventor Certificates, and 3 patents (PCT Int. Appl.). Her current research interests include the development of nanostructured materials for high performance in optoelectronics.Efrat LifshitzEfrat Lifshitz is the Full Professor of Chemistry of Matwei Gunsbuourgh Academic Chair, Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Solid State Institute, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion, Israel. She earned her M.Sc in Chemistry and her Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor, USA and did postdoctoral research at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Her research interest is the development and magneto-optical characterization of chemically prepared semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs). She has contributed substantially to the synthesis of near-infrared active NCs, had a particular strong impact on the understanding of the basic magneto-optical properties of manmade solids and already utilized the accumulated knowledge in the development of opto-electronic devices and biological tagging based on the mentioned NCs.
1 Introduction
IV–VI (PbTe, PbSe, PbS) colloidal nanostructures, such as quantum dots (QDs) and quantum rods (QRs), are the focus of widespread scientific and technological interest.1–4 They have a rock-salt crystal structure (space group Fmm), and exhibit a size-tunable energy band gap in the range of 0.3–1.7 eV, with the broad band absorption profile ranging from near-infrared (NIR) to the visible range.5–7 Furthermore, they possess small electron and hole effective masses,8 a large dielectric constant9 and a relatively large exciton effective Bohr radius.10 These properties make them applicable in NIR gain devices,6,7 biological markers,11–13 photovoltaic cells,14–20 Q-switches,21,22 and thermoelectric devices.23–25 For example, the broad band absorption enables light harvesting in photovoltaic cells, as recent efforts showed IV–VI QD based solar cells with a power conversion efficiency of up to 8%.14–20 Investigations carried out during the past decade have explored other characteristic properties related to the density of states,26 electron–hole exchange interactions,27 radiative lifetimes,28,29 Auger relaxations30 and multiple exciton generation.31–41 Previous studies have demonstrated variations in the physical properties of IV–VI nanostructures, by variation of their shape (e.g., rods,42–44 wires,45–47 cubes,48,49 platelets50 or polypods.51–53) Additionally, it was demonstrated that surface properties, determined by the crystal facet energy and surfactants, have a significant influence on the morphology,54,55 as well as on the physical properties of the nanostructures.56–58
Despite the advanced development of various IV–VI QD nanostructures, their implementation in various optoelectronic devices has been hampered due to the sensitivity of PbTe and PbSe QDs to oxygen.59,60 Several research groups investigated the influence of the cation/anion ratio on the surface properties and showed that excess Pb2+ in IV–VI QDs or Cd2+ in II–VI QDs at the exterior surfaces may increase the number of bound surfactant molecules, thus improving the surface passivation.61–65 Other approaches included exchange of surface ligands for control of surface coverage.66,67 For example, recent studies discussed the immediate influence of oxygen exposure on the luminescence intensity of grown oleic acid-capped PbSe QDs,60,68 and suppression of the oxidation process by an exchange of the surfactants with alkylselenide molecules.69 Other studies demonstrated stabilization of the QDs' surface by a post-synthetic treatment, exchanging the organic surfactants with inorganic shells70 or halide anions.16,71
Alternatively, efficient passivation is achieved by an epitaxial growth of another semiconductor onto IV–VI core QDs, leading to the formation of core–shell heterostructures, where the exterior shell surface is still covered by organic molecules. This article discusses the formation of PbSe cores covered by another IV–VI semiconductor shell, i.e., PbS. Other reports showed capping of PbSe cores by a cation exchange procedure, with a II–VI CdSe semiconductor shell.72–74 The PbSe/CdSe heterostructures can be further covered by the high-potential barrier and relatively chemically inert ZnSe(S) epitaxial shell.72 Encapsulation by metal oxide compounds (e.g., ZnO) for the formation of air-stable QDs was also demonstrated.75 As discussed in the following, besides achieving chemical and photochemical stability, a shell growth might render an overall heterostructure with new physical properties, depending on the core-to-shell band-edge offset, which leads to the generation of either type-I heterostructures (when the conduction and valence bands of the shell wrap those of the core) or type-II heterostructures (when the band-edge of the constituents has a staggered alignment).76 Type-I heterostructures confine the carriers mainly into the core region, while type-II heterostructures allocate one carrier in the shell and retain the second carrier within the core. The intermediate alignment, the so-called quasi-type-II heterostructures, permits the delocalization of one carrier over the entire core/shell structure, while the other is confined either in the core or in the shell. The blue-colored shapes in Fig. 1 show a schematic drawing of the different heterostructures (top row) and their anticipated band-edge alignment with the carriers' distribution curves (bottom row). Type-II and quasi-type-II heterostructures induce partial charge separation thereby influencing the strength of direct Coulomb and exchange interactions,77,78 which leads to an immediate change of the radiative lifetime of a single79 exciton and multiple excitons80–84 and their exciton bright-to-dark energy split.77,85–87
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different kind of core/shell heterostructures (top row). Illustration of possible electron and hole wave function distributions in core/shell heterostructures (bottom row). 
In recent years, chemical stability as well as tuning of physical properties has been successfully achieved by integrating alloy composition in colloidal II–VI QDs88–90 and in a few examples of colloidal IV–VI QDs.47,91 Interestingly, our work6,92 is showing the advantage of alloy composition combined with core/shell heterostructures. For example, the presence of alloying in PbSe/PbSexS1−x or PbSexS1−x/PbS provides smoothing of the core-to-shell boundary potential (see Fig. 1 red-colored shape), and induces considerable chemical and photo-chemical stability.6,79,93 An epitaxially grown PbS or PbSexS1−x shell has an extremely small crystallographic mismatch (≤3%) with the PbSe cores, thereby reducing core/shell interface defects.6,92 Recently developed alloyed QD heterostructures, such as CdxZn1−xSe/ZnSe,94 CuInS2/ZnS,95 and CdTe/CdTexSe1−x,62,96 showed exceptionally high spectral stability (blinking-free),62,96 and sustained a relatively long biexciton lifetime (0.5 ns).97 We recently published theoretical and experimental work exploring the properties of PbSexS1−x and PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1) alloyed colloidal QDs, showing the variability of the electronic properties with the elemental composition,92,98 and modification of exciton–phonon interaction, direct Coulomb and exchange interaction whenever an alloy composition was involved.92,98 Additional details of this work are the focus of this review.
Shape control has recently received renewed attention, in the generation of alloyed anisotropic structures or heterostructures. These structures experience tuning of the electronic properties via their unique shape and composition, anticipating polarization-sensitive light emission,99 large absorption cross-sections, partial charge separation,100 transport along the major growth axis, as well as possible efficient multiple exciton generation.41 Preliminary efforts in this direction, including the synthesis of colloidal PbSe quantum rods (QRs)52 and PbSexS1−x wires of a few microns in length, had been shown.47 Theoretical electronic band structure calculations of pure PbSe and PbS nanowires suggested that the ground exciton binding energy in the elongated rod-like structures is substantially larger than that of QDs with a diameter equivalent to the rod's width.101
This article focuses on the synthesis, development, and characterization of structural and electronic properties in QD and QR core/shell heterostructures, having a general chemical formula PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1). Section 2 provides the theoretical model of the electronic band structure, using the multiband k·p envelope function method. The model emphasizes the type of electronic configuration (e.g., type-I or quasi-type-II), the dependence on size, internal architecture, shape and composition. Section 3 contains a summary of the applied synthetic methods, as well as description of the crystallographic and morphological characterization of the nanostructures. Section 4 presents the study of the steady-state and time-resolved optical properties of the discussed heterostructures, measured at various temperatures and recorded with/without oxygen exposure. The results revealed the formation of core/shell heterostructures with a quantum yield (QY) of up to 68%, relatively narrow emission bands with a long excited-state lifetime, tolerance to oxygen environment for a restricted time duration, peculiar Stokes shift behavior, and overall, a dominant tuning of band-edge properties by composition and core-to-shell division. Finally, representative applications of discussed IV–VI QD heterostructures are given in Section 5.
2 Theoretical prediction of the electronic properties of QD and QR heterostructures
2.1a Electronic structure of the PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y QD heterostructures
The electronic band structure of the QD heterostructures (with/without alloy composition) was evaluated, using the four-band k·p envelope function method1,26 that revolves around the solution of the effective Schrödinger equation of the form Ĥk·p(−i∇)F(r) = EF(r), in which F(r) are the four-component envelope eigenfunctions. The model considered specific features related to the discontinuity of the effective mass, crystal potential, and dielectric constant of the constituents at the core/shell and at the shell/surroundings interface,98 covering all cases, when either the core, the shell (or both) has an alloy composition. A schematic drawing of a PbSe/PbS core/shell heterostructure is shown in Fig. 2(a). Rc and Rs are the radii of a core QD heterostructure and a core/shell QD heterostructure, respectively; W is the shell thickness. The Hamiltonian Ĥkp(−i∇) was adjusted to the discontinuity at the PbSe/PbS core/shell heterostructure interface by the appropriate choice of the kinetic energy term, ensuring probability current conservation and continuity of the envelope functions.102
 Fig. 2  (a) A schematic drawing of a QD heterostructure with alloy composition and general chemical formula PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y, where 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 1. Rc and Rs are the core and core/shell radius, respectively, and W is the shell thickness; (b) a plot of the remote band contributions to the anisotropic conduction and valence band effective masses, meff/m0 (right axis, m0 is the free electron mass), m−, and m+ (left axis) versus the radial coordinate of a heterostructure shown in (a) with Rc = 2 nm and Rs = 3 nm. The band-edge energies are scaled with respect to zero vacuum energy. 
The theoretical treatment further considered a few special points: anisotropy in effective mass (typical for IV–VI semiconductors), expressed via the remote band contributions to the longitudinal (∥) and transverse (⊥) conduction (−) and valence (+) band effective masses, m±∥,⊥; the dependence of each physical parameter on a position (r) across the dot (Fig. 2(b)), and its smooth variability across the core/shell and the shell/surrounding interfaces, with a smoothing factor γ. The smooth potential profile reflects the nature of the interface region in alloyed materials with a gradient composition. The overall band offset was chosen as that of the corresponding bulk materials (where the valence band maximum of bulk PbS lies 0.025 eV above that of PbSe, while the conduction band minimum lies 0.155 eV above that of PbSe). Then, the values of the conduction and valence band-edge energies of the QDs are given by: V− = −(4.6 + 0.155x) eV and V+ = −(5.01 + 0.025x) eV, respectively. These relations are based on the PbS bulk electron affinity,103 the calculated PbS to PbSe band offset,104 and the composition-dependent bulk PbSexS1−x band-gap energy.105 The vacuum level is selected as the zero reference energy. The height of the outer barrier (at r = Rs) of both electrons and holes is taken to be equivalent to the corresponding bulk electron affinity. It is worth noting that the ligand and solvent surrounding may lower the barrier height by a limited amount; however, it does not change the trends shown in Fig. 2. The carriers' mass outside the QD is considered as the free electron mass. The typical radial variation of the effective masses and band-edge energies is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The QD heterostructures investigated are ternary core or core/shell QDs, having a general formula PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y, covering the following cases: (a) x = y = 1 or x = y = 0 refers to a simple core PbSe or PbS, respectively; (b) 0 < x = y < 1 is a homogenous alloy core; (c) x = 1 and y = 0 are simple PbSe/PbS QDs; and (d) x = 1 (y = 1) and y ≠ 0 (x ≠ 0) are complex core/shell QD heterostructures, when either the core or the shell has a homogenous alloyed composition.
In most cases, the value of the ground-state exciton energy (Eg) is of major practical and experimental importance. Fig. 3(a) presents the dependence of Eg on Rc and W in PbSe/PbS QD heterostructures and shows a decrease of the values of Eg in core/shell QDs with respect to those in pure core QDs of the same overall size Rs, which is in agreement with previous experimental observations.92Fig. 3(b) presents the dependence of Eg on W and x in PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed shell QD heterostructures with Rc = 1.5 nm, emphasizing that the tunability of Eg can be controlled not only by varying the core/shell size but also by a change in composition or/and internal structure. Therefore, the diagrams given in Fig. 3 can be used as a practical working tool, predicting the alloyed core/shell QD heterostructures design with ground-state exciton energy on demand.
 Fig. 3  Variation of the ground-state exciton energy, Eg, versus (a) core radius (Rc) and shell thickness (W) in PbSe/PbS QD heterostructures, and (b) shell thickness (W) and composition (x) in PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QD heterostructures with Rc = 1.5 nm. 
2.1b Spatial charge distributions in PbSexS1−x and PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y QD heterostructures
The envelope functions are used as a base for the calculation of the probability density distribution (|F(r)|2) yielding knowledge about the spatial delocalization of the carriers over the entire QDs structure. Fig. 4 (top row) displays concentric charge density isosurfaces of the lowest electron and hole states in PbSe QDs with Rc = 3 nm, framed within half spheres that are cut along the [10] crystallographic plane. The inner sphere designates the larger density (in units of e nm−3, where e is the electron charge), which gradually decreases toward the external surface (red/blue colors designate a positive/negative charge, as shown in the legend). The electron distribution was found to be nearly isotropic around the QD's center in all the samples discussed. However, an ellipsoid shape, slightly elongated in the transverse direction, is seen in the density distribution of a hole, stemming from the anisotropy in its effective mass. The second and third rows in Fig. 4 display charge difference functions, defined as Δρ(r) = e(|Fhole|2 − |Felectron|2) of a few core and core/shell QD heterostructures. The isosurfaces in the second row show a ring-like displacement of the hole toward the QD's equator in pure PbSe QDs that decreases gradually on the increase of sulfur content in PbSexS1−x QDs and nearly diminishes in pure PbS core QDs. Isosurfaces shown in the third row reveal an obvious symmetric hole delocalization in PbSe/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures and anisotropic mutual electron–hole distribution displacement in PbSe/PbSe0.5S0.5 and PbSe0.5S0.5/PbS QD heterostructures. The isosurfaces here are associated with QDs with an identical overall size of Rs = 3 nm. Charge density distribution of QDs of other sizes shows similar behavior (not shown). The probability density distribution of carriers in remote states is not included in the current review. However, control over charge distribution of band-edge carriers shown here suggests an option to accumulate charges at different regions of the QD volume. A ring-shaped net positive charge is visualized at the equator in core PbSexS1−x QDs originating from a relatively larger anisotropy in effective mass of the valence band with respect to that of the conduction band. In core/shell QD heterostructures both effective mass anisotropy and the presence of the band offset, have a considerable effect, resulting in either a symmetric or an asymmetric total charge distribution, depending on the core and shell composition.
 Fig. 4  (Top) Charge density distribution of electron (blue) and hole (red), shown as half a sphere of concentric isosurfaces, given in units of e/nm3 (e is the electron charge). (Middle) Charge density difference, Δρ, in PbSe, PbSe0.5S0.5, and PbS core QDs. (Bottom) Charge density difference, Δρ, in PbSe/PbS, PbSe/PbSe0.5S0.5 and PbSe0.5S0.5/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures. Red color corresponds to excess hole density, while the blue color designates excess electron density. The longitudinal [111] crystallographic direction is marked in the upper panel. 
The step-like band alignment of the heterostructure alters the confining potential felt by the charge carriers. As explained (see Fig. 2(b)), the bulk band offsets between the core and the shell materials are functions of composition. As mentioned above, in the case of the PbSe/PbS system, these values are 0.155 eV and 0.025 eV for the conduction band and the valence band, respectively. This kind of alignment can be regarded as quasi-type-II, since the valence band offset is small, permitting asymmetric delocalization of the carriers over the entire core/shell structure. Moreover, for relatively small QDs, the typical confinement energies largely exceed the energy of the band offsets. Consequently, the lowest electronic levels lie above the band offset, so they are weakly influenced by the heterostructure architecture. However, in sufficiently large core/shell QDs, the confined electronic levels are allocated below the offset energy, enforcing localization of at least one carrier within a selective regime. In contrast, the hole is less affected by the small valence band offset and remains more delocalized as the QDs size changes.106 This concept is illustrated in Fig. 5, where the gradual decrease of the lowest electron energy with increasing size of the core/shell QD heterostructures can be seen. Note the strong pronounced advance of the density of state with the growth of the overall size. Since the band offsets are functions of composition and the confinement energies are functions of size, the degree of the electron localization in the core (or, equivalently, its location within the system) can be controlled by varying these two degrees of freedom.
 Fig. 5  Schematic drawing of the energy levels of electrons and holes (black lines) in PbSe/PbS heterostructures of three different sizes, having a constant ratio Rs/Rc = 2. Blue curves represent the band alignment profile. 
An estimate of electron's confinement within the core can be obtained by integrating the probability density (P) over the core region. The extent of the electron and hole separation in PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y QD heterostructures can be further analyzed by evaluating the probability of finding a carrier in the core, Pcore, or in the shell, Pshell, when (1)

Fig. 6(a) presents radial probability density of the ground-state electron and hole in the indicated PbSe/PbS, PbSe/PbSe0.75S0.25, QD heterostructures of dimensions Rc = 1 nm, Rs = 2 nm (top row) and Rc = 6 nm, Rs = 12 nm (bottom row). The figure shows that the electron–hole charge separation becomes more pronounced with the growth of the overall size of the QDs, while retaining a constant Rc/Rs ratio. In addition, a charge separation seems to be slightly more efficient in PbSe/PbS with respect to that found in the alloyed PbSe/PbSe0.75S0.25 QDs because of larger band offsets in PbSe/PbS (see the bottom row). Fig. 6 displays plots of Pecore, in (b), and Phcore, in (c), versus values of Rs in a few different QD heterostructures (see legend b). The values of Pecore span a range from 0.2 to 1.0, while those of Phcore are grouped in a narrower range of 0.25–0.40. This is a direct consequence of the quasi-type-II band alignment with very small valence band offset, emphasizing the option to engineer the charge distribution between the core and the shell constituents.
 Fig. 6  (a) Radial probability density of the ground-state electron and hole in the indicated QDs of dimensions Rc = 1 nm, Rs = 2 nm (top row) and Rc = 6 nm, Rs = 12 nm (bottom row). Solid vertical lines designate the external QD boundaries, and dashed lines represent the core/shell interface position. Probability of locating the electron (b) and the hole (c) in the core region of various QD heterostructures (indicated in c) as a function of overall radius, Rs, with a constant ratio Rs/Rc = 2. 
2.2 The electronic structure of the PbSexS1−x and PbSe/PbS QRs
The electronic structure of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs was calculated using the framework of the four-band k·p envelope function method, in a similar manner to the procedure discussed in Section 2.1a. However, a cylindrically symmetric part of the full Hamiltonian, Ĥkp(−i∇), describing electrons and holes in the vicinity of a single L point of the first Brillouin zone, is used in the present calculation.101 In general, the fundamental band gap in IV–VI semiconductor materials occurs at four different L-points, being energy degenerate in isotropic QDs. However, this degeneracy is lifted in asymmetric QRs, so each electronic band extreme (L valley) possesses an individual set of direction-dependent material parameters. Fig. 7(a) shows a representative plot of calculated Eg (ignoring the Coulomb interaction) of the lowest energy valley in alloyed PbSexS1−x QRs with x = 0.5, grown in the 〈110〉 directions. The results presented in the figure reveal the considerable influence of the radius on the value of Eg; however, the contribution of the length becomes negligible above about 10 nm. Fig. 7(b) displays the dependence of Eg for QRs grown along the 〈110〉 directions versus the radius and composition of the QRs (with a fixed length of 10 nm). The plot exposes important flexibility in tailoring Eg with control of composition, when a fixed length is demanded. It should be mentioned that the current model is applicable mostly for QRs with a radius >3.0 nm, when evaluation by an effective mass model deviates from measured values for very small structures (<2.5 nm) with an extreme quantum confinement in at least one spatial dimension.
 Fig. 7  Calculated values of Egversus: (a) radius and length of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs with x = 0.5 and (b) radius and composition of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs at a fixed length of 10 nm. 
3 Synthesis, structural and composition characterization of PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y QD and QR core/shell colloidal heterostructures
PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y alloyed core/shell QD and QR heterostructures were formed by one-step or two-step synthesis, carried out at various temperatures. General terms of the synthesis conditions are presented schematically in Fig. 8 and discussed in Sections 3.1 through 3.3.
 Fig. 8  Schematic presentation of four different core/shell colloidal heterostructures, prepared by adjustable colloidal procedures, as described in the text. Pb(OA)2 = lead oleate, TOP = trioctylphosphine, TMS2S = bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide precursors. 
3.1 PbSe/PbS core/shell colloidal QDs with band-edge energy in the range of 1.0–1.4 eV
The synthesis of spherical shaped PbSe/PbS core/shell colloidal QDs with Rs < 2.0 nm and band-edge energy in the range of 1.0–1.4 eV was described earlier.107 The preparation procedure included two steps. The first step focused on the preparation of ultra-small PbSe core QDs with the band-edge energy in the range of 1.5–1.7 eV. The main reaction mixture was comprised of lead oleate (Pb(OA)2), stearyl alcohol and hexadecane (HDC). The mixture was heated to 100 °C under vacuum for one hour. A selenium precursor solution, containing trioctylphosphine (TOP)Se, diphenylphosphine (DPP) and hexadecane (HDC), was prepared separately and was injected after the first hour into the reaction mixture at 80 °C. Next, the temperature was reduced to 70 °C and selenium precursor solution was injected into the main reaction mixture. To quench the reaction, the mixture was poured into a mixture of ethanol, acetonitrile, and toluene. Then, the QDs were separated by centrifugation. A representative high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image of small PbSe QDs is presented in Fig. 9(a). The figure shows QDs with a nearly spherical shape having an average radius of 1.2 ± 0.2 nm. The inset provides a fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern of the HR-TEM, revealing a cubic single crystal with a rock-salt structure and a space group Fmm, as expected from IV–VI semiconductor structures.
 Fig. 9  (a) HR-TEM image of PbSe QDs with Rc = 1.0 ± 0.2 nm. Inset: FFT pattern of the TEM of (a). (b) Absorption spectra of PbSe QDs shown in (a) recorded after thermal annealing at 60–120 °C. Inset: dependence of the lowest absorption band-edge energy on the annealing temperature. (c) Time-evolution of absorption spectra of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs during drop-wise injections of TMS2S into the reaction mixture at 70 °C. Time interval between the spectra is 10 min. (d) XRD pattern of PbSe (blue) with Rc = 1.2 ± 0.2 nm and PbSe/PbS (green) core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 1.8 nm/1.1 nm indexed to the bulk rock-salt crystal structure of PbSe (blue line) and PbS (red line). 
The shell growth was carried out as a second step of the reaction, after the small PbSe cores were precipitated from the first reaction mixture in order to eliminate the presence of unreacted selenium precursor. The temperature stability of small-sized PbSe QDs (1.0 ± 0.2 nm in radius) was examined in the reaction mixture, at the temperatures above 60 °C by following the changes of the absorption spectrum. Fig. 9(b) shows the absorption spectra of the PbSe QDs dissolved in tetrachloroethylene (TCE) and recorded after thermal annealing processes carried out at various temperatures from 60 °C to 100 °C. The inset of the figure shows a plot of the shift in the band-edge energy with increasing annealing temperature, having a drastic change beyond 70 °C. Thus, the shell coating was carried out at temperature ≤70 °C, which is substantially lower than other previously reported procedures.108–110 The shell growth involved injection of diluted bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide (TMS2S) in a drop-wise manner into the reaction mixture containing PbSe QDs, Pb(OA)2 and diphenylether (DPE). The drop-wise injection of sulfur precursor prevented instantaneous super-saturation and co-nucleation of PbS QDs and made it possible to coat the PbSe QDs with a shell of desired thickness.
The growth of the PbS shell was monitored by a gradual red shift of the absorption, as shown in Fig. 9(c). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs (green) and the corresponding PbSe QDs (blue) are shown in Fig. 9(d), with pronounced (111), (200) and (220) diffraction peaks at a 2θ of 25.44°, 29.21° and 41.80°, respectively. The diffraction lines of bulk PbSe and PbS are also displayed in the figure with blue and red lines, respectively. The diffraction pattern of the core/shell QDs exhibits only a minor change with respect to that of the pure PbSe core, due to the close crystallographic similarities of the PbSe and PbS constituents.
The evidence for the formation of PbSe/PbS core/shell heterostructures is also provided by HR-TEM and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). A representative HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 1.8 nm/1.1 nm is given in Fig. 10(a), while the FFT pattern of the HR-TEM is shown in the inset. These measurements reveal that the PbSe/PbS QDs have the same structure as the initial PbSe core QDs (see Fig. 9(a)). The representative XPS spectra of PbSe/PbS and PbSe QDs prove the presence of both Se and S in core/shell QDs. The dependence of the cation/anion ratio on the sizes is plotted in Fig. 10(c), demonstrating excess of Pb in the ultra-small cores (blue symbols), similar to previous observations.69,111–113 On the other hand, a nearly stoichiometric Pb/Se(S) ratio is achieved in PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs (red symbols in Fig. 10(c)). The PbS shell coating process results in immediate filling of anion vacancies at the exterior surfaces, which is followed by further epitaxial growth of a full shell.
 Fig. 10  (a) HR-TEM of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 1.8 nm/1.1 nm (scale bar = 5 nm). Inset: FFT pattern of the HR-TEM of (a). (b) XPS spectra of PbSe/PbS core/shell (top) and of PbSe core (bottom) QDs. The assignment of the bands is shown in the figure. (c) Dependence of the cation/anion stoichiometric ratio on the QD size in PbSe core (blue) and in PbSe/PbS core/shell (red) QDs. 
3.2 PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y core/shell colloidal QD heterostructures with the band-gap energy in the range of 0.62–1.0 eV
The synthesis of large-sized (4.2–10 nm) PbSe/PbS core/shell colloidal QDs, with the tunable band-gap energy in the range of 0.62–1.0 eV, is described in detail elsewhere.6 However, a brief description is given here. The preparation involves a two-step process,6 starting with the formation of PbSe cores and their isolation from the initial reaction solution. The cores were prepared by injection of (TOP)Se into a main reaction mixture containing Pb(OA)2 and DPE at 180 °C, while the growth occurred at 120 °C.3,114,115Fig. 11(a) shows absorbance curves recorded in situ during the QDs' growth with a time interval of one second. The spectra are characterized by the first 1S-exciton absorption peak, whose energy changes from 1.2 to 0.8 eV, associated with the formation of PbSe QDs with a radius of 1.5 ± 0.2 nm to 2.6 ± 0.2 nm.113,116 The second step included the growth of an epitaxial PbS shell onto the pre-prepared PbSe cores, by the injection of stoichiometric amounts of Pb and S precursors into a new, Se-free solution containing suspended PbSe QDs. The coating reaction was performed at 120 °C using (TOP)S as the sulfur source. The PbS coating of totally 1–2 monolayers (MLs) was obtained within the first 15–30 minutes of the reaction.
 Fig. 11  (a) Representative in situ absorbance of PbSe colloidal QDs monitored in situ during the reaction, recorded one after the other with a time delay of one second, and leading to the growth of QDs with the size ranging from 3.0 ± 0.4 nm to 5.2 ± 0.4 nm. (b) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell colloidal QD heterostructures with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.1 nm/1.5 nm (scale bar = 2 nm). Inset: SAED pattern of the same QDs. (c) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 3.0 nm/1.5 nm (scale bar = 5 nm). (d) A STM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 4.0 nm/1.5 nm spread over a gold substrate (scale bar = 10 nm). A height profile of a single QD is shown in the inset. (e) TEM image of PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.5 nm/1.5 nm. Inset: HR-TEM image of the corresponding single QD (scale bar = 4 nm). 

Fig. 11(b) shows a HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.1 nm/1.5 nm. This image reveals the formation of spherical QDs with well-resolved crystal fringes and without distinct boundaries at the core/shell interface, due to close matching (3% mismatch) of the PbSe and PbS crystallographic parameters. The inset shows a selective area electron diffraction (SAED) image, disclosing a cubic single crystal, with a lattice spacing of 6.12 Å associated with a rock-salt structure of the space group Fmm that was preserved in the core/shell heterostructures. The increase in the overall size of core/shell QDs by 1.2 nm, compared to the preliminary cores, is consistent with a PbS shell thickness of one ML. PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a shell thickness >2 MLs required synthesis with repeated injections (2–4 times) until the desired shell thickness was achieved. Fig. 11(c) presents a HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 3.0 nm/1.5 nm, while Fig. 11(d) shows a scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 4.0 nm/1.5 nm. The STM image was recorded with a bias voltage of 2 V and a set-point current of 5 pA.117 The inset presents a height profile of a single QD. The lateral dimensions of the profile are substantially larger than the actual size due to a broadening of the tip width, thus, the height alone indicates the QD's size. The synthesis of PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y alloyed-core/alloyed-shell QDs involved a one-step procedure.6 Alloy core/shell QDs were produced by simultaneous injection of Pb(OA)2, (TOP)Se and (TOP)S precursors into the preliminary prepared reaction solution. The composition and thickness of the shell were controlled by the growth parameters, such as the monomer concentration, temperature, and duration of the reaction. Fig. 11(e) shows a TEM image of the PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.5 nm/1.5 nm; a HR-TEM image of a selective single QD is displayed in the inset. The images show the formation of spherical QDs with a high crystallinity and without a distinct boundary at the core/shell interface. The composition of the PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x QDs was determined by XPS and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis by extracting aliquots from the reaction mixture at varied time intervals. In fact, the alloy component (y or x) refers to average composition at an intermediate time after injection. It is likely that a graded composition has been generated between adjacent aliquots and only an average composition can be assigned. Thus, a general notation of PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x is adopted in the current case. The EDX analysis indicated that the use of Se/S ≫ 1 element ratio enabled the formation of PbSe/PbSexS1−x composition, while the use of Se/S < 1.2 caused an introduction of sulfur into the core, leading to the formation of the so-called PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x QDs.
3.3 Structural properties of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs
The growth of elongated structures can occur in the presence of templating ligands (e.g., amines, phosphonic acids) that bind to selective crystallographic facets with high surface energy and density of atoms. It was recently shown118 that the tris(diethylamino)phosphine (TDP) ligands, used in the growth of PbSe QRs, undergo chemical decomposition and release diethylamines,118 which have a critical influence on the final shape of the nanostructure. We examined the structural properties of recently proposed ternary PbSexS1−x and PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures. The synthesis of binary PbSe QRs was based on the procedure reported earlier52 with small variations. PbSexS1−x QRs were prepared from Pb(OA)2, (TDP)Se and (TOP)S in squalane. The growth temperature was 170 °C and reaction time varied between 1 and 10 minutes.43
The synthesis of PbSe/PbSexS1−x QRs began with the formation of PbSe rods, and then continued with an epitaxial growth of the ternary shell. Fig. 12(a) and (b) show HR-TEM images of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs with a length/radius ratio of 15.1 nm/2.0 nm and 19.9 nm/1.3 nm, respectively, prepared under the growth conditions described. The images present distinct uniform crystal fringes, identified with the [220] crystallographic planes (as marked in Fig. 12). The growth of the rods takes place along the 〈110〉 (a) or 〈100〉 (b) crystallographic directions, dominated by the appearance of a single crystal. Fig. 12(a) refers to QRs with a growth duration of 1.5 minutes, attaining a radius, Rc, of about 2.0 nm, while Fig. 12(b) presents a QR, which grew in length, but its width has been reduced with time (growth time > 1.5 minutes), accompanied by the formation of radius fluctuation along the QR. An unusual twist of a crystallographic plane rarely appears along a small fragment of a QR, but the main crystallographic direction is preserved. It should be noted that the growth in length is delicately balanced by a change of the reaction temperature within ∼20 °C. A representative fast Fourier transform of a TEM image of ternary QRs is shown in the inset of (a), confirming a rock-salt crystallographic structure. Similar rock-salt structures appeared in all the QRs investigated.
 Fig. 12  Representative HR-TEM images of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs with a length/radius ratio of (a) 15.0 nm/2.0 nm, (b) 19.9 nm/1.5 nm. Inset in (a) is the FFT pattern of the HR-TEM. (c) HR-TEM image of an ensemble of QRs shown in (a). (d) In situ absorbance monitoring of the PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QRs synthesis recorded with a time delay of one second. (e) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures with x = 0.27. 
A TEM image of PbSexS1−x QRs of Fig. 12(a) deposited on a TEM grid is displayed in Fig. 12(c), showing relatively uniform dimensions, with an average size deviation of ∼5% in radius and ∼15% in length of the QRs. Experimental evidence of QRs creation is given by the absorption line profile, which is not symmetric. The spectra recorded by monitoring the absorbance during the reaction, with a time delay of one second, are presented in Fig. 12(d). The spectra are initially characterized by the existence of an exciton band, related to the band-edge transition and considered as Eg. This band shifts steadily to a longer wavelength with the growth progression; however, at a certain stage, the energy shift decelerates, together with a change in the curve profile, resembling typical rod-like absorbance and the additional appearance of a weak fine structure. It should be noted that the value of Eg is predominantly controlled by the radius of the QRs, and mildly influenced by their length above 10 nm.

Fig. 12(e) gives an image of QRs with a PbSexS1−x composition (typical length/radius ratio of 25 nm/1.5 nm). The Pb/Se/S atomic ratio within the QRs was measured by EDX, monitoring an ensemble of structures. The local composition along the main axes of a single QR was measured by high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) with a spatial resolution of 0.1 nm (not shown), revealing a homogeneous distribution of Pb, Se, and S atoms through the whole volume of a QR and confirming the formation of the ternary PbSexS1−x compound in the QRs.
4 Optical properties of PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1) QD heterostructures
4.1 Continuous-wave photoluminescence measurements at room temperature of PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y QDs
This section emphasizes the optical properties of PbSe/PbS, PbSe/PbSexS1−x and PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y heterostructures, with variable core-to-shell division and a radial gradient composition (when 0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1). A thorough investigation of the optical properties was performed by continuous-wave (cw) photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, recorded under oxygen-free environment at room temperature (RT). The variation of the properties with a change in temperature is addressed in Section 4.2.
Representative absorption (red lines) and cw-PL (blue lines) spectra of PbSe/PbS QDs with an average total radius of 1.7 ± 0.2 nm (with a core radius of 1.1 nm) are shown in Fig. 13. The samples are dispersed in 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate glass solution (GS). The core/shell spectra exhibit a systematic red shift of the absorption and emission bands, when compared with the corresponding cores. The band-edge energies of these PbSe/PbS heterostructures center around 1.4 eV, while those of PbSe QDs are centered between 1.55 and 1.7 eV. The size dependence of the cw-PL bands is indicative of their association with band-edge (1Se–1Sh) transitions.
 Fig. 13  Absorption and cw-PL spectra of small-sized PbSe/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures and the corresponding different ultra-small PbSe core QDs. 
The cw-PL bands exhibit an energy Stokes shift from its first absorption bands (as marked on the figure), which gradually increases when the PbSe core radius drops. The energy Stokes shift in PbSe/PbS QDs (top curves in Fig. 13) was found to be around 140 meV, which is smaller than that observed in the initial PbSe cores (bottom curves in Fig. 13). The observations suggest that the Stokes shift depends on the overall QD diameter. The theoretical calculations presented in Fig. 5 show that in the strong confinement regime, the band-gap states lie above the core/shell interface potential barrier. As a result, the carriers are delocalized over the entire core/shell structure and, consequently, the overall diameter appears to be the main factor determining the decrease of the Stokes shift. The shift of 140–460 meV seen in Fig. 13 is significantly larger than that expected119,120 for spherical PbSe QDs and may be explained by: (a) an exceptionally large exchange interaction in small-sized IV–VI QDs; (b) existence of a Franck–Condon shift121,122 that can be manipulated by off-resonance excitation or/and size distribution; (c) the lift of four-fold degeneracy at the L-point of the Brillouin zone.42,98,123 Previous theoretical calculations estimated the existence of exchange splitting86,92,120 and a Franck–Condon shift121,122 in the range of 20–30 meV, which is smaller than the Stokes shift observed in the present study. Also, the observed Stokes shift was not affected by a change in the excitation energy. Lifting of the four-fold degeneracy allows excitation in one valley and emission from another valley, which occurs in nanostructures with a minor deviation from a spherical shape that might be undetectable in a TEM image.42 Most likely, a slight shape distortion of the PbSe cores is maintained after homogenous covering of a PbS shell. A theoretical approach evaluating the inter-valley splitting both in PbSe and PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs was discussed in Section 2.1. This theoretical approach supports a large Stokes shift due to a lift of band-edge degeneracy, if a small elliptical shape distortion (with an aspect ratio of ∼1.1) could be assumed.107
The discussion below compares optical properties of large-sized QDs with different dimensions and compositions, exhibiting band-gap energy in the range of 1.0–0.92 eV. Representative absorption (dashed lines) and cw-PL (solid lines) spectra of a few QDs are shown in Fig. 14(a). The cw-PL spectra were pumped by a non-resonant excitation (Eex = 1.54 eV). The bottom curve and top curve in Fig. 14(a) correspond to spectra of PbSe core QDs with average radii of Rc = 1.5 ± 0.2 nm and Rc = 2.4 ± 0.2 nm, respectively. The middle curves represent different QD heterostructures (core/shell, core/alloyed-shell and alloyed-core/alloyed-shell), each with a composition as indicated in the legend, when Rc = 1.5 nm and Rs is either 2.1 nm or 2.4 nm. This set of curves suggests the occurrence of a red shift of the absorption and emission spectra of the core/shell heterostructures with respect to those of their primary cores, but they are blue-shifted with respect to cores with a radius of 2.4 nm. This midway shift is related to a quantum size effect combined with composition tuning of the band gap.
 Fig. 14  (a) Absorption (dashed lines) and emission (solid lines) spectra of PbSe core QDs, and various core/shell QD heterostructures with the Rs./Rc ratio, as given in the legend. The exact composition and the radius of QDs are labeled in the figure. (b) Calculated (empty circles) and experimental (filled circles) energy band gap values of the QDs given in the legend. (c) Stokes shift energy (ES) of the various QDs as indicated in the legend. 
The measured Eg, estimated by the first exciton absorption band, and the corresponding calculated values including correction for the Coulomb interaction (discussed in Section 2) are compared in Fig. 14(b), showing qualitative agreement between the theoretical and experimental results. Table 1 includes comparison of the experimental and theoretical values of Eg of various IV–VI QDs with a few other relevant parameters, i.e. quantum yield (η), radiative lifetime (τrad), and emission energy Stokes shift (ES). The value of the cw-PL QY (η) was measured using the integrating sphere technique at RT.124 Systematic improvement of η (up to 68%) was found in core/shell, core/alloyed-shell and alloyed-core/alloyed-shell heterostructures, in contrast to a typical value of ∼48% found in the primary core QDs. The relatively high η might be related to the improved quality of surfaces, e.g., close crystallographic match between the core and the shell constituent. Moreover, the increase of the sulfur content at the exterior surface creates a lower oxidation outcome.
Table 1 Relevant parameters of the investigated QDs at RT: Pb, Se, S percentages; core radius (Rc); overall radius (Rs); band gap energy (Eg); QY (η); radiative lifetime (τrad); and Stokes shift (ES)




Molecular formula of QDs
Pb [%]
Se [%]
S [%]

R
c [nm]

R
s [nm]

E
g exp. [eV]

E
g calc. [eV]

η [%]

τ
rad [μs]

E
S [meV]




PbSe
77
22
0.0
1.1
1.1
1.65
1.9
58
6.1
280


PbSe
51
48
0.0
1.5
1.5
1.17
1.03
48
3.0
112


PbSe/PbS
55
17
27
1.1
1.7
1.32
1.50
62
6.6
140


PbSe/PbS
55
17
27
1.5
2.1
1.03
1.10
55
4.5
55


PbSe/PbSe0.68S0.32
50
40
10
1.5
2.1
1.00
1.14
68
4.2
75


PbSe0.5S0.5
51
25
24
1.6
1.6
1.18
1.30
27
5.5
103


PbSe0.5S0.5/PbSe0.24S0.76
49
20
30
1.6
1.9
1.09
1.40
46
4.4
73


PbSe0.5S0.5/PbSe0.27S0.73
48
17
33
1.6
2.4
1.02
0.97
65
4.2
45




The cw-PL spectra are displayed in Fig. 14(a), each showing an asymmetric band whose maximal point is Stokes shifted from the corresponding first exciton absorption band by energy, ES. Fig. 14(c) displays a plot of ESversus the values of Eg of the QDs listed in the legend. The emission energy Stokes shift in the listed QD heterostructures may be related to the following factors: (i) an increase of the overall size of the QDs by the growth of the shell width; (ii) a variation of the valley–valley and electron–hole exchange interactions with respect to that found in pure PbSe cores, due to a quasi-type-II band alignment. It is important to note that the value of ES in core/alloyed-shell and alloyed-core/alloyed-shell QDs is smaller than that found in pure cores; however, it is slightly larger than that found in pure core/shell QDs of the same overall size (see Table 1). The variation in ES has also been found in the past in alloyed II–VI125 and III–V QDs,126 uniquely explained in those materials, as a consequent effect of optical bowing.127
4.2 Thermally activated processes in PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x QDs
Thermally activated processes in the QDs were studied by following variation in the emission spectrum as a function of temperature. Fig. 15(a–c) illustrate a set of cw-PL spectra of PbSe, PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 and PbSe/PbS QDs, recorded at various temperatures from 1.4 to 300 K. The QDs had a similar core size; they were dispersed in GS, were kept under oxygen-free conditions, and were excited at 1.54 eV. The cw-PL spectra exhibit an energy red-shift with a decrease in temperature, resembling a trend found in low energy band-gap semiconductors.128 Also, a majority of the PL curves have an asymmetric emission band, presumably consisting of two overlapping recombination events, where the energy split varies from 55 meV to 80 meV, and it is the smallest for the largest shell width and S/Se ratio. Interestingly, the split energy closely retains its value with the increase in the temperature, although the high-energy component becomes the dominant band at elevated temperatures. The nature of the emission bands was examined by a variation of the pumping intensity. We found that the spectra maintain the relative intensity between the red side and the blue side of the emission bands. We excluded existence of multiple excitons emission under strong pumping conditions due to the long lifetime of the entire emission bands (vide intra). The possibility that a trapped carrier recombination occurs in the present case was also excluded, due to the lack of the saturation effect at the highest pumping power. More likely, the entire emission spectrum is related to a band-edge recombination. It is important to mention that the appearance of an asymmetric band or even two distinct emission bands in non-resonant excited cw-PL spectra of colloidal IV–VI QDs has already been reported in previous studies,2,68,92,129,130 proposing the following routes, based on either theoretical42,86 or experimental evidence:68,79,92,130–133 (a) exciton fine structure near the band gap; (b) overlap of two events, one related to band-edge recombination and the second to trap-to-band recombination;69 (c) an inter-valley coupling at the L-points of the Brillouin zone.5,86,126,129 Further, fluorescence line narrowing of binary PbSe QDs showed Stokes and anti-Stokes energy shift emission bands with respect to the absorption edge, associated with the existence of two bands.119,120,134 Rarely, we have seen a split-exciton absorption band (unpublished results), which is unexpected in spherical structures unless a geometric distortion is present. Thus, the presence of two bands may be related to the degeneracy split of band-edge states due to a slight shape anisotropy of the QDs.
 Fig. 15  cw-PL spectra of (a) PbSe QDs, (b) PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs, (c) PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as indicated in the legend. (d) Plot of the normalized cw-PL integrated intensity (IPL) versus temperature (T) of various colloidal QDs as given in the legend. 

Fig. 15(d) shows a plot of the normalized cw-PL integrated intensity (IPL) versus temperature (T) of a few oxygen-free core/shell and core IV–VI QDs. The values of IPL(T) include integration over the entire emission spectrum, and IPL at each temperature is normalized with respect to the maximal value at RT as observed under air-free conditions. The plots are characterized by a mild increase of IPL(T) between 5 K and 50 K, correlated with a phonon-assisted process from a dark-to-bright exciton emission,135 followed by small quenching that may be associated with carrier trapping. Eventually >150 K, a sharper intensity growth is achieved up to RT. The optimal intensity at RT is correlated with the recombination nature from a bright exciton state,135 which is presumably enhanced by a phonon-assisted de-trapping from shallow non-radiative defect states.

Fig. 16 displays a set of measurements reflecting plausible deterioration of IV–VI QDs on exposure to air. The cw-PL spectra of PbSe core QDs covered with oleic acid (in GS) are shown in Fig. 16(a), illustrating reduction of the luminescence intensity with the increase of the temperature, after air exposure over 20 minutes. Such a drastic effect may be associated with thermally activated trapping at elevated temperature into defect states associated with oxidation sites at the exterior surfaces.132Fig. 16(b) exhibits cw-PL curves of PbSe/PbS QDs with a diameter of 2.7 nm, recorded at a similar temperature range and exposure time as in Fig. 16(a), but the air environment did not quench the luminescence intensity in the shell coated QDs. In contrast, some enhancement of IPL is observed at RT. Fig. 16(c) displays the change in normalized IPLversus T of the QDs discussed in Fig. 16(b), with a variation in exposure time from 20 to 200 minutes. The plot indicates that a limited exposure time is possible without dramatic change of the luminescence QY, above which an oxidation process may occur, with a subsequent quenching of the luminescence intensity.68,132 Although the chemical stability of the QDs is restricted to a limited duration, it can be beneficial for certain processes in the QD-based device fabrication.
 Fig. 16  cw-PL spectra of (a) PbSe QDs, (b) PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio, as given in the figure. The samples in (a) and (b) were dispersed in GS and were recorded after an exposure to air atmosphere for a time duration of 20 minutes. (c) Plot of the normalized IPLversus T of a QD shown in (b), with a variation in exposure time (from 20 to 200 minutes) to air environment. 
4.3 Time-resolved photoluminescence investigations of PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1) QDs at variable temperatures
Time-resolved PL (tr-PL) measurements at various temperatures were used to investigate the nature of the radiative processes, quantum efficiency and for further support of the dark-to-bright activation. The tr-PL spectra were measured by exciting the sample at 1.17 eV and following the PL intensity decay process over time. A low power excitation ensured the formation of a single exciton, best fitted to a single exponent, I(t) = Aexp(−t/τ0), with measured intrinsic PL decay time τ0. Fig. 17(a) displays PL decay curves of PbSe and PbSe/PbS QDs with Rc and the Rs/Rc ratio as indicated in the legend. For the most part, the value of τ0 decreased from 3.5 μs to 1.4 μs, with the growth of the core radius from Rc = 1.1 to 2.4 nm, and with the variation of core-to-shell division.60,136,137 The values of τ0 at each temperature depend on the radiative (τrad) and nonradiative (τNrad) processes, according to the following relation:138,139 (2)
 Fig. 17  (a) Representative PL decay curves of PbSe core and core/shell QDs with Rc and the Rs/Rc ratio, as given in the legend, measured when dispersed in GS. (b) τrad dependence on the size and composition of the QDs listed in the legend, dispersed in GS. (c) PL decay curves of PbSe core QDs, dispersed in different media (see the legend). 
The integrated PL intensity (IPL) and quantum yield, η, are related to each other in the following manner: (3)where I0 is the exciting photon flux, in the current case assumed to be close to the maximal PL intensity at RT when measured under air-free conditions. τrad is the meaningful quantity to consider when comparing the behavior of core/shell versus core QDs or versus literature reports.60,87

Fig. 17(b) shows a plot of τradversus the size of a few PbSe QDs, PbSe/PbS QDs, and PbSeyS1−y/PbSexS1−x QDs, as listed in the legend. The figure designates that the value of τrad is reduced from 6.5 μs to 2.7 μs with the growth of a PbSe core radius (See also Table 1). The origin of this trend is still questionable. However, some elucidation is gained from the theoretical work described in Section 2.1b, suggesting partial electron–hole separation (see Fig. 4, middle row) in pure core PbSe QDs – a separation that increases with the decrease of the QD size (unpublished results). The values of τrad are substantially longer (a few μs) than those found in II–VI semiconductor QDs (∼20 ns), a fact that can be connected to a relatively high dielectric constant of the PbSe semiconductor (ε∞ = 24) or to a possible contribution from adjacent Σ and K Brillouin zone extremes.85 The arrows in (b) designate the increase of τrad from core QDs (black symbols) to that of the corresponding core/shell (red symbols) QDs. This increase of the τrad can be associated with potential elimination of the trapping site by the growth of the crystalline-matched epitaxial shell, by the quasi-type-II character of the heterostructures, or/and by the total increase of the QDs diameter.
The IV–VI QDs discussed can be employed in various optoelectronic devices, requiring dispersion in different media, such as a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) polymer21,28 or water environment.28 Representative tr-PL decay curves of 4.4 ± 0.4 nm PbSe QDs dissolved in several different solutions (hexane, chloroform, GS, water) or dispersed in the PMMA polymer film are presented in Fig. 17(c), all showing single exponential behavior. Table 2 summarizes the values of the τrad and η of PbSe QDs having the same diameter while dispersed in different media. The pronounced differences given in the table can be related to a different surface quality, on variation of the surrounding ligands and solvent, as well as to a small variation of the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium.29
Table 2 Room temperature values of the measured lifetime (τ0), quantum efficiency (η) and radiative lifetime (τrad) of PbSe QDs with Rc = 2.2 nm, dispersed in different media




Solvent
Size (nm)

τ
0 (μs)

η (%)

τ
rad (μs)




CH3Cl
4.7
1.07
39
2.74


GS
4.7
1.17
48
1.67


Hexane
4.7
1.14
60
1.29


PMMA
4.7
1.28
7
4.03


H2O
4.7
0.78
9
8.69




The value of τ0 for PbSe QDs dissolved in hexane, chloroform, and GS is approximately 1.1 μs, while τ0 values for the same QDs dissolved in water or embedded in the PMMA polymer are <1.0 μs. Destruction of the organic capping by a certain medium might induce a substantial reduction in the value of η. Also, it should be noted that water soluble QDs underwent a ligand exchange due to thiol-amine molecules having less protection capability, which falls below that of the oleic acid. Additionally, water and PMMA media induce a surrounding with a relatively high dielectric constant (ε∞(water) = 5.5, ε∞(PMMA) = 4.0) differing from other organic media (ε∞(hexane) = 1.94). Indeed, the lifetime of the QDs embedded in PMMA and water solution is scaled by a factor of [3 εi/(2εi + εQD)]−2 when εi corresponds to the dielectric constant of the surrounding.29 The value of τrad of QDs dissolved in water is scaled by a factor of 3.2–4.5 with respect to QDs dissolved in organic media; see Table 2. However, the value of τrad of QDs dispersed in PMMA is scaled by a factor of only 1.45–2.0 with respect that of QDs dissolved in organic media. It can be concluded that the QD surface-capping quality with thiol-amine molecules has a bigger influence on the radiative process in QDs.
Representative tr-PL curves of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs recorded under air-free conditions at various temperatures are shown in Fig. 18(a). Low power excitation measurements of PL decay curves were fitted to single exponent or two exponent functions, showing an obvious change with a variation of the temperature. The values of τrad derived from eqn (2) and (3) were plotted versus the measured T in Fig. 18(b) for the QDs indicated in the legend. η was measured at RT by integrating sphere (discussed above). The plots reveal a long τrad at cryogenic temperatures, which changes at elevated temperatures. Such a change is explained by the existence of electron–hole exchange interactions, which split exciton electronic states into bright and dark components. The dark component is the lowest in energy and dominates the emission at cryogenic temperatures. However, τrad changes dramatically at elevated temperatures, when bright state recombination becomes a dominant event. The dependence of τrad on the dark–bright thermalization is given in the following relation:87,92,140 (4)where Δex is an exchange split energy; τb and τd correspond to a radiative process from a bright and a dark state, respectively.79 At the lowest temperature (1.4 K), τd = τrad(1.4 K), and is viewed as a “frozen exciton” with a lifetime of ∼10 to 40 μs. The best fit process, using eqn (4), to the curves shown in Fig. 18(b) revealed values for Δex from 13 to 18 meV and τb values in the range of 100–650 ns, consistent with results reported previously.79 The values of τb decreased with the increase of the QDs size, associated with the reduction of Δex, and the enhancement of bright and dark states mixing in the larger QDs. The bright-dark energy gap depends on the QDs size being 10–30 meV in spherical QDs,120 and <1 meV in elliptical or elongated structures (e.g., rods or wires).42 The results shown in Fig. 18 reveal a longer τrad in PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with respect to that of PbSe core QDs.92 Interestingly, the values of τrad vary only slightly across the whole temperature range under examination in core/alloyed-shell QDs. A small variation is a consequence of a small exchange split dark and bright states in the alloyed QDs.141
 Fig. 18  (a) Representative transient PL curves of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as indicated in the legend. QDs dispersed in GS and recorded at various temperatures, as indicated in the legend. (b) Variation of the τradversus the temperature of the various sizes and compositions of QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as given in the legend. 
4.4 Optical properties of PbSexS1−x and PbSe/PbSexS1−x QRs at different temperatures
The optical properties of alloyed QRs were examined in a similar manner to the study of the analogous QDs. Fig. 19(a) illustrates RT absorption and cw-PL spectra of PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs with a variable size, dissolved in GS. The cw-PL bands show an energy Stokes shift relative to the first absorption band, which decreases gradually with the increase of the QRs' size. Fig. 19(b) displays a plot of ESversus the band gap energy of various alloyed PbSexS1−x QRs, compared to an emission energy Stokes shift found in relevant binary QRs and QDs and observed at RT. In general, the Stokes shift in QRs is larger than that of QDs with similar Eg values, suggesting a larger binding energy of an exciton in elongated structures.
 Fig. 19  (a) RT absorption and cw-PL spectra of a few PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs with different sizes as given in the legend, dissolved in GS. (b) Plots of the energy Stokes shift observed at RT of QDs and QRs as listed in the legend. 
Representative cw-PL spectra of alloyed PbSexS1−x (x = 0.6) QRs with an average length/radius ratio of 10.4 nm/2.1 nm are shown in Fig. 20(a); the spectra were recorded at various temperatures and under oxygen-free conditions. The cw-PL spectra in Fig. 20(a) are shifted to higher energies with increasing temperature. The cw-PL band always has an asymmetric appearance and may occasionally show a second weak band, depending on the dimension of the QRs.
 Fig. 20  (a) Representative cw-PL spectra of ternary PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs with an average length/radius ratio of 10.4 nm/2.05 nm recorded at various temperatures. The dashed line indicates the absorbance of the QRs, recorded at RT. (b) Plot of the FWHM of the cw-PL emission band versus T of various QDs and QRs. The representative best-fit curve (see the text) is shown by a solid line. QDs and QRs have the same first-exciton absorption energy −0.925 eV. (c) Plot of the normalized IPLversus temperature for PbSe and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures. 
The characteristic appearance of an asymmetric or satellite band may be related to a break of degeneracy of extreme points at the L point of the Brillouin zone, which was discussed above in the case of elliptical distortion of QDs. However, the QRs exhibit a larger aspect ratio (length/width). Fig. 20(b) exhibits a plot of the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the entire (anisotropic) emission band versus the temperature (T) of the QDs and QRs listed in the legend. The symbols designate experimental points. A best-fit to these points was implemented using the Bose–Einstein relation:142,143 Γ(T) = Γinh + σT + ΓLO/(eELO/kBT − 1)(5)where Γ(T) is the emission band FWHM, Γinh is the inhomogeneous broadening parameter at T = 0, σ is an acoustic phonon coupling, ΓLO is an optical phonon coupling, and ELO is the longitudinal optics phonon energy. It should be noted that the value of ELO varies with size,79 shape,144 and composition (unpublished results) of the QRs; however, a constant value of 16.8 meV was used in the above relation for a set of QRs with relatively narrow size dispersion. The solid line shows a representative best-fit curve. The theoretical fit for all samples (not shown here) revealed the following values σ = 0.02, 0.04, 0.03, and 0.02 meV K−1 and ΓLO = 26, 22, 59, and 41 meV for PbSexS1−x QRs, PbSe QRs, PbSe QDs, and PbSexS1−x QDs, respectively. The values reflect reduction of optical phonon coupling in QR structures with alloy composition, suggesting localization of phonons in alloyed materials, as often found in bulk semiconductors.145

Fig. 20(c) displays a plot of the normalized IPLversus T for the oxygen-free PbSe and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 QR heterostructures. The plots suggest a minor change in IPL over the 4–150 K temperature range. However, above that temperature, a sharp intensity increase is seen in the temperature-dependent curve of both samples only under oxygen-free conditions. The tolerance to a short exposure time to air is similar to that found in IV–VI QDs (see Section 4.3).
Representative tr-PL decay curves of PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs, monitored at the peak emission energy and at various temperatures, are given in Fig. 21(a). These decay curves were fitted to single exponent or two exponent functions, always with a dominant decay component, showing lifetime increase with decreasing temperature. The relationship between τ0 and τrad was determined by examining normalized IPL(T) at various T using a similar procedure previously described in the analysis of similar colloidal QDs. Fig. 21(b) displays a plot of the values of τradversus the temperature of alloyed PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 QR heterostructures. Over the entire temperature range, there is only a minor change in τrad with respect to those of core/shell QDs (Fig. 18(b)). The relatively large exchange interaction in IV–VI QDs implies the occurrence of an emission process from a dark state at cryogenic temperatures, but a dominant emission from a bright state at room temperature (see Fig. 18(b)). In contrast, these results showed that the variation of the emission lifetime is minor in QRs, in agreement with the small exchange split (∼180 μeV) calculated by the theoretical model described in Section 2.2; hence, both dark and bright states are thermally populated over the wide temperature range under investigation. The relatively low values of τrad in QRs are in correlation with theoretical considerations, suggesting reduction of the lifetime due to anisotropic dielectric screening in elongated structures.101 The influence of alloying on the lifetime of the QRs is negligible with respect to that of reduced screening in QRs.
 Fig. 21  (a) Representative PL decay curves of PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs at various temperatures. (b) Plot of τradversus temperature for ternary PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures. 
5 Applications
PbSe, PbSe/PbS core/shell and PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QD heterostructures with a band gap of 0.8 eV, dispersed in the PMMA polymer, were used in the eye-safe laser of Er:glass. The absorber saturation investigations revealed a relatively large ground state cross-section of absorption (σgs ≅ 10−15 cm2) and behavior of a “fast” absorber with an effective lifetime (τeff ≅ 4.0 ps). The τeff was associated with the formation of multi-excitons at the measured pumping power. The product of σgs and τeff enables a sufficient Q-switching performance and tunability in the near-infrared spectral regime. The improved properties were achieved using PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QD heterostructures.21,22,120
The gain devices of the discussed colloidal QDs were examined, showing an amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) under conditions that are suitable for technological devices, such as optical pumping by a continuous diode laser under RT conditions. The optical gain and the ASE properties were determined with variable pump intensity on a 4.2 μm thick, QD-doped PMMA film (arranged on a Si wafer) with a variable (0.01–0.2 cm) stripe length, using a cw laser diode at 980 nm as the pump source. The pump beam is concentrated with a cylindrical lens, and a narrow stripe of uniform intensity is selected using a 300 μm wide slit made of an aluminum foil directly deposited on the film surface. The ASE band is clearly narrower than the spontaneous emission band, but its width is independent of the pumping power, suggesting the absence of inhomogeneous broadening due to the QD size distribution. The results revealed a relatively large gain parameter (g = 2.63–6.67 cm−1).120
Solid state high efficiency QDs/TiO2 heterojunction solar cells, which used small-sized PbSe/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures with a band gap in the range of 1.1–1.3 eV, achieved improved parameters, such as a power conversion efficiency (η) of 4.5% with a short circuit photocurrent (Jsc) of 17.3 mA cm−2. The PbS shell covering the PbSe core should offer sufficient protection from a fast-oxygen penetration, providing the PbSe/PbS QD heterostructures with low surface trapping, chemical and photo-chemical stability, and contribute to the success of their integration into solar cell devices.20
6 Summary
The benefits of the IV–VI nano-heterostructures discussed extensively in the current review could be of significant importance in applications where the material size is restricted. Examples appear in biological platforms, demanding QDs of small dimensions, or in various opto-electronic applications, demanding closely packed self-assembled QDs of relatively small dimensions. However, all applications still have stringent requirements regarding the optical tunability. We showed that restrictions can be overcome by the new strategies which gain control of QDs' properties by using (a) alloyed ternary or quaternary compounds, with homogeneous or graded composition along a selective direction; and (b) core/shell heterostructures, consisting of a semiconductor core, covered by a shell of another semiconductor, when the band-edge offset at the core/shell interface can be tuned from a type-I through quasi-type-II to a type-II alignment and one of the constituents (core or shell) may have an alloy composition.
Unique alloyed colloidal core/shell heterostructures, such as PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y, (0 ≤ x(y) ≤ 1) QDs and QRs, were featured in this document. They possess tunable band-gap energy and a high crystallographic and dielectric match between the core and the shell. Moreover, the overall electronic properties and carrier distribution functions can be regulated by the core/shell architecture. Further, these heterostructures show exceptionally high emission QY, chemical and photochemical stability. The electronic band structure calculation of the discussed heterostructures was determined by using a k·p model, covering a wide range of physical aspects, including an effective mass anisotropy and dielectric variation between the constituents, indicating possibilities for tailoring heterostructures with the relevant composition and optical properties. A thorough investigation of the optical properties was performed by recording variable-temperature continuous-wave and time-resolved PL spectra. Energy shifts and band-edge temperature stability were explored by alleviating dark–bright splitting by exchange and/or valley–valley interactions, and by emission QYs and radiative lifetimes. The results were compared to the existing known properties of primary PbSe structures. The results reflect the uniqueness of the electronic properties of the heterostructures, which are controlled by the shell thickness and the alloy composition.
Acknowledgements
We thank G. Kventsel for helpful discussions, providing many insightful comments; A. Bartnik and F. Wise for helpful discussions and guidance on the theoretical model; A. Efros for useful scientific discussions; and O. Solomeshch for assistance in the QY measurements. We thank D. Kolan for the preparation of colloidal QRs, and Y. Kauffmann and D. Kolan for the structural characterization of the rods. We thank M. Saraf for carrying out the scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements. We thank L. Etgar for implementing the QDs in photovoltaic cells. We thank A. Q. Le Quang, I. Ledoux-Rak, and J. Zyss for assisting in the gain device measurements. We acknowledge the support from the Israel Science Foundation (project no. 1009/07 and 1425/04), the USA-Israel Binational Science Foundation (no. 2006-225), the Israel Ministry of Science (no. 3-896), and the European FP7 SANS and Nanospec projects.
References
I. Kang and F. W. Wise, Electronic structure and optical properties of PbS and PbSe quantum dots. OSA, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1997, 14, 1632 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, C. Chen, R. Krishnan, T. D. Krauss, J. M. Harbold, F. W. Wise, M. G. Thomas and J. Silcox, Optical Properties of Colloidal PbSe Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Wehrenberg, C. Wang and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Interband and Intraband Optical Studies of PbSe Colloidal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10634–10640 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, PbSe Nanocrystal Solids for n- and p-Channel Thin Film Field-Effect Transistors, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Harbold, H. Du, T. D. Krauss, K.-S. Cho, C. B. Murray and F. W. Wise, Time-resolved intraband relaxation of strongly confined electrons and holes in colloidal PbSe nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 195312 CrossRef .
M. Brumer, A. Kigel, L. Amirav, A. Sashchiuk, O. Solomesch, N. Tessler and E. Lifshitz, PbSe/PbS and PbSe/PbSexS1−x Core/Shell Nanocrystals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, Pushing the Band Gap Envelope: Mid-Infrared Emitting Colloidal PbSe Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11752–11753 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Madelung, Semiconductors: Data Handbook, Springer, 3rd edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
H. E. Romero and M. Drndic, Coulomb Blockade and Hopping Conduction in PbSe Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 156801 CrossRef .
F. W. Wise, Lead Salt Quantum Dots: the Limit of Strong Quantum Confinement, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 773–780 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alivisatos, The use of nanocrystals in biological detection, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dubertret, Quantum dots: DNA detectives, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 797–798 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Next-generation quantum dots, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 732–733 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Nanoscience and Nanostructures for Photovoltaics and Solar Fuels, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735–2741 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Quantum dot solar cells, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal-quantum-dot photovoltaics using atomic-ligand passivation, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Hybrid passivated colloidal quantum dot solids, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, S. L. Swisher, T. Ewers, J. Engel, V. E. Ferry, H. A. Atwater and A. P. Alivisatos, Photovoltaic Performance of Ultrasmall PbSe Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8140–8147 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, Depleted Bulk Heterojunction Colloidal Quantum Dot Photovoltaics, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, D. Yanover, R. K. Čapek, R. Vaxenburg, Z. Xue, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Lifshitz and M. Grätzel, Core/Shell PbSe/PbS QDs TiO2 Heterojunction Solar Cell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2736–2741 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brumer, M. Sirota, A. Kigel, A. Sashchiuk, E. Galun, Z. Burshtein and E. Lifshitz, Nanocrystals of PbSe core, PbSe/PbS, and PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/shell as saturable absorbers in passively Q-switched near-infrared lasers, Appl. Opt., 2006, 45, 7488–7497 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Sirota, E. Galun, V. Krupkin, A. Glushko, A. Kigel, M. Brumer, A. Sashchiuk, L. Amirav and E. Lifshitz, in IV–VI semiconductor nanocrystals for passive Q-switch in IR, ed. D. L. Andrews, G. Z. Cao and Z. Gaburro, SPIE, Denver, CO, USA,  2004, pp. 9–16 Search PubMed .
R. Y. Wang, J. P. Feser, J.-S. Lee, D. V. Talapin, R. Segalman and A. Majumdar, Enhanced Thermopower in PbSe Nanocrystal Quantum Dot Superlattices, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2283–2288 CrossRef CAS .
D. Loss and D. P. DiVincenzo, Quantum computation with quantum dots, Phys. Rev. A, 1998, 57, 120 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Petta, A. C. Johnson, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Laird, A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson and A. C. Gossard, Coherent Manipulation of Coupled Electron Spins in Semiconductor Quantum Dots, Science, 2005, 309, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, The Electronic Structure of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 475–521 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris, M. Kuno, M. G. Bawendi, A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Observation of the “Dark Exciton” in CdSe Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 75, 3728 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kigel, M. Brumer, G. Maikov, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, The ground-state exciton lifetime of PbSe nanocrystal quantum dots, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 46, 272–276 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Jamie, 
            et al., Time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy of ligand-capped PbS nanocrystals, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 175 CrossRef .
D. I. Chepic, A. L. Efros, A. I. Ekimov, M. G. Ivanov, V. A. Kharchenko, I. A. Kudriavtsev and T. V. Yazeva, Auger ionization of semiconductor quantum drops in a glass matrix, J. Lumin., 1990, 47, 113–127 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Semiconductor Quantum Dots and Quantum Dot Arrays and Applications of Multiple Exciton Generation to Third-Generation Photovoltaic Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nair, S. M. Geyer, L.-Y. Chang and M. G. Bawendi, Carrier multiplication yields in PbS and PbSe nanocrystals measured by transient photoluminescence, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125325 CrossRef .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, High Efficiency Carrier Multiplication in PbSe Nanocrystals: Implications for Solar Energy Conversion, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Highly Efficient Multiple Exciton Generation in Colloidal PbSe and PbS Quantum
Dots, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, In Spite of Recent Doubts Carrier Multiplication Does Occur in PbSe Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef .
J. A. McGuire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, New Aspects of Carrier Multiplication in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810–1819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, S. Park, S. T. Connor, T. Mokari, Y. Cui and K. J. Gaffney, Efficient Multiple Exciton Generation Observed in Colloidal PbSe Quantum Dots with Temporally and Spectrally Resolved Intraband Excitation, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. Law, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Variations in the Quantum Efficiency of Multiple Exciton Generation for a Series of Chemically Treated PbSe Nanocrystal Films, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836–845 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, Y. Sahoo, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Multiple exciton generation and electrical extraction from a PbSe quantum dot photoconductor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 031107–031113 CrossRef .
M. T. Trinh, L. Polak, J. M. Schins, A. J. Houtepen, R. Vaxenburg, G. I. Maikov, G. Grinbom, A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik, M. Bonn, E. Lifshitz and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Anomalous Independence of Multiple Exciton Generation on Different Group IV–VI Quantum Dot Architectures, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cunningham, J. E. Boercker, E. E. Foos, M. P. Lumb, A. R. Smith, J. G. Tischler and J. S. Melinger, Enhanced Multiple Exciton Generation in Quasi-One-Dimensional Semiconductors, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3476–3481 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Tischler, T. A. Kennedy, E. R. Glaser, A. L. Efros, E. E. Foos, J. E. Boercker, T. J. Zega, R. M. Stroud and S. C. Erwin, Band-edge excitons in PbSe nanocrystals and nanorods, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245303 CrossRef .
A. Rubin-Brusilovski, G. Maikov, D. Kolan, R. Vaxenburg, J. Tilchin, Y. Kauffmann, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Influence of Alloying on the Optical Properties of IV–VI Nanorods, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18983–18989 CAS .
M. Casavola, M. A. van Huis, S. Bals, K. Lambert, Z. Hens and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Anisotropic Cation Exchange in PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell Nanocrystals of Different Geometry, Chem. Mater., 2011, 24, 294–302 CrossRef .
J. E. Boercker, E. M. Clifton, J. G. Tischler, E. E. Foos, T. J. Zega, M. E. Twigg and R. M. Stroud, Size and Temperature Dependence of Band-Edge Excitons in PbSe Nanowires, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 527–531 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sashchiuk, L. Amirav, M. Bashouti, M. Krueger, U. Sivan and E. Lifshitz, PbSe Nanocrystal Assemblies: Synthesis and Structural, Optical, and Electrical Characterization, Nano Lett., 2003, 4, 159–165 CrossRef .
T. Mokari, S. E. Habas, M. Zhang and P. Yang, Synthesis of Lead Chalcogenide Alloy and Core/Shell Nanowires, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5605–5608 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bashouti and E. Lifshitz, PbS Sub-micrometer Structures with Anisotropic Shape: Ribbons, Wires, Octapods, and Hollowed Cubes, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 47, 678–682 CrossRef .
E. Lifshitz, M. Bashouti, V. Kloper, A. Kigel, M. S. Eisen and S. Berger, Synthesis and Characterization of PbSe Quantum Wires, Multipods, Quantum Rods, and Cubes, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Ultrathin PbS Sheets by Two-Dimensional Oriented Attachment, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Cho, D. V. Talapin, W. Gaschler and C. B. Murray, Designing PbSe Nanowires and Nanorings through Oriented Attachment of Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7140–7147 CrossRef CAS .
W.-k. Koh, A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise and C. B. Murray, Synthesis of Monodisperse PbSe Nanorods: A Case for Oriented Attachment, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3909–3913 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Zhou, L. Wang, X. Tian, Y. Wang and Z. Pi, Preparation and tunable photoluminescence of alloyed CdSxSe1−x nanorods, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 3015–3019 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bealing, W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, T. Hanrath and R. G. Hennig, Predicting Nanocrystal Shape through Consideration of Surface-Ligand Interactions, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lobo, H. Borchert, D. V. Talapin, H. Weller and T. Möller, Surface oxidation of CdTe nanocrystals—a high resolution core-level photoelectron spectroscopy study, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 286, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Semiconductor crystallites: a class of large molecules, Acc. Chem. Res., 1990, 23, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Shape control of CdSe nanocrystals, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akamatsu, T. Tsuruoka and H. Nawafune, Band Gap Engineering of CdTe Nanocrystals through Chemical Surface Modification, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1634–1635 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Mićić, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, PbTe Colloidal Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Multiple Exciton Generation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sykora, A. Y. Koposov, J. A. McGuire, R. K. Schulze, O. Tretiak, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Effect of Air Exposure on Surface Properties, Electronic Structure, and Carrier Relaxation in PbSe Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2021–2034 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, S. Kirstein, H. Möhwald, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Strongly Photoluminescent CdTe Nanocrystals by Proper Surface Modification, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8360–8363 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kloper, R. Osovsky, J. Kolny-Olesiak, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, The Growth of Colloidal Cadmium Telluride Nanocrystal Quantum Dots in the Presence of Cd0 Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10336–10341 CAS .
I. Moreels, B. Fritzinger, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Surface Chemistry of Colloidal PbSe Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15081–15086 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Abel, P. A. FitzGerald, T.-Y. Wang, T. Z. Regier, M. Raudsepp, S. P. Ringer, G. G. Warr and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Probing the Structure of Colloidal Core/Shell Quantum Dots Formed by Cation Exchange, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3968–3978 CAS .
B. Fritzinger, R. K. Capek, K. Lambert, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Utilizing Self-Exchange to Address the Binding of Carboxylic Acid Ligands to CdSe Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10195–10201 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Tracy, D. N. Weiss, D. P. Dinega and M. G. Bawendi, Exchange biasing and magnetic properties of partially and fully oxidized colloidal cobalt nanoparticles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 064404 CrossRef .
A. Nag, M. V. Kovalenko, J.-S. Lee, W. Liu, B. Spokoyny and D. V. Talapin, Metal-free Inorganic Ligands for Colloidal Nanocrystals: S2–, HS–, Se2–, HSe–, Te2–, HTe–, TeS32–, OH–, and NH2– as Surface Ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Chappell, B. K. Hughes, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik and J. C. Johnson, Emission Quenching in PbSe Quantum Dot Arrays by Short-Term Air Exposure, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 889–893 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Hughes, D. A. Ruddy, J. L. Blackburn, D. K. Smith, M. R. Bergren, A. J. Nozik, J. C. Johnson and M. C. Beard, Control of PbSe Quantum Dot Surface Chemistry and Photophysics Using an Alkylselenide Ligand, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5498–5506 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, J. Zaumseil, J.-S. Lee and D. V. Talapin, Expanding the Chemical Versatility of Colloidal Nanocrystals Capped with Molecular Metal Chalcogenide Ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10085–10092 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Bae, J. Joo, L. A. Padilha, J. Won, D. C. Lee, Q. Lin, W.-k. Koh, H. Luo, V. I. Klimov and J. M. Pietryga, Highly Effective Surface Passivation of PbSe Quantum Dots through Reaction with Molecular Chlorine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20160–20168 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pietryga, D. J. Werder, D. J. Williams, J. L. Casson, R. D. Schaller, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, Utilizing the Lability of Lead Selenide to Produce Heterostructured Nanocrystals with Bright, Stable Infrared Emission, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4879–4885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lambert, B. D. Geyter, I. Moreels and Z. Hens, PbTe/CdTe Core/Shell Particles by Cation Exchange, a HR-TEM Study, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 778–780 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lee, I. n. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Infrared-Active Heterostructured Nanocrystals with Ultralong Carrier Lifetimes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9960–9962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, C. L. Perkins, J. Tolentino, M. H. Zarghami, J. Bustamante and M. Law, Robust, Functional Nanocrystal Solids by Infilling with Atomic Layer Deposition, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5349–5355 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Core/Shell Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Small, 2009, 5, 154–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris and M. Bawendi, Band-edge exciton in quantum dots of semiconductors with a degenerate valence band: dark and bright exciton states, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843–4856 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brovelli, R. D. Schaller, S. A. Crooker, F. García-Santamaría, Y. Chen, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon and V. I. Klimov, Nano-engineered electron–hole exchange interaction controls exciton dynamics in core–shell semiconductor nanocrystals, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 280 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kigel, M. Brumer, G. I. Maikov, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Thermally Activated Photoluminescence in Lead Selenide Colloidal Quantum Dots, Small, 2009, 5, 1675–1681 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shabaev, C. S. Hellberg and A. L. Efros, Efficiency of Multiexciton Generation in Colloidal Nanostructures, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46(6), 1242–1251 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vaxenburg, E. Lifshitz and A. L. Efros, Suppression of Auger-stimulated efficiency droop in nitride-based light emitting diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 031120–031125 CrossRef .
C. Delerue, G. Allan, J. J. H. Pijpers and M. Bonn, Carrier multiplication in bulk and nanocrystalline semiconductors: mechanism, efficiency, and interest for solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125306 CrossRef .
L. A. Padilha, J. T. Stewart, R. L. Sandberg, W. K. Bae, W.-K. Koh, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Aspect Ratio Dependence of Auger Recombination and Carrier Multiplication in PbSe Nanorods, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1092–1099 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, L. Rens, D. A. M. de Boer Wieteke, M. Schins Juleon, D. A. Siebbeles Laurens and T. Gregorkiewicz, Direct generation of multiple excitons in adjacent silicon nanocrystals revealed by induced absorption, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 1749–4885 CrossRef .
J. M. An, A. Franceschetti, S. V. Dudiy and A. Zunger, The Peculiar Electronic Structure of PbSe Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2728–2735 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. An, A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, The Excitonic Exchange Splitting and Radiative Lifetime in PbSe Quantum Dots, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2129–2135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Photoluminescence Lifetime of Lead Selenide Colloidal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14860–14863 CAS .
J. Ouyang, M. Vincent, D. Kingston, P. Descours, T. Boivineau, M. B. Zaman, X. Wu and K. Yu, Noninjection, One-Pot Synthesis of Photoluminescent Colloidal Homogeneously Alloyed CdSeS Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5193–5200 CAS .
X. Zhong, M. Han, Z. Dong, T. J. White and W. Knoll, Composition-Tunable ZnxCd1−xSe Nanocrystals with High Luminescence and Stability, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8589–8594 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Bailey and S. Nie, Alloyed Semiconductor Quantum Dots: Tuning the Optical Properties without Changing the Particle Size, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7100–7106 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Smith, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Tuning the Synthesis of Ternary Lead Chalcogenide Quantum Dots by Balancing Precursor Reactivity, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 183–190 CrossRef .
G. I. Maikov, R. Vaxenburg, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Composition-Tunable Optical Properties of Colloidal IV–VI Quantum Dots, Composed of Core/Shell Heterostructures with Alloy Components, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6547–6556 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Photovoltaic Devices Employing Ternary PbSxSe1−x nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699–1703 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Ren, K. Kahen, M. A. Hahn, M. Rajeswaran, S. Maccagnano-Zacher, J. Silcox, G. E. Cragg, A. L. Efros and T. D. Krauss, Non-blinking semiconductor nanocrystals, Nature, 2009, 459, 686–689 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. J. Daou, I. Texier, T. T. Kim Chi, N. Q. Liem and P. Reiss, Highly Luminescent CuInS2/ZnS Core/Shell Nanocrystals: Cadmium-Free Quantum Dots for In Vivo Imaging, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2422–2429 CrossRef CAS .
R. Osovsky, D. Cheskis, V. Kloper, A. Sashchiuk, M. Kroner and E. Lifshitz, Continuous-Wave Pumping of Multiexciton Bands in the Photoluminescence Spectrum of a Single CdTe-CdSe Core–Shell Colloidal Quantum Dot, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 197401 CrossRef .
D. Oron, M. Kazes and U. Banin, Multiexcitons in type-II colloidal semiconductor quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035330 CrossRef .
R. Vaxenburg and E. Lifshitz, Alloy and heterostructure architectures as promising tools for controlling electronic properties of semiconductor quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 075304 CrossRef .
J. Hu, L.-s. Li, W. Yang, L. Manna, L.-w. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Linearly Polarized Emission from Colloidal Semiconductor Quantum Rods, Science, 2001, 292, 2060–2063 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Miszta, S. Kudera, L. Manna, E. Di Fabrizio and R. Krahne, Spatially resolved photoconductivity of thin films formed by colloidal octapod-shaped CdSe/CdS nanocrystals, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2964–2970 RSC .
A. C. Bartnik, A. L. Efros, W. K. Koh, C. B. Murray and F. W. Wise, Electronic states and optical properties of PbSe nanorods and nanowires, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 195313 CrossRef .
G. E. Cragg and A. L. Efros, Suppression of Auger Processes in Confined Structures, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 313–317 CrossRef .
R. A. Knapp, Photoelectric Properties of Lead Sulfide in the Near and Vacuum Ultraviolet, Phys. Rev., 1963, 132, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Wei and A. Zunger, Electronic and structural anomalies in lead chalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 13605 CrossRef CAS .
H. Preier, Recent advances in lead-chalcogenide diode lasers, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1979, 20, 189–206 CAS .
A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise, A. Kigel and E. Lifshitz, Electronic structure of PbSe/PbS core–shell quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245424 CrossRef .
D. Yanover, R. K. Čapek, A. Rubin-Brusilovski, R. Vaxenburg, N. Grumbach, G. I. Maikov, O. Solomeshch, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Small-Sized PbSe/PbS Core/Shell Colloidal Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sashchiuk, L. Langof, R. Chaim and E. Lifshitz, Synthesis and characterization of PbSe and PbSe/PbS core–shell colloidal nanocrystals, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 240, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stouwdam, J. Shan, F. van Veggel, A. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. Young and M. Raudsepp, Photostability of colloidal PbSe and PbSe/PbS core/shell nanocrystals in solution and in the solid state, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1086–1092 CAS .
J. Xu, D. Cui, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, Z. Liang, Q. Wang, S. Xu and A. Wang, Synthesis and surface modification of PbSe/PbS core–shell nanocrystals for potential device applications, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5428–5434 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Pellegrino, M. Zhao, B. Zou, J. Seo, Y. Wang and W. Yu, Size-Dependent Composition and Molar Extinction Coefficient of PbSe Semiconductor Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1518–1524 CrossRef CAS .
D. Smith, J. Luther, O. Semonin, A. Nozik and M. Beard, Tuning the Synthesis of Ternary Lead Chalcogenide Quantum Dots by Balancing Precursor Reactivity, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. De Muynck, F. Vanhaecke, D. Poelman, J. C. Martins, G. Allan and Z. Hens, Composition and Size-Dependent Extinction Coefficient of Colloidal PbSe Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6101–6106 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, S. Shouheng, W. Gaschler, H. Doyle, T. A. Betley and C. R. Kagan, Colloidal synthesis of nanocrystals and nanocrystal superlattices, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 47 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Houtepen, R. Koole, D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. Meeldijk and S. G. Hickey, The hidden role of acetate in the PbSe nanocrystal synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6792–6793 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, M. Califano and S. E. Watkins, Size-Dependent Valence and Conduction Band-Edge Energies of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5888–5902 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Grinbom, M. Saraf, C. Saguy, A. C. Bartnik, F. Wise and E. Lifshitz, Density of states in a single PbSe/PbS core–shell quantum dot measured by scanning tunneling spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245301 CrossRef .
W.-k. Koh, Y. Yoon and C. B. Murray, Investigating the Phosphine Chemistry of Se Precursors for the Synthesis of PbSe Nanorods, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1825–1829 CrossRef CAS .
A. Efros and M. Rosen, The electronic structure of semiconductor nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 475–521 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lifshitz, M. Brumer, A. Kigel, A. Sashchiuk, M. Bashouti, M. Sirota, E. Galun, Z. Burshtein, A. Q. Le Quang, I. Ledoux-Rak and J. Zyss, Air-Stable PbSe/PbS and PbSe/PbSexS1−x Core/Shell Nanocrystal Quantum Dots and Their Applications, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25356–25365 CrossRef CAS .
R. Leitsmann and F. Bechstedt, Characteristic Energies and Shifts in Optical Spectra of Colloidal IV–VI Semiconductor Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3505–3512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Franceschetti, Structural and electronic properties of PbSe nanocrystals from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 075418(6) CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Confinement effects in PbSe quantum wells and nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 245321(9) CrossRef .
J. C. de Mello, H. F. Wittmann and R. H. Friend, An improved experimental determination of external photoluminescence quantum efficiency, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 230–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Garrett, A. D. Dukes Iii, J. R. McBride, N. J. Smith, S. J. Pennycook and S. J. Rosenthal, Band Edge Recombination in CdSe, CdS and CdSxSe1−x Alloy Nanocrystals Observed by Ultrafast Fluorescence Upconversion: The Effect of Surface Trap States, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12736–12746 CAS .
Y. H. Huang, C. L. Cheng, T. T. Chen, Y. F. Chen and K. T. Tsen, Studies of Stokes shift in InxGa1?xN alloys, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 103521 CrossRef .
L. A. Swafford, L. A. Weigand, M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride, J. L. Rapaport, T. L. Watt, S. K. Dixit, L. C. Feldman and S. J. Rosenthal, Homogeneously alloyed CdSxSe1−x Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Composition/Size-Dependent Band Gap, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12299–12306 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Krauss and F. W. Wise, Raman-scattering study of exciton-phonon coupling in PbS nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 9860 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grodzińska, W. H. Evers, R. Dorland, J. van Rijssel, M. A. van Huis, A. Meijerink, C. de Mello Donegá and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Two-Fold Emission From the S-Shell of PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell Quantum Dots, Small, 2011, 7, 3493–3501 CrossRef .
J. M. Harbold and F. W. Wise, Photoluminescence spectroscopy of PbSe nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125304 CrossRef .
R. D. Schaller, S. A. Crooker, D. A. Bussian, J. M. Pietryga, J. Joo and V. I. Klimov, Revealing the Exciton Fine Structure of PbSe Nanocrystal Quantum Dots Using Optical Spectroscopy in High Magnetic Fields, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 067403 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Abel, H. Qiao, J. F. Young and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Four-Fold Enhancement of the Activation Energy for Nonradiative Decay of Excitons in PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell versus PbSe Colloidal Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2334–2338 CrossRef CAS .
B. Geyter, Y. Justo, I. Moreels, K. Lambert, P. F. Smet, D. Thourhout, A. J. Houtepen, D. Grodzinska, C. M. Donega, A. Meijerink, D. Vanmaekelbergh and Z. Hens, The Different Nature of Band Edge Absorption and Emission in Colloidal PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(1), 58–66 CrossRef .
J. M. An, M. Califano, A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Excited-state relaxation in PbSe quantum dots, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 164720–164727 CrossRef .
E. Lifshitz, R. Vaxenburg, G. I. Maikov, A. Rubin-Brusilovski, D. Yanover, J. Tilchin and A. Sashchiuk, The Influence of Alloy Composition on the Electronic Properties of IV–VI Core/Shell Colloidal Heterostructures, Isr. J. Chem., 2012, 52, 1037–1052 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, Size-Dependent Optical Properties of Colloidal PbS Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oron, A. Aharoni, C. de Mello Donega, J. van Rijssel, A. Meijerink and U. Banin, Universal Role of Discrete Acoustic Phonons in the Low-Temperature Optical Emission of Colloidal Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 177402 CrossRef .
M. Gurioli, A. Vinattieri, M. Colocci, C. Deparis, J. Massies, G. Neu, A. Bosacchi and S. Franchi, Temperature dependence of the radiative and nonradiative recombination time in GaAs/AlxGa1−xAs quantum-well structures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3115 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chun Hsiung, 
            et al., Recombination dynamics in CdTe/CdSe type-II quantum dots, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 115702 CrossRef .
C. de Mello Donegá, M. Bode and A. Meijerink, Size- and temperature-dependence of exciton lifetimes in CdSe quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 085320 CrossRef .
G. Bester, S. Nair and A. Zunger, Pseudopotential calculation of the excitonic fine structure of million-atom self-assembled In_{1−x}Ga_{x}As/GaAs quantum dots, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 161306 CrossRef .
Z. Li-Gong, S. De-Zhen, F. Xi-Wu and L. Shao-Zhe, Exciton-Phonon Scattering in CdSe/ZnSe Quantum Dots, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2002, 19, 578–580 CrossRef .
J. Lee, E. S. Koteles and M. O. Vassell, Luminescence linewidths of excitons in GaAs quantum wells below 150 K, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 33, 5512–5516 CrossRef CAS .
B.-R. Hyun, A. C. Bartnik, W.-k. Koh, N. I. Agladze, J. P. Wrubel, A. J. Sievers, C. B. Murray and F. W. Wise, Far-Infrared Absorption of PbSe Nanorods, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2786–2790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Azhniuk, Y. I. Hutych, V. V. Lopushansky, A. E. Raevskaya, A. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy, A. V. Gomonnai and D. R. T. Zahn, Interplay of factors affecting Raman scattering in cadmium chalcogenide nanocrystals in dielectric media, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2007, 79, 012017 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Aldona Sashchiuk	Aldona Sashchiuk received her Ph.D. in Semiconductors Physics from the Semiconductors Physics Institute, Lithuanian Academy of Sciences in Vilnius. Her research was focused on investigation of magnetic field influence on the electronic properties of Ge and Si semiconductors for microelectronic applications. She has received prizes as USSR Inventor, and at USSR Exhibition in Moscow. In 1998 she joined the opto-electronic laboratory of Prof. Efrat Lifshitz in the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology as Senior Researcher. She is a co-author of more than 80 scientific papers, 5 book chapters, 72 USSR Inventor Certificates, and 3 patents (PCT Int. Appl.). Her current research interests include the development of nanostructured materials for high performance in optoelectronics.
Efrat Lifshitz	Efrat Lifshitz is the Full Professor of Chemistry of Matwei Gunsbuourgh Academic Chair, Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Solid State Institute, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion, Israel. She earned her M.Sc in Chemistry and her Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor, USA and did postdoctoral research at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Her research interest is the development and magneto-optical characterization of chemically prepared semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs). She has contributed substantially to the synthesis of near-infrared active NCs, had a particular strong impact on the understanding of the basic magneto-optical properties of manmade solids and already utilized the accumulated knowledge in the development of opto-electronic devices and biological tagging based on the mentioned NCs.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different kind of core/shell heterostructures (top row). Illustration of possible electron and hole wave function distributions in core/shell heterostructures (bottom row).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A schematic drawing of a QD heterostructure with alloy composition and general chemical formula PbSexS1−x/PbSeyS1−y, where 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 1. Rc and Rs are the core and core/shell radius, respectively, and W is the shell thickness; (b) a plot of the remote band contributions to the anisotropic conduction and valence band effective masses, meff/m0 (right axis, m0 is the free electron mass), m−, and m+ (left axis) versus the radial coordinate of a heterostructure shown in (a) with Rc = 2 nm and Rs = 3 nm. The band-edge energies are scaled with respect to zero vacuum energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  Variation of the ground-state exciton energy, Eg, versus (a) core radius (Rc) and shell thickness (W) in PbSe/PbS QD heterostructures, and (b) shell thickness (W) and composition (x) in PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QD heterostructures with Rc = 1.5 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (Top) Charge density distribution of electron (blue) and hole (red), shown as half a sphere of concentric isosurfaces, given in units of e/nm3 (e is the electron charge). (Middle) Charge density difference, Δρ, in PbSe, PbSe0.5S0.5, and PbS core QDs. (Bottom) Charge density difference, Δρ, in PbSe/PbS, PbSe/PbSe0.5S0.5 and PbSe0.5S0.5/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures. Red color corresponds to excess hole density, while the blue color designates excess electron density. The longitudinal [111] crystallographic direction is marked in the upper panel.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic drawing of the energy levels of electrons and holes (black lines) in PbSe/PbS heterostructures of three different sizes, having a constant ratio Rs/Rc = 2. Blue curves represent the band alignment profile.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Radial probability density of the ground-state electron and hole in the indicated QDs of dimensions Rc = 1 nm, Rs = 2 nm (top row) and Rc = 6 nm, Rs = 12 nm (bottom row). Solid vertical lines designate the external QD boundaries, and dashed lines represent the core/shell interface position. Probability of locating the electron (b) and the hole (c) in the core region of various QD heterostructures (indicated in c) as a function of overall radius, Rs, with a constant ratio Rs/Rc = 2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Calculated values of Egversus: (a) radius and length of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs with x = 0.5 and (b) radius and composition of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs at a fixed length of 10 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic presentation of four different core/shell colloidal heterostructures, prepared by adjustable colloidal procedures, as described in the text. Pb(OA)2 = lead oleate, TOP = trioctylphosphine, TMS2S = bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide precursors.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HR-TEM image of PbSe QDs with Rc = 1.0 ± 0.2 nm. Inset: FFT pattern of the TEM of (a). (b) Absorption spectra of PbSe QDs shown in (a) recorded after thermal annealing at 60–120 °C. Inset: dependence of the lowest absorption band-edge energy on the annealing temperature. (c) Time-evolution of absorption spectra of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs during drop-wise injections of TMS2S into the reaction mixture at 70 °C. Time interval between the spectra is 10 min. (d) XRD pattern of PbSe (blue) with Rc = 1.2 ± 0.2 nm and PbSe/PbS (green) core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 1.8 nm/1.1 nm indexed to the bulk rock-salt crystal structure of PbSe (blue line) and PbS (red line).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HR-TEM of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 1.8 nm/1.1 nm (scale bar = 5 nm). Inset: FFT pattern of the HR-TEM of (a). (b) XPS spectra of PbSe/PbS core/shell (top) and of PbSe core (bottom) QDs. The assignment of the bands is shown in the figure. (c) Dependence of the cation/anion stoichiometric ratio on the QD size in PbSe core (blue) and in PbSe/PbS core/shell (red) QDs.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Representative in situ absorbance of PbSe colloidal QDs monitored in situ during the reaction, recorded one after the other with a time delay of one second, and leading to the growth of QDs with the size ranging from 3.0 ± 0.4 nm to 5.2 ± 0.4 nm. (b) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell colloidal QD heterostructures with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.1 nm/1.5 nm (scale bar = 2 nm). Inset: SAED pattern of the same QDs. (c) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 3.0 nm/1.5 nm (scale bar = 5 nm). (d) A STM image of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 4.0 nm/1.5 nm spread over a gold substrate (scale bar = 10 nm). A height profile of a single QD is shown in the inset. (e) TEM image of PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QDs with a Rs/Rc ratio of 2.5 nm/1.5 nm. Inset: HR-TEM image of the corresponding single QD (scale bar = 4 nm).	 

 	Fig. 12  Representative HR-TEM images of ternary PbSexS1−x QRs with a length/radius ratio of (a) 15.0 nm/2.0 nm, (b) 19.9 nm/1.5 nm. Inset in (a) is the FFT pattern of the HR-TEM. (c) HR-TEM image of an ensemble of QRs shown in (a). (d) In situ absorbance monitoring of the PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QRs synthesis recorded with a time delay of one second. (e) HR-TEM image of PbSe/PbSexS1−x core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures with x = 0.27.	 

 	Fig. 13  Absorption and cw-PL spectra of small-sized PbSe/PbS core/shell QD heterostructures and the corresponding different ultra-small PbSe core QDs.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Absorption (dashed lines) and emission (solid lines) spectra of PbSe core QDs, and various core/shell QD heterostructures with the Rs./Rc ratio, as given in the legend. The exact composition and the radius of QDs are labeled in the figure. (b) Calculated (empty circles) and experimental (filled circles) energy band gap values of the QDs given in the legend. (c) Stokes shift energy (ES) of the various QDs as indicated in the legend.	 

PbSe	77	22	0.0	1.1	1.1	1.65	1.9	58	6.1	280
PbSe	51	48	0.0	1.5	1.5	1.17	1.03	48	3.0	112
PbSe/PbS	55	17	27	1.1	1.7	1.32	1.50	62	6.6	140
PbSe/PbS	55	17	27	1.5	2.1	1.03	1.10	55	4.5	55
PbSe/PbSe0.68S0.32	50	40	10	1.5	2.1	1.00	1.14	68	4.2	75
PbSe0.5S0.5	51	25	24	1.6	1.6	1.18	1.30	27	5.5	103
PbSe0.5S0.5/PbSe0.24S0.76	49	20	30	1.6	1.9	1.09	1.40	46	4.4	73
PbSe0.5S0.5/PbSe0.27S0.73	48	17	33	1.6	2.4	1.02	0.97	65	4.2	45

 	Fig. 15  cw-PL spectra of (a) PbSe QDs, (b) PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs, (c) PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as indicated in the legend. (d) Plot of the normalized cw-PL integrated intensity (IPL) versus temperature (T) of various colloidal QDs as given in the legend.	 

 	Fig. 16  cw-PL spectra of (a) PbSe QDs, (b) PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio, as given in the figure. The samples in (a) and (b) were dispersed in GS and were recorded after an exposure to air atmosphere for a time duration of 20 minutes. (c) Plot of the normalized IPLversus T of a QD shown in (b), with a variation in exposure time (from 20 to 200 minutes) to air environment.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 17  (a) Representative PL decay curves of PbSe core and core/shell QDs with Rc and the Rs/Rc ratio, as given in the legend, measured when dispersed in GS. (b) τrad dependence on the size and composition of the QDs listed in the legend, dispersed in GS. (c) PL decay curves of PbSe core QDs, dispersed in different media (see the legend).	 
	(3)

CH3Cl	4.7	1.07	39	2.74
GS	4.7	1.17	48	1.67
Hexane	4.7	1.14	60	1.29
PMMA	4.7	1.28	7	4.03
H2O	4.7	0.78	9	8.69
	(4)

 	Fig. 18  (a) Representative transient PL curves of PbSe/PbS core/shell QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as indicated in the legend. QDs dispersed in GS and recorded at various temperatures, as indicated in the legend. (b) Variation of the τradversus the temperature of the various sizes and compositions of QDs with the Rs/Rc ratio as given in the legend.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) RT absorption and cw-PL spectra of a few PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs with different sizes as given in the legend, dissolved in GS. (b) Plots of the energy Stokes shift observed at RT of QDs and QRs as listed in the legend.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Representative cw-PL spectra of ternary PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs with an average length/radius ratio of 10.4 nm/2.05 nm recorded at various temperatures. The dashed line indicates the absorbance of the QRs, recorded at RT. (b) Plot of the FWHM of the cw-PL emission band versus T of various QDs and QRs. The representative best-fit curve (see the text) is shown by a solid line. QDs and QRs have the same first-exciton absorption energy −0.925 eV. (c) Plot of the normalized IPLversus temperature for PbSe and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures.	 
Γ(T) = Γinh + σT + ΓLO/(eELO/kBT − 1)	(5)

 	Fig. 21  (a) Representative PL decay curves of PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs at various temperatures. (b) Plot of τradversus temperature for ternary PbSe0.6S0.4 QRs and PbSe/PbSe0.7S0.3 core/alloyed-shell QR heterostructures.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
