Softening gold for elastronics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00609A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00609A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1668-1711Softening gold for elastronics

        
          
            Bowen 
            Zhu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Shu 
            Gong†
ab and 

        
          
            Wenlong 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: wenlong.cheng@monash.edu
bThe Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Received 
      30th July 2018
    First published on 28th November 2018AbstractGold, one of the noble metals, has played a significant role in human society throughout history. Gold's excellent electrical, optical and chemical properties make the element indispensable in maintaining a prosperous modern electronics industry. In the emerging field of stretchable electronics (elastronics), the main challenge is how to utilize these excellent material properties under various mechanical deformations. This review covers the recent progress in developing “softening” gold chemistry for various applications in elastronics. We systematically present material synthesis and design principles, applications, and challenges and opportunities ahead.
Bowen Zhu
Bowen Zhu received his BS degree in chemistry from Jilin University (China) in 2010. He obtained his PhD degree in materials science in 2016 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, under the supervision of Professor Xiaodong Chen. After his postdoctoral fellow training at Professor Yang Yang's research group, UCLA, he joined Professor Wenlong Cheng's group at Monash University in 2017, Australia, as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) fellow funded by Australian Research Council. His research is focused on soft electronics for sensing and energy conversion.
Shu Gong
Shu Gong is a Research Fellow at Monash University, Australia, under the supervision of Professor Wenlong Cheng. He received his BS from Central South University, China, in 2011, and his PhD from Monash University in 2017. At Monash University, his research interests include the development of soft electronics based on nanomaterials.
Wenlong Cheng
Wenlong Cheng is a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Monash University, Australia, and an Ambassador Technology Fellow in Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication. He earned his BS from Jilin University, China, in 1999, and his PhD from Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005. He held positions in the Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics and the Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering of Cornell University before joining Monash University in 2010. His research interests lie at the nano-bio interface, particularly addressing plasmonic nanomaterials, DNA nanotechnology, nanoparticle anticancer theragnostics, and electronic skin.
1. Introduction
Gold has been treated as one of the noble metals throughout history for its beauty and resistance against corrosion. Although chemically inert, gold metal is ductile with glittering appearance, making it an excellent material candidate for constructing objects for long-term use, such as jewellery, decoration and currency. In modern society, gold also plays an important role in electrical systems and consumer electronics because of its high electrical conductivity and mechanical robustness. Recent advances in gold chemistry and nanotechnology offer new opportunities to precisely shape gold at the nanoscale in a scalable manner, enabling formulation of the so-called artificial periodic table.1–4 This offers new opportunities for applying gold nanomaterials in the emerging field of elastronics.
1.1 Gold in history
Gold has a special place in the history of mankind – its chemical inertness makes it an ideal source of historical artifacts and works of art, which can retain their brilliant luster for thousands of years without tarnishing. The well-known gold artwork, the Lycurgus Cup, was manufactured at the around 5th to 4th century BC by Roman artisans. The presence of gold nanoparticles makes it appear ruby red in transmitted light and green in reflected light (Fig. 1a).5 Similarly, Medieval stained-glass artisans trapped gold nanoparticles in a 'glass matrix' in order to generate a red colour in the windows. These examples are evidence of the earliest human nanotechnology for shaping gold at the nanoscale to achieve appealing optical properties. In addition, gold had been long used as an ideal metal for the fabrication of high value coins. The first real gold coins were produced in Western Turkey in the 6th century BC, which were made from an alloy of gold and silver. The usage of gold coins reached its summit in the 19th century, when almost all gold mined was used for the fabrication of coins. Nowadays, gold coins or medals are mainly fabricated as memorabilia and mementoes. For instance, a gold medal in the Olympic Games has been awarded to top-ranking athletes since 1900 (Fig. 1b).6 In addition, the claims for the medical benefits of gold originated from many ancient cultures thousands of years ago. Ancient Chinese people used gold in the treatment of ailments such as smallpox, skin ulcers and measles. In Japan, thin gold foil was placed in drinks or food for the benefit of health. It was also reported that the use of gold complexes was beneficial in the treatment of arthritis. Later work demonstrated conclusively that gold drugs are effective in treating rheumatoid arthritis patients. The most commonly used gold compounds in such treatments are Myocrisin and Auranofin.7–9
 Fig. 1  Applications of gold materials in history and in modern society. (a) The Lycurgus Cup of the 5th to 4th century B.C, based on gold colloids. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Gold medals presented at the Games of the 2nd Olympiad (Paris, France; 1900). Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The distribution of global demand for gold in 2017. Source from World Gold Council. 
1.2 Gold in modern technology
The uses of gold are versatile in modern society. Based on the survey of World Gold Council, jewellery, investment, central bank net purchases, and technology are four main categories of usages (Fig. 1c). As for technology, nearly 80% of gold is consumed in the electronics industry, including three key applications: wireless chips, printed circuit boards (PCBs) and gold bonding wires. Gold electrodes are crucial components in traditional integrated circuits, which have been applied in many specialized chips on computer motherboards due to their electrical stability and chemical inertness. In addition, there are a number of direct applications of gold in medical devices. For example, gold and its alloys have been widely applied for dental restorations, considering its longevity, functionality, and biocompatibility. Research is currently ongoing on the role that gold can play in cancer treatment by photothermal effects.10 Methods have already been developed that deliver anti-cancer drugs directly to tumours using gold nanoparticles.11
1.3 Gold in future electronics
Despite the considerable multi-faceted contributions of gold in modern society, here we will mainly focus on the role of gold in next-generation electronics. The last several decades have witnessed tremendous advances in the development of soft wearable and implantable electronics, which provides a plethora of opportunities for artificial intelligence, remote biodiagnosis, sports tracking, and health monitoring.12–16 It is encouraging to see that gold has played a critical role in this field due to its superior mechanical ductility, electrical conductivity and chemical inertness. More importantly, gold demonstrates excellent biocompatibility and a high degree of resistance to bacterial colonisation within the human body, due to which it is the prime material of choice for developing wearable and implantable sensors for collecting biometric information in real-time and in situ.
“Elastronics” is the combination of two words “elastic” and “electronics”, which in essence refers to stretchable electronics. It is expected that electronics will evolve from current rigid electronics to flexible electronics to ultimately stretchable electronics (i.e. elastronics). Sophisticated elastronics technology will eventually realize our dream of bio-integratable electronics, thereby revolutionizing wearable/implantable biodiagnostics and human-like robotics. One of the most important missions in elastronics is to devise thin, soft, skin-conformal electronics to circumvent the fundamental limitation imposed by low-modulus tissues and high-modulus electronic materials, namely so-called mechanical mismatch.17–20 One obvious benefit of tissue-modulus-matching elastronics is the true seamless integration of artificial sensing systems with biology. At the same time, elastronics should be able to adapt to complex static/dynamic deformation and maintain stable and reliable electrical performance in various biological environments. If such systems are also highly biocompatible without fouling and immune responses, they essentially become part of our organs, enabling true remote biodiagnostics anytime and anywhere.
The emerging elastronics systems concern stretchable interconnects, sensors, transistors, memories, energy devices, data communications modules and so on. Stretchable interconnects are the fundamental components in an elastronic system, which connect all the functional devices to realize stretchable integrated circuits. One of the key requirements is strain-insensitivity, namely, the interconnects are expected to retain their conductivity under various mechanical deformations. The state-of-the-art carbon nanotube-based stretchable interconnects can have a minimal resistance change of less than 5% for a 1000% strain.21
Unlike stretchable interconnects, stretchable sensors require electrical responses to bio-stimuli including physical parameters (e.g. pressure, strain) and chemical parameters (e.g. ions, chemicals and biological markers). Pressure or strain sensing devices represent current mainstream research focuses, which include resistive, capacitive, piezoelectric and triboelectric types. While design principles and requirements of material choices differ from type to type, the resistive-type elastronic sensors may have completely different requirements from stretchable interconnects. For instance, resistive strain sensors require large resistance changes to small strain changes, in sharp contrast to strain-insensitivity required for interconnects.22
In contrast to dominant energy research dealing with large-scale energy solution to minimize carbon footprints in the environment and medium-level energy challenges for powering electric vehicles with high energy and power density, biomedical energy concerns small-scale energy solution in which stretchability and biocompatibility are the key challenges.23 Current stretchable energy devices mainly consist of energy conversion and storage devices, including stretchable nanogenerators/photovoltaics and supercapacitors/batteries, respectively. Evidently, each device type has specific requirements in materials and design rules, which will be discussed later in this review.
Similar to current rigid electronics, it is expected that stretchable transistors will be also fundamental building blocks in future elastronic systems. It is non-trivial to design stretchable transistors. Such transistors may not have to hold superior electrical performance compared with conventional rigid silicon electronics, but they should be able to function when being bent, twisted, or stretched. While the past several years have witnessed encouraging progress, the performance of a transistor often deteriorates because of the challenging material delamination/crack at the interfaces between the terminal metal and semiconductor and elastomeric supports upon repeating large strains for multiple cycles. Similar challenges are present for other multi-layer material devices, such as stretchable memory devices.
In the frontier elastronics research, various materials including carbon, metals, and conducting polymers have been actively explored towards the design of elastronic components and integrated systems. As far as gold is concerned, various approaches have been developed to “soften” gold-based materials to construct elastronics with diverse functionalities. However, a dedicated review on gold-based wearable electronics is absent, despite their potential and rapid progress. Here, we aim to fill this gap by discussing gold materials in the context of soft electronics. Firstly, the advantageous material properties of gold are highlighted. This is followed by a description of fabrication strategies, interface control, and structural design as the three key parameters to achieve high-performance elastronics. We further cover various applications including interconnects, pressure/strain sensors, energy devices, organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs) and memory devices. Finally, we elaborate on the opportunities and challenges in future development from our point of view.
2. Why gold?
In elastronics, the stretchable conductors (electrodes) are the cornerstones for components such as interconnects, resistors, capacitors, transistors and memory devices. While different devices have specific requirements, in general materials need to possess (1) high electrical conductivity; (2) superior mechanical compliance and robustness; (3) long-term stability and high chemical resistance, especially when employed at the biointerface; (4) ease of fabrication/modification to thin geometries for conformal interfaces; and (5) excellent biocompatibility for on-skin and in-body applications.
To date, most electrode materials in soft electronic devices are metals (Au, Ag, Cu, Al, etc.) or carbon based materials (CNT, graphene, etc.).12,24–28 Even though carbon based materials have received tremendous research attention, their intrinsic conductivity is about two orders lower than that of metal counterparts (Table 1).28 The intrinsic conductivity of silver (6.3 × 107 S m−1) and copper (5.96 × 107 S m−1) is slightly higher than that of gold, but they have poorer chemical stability subject to oxidation and corrosion under ambient conditions, which may cause issues for on-skin and in-body applications. In contrast, gold is much more chemically inert29 and may be more suitable for designing elastronic devices for biomedical applications. Gold locates at a special position in the periodic table of the elements, with the atomic number of 79 (Fig. 2). Copper, silver and gold are all Group 11 metals with a similar outermost electron configuration of [nd10](n + 1)s1, indicating an analogous tendency to form a closed-shell configuration of [nd10]. However, gold's 5d orbitals are more extended than copper's 3d and silver's 4d orbitals, leading to the highest binding energy and activation barriers when bonding gold with other atoms or molecules to form new compounds or be dissolved.29 As a result, gold holds a higher first ionization potential (9.225 eV) than copper (7.735 eV) and silver (7.575 eV), rendering it more noble, inert and non-corrosive.30,31
Table 1 The conductivity of materials commonly applied in soft electronics. Data taken from ref. 28




Material
Conductivity (S m−1)




Au
4.10 × 107


Ag
6.30 × 107


Cu
5.96 × 107


Carbon (graphite)
2.0 × 105




 Fig. 2  Scheme of gold element. Gold element locates at Group 11, Period 6 of the periodic table. 
Gold chemistry has been well understood in that both wet chemistry synthesis and surface modification can be well controlled. Gold holds the lowest electrochemical potential among metals, providing a facile way to obtain metallic gold structures by simply reducing cationic gold—a strong nucleophile acceptor—with numerous available reducing agents. More significantly, although gold metal itself is non-corrosive, the gold atoms at the surface can readily interact with sulphur functional groups, enabling facile surface chemical modification (Fig. 3). It has been well-documented that many chemical functional moieties and biological species including DNA, RNA, and peptides can be reliably anchored to gold surfaces without influencing their material properties. Interestingly, apart from surface gold reactivity with sulphur groups, inner gold remains chemically inert. This is because gold atoms at the surface are not fully coordinated with free valencies; yet the reaction between sulphur groups and bulk gold is hard since gold sulphides are thermodynamically unstable due to the high oxidation potential. In contrast, bulk silver will be corroded by sulphur groups to form stable silver sulphide.31
 Fig. 3  Gold nanostructures can be modified with a variety of functional groups, such as SAM layers, polymers, DNA, RNA, and others. 
Another attribute of gold for biomedical applications is the biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity well suitable for in vitro and in vivo applications. Gold can hardly cause inflammation or allergic responses, and has been demonstrated to be safe when in contact with organs (e.g. skin) and tissues (e.g. oral mucosa).32,33 Gold jewellery, dental restorations and prostheses are widely used by millions of people.34 Gold based wearable and implantable devices, fabricated on water-soluble materials such as silk and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), have been successfully attached onto the surface of the heart and skin by dissolving the substrates, showing no immune response.35,36 A report on substrate-free electronics shows that gold nanomesh could be directly attached to human skin for a long time without causing uncomfortableness or inflammation.37 Gold can also serve as a protection layer for metals unstable in biological environments (e.g. Ag and Cu). A soft bioelectronic device based on silver–gold core-sheath nanocomposites has been devised for long-term (3 weeks) continuous electrophysiological monitoring of human skin and swine heart, demonstrating lower fibrotic reaction and inflammatory responses than Ag counterparts both in vitro and in vivo.38 Cytotoxicity test results and histological analysis further prove that the improvements in the biocompatibility of nanocomposites originated from the Au sheath, which effectively avoided Ag ion leaching and Ag oxidation at the bio-interface.38 Moreover, biocompatibility could be further improved by covering gold electronics with adhesive gel materials, providing reliable contact between the device and the bio-interface for both in vivo cardiac signal monitoring and in vitro human motion detection.39 Also, by virtue of the versatile gold nanochemistry, gold nanostructures (e.g., gold nanoparticles and gold nanocages40) have been demonstrated to be an appealing platform for biomedical applications such as biosensing, drug delivery and photothermal therapy.41–44 Both bulk gold and colloidal gold have been demonstrated to be excellent electrochemical electrodes that are widely used for biosensing applications.45,46
In addition, gold is an indispensable electrode material for the field of organic electronics, where the metal–organic interface plays a vital role in device performance.47 For instance, the work function of gold is very close to the HOMO levels of P3HT and pentacene, two organic semiconductors widely applied in organic transistors, leading to small hole-injection barriers and thus low contact resistance (Fig. 4).47,48 Considering that most organic transistors are p-type devices and the intrinsic flexibility of many organic semiconductors, there has been an increasing interest in engineering gold materials and structures in organic transistors for applications in soft electronics.49–52
 Fig. 4  Energy level diagram of gold in comparison to the energy of the frontier orbitals of pentacene and P3HT. Data taken from ref. 47. 
As mentioned before, gold possesses advantages such as intrinsic chemical inertness, high electrical conductivity, facile chemical synthesis and surface functionalisation. This, in conjunction with superior biocompatibility and band gap matching with organic semiconductors, makes gold a ubiquitous material of choice for designing elastronics to be seamlessly integrated with soft curvilinear biological systems.
3. Soft fabrication strategies
One of the key requirements for using gold in elastronics is to achieve mechanical stretchability but maintain the good material properties mentioned above. In this case, gold nanostructures hold great promise, which can be obtained by top-down and bottom-up strategies, or the combination of both.53–56 On the one hand, top-down approaches could make bulk rigid materials become deformable with special structural designs. On the other hand, bottom-up synthesis provides a tremendous nanomaterials platform. And the combination of these two approaches can further boost the advances in high-performance elastronic materials.
Top-down fabrication applies lithography approaches to achieve nanostructures and patterns from bulk materials. Fine pattern features in the nanometer range can be achieved in clean room environments by top-down fabrication methods, such as photolithography and electron beam lithography (EBL). In contrast, bottom-up fabrication builds nanostructures by wet chemistry reaction or assembly of nanometer-scale colloidal nanoparticle building blocks. Both strategies have been successfully employed for softening gold materials to construct a conformal interface with elastomeric substrates to achieve stretchability. While each strategy has its own pros and cons, the combination of the two approaches is also reported.56,57 In the following sections, we will discuss in detail the advances in the production of gold nanomaterials for elastronics by top-down, bottom-up, and the combined method.
3.1 Top-down fabrication of gold structures
Gold structures and patterns via top-down fabrication can be achieved with abundant choices of structural designs, readily accessible process, and large-area capability. As illustrated in Fig. 5, bulk gold sources can be used to manufacture various nanostructures, such as belts, mesh and microcracked film, through physical vapour deposition (PVD) and conventional semiconductor techniques of patterning and etching processes. These gold nanostructures can then serve as stretchable electrodes or strain-sensitive materials in elastronics.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of top-down fabrication starting from a gold source. 

3.1.1 Wrinkled and microcracked gold films. 
Gold films, either freestanding or supported on polymer substrates, cannot survive even under very low strain (1–2%) causing conductivity loss.58 However, gold films deposited on thermally expandable polymer substrates, e.g. polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), through the PVD method, have long been observed with stretchability by adapting to the wrinkled structures of substrates.59–61 The wrinkling is formed due to the relief of compressive stress during the cooling of the polymer substrate after deposition (Fig. 6a).62 The wrinkled structures can render the gold films highly stretchable without losing conductivity, because these structures can become flat under stretching in the low strain regime.58,62 At large strain, microcracks will form and become dominant in determining the electrical conductance of the deposited gold films. Because the microcracked gold film could form percolating networks and deflect out of the plane at the gold/elastomer interface, it can usually survive in the small strain range.63 The complex microscale and nanoscale cracks coexist but the cracks can be repaired upon stress release forming typical turn-up flakes (Fig. 6b and c). It was reported that the microcracked gold film can achieve up to 120% uniaxial stretchability (Fig. 6d).64
 Fig. 6  Wrinkled and microcracked gold films from top-down fabrication. (a) An optical image of gold films directly deposited on PDMS substrates, forming wrinkled structures. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics. (b) A SEM image of microcracked gold film on PDMS under 60% strain. (c) A SEM image of the microcracked gold film released from stretching. The cracks are recovered. (d) Electrical stretchablility of the microcracked gold film on PDMS, showing a maximum stretchability of 120%. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) Microcracked gold films deposited on PDMS fibres with microbeads. The strain distribution is different along the PDMS fibre because of beads’ structure. (f) The gold films on PDMS fibres show a maximum stretchability up to 125%. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Further improvement in stretchability can be achieved by depositing gold films on PDMS fibres with microbeads.65 As depicted in Fig. 6e, the microbeads can change the strain distribution among PDMS fibres and induce long nanocracks in microcracked gold networks, which can help in releasing the external strain. With such a design, the microcracked gold films on PDMS fibres can be stretched up to 125% strain (Fig. 6f).65
Not only can the direct deposition method generate stretchable microcracked gold films on normal polymeric films, but it also works for emerging biomaterials, such as silk, to build on-skin conformal electronics.66,67 By thermal deposition of 80 nm gold film on silk substrates followed by a plasticization process, highly stretchable wrinkled gold structures can be obtained, which can be stretched >100% without losing electrical conductivity.68 The success of stretchable gold film on plasticized silk makes the fabrication via PVD applicable to build on-skin electronics, providing a facile engineering strategy for the integration of bio-integrated elastronics.


3.1.2 Gold mesh. 
To render metal electrodes lightweight, stretchable, compressive, and even transparent, mesh structures are often applied because of their unique electrical and mechanical properties.35,69–75 With direct deposition of gold films via PVD, large-area uniform and intact metal mesh structures can readily be obtained by several methods such as lithography and etching, grain boundary lithography and transfer method, and template method with sacrificial layers.76–79 Several kinds of mesh structures have been developed with both high transparency and stretchability, such as grids, spring-like structures, and honeycomb structures.73–79
By depositing gold grids on a parylene substrate of 1.2 μm thickness, highly conductive gold arrays, with a sheet resistance of 3 Ω sq−1, can be achieved. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, fine gold grid patterns with a linewidth of 3 μm can be obtained. With a prestretching strategy, the gold grid can be compressed to 50%, with tiny sheet resistance change from 3 to 7 Ω sq−1. In comparison, the sheet resistance of an ITO sample dramatically increased from 79 to 378 Ω sq−1 (Fig. 7b).80 By using electrospun polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) fibres as the sacrificial layer, stretchable on-skin electronics with gold nanomesh structures have been demonstrated recently.37 In the fabrication process, a thin gold layer was deposited onto PVA fibres and patterned using a shadow mask. The PVA fibres can then be dissolved by spraying water, leaving substrate-free gold films with nanomesh structures. As depicted in Fig. 7c, the gold nanomesh can attach to skin seamlessly, and can be integrated into a wireless sensing system.37 The SEM image shows that the gold nanomesh replicates the fibre structure of PVA (Fig. 7d), and it can adapt the irregular skin surfaces conformably. The gold nanomesh shows reliable responses in the reversible stretching test, with a maximum stretchability up to 48%.37 More recently, a 4 inch wafer-size stretchable gold nanomesh film has been reported with ultrathin polyimide film as the support and sacrificial layer. The gold nanomeshes with nanoscale spring-like structures demonstrate unique electrical, mechanical and optical properties, holding low sheet resistance (8.35 Ω sq−1), high stretchability (up to 70% strain), and good transparency (65% at 550 nm).73
 Fig. 7  Gold grid and mesh structures from top-down fabrication. (a) An optical image of a gold grid. Scale bar: 100 μm. Right: scheme of an individual gold grid. (b) The gold grid shows better electrical stretchability than ITO at different compression strain. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. (c) A gold nanomesh conductor connected with circuits and attached to a fingertip. Scale bar: 1 mm. (d) A SEM image showing the gold nanomesh structures, replicating the fibre structures of an electrospun PVA film. (e) The gold nanomesh shows a maximum stretchability up to 48%. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.1.3 Gold nanobelts. 
By rational design of out-of-plane structures, highly stretchable gold electrodes can be fabricated and patterned via photolithography processes.81–83 Using tripod structured PDMS as substrates, stretchable gold nanobelts with wavy structures can be fabricated via photolithography and etching processes (Fig. 8a). The gold nanobelts can be transferred to the tripod PDMS substrate uniformly (Fig. 8b). During stretching and releasing cycles, sinusoidal texture will be formed, and no delamination of the gold nanobelts can be observed (Fig. 8c and d). Because the gold nanobelts are suspended and are not in direct contact with the tripod PDMS substrate, they can sustain a large strain up to 130% with good repeatability (>10000 cycles) without serious detriment to electrical conductance (Fig. 8e).84
 Fig. 8  Gold nanobelts fabricated by the top-down approach. (a) Schematic of fabrication flow: (I) gold is deposited on a patterned Cu film; (II) spin-coating of a thin PDMS layer and laminating on the tripod PDMS substrate; (III) removal of Cu film and photoresist. (b) A picture of stretchable gold nanobelts sustained on the tripod PDMS film. (c and d) Optical images of the gold nanobelts in stretching (c) and relaxing (d) states. (e) Current–voltage curves of the gold nanobelts under different strain. The gold nanobelts show good conductivity even under 130% strain. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 

3.2 Bottom-up fabrication
Alternatively, the bottom-up approach can also produce soft and foldable materials/structures by self-assembly or self-organization of nanoparticle building blocks. It becomes increasingly significant in finding novel fabrication methods in the electronics industry, as the lithography approach is approaching technological limits of miniaturization.85 Facile gold nanochemistry and surface functionalization make it possible to synthesize well-defined nanoparticles with tunable sizes and shapes in large quantity and with low cost.
One of the advantages of bottom-up fabrication lies in the precise control of gold morphology.41 Typically, the bottom-up fabrication (Fig. 9), starting from gold precursors such as gold(III) chloride (HAuCl4), can be attributed to three steps: (1) nucleation and formation of seeds, (2) growth of seeds into nanostructures, and (3) assembly of nanostructures into functional materials. At the beginning, small spherical gold seeds (<5 nm) are formed with a fast nucleation rate due to high chemical supersaturation.86–88 Subsequently, seed-mediated growth methods are commonly applied to grow different kinds of gold nanostructures. The shape control of nanostructure will not only be determined by the internal structure of the seed, but be affected by reaction medium. During the seed-mediated growth, the isotropic seeds could be grown into anisotropic nanostructures in growth solution with milder reductant, higher gold ion concentration, and shape templating agents and surfactants.89–91
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the bottom-up fabrication process. Starting with HAuCl4, a variety of gold nanostructures can be synthesized via wet chemistry. And the gold nanomaterial suspensions can serve as inks for assembling them into functional electrodes. 
Gold nanochemistry provides a rich toolbox to synthesize various kinds of gold nanostructures, such as nanoparticles,92–96 nanorods,92 nanosheets,97 nanoflowers,98 nanocages,40,99 nanowires (NWs),100–102 nanohelices,103 and nanobelts,104 to name a few. The seed-mediated approach has been demonstrated to be a facile strategy, allowing for controlling thermodynamics and kinetics in nucleation and growth by careful selection of ligands, reducing agents and precursor concentrations. For example, starting with identical seeds, gold nanoparticles (NPs) with different diameters could be synthesized by altering the reductants, the concentration of surfactants and the growth times (Fig. 10a and b).92 By using surfactants like cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to preferentially interact with particular crystalline facets, offering the rod ends higher priority to react with medium, gold nanorods can be grown with well controlled size, shape, crystalline structure and monodispersity (Fig. 10c).92,105 Utilizing two-dimensional materials like graphene oxide as a template, ultrathin gold nanosheets (∼2.4 nm thickness) with hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structures have been synthesized,106 which could also be transformed to face-centred cubic (fcc) structures by changing the surface ligands (Fig. 10d).97 Gold nanoflowers with fivefold stellate polyhedral structures have been reported with a surfactant-free seed-mediated growth method (Fig. 10e).98 More complicated structures such as nanocages and matryoshka-like cages (Fig. 10f) have also been synthesized by the seed-mediated silver-coating method and galvanic replacement reaction between Ag nanocubes and Au ions in aqueous solution.99 High aspect-ratio nanowires could also be achieved via seed-mediated growth with a strong binding ligand like 4-mercaptobenzoic acid under mild conditions in polar solution.100 Due to the rapid binding of strong ligands, Au can only be grown at the ligand-deficient seed/substrate interface, forming vertically aligned ultrathin AuNWs (diameter = 6 nm) (Fig. 10g).100 Recently, by asymmetrical blocking of the solvent–nucleus interface, gold nanohelix has been successfully synthesised with highly consistent helicity due to non-uniform growth rates at the circumference (Fig. 10h).103 Also, gold nanoribbons with ultrathin thickness (2–6 nm) have been reported with oleylamine as a capping agent and soft-template (Fig. 10i).104
 Fig. 10  TEM images of different gold nanostructures via bottom-up synthesis. (a) Gold nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼20 nm. (b) Gold nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼45 nm. (c) Gold nanorods. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Gold square sheets. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Gold nanoflower. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) Gold nanocage. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (g) Gold nanowires. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (h) Gold nanohelices. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Gold nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Over the past several decades, wet chemistry synthesis in controlling gold nanochemistry has advanced significantly, enabling the formation of so-called artificial periodic table of gold nanostructures.2 These gold nanomaterial solutions, or gold “inks”, provide a wide materials platform for assembling these nanostructures into stretchable electrodes and sensor skin devices. To date, although only a few of these nanostructures have been utilized in elastronics, pressure and/or strain sensitive layers, and charge-trapping materials, some special and highly anisotropic structures, such as flowers, helices, and cages, may provide novel intriguing properties for future elastronics.22,107

3.2.1 Assembly at the air–liquid interface. 
The air–liquid interface is a versatile platform to generate free-standing nanoassemblies in monolayer or multilayer layouts.108,109 Nanoparticles can self-assemble at such an interface, forming uniform two dimensional (2D) nanoparticle arrays across a large area.110 The Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly at the air/liquid interface is an excellent approach to produce dense, large-area and uniform monolayers and multilayers of nanoparticles.111–113 Nanoparticle monolayers can be generated by transferring 2D nanoparticle arrays, assembled at the air–water interface, onto arbitrary solid substrates. Fig. 11a shows a schematic of the LB process of assembling high-density oleylamine capped AuNP monolayers at the air–water interface.114 The number density in the monolayer could reach ∼7100 AuNPs μm−2 (Fig. 11b).114 As shown in the magnified TEM images in Fig. 11b, the AuNP monolayer assembled via the LB process holds high uniformity. Multilayers of nanoparticles could be generated by simply repeating the process (Fig. 11c).115 As shown in Fig. 11d, one LB cycle contains two steps: dipping (left) and pulling (right). The number of layers can be programmed simply by adjusting the cycle number of the LB process. Close-packed one layer (left) and three layers (right) of AuNPs generated via the LB process are depicted in Fig. 11e.115 The large-area uniformity together with high density of the LB process makes it an important approach to achieve device-to-device uniformity for soft electronic devices.114
 Fig. 11  Assembly of gold nanoparticles at the air/water interface via Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly. (a) Schematic of the assembling high-density AuNP monolayer via the LB process. (b) TEM images of the AuNP monolayer via LB assembly. The insets depict magnified images. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (c) Schematic of assembling multilayer AuNPs via the LB process. (d) Images showing the LB assembly process at dipping (left) and pulling (right). (e) TEM images of assembled AuNPs with one layer (left) and three layers (right). Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to nanoparticles, it is possible to form monolayers or multilayers of one dimensional (1D) gold nanomaterials via self-assembly at the air–water interface.22 Ultrathin AuNWs, with 2 nm diameter and an aspect ratio of >10000, have been demonstrated as great building blocks to self-assemble into transparent conductive films for stretchable electronics.101,102 As depicted in Fig. 12a, a droplet of AuNW suspension in hexane could readily spread on the water surface, forming a AuNW monolayer with the evaporation of hexane. As shown in the TEM image (Fig. 12a), a closely packed AuNW monolayer film was formed via self-assembly of fresh AuNWs at the air–water interface.101 Interestingly, after an aging process, the AuNWs turned to form mesh-like networks at the air–water interface due to the partial removal of capping ligands of AuNWs (Fig. 12a, SEM image). The self-assembled AuNW monolayers on the water surface could be transferred to various solid substrates. Fig. 12b shows a SEM image of the well-ordered ultrathin AuNW monolayer transferred onto a PDMS substrate.102 By repeating the transferring process, multilayers of AuNWs could be readily generated with good transparency and conductivity (Fig. 12c).102 Different from other 1D inorganic nanowires, ultrathin AuNWs are relatively soft and mechanically more flexible, rendering them promising to build intrinsically stretchable electronics via air–water interfacial self-assembly.
 Fig. 12  Assembly of gold nanowires at the air–water interface. (a) Schematic of assembling fresh and aged AuNWs at the air–water interface. The dashed areas show the corresponding TEM (top) and SEM (down) images of the assembled films. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) A SEM image of the assembled AuNW monolayer transferred onto a PDMS substrate. Scale bar: 1 μm. (c). Transmission spectra of assembled AuNWs transferred onto PDMS substrates with different layers of 1 layer (1L), 2 layers (2L), 3 layers (3L), and 4 layers (4L). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to 0D and 1D gold nanostructures, 2D gold nanosheets have also been used in the self-assembly at the air–water interface. Gold nanosheets could be synthesized by a hydrothermal method with lateral dimensions in the micrometer range (Fig. 13a) and a thickness of ∼20 nm (Fig. 13b).116 By dropcasting the gold nanosheet suspension onto the water surface, the solution could spread and form a nanosheet monolayer film at the air–water interface upon solvent evaporation. Fig. 13c shows a photograph of the gold nanosheet film floating on the water surface. The film on the water surface could be transferred to different kinds of substrates simply by contacting the substrate with the nanosheet film. SEM images of the gold nanosheets transferred onto a silicon wafer are presented in Fig. 13d. Multilayers of nanosheets and stretchable films could be readily achieved by transferring the assembled gold nanosheets with repeated processes and with elastomer substrates, respectively.116
 Fig. 13  Assembly of gold nanosheets at the air–water interface. (a) A SEM image of synthesized gold nanosheets, with dimensions ranging from 20 to 50 μm. (b) A cross-section TEM image of an individual gold nanosheet, showing the thickness of nanosheet as ∼20 nm. (c) A photo of the gold nanosheets floating on the water surface. (d) SEM images of the gold nanosheets transferred onto a silicon wafer. The inset shows the enlarged SEM image. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.2 Printing and direct-writing. 
The availability of gold ‘nano-inks’ provides a facile way to generate functional gold films by printing, direct writing, spray coating and drop-casting.
By drop casting AuNW suspension on different elastomeric substrates, such as latex rubber, Ecoflex, and PDMS, a variety of stretchable gold films could be achieved. Fig. 14a shows an example of a drop casting process of AuNW inks on elastomers with polyimide masks. A droplet of AuNW suspension was dropped onto the latex substrate, forming conductive AuNW films after the solvent evaporated.117 With a thickness of 1.64 μm, the as-prepared AuNW films on the latex substrate are uniform with strong adhesion, which can be attached onto skin conformally (Fig. 14b). From the top-view SEM image in Fig. 14b, polymer-like entangling and bundling morphologies of the AuNWs could be observed, rendering the AuNW films highly stretchable. The AuNW films on latex rubber could be stretched up to 300% without cracking or detachment. Also, the AuNW films showed good electrical stretchability without hysteresis in dynamic stretching cycles from 0% to 100% (Fig. 14c). In comparison, a sputtered gold film on latex became nonconductive when being stretched >30%.117
 Fig. 14  Assembly of AuNWs at the solid–liquid interface. (a) Schematic of a drop-casting process with a polyimide mask. (b) A photo showing assembled AuNW films on a latex substrate fabricated via drop casting attached on the little finger. The insets show the cross-section (up) and top-view (down) SEM images. (c) Electrical performance of the assembled AuNW films on latex up to 100% strain. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Direct-writing of AuNWs/PANI composite inks. (i) A photo showing the process. Photo of written features at 0% (ii) and 65% (iii) strain. (e) A photo of the written feature on an inflated glove. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Direct-writing with gold inks offers a facile way to readily generate arbitrary patterns of AuNWs for draw-on electronics. On the other hand, copper nanowires require careful design of ink formation to reach desired rheology properties.118,119 Additives such as polyaniline (PANI) microparticles could be added to AuNW suspension, forming a hybrid conductive ink for smooth delivery to various stretchable substrates. The ink could be drop cast or directly written with arbitrary features onto latex rubber (Fig. 14d).120 The incorporation of PANI leads to significant improvement in the conductivity of the prepared AuNW films, because the PANI particles could serve as interconnects among AuNWs enhancing percolation conductivity. The AuNW films with and without 20% PANI showed a typical resistance of ∼2 MΩ and 148 kΩ, respectively. One advantage of the direct writing method lies in the ease of generating different patterns on elastomer substrates for constructing stretchable electronics. Fig. 14d shows an example of a tattoo-like ‘rose’ pattern of the AuNWs/PANI composite directly written using a Chinese penbrush onto a latex glove, capable of being uniaxially stretched up to 65% and expanding (Fig. 14e).120 A strain sensor based on the AuNW films was successfully integrated into wireless circuits for remote control of robotic arms. Such a low-cost yet efficient strategy of producing tattoo-like stretchable sensors indicates the potential of future draw-on electronics for biodiagnostics anytime anywhere.
 Fig. 15  Assembly of gold nanoparticles for stretchable conductors. (a) A top-view photo of the AuNWs/PU composite film. (b) A cross-section SEM image of the AuNPs/PU composite film. (c) The multilayer AuNPs/PU films via LBL assembly show a high conductivity of 11000 S cm−1. (d and e) TEM images of the assembled AuNPs/PU films at 0% (d) and 50% (e) strain. (f) The LBL assembled AuNPs/PU film holds a stretchability up to 110%. Modified with permission.122 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.2.3 Layer-by-layer assembly. 
Layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly is a powerful thin film fabrication method that was initially developed for depositing cationic and anionic polymers. Recently, LBL has been successfully used for fabricating elastronic conductors using gold nanostructure based composites.121 Interestingly, nanoparticles are more favourable, compared with high-aspect-ratio nanostructures, to build stretchable and durable conductors by incorporating them in a polymer matrix, because a nanoparticle based composite matrix shows greater mechanical mobility under stretching. Using the LBL assembly process, a gold nanoparticle based stretchable conductor was demonstrated by incorporating AuNPs in the polyurethane (PU) matrix.122 By laminating five sheets, each containing a composite film made from 500 LBL deposition cycles of AuNWs and PU, a highly conductive film (11000 S cm−1) was achieved with a thin thickness of ∼6.5 μm (Fig. 15a–c). As illustrated in TEM images at different strain levels (Fig. 15d and e), the AuNPs in the composite matrix show high movement capability, and they can be reorganized into continuous band networks along the stretched direction. Consequently, the composite film can maintain a conductivity of 2400 S cm−1 even at a 110% strain (Fig. 15f).122


3.2.4 Electroless plating on elastomers. 
Electroless plating is a well-established approach to coat continuous bulk metallic films on rigid solid substrates such as glass. While it may be not straightforward to extend the recipe to elastomeric substrates, stretchability of such continuous metallic films is another concern. In this context, we have recently demonstrated a highly conductive vertical AuNW array that can grow directly from an elastomeric substrate with strong adhesion. The initial success was reported on rigid substrates such as silicon via the gold seed-mediated bottom-up growth method, by which AuNWs could grow anisotropically because of strong surface-binding ligands.100 With some modification, we successfully grew highly conductive vertically aligned gold nanowire arrays on elastomer substrates, such as PDMS, PU and Ecoflex.123 The schematic of the fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. 16a. Briefly, after surface modification of APTMS on a plasma treated elastomer substrate, Au seeds (∼3–5 nm diameter) were anchored onto the amino groups on the elastomer surface. Then the vertical AuNWs were grown by immersing the substrate in a mixed growth solution containing gold precursors (HAuCl4), ligands (4-mercaptobenzoic acid) and reducing agents (L-ascorbic acid). This process leads to vertically aligned AuNW films standing normal to elastomeric substrates. Detailed morphological studies show that the film has enokitake-like features, which display unconventional remarkable Janus material properties. As illustrated in the SEM image (Fig. 16b) and the corresponding schematic (Fig. 16c), the vertical AuNW film consisted of a closely packed nanoparticle layer (‘head’ side), originating from the Au seeds, and a vertically aligned nanowire layer (‘tail’ side).123 The two different layers exhibited Janus optical properties. As illustrated in Fig. 16d, the head side of the film displayed a shining gold colour as the bulk gold film, while the tail side showed a black colour. More intriguingly, multilayer nanostructured films with different head/tail configurations, such as head-to-head (Fig. 16e), tail-to-tail (Fig. 16f), and layer-by-layer (Fig. 16g), could be readily obtained by multiple AuNW growth processes without causing film deterioration or rupture.123 Due to the Janus film structures, distinct mechanical properties are observed depending on the side attached to elastomeric substrates. The vertical AuNWs directly grown on the Ecoflex substrate, with the tail side bonded to the surface and the head side exposed, exhibited an exceptionally high conductivity of up to 800% strain without losing conductivity. Yet, the head side-bonded film can only be stretched up to 83% strain before conductivity is lost permanently. In addition, the head-bonded film is more sensitive to bending forces and point loads than the corresponding tail-bonded film due to the greater tendency of cracking for the head side.
 Fig. 16  Direct growth of AuNWs on elastomer substrates. (a) Schematic of fabricating standing AuNWs directly on elastomer substrates. (i) Surface modification of saline groups with amine moieties; (ii) attachment of citrate-stabilized colloidal gold seeds; (iii) seed-mediated growth of the standing AuNW arrays. (b) SEM image of the as-grown standing AuNW Janus film. Scale bar: 500 nm. (c) Schematic showing the structures of standing AuNWs. (d) A photo of a free standing AuNW Janus film. (e–g) Cross-section SEM images of AuNW Janus films with different assembled structures: (e) head-to-head, (f) tail-to-tail, and (g) layer-by-layer. Scale bars: 500 nm. Modified with permission.123 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The length of AuNWs can be well controlled simply by adjusting the length growth time, which enables the fabrication of vertical AuNW films with staircase-like morphology using the mask-assisted step-growth process.124 As illustrated in Fig. 17a, after the 1st growth cycle of vertical AuNWs, a polyimide mask was partially covered on the substrate before the 2nd growth process. The subsequent growth step will only cause the elongation of exposed AuNWs. As shown in the AFM images and height profiles of a 3-step staircase vertical AuNW film (Fig. 17b), the sum of thicknesses of the three stairs layers (∼1.54 μm) matched well with the total thickness (∼1.5 μm). The gradient structure of the layers could also be confirmed by the SEM images of the boundary area of two layers (Fig. 17c). For each staircase, the AuNWs maintained a vertically aligned architecture (Fig. 17d), which enabled location- and sharpness-specific tactile sensing due to the unique staircase-like structures.124
 Fig. 17  Direct growth of multilayer standing AuNWs on elastomer substrates. (a) Schematic of fabricating multilayer standing AuNWs directly on Ecoflex. (b) A schematic showing the three-layer vertically aligned AuNWs (top). Height profiles and the corresponding AFM images of the boundary areas of the three-layer AuNW film. (c) Top-view SEM image of the boundary area of the multilayer AuNW film. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the AuNW film. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.3 Combined method
To achieve multifunctional elastronic devices, it is often required to combine top-down patterning with bottom-up assembly strategies. For example, the bottom-up assembly method is effective for producing highly stretchable conductive films but usually it will not lead to patterned structures until a top-down masking/templating or spatially confining assembly is used.

3.3.1 Template-assisted growth of gold nanowires. 
Template-assisted synthesis is widely applied to produce highly ordered nanostructures such as porous nanomaterials, hollow structures and nanowires. As far as gold nanowires are concerned, an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane can be employed as a sacrificial template, which has highly ordered channels with adjustable pore diameters and which offers the advantage of ease of removal.125 With the AAO membrane as a template, bottom-up fabrication methods, such as electrochemical deposition, can be applied to generate finely controlled metal or semiconductor nanowires.126–130 Typically, a metal layer, usually gold, is firstly deposited onto the AAO membrane to serve as an electrode for subsequent electrodeposition of AuNWs (Fig. 18a).131 The length of AuNWs can be adjusted simply via electrodeposition time. Then the AAO template can be dissolved by using alkaline solutions. The as-prepared AuNWs, replicating the channel structures of AAO, can be further transferred onto elastomeric substrates to serve as highly adhesive stretchable electrodes.
 Fig. 18  Template-assisted growth of gold nanowires. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of gold nanowires with the AAO template via thermal evaporation and subsequent electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of fabricating gold nanowires in AAO templates with thin TiO2 layers. TiO2 is first grown inside the AAO channel, and then Au is reduced by photochemical deposition. (c) SEM image of the AAO template after AuNW growth. The inset shows a digital photo. Scale bar: 200 nm. (d) Cross-section SEM image of template-grown AuNWs, showing a high aspect ratio. Scale bar: 5 μm. (e) TEM image of an AuNW with ncp structure fabricated with template-assisted growth. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Interestingly, although gold normally holds a face-centred cubic (fcc) structure, gold nanowires templated by AAO templates in conjunction with TiO2 coating can have a hexagonal non-close-packed (ncp) lattice.132 As illustrated in Fig. 18b, TiO2 layers were firstly deposited on the AAO channels via atomic layer deposition (ALD) to form nanotube arrays. Then the gold nanowires were grown by photoelectrochemical reduction of HAuCl4 to metallic Au. The TiO2 nanotubes not only serve as a photocatalyst to reduce gold ions, but also provide nanoscale confinement, rendering gold ncp structures stable. The AAO template method can produce a compact array of gold nanowires. As illustrated by the SEM images, the pores of AAO are filled after AuNW growth, making the membrane black (Fig. 18c). The parameters of AuNWs are defined by the template employed, showing a high aspect ratio with a length >20 μm and a diameter of ∼50 nm (Fig. 18d and e).132


3.3.2 Patterning of gold nanostructures. 
Wet chemically synthesized gold nanomaterial-based electronic inks can be formulated with desired properties by controlling the size and shape of gold nanoparticles. While their self-assembly at the air/liquid or air/solid interface provides a simple yet efficient approach to form highly conductive thin films that can be stretched at different levels, it is also required to pattern them with different kinds of features for their integration into elastronic devices.
Templates or masks are widely applied to generate fine patterns of self-assembled gold nanomaterials. Using a PDMS stamp with micropillars as a template, flexible grid electrodes can be fabricated by one-step patterning of gold inks with ultrathin gold nanowires (Fig. 19a). Because of the small diameter (<2 nm), the ultrathin AuNWs can be confined in the PDMS stamp during solvent evaporation, forming bundles that can be further sintered via plasma treatment (Fig. 19b). This templated assembly method can provide highly conductive AuNW grids, holding a sheet resistance of 29 Ω sq−1, with fine submicrometer lines (Fig. 19c).133
 Fig. 19  Patterning assembled gold nanowires. (a) Schematic of the template-assisted imprinting process for patterning ultrathin gold nanowires. (b) Schematic illustration of forming conductive AuNW grids. (c) SEM images of conductive AuNW grids. The inset shows a higher magnification image of bundled AuNWs. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of patterning the AuNW mesh by using masks. (e) A photo of the patterned AuNW mesh on the PET substrate. Scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Different pattern features of the ultrathin AuNWs can be achieved by transferring the AuNW films assembled at the water–air interface to target substrates using masks. A typical procedure is schematically presented in Fig. 19d. First, a dense monolayer of ultrathin AuNWs will assemble at the water–air interface. Arbitrary patterns can be formed on masking tapes by using a cutting machine. AuNWs could be transferred to the patterned mask coated substrate by contact imprint. After peeling off the mask, AuNW patterns will be left on the hollowed area of the substrate. Flexible and stretchable substrates can be employed to receive the transferred patterned mesh (Fig. 19e), enabling great processability and compatibility in fabricating stretchable electronic sensors.101
Other reported patternable elastronics include 2D gold nanostructures. For example, gold hexagonal and triangular nanosheets can be synthesized by reducing HAuCl4 with L-arginine in aqueous solution. Similar to the assembly of AuNWs, a monolayer film of gold nanosheets can be formed on the air–water interface by simply spreading the nanosheet suspension in 1-butanol onto the water surface. The floating gold nanosheet film can then be transferred to other substrates by contact printing. By transferring with a PDMS stamp, different kinds of electrode patterns can be formed. Line electrode patterns with a linewidth of 300 μm and rectangular patterns with parameters of 200 μm × 500 μm are shown in Fig. 20a and c, respectively. These electrodes showed impressive stretchability up to 60% in the longitudinal direction without serious resistivity increase (Fig. 20b and d).116
 Fig. 20  Patterning gold nanosheets and vertical AuNWs. (a and c) Optical images of patterned gold nanosheets on Ecoflex substrates with line (a) and rectangular arrays (c), respectively. (b and d) Resistivity changes of the line (b) and rectangular (d) patterns of gold nanosheets at different strain states. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e) Fabrication flow of patterned vertically aligned AuNW electrodes: (1) patterning the photoresist via conventional photolithography; (2) seed-mediated vertical AuNW growth; (3) covering vertical AuNWs with PDMS; (4) curing and peeling off PDMS. (f) Photo of 4 in wafer-size stretchable electrodes under strain. (g) Optical image of the vertical AuNWs/PDMS electrodes under 100% strain. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
More recently, an efficient method to achieve patterned AuNWs has been developed.134 Matching the conventional photolithography process, the method combined the advantages of both top-down patterning and bottom-up synthesis of vertical AuNWs,135 providing fine patterns of AuNW electrodes with high resolution and high scalability. Typically, a positive photoresist was applied to obtain electrode array patterns via photolithography. Then patterned vertical AuNWs were synthesised with a seed-mediated growth method.100 Subsequently, the as-grown vertical AuNWs could be embedded in PDMS substrates by spin-coating and curing the PDMS precursor mixture (base:curing agent = 10:1, w:w). After peeling off the PDMS, the patterned AuNWs were transferred onto PDMS with high adhesion. The schematic of the fabrication process is presented in Fig. 20e. As illustrated in Fig. 20f, a 4 inch wafer-size stretchable patterned AuNW electrode film was achieved. Fig. 20g shows an optical image of the AuNW electrodes under 100% strain, where no delamination was observed. The patterned AuNW electrodes show a high initial conductivity of 1288 S cm−1 at 0% strain, and hold a conductivity of 152 S cm−1 at a maximum stretchability of 170% strain.134

4. Interface control
Bulk gold is hard and brittle, with a Young's modulus of 4–6 orders of magnitude larger than that of human skin or tissue, limiting its applications where large mechanical deformation is required.13 Differently, a gold thin film does not harden as much as its bulk counterpart does. When a freestanding gold film is stretched, it ruptures by strain localization, and the elongation is less than a few percent (Fig. 21a).58,136 When a metallic film is deposited on a polymer substrate, its rupture strains are highly dependent on its adhesion to the substrate.136 Well-bonded metal films can sustain strains up to 50% without appreciable microcrack (Fig. 21b).136 By contrast, poorly bonded metal films form channel cracks at strains as small as 2% (Fig. 21c).136,137 In the well-bonded gold film/polymer substrate system, the electrical resistance of the metal film increases with elongation in a way predicted on the assumption that the film retains the rectangular shape during deformation, and that the resistivity ρ of the film remains unchanged. Consequently, the resistance of the strained film R is R = (L/L0)2R0(1)where R0 is the resistance of the unstrained film, and L and L0 are the initial and strained length of the film, respectively.
 Fig. 21  Schematic of strain localization caused rupture of a metal film. (a) A freestanding metal film breaks into two parts to accommodate the local elongation. (b) The local elongation in the metal film could be compromised by the polymer substrate when bonding is strong. (c) The rupture of a metal film could be assisted by the debonding of the metal film from substrates when the bonding is weak. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics. 
Although gold electronics with a stretchability of ∼50% strain may be suitable for a majority of on-skin applications, the substrate is restricted by high Young's modulus polymers (e.g. polyimide with a modulus of ∼5 GPa) that cannot be attached conformally to soft biological surfaces and be deformed in a reversible manner. More compliant elastomer substrates (Young's modulus of 1–200 MPa) are needed for applications such as sensor skin and retinal implants.58 However, gold and elastomers are rather dissimilar materials; the cohesive energy of gold is typically two orders of magnitude higher than that of elastomers.138 This is one reason for very weak interaction between metals and elastomers. Another reason is that the elastomer surfaces are usually non-polar, or have very low wettability (i.e. PDMS).138 Consequently, various strategies were applied at both gold/elastomer and device/human skin interfaces to improve their interfacial bonding interaction.
4.1 Gold/elastomer interface control
As discussed above, gold thin films can be easily wiped off from a soft substrate if no interface control is made. This is due to the fundamental mechanical mismatch at the hard/soft interface and poor adhesion.139 In the following section, several strategies including planar interface design, microstructure interface design, nanoscale interface design, and chemical modification are introduced to achieve conformal, durable and stretchable electronics based on gold (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of various strategies for gold/elastomer interface control. 

4.1.1 Planar interface. 
The most straightforward method to bond a gold thin film with a soft substrate is by complete encapsulation to form an elastomer/gold/elastomer sandwiched planar interface. Compared to the gold/elastomer layout which can be easily damaged even by mild touching, the sandwich-structured film exhibited higher reliability with reversible conductivity after repeated stretching–releasing cycles. In 2010, stretchable gold thin films sandwiched in PDMS were successfully prepared using standard photolithography.140 The extensive stretchability of the conductors relies on a randomly and independently distributed network of micro-cracks (∼100 nm long) in the metal film. With the planar interface design, the micro-patterned gold conductor is electrically reliable and mechanically robust to uniaxial and radial stretching. Other elastic materials such as latex rubber120 or polyimide35,141 have also been utilized for the encapsulation of gold thin films to reinforce the gold/elastomer interface.


4.1.2 Microstructure interface. 
In addition to the planar interface, construction of a microstructure interface proves to be another effective approach to reduce interfacial crack propagation and the tensile stress, thereby improving the mechanical robustness of gold-based elastronics.142 In the early 2000s, gold films were reported to be stretched and relaxed reversibly by tens of percent on an elastomeric substrate, due to the presence of tribranched micropatterns.63 Since then, several microstructure designs including micropyramids,143 sand-paper replica,142 microparticles,144 and interlocking layers131 have been applied at the gold/elastomer interface to improve their surface adhesion and stretchability. Under stretching, the rough surface of microstructures generates a fine-scale inhomogeneous stress state within the film and a non-percolating crack pattern develops, preserving the conductivity in a reversible manner.142 The microstructure interface can be easily fabricated by curing PDMS on sand-blasted or surface-etched masters (Fig. 23a). Compared to a smooth surface, the threshold strain corresponding to electrical failure of a microstructured surface is increased by a factor >50 (Fig. 23b).142 In addition, no channel cracks are observed on rough gold, indicating enhanced surface adhesion compared to planar gold films. Similarly, a simple, low-cost and green approach is developed to deposit a microstructured coating on the PDMS.144 The microstructure coating is fabricated using an aqueous emulsion of poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc), which could be conformally coated with gold. The resistance of the PDMS/PVAc/gold thin film remains remarkably low up to 65% strain, indicating its potential as a robust and stretchable interconnect.
 Fig. 23  Structural design with the microstructure interface. (a) Optical images of PDMS films with increased levels of roughness from “1” to “4”. (b) Resistance changes of gold films deposited on PDMS with different levels of roughness as a function of applied strain. The inset shows an optical image of the gold film on a flat PDMS substrate at 5% strain. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2012, Acta Materialia Inc. (c) Schematic of an interlocking interface between gold and PDMS inspired by tree roots. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the stretchable gold film with nanopiles embedded in the PDMS substrate. The insets show the photos of the sample from front and reverse sides. (e) Comparison of adhesive strength and adhesion ratio among the nanopile gold film, flat nonstretchable film (NSGF), and normal crack-based stretchable gold film (CSGF). Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
More recently, inspired by roots of plants that could firmly grip the ground, researchers introduced an interlocking microstructure of PDMS to firmly anchor gold films (Fig. 23c and d).131 The soft substrate could regulate the strain distribution in the gold film, thus avoiding cracks induced by the strain concentration. The finite element modelling (FEM) results show that the pillar array underneath can indeed change the strain distribution into a more random style compared with that in a flat film. As a result, such an interlocking layer offers both high adhesion and stretchability. The adhesion test also proved that the pillar film exhibited much higher adhesive strength compared with the normal crack-based stretchable gold film and flat non-stretchable evaporated gold film (Fig. 23e).131


4.1.3 Nanoscale interface. 
Compared to the 2D planar and microstructure interface, the 3D nanoscale interface offers a more conductive pathway and a higher weight ratio of conductive fillers to elastomers. As a result, such a 3D composite layout exhibits superior stretchability and conductivity, simultaneously (Table 2). In 2013, the Kotov group developed a gold nanoparticle (NP)/polyurethane (PU) composite film either by layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition (Fig. 24a) or by vacuum-assisted flocculation (VAF) (Fig. 24b).122 Gold nanoparticles are embedded in the PU matrix to form a soft–hard 3D nanoscale interface (Fig. 24c and d). High conductivity (up to 11000 S cm−1) and stretchability (up to 500%) were observed in this composite, owing to the 3D conductive pathway combined with strain-induced self-organization of nanoparticles.122 In addition, gold nanoparticles were well protected by the soft PU matrix, leading to stable conductivity of the composite even under high tensile strain.
Table 2 The comparison of conductivity and stretchability between 2D and 3D gold composites






Materials
Sheet resistance or conductivity
Stretchablility (%)
Ref.




2D gold composite
Gold nanosheets
2–3 Ω sq−1
200

116



Gold nanowires
148.1 ± 78.2 kΩ sq−1
150

120



Gold nanowires
6.1 Ω sq−1
800

135







3D gold composite
Gold nanoparticles
Up to 11000 S cm−1
500

122



Ag–Au core shell nanowires
Up to 72600 S cm−1
Up to 840

38





 Fig. 24  Interface control at the nanoscale via layer-by-layer assembly. (a) A photo of a freestanding film of (PU/NP)500 based on LBL stacking. (b) A photo of a freestanding PU/NP film made by VAF. (c) Top-view SEM image of a 1 × LBL PU/NP film. (d) Cross-section SEM image of a 1 × LBL PU/NP film. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
More recently, a Ag–Au nanocomposite composed of ultralong gold-coated silver nanowires in an elastomeric block-copolymer matrix was reported.38 The binary nanowire system exhibited an optimized conductivity of 41850 S cm−1 due to the high aspect ratio percolated network. More importantly, the solvent-drying process of nanowires generates a phase separated interface between the nanowires and the polymer matrix, which yields a high stretchability of up to 840%. The thick gold sheath deposited on the silver nanowire surface prevents oxidation and silver ion leaching, making the composite highly desirable for wearable and implantable electronics.38


4.1.4 Chemical modification. 
As mentioned above, adhesion between the gold thin film electrode and the elastic substrate is crucial for the long-term use of stretchable and durable electronics, such as the detection of body-surface biosignals in electrocardiography (ECG), and implanted devices where the interface friction may easily induce failure or debonding.145,146 Strong adhesion between rigid Au films and soft elastomer could be achieved indirectly by introducing an interlayer which has good interaction with both gold and elastomer. For instance, a polycarbonate interlayer was reported to fundamentally enhance the interaction between gold and polymer after annealing the Au/polycarbonate system at the glass transmission temperature (235 °C).147 However, such high annealing temperature is normally not allowed for elastomers used in elastronic devices. Consequently, room temperature surface modification methods have been developed to improve the adhesion between gold and elastomers. The first example is to apply an adhesive interlayer such as Ti, Cr, Al, or Al2O3 and then activate and hydroxylate the respective surfaces of gold and elastomer by plasma treatment or UV/O3 exposure in air.148,149 For example, a PDMS/Al2O3/Al/Au structure layout was reported with a pull-off strength as high as 14.7 N mm−2, and was further increased to over 35 N mm−2 after the system was annealed at 150 °C for 2 h.149 This significant adhesion improvement was explained by the formation of Au–Al alloys at their interface. Another method has been introduced by thermal curing of a prepolymer of PDMS on Au electrodes with a Ti interlayer (5 nm).150
However, the use of an additional adhesive layer can deteriorate the optical and electrochemical performance of gold elastronic devices, nor are these elements suitable for bio-applications.151 Consequently, using a molecule that bonds to both gold and elastomers may be an alternative strategy to avoid these problems. The Rogers group showed that conformal contact of two hydroxyl (–OH) groups on the Ti (5 nm) surface (titanol) and the hydroxylated PDMS surface (silanol) by oxygen plasma treatment results in permanent Ti–O–Si bonds.148 Such molecular bonding could be further applied for controlling the buckled structure of semiconductor ribbons on PDMS substrates via selective exposure to UV/O3.152,153 For a molecular adhesive to gold, (3-mercaptopropyl) trimethoxysilane (MPTMS) has been used because of the different functionality of its two terminal groups. In detail, the three methoxy (–OCH3) functional end groups can bind to oxide surfaces such as PDMS, while the thiol (–SH) functional head group can bind to gold (Fig. 25a and b).154 The results indicate that liquid deposition of MPTMS either by drop-casting or by spin-coating provides strong adhesion between Au and PDMS. The Au patterns with a linewidth of less than 2 μm were successfully transferred to PDMS using a dry peel-off process at a full 3-inch wafer scale (Fig. 25c). The as-prepared Au/PDMS thin film passed the tape test with no visible damage and almost no electrical conductivity changes (Fig. 25d–f).154
 Fig. 25  Interface control via chemical modification. (a) Chemical modification of MPTMS, hydrolysed MPTMS, and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (from left to right) on the gold film. (b) A schematic showing the dry peeling-off process to transfer the chemically modified Au film on PDMS. (c) A photo of PDMS embedded with Au micro-patterns. (d–f) Schematic illustration and corresponding photos of the tape adhesion test on the PDMS film embedded with Au micro-patterns. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Very recently, our group used chemically modified soft substrates (e.g. PDMS, Ecoflex) to directly grow vertically aligned gold nanowires (V-AuNWs) with enhanced surface bonding.123 The V-AuNW films exhibit exceptionally high stretchability up to 800% of strain without completely losing their conductivity (Fig. 26a, red solid line).123 The original conductivity can be recovered upon stress release (Fig. 26a, red dashed line). In contrast, if the film is simply transferred onto Ecoflex without chemical modification, the conductivity is lost permanently with only 83% strain applied (Fig. 26a, black line). When the film is being stretched, the strong adhesion between the nanowire and the Ecoflex substrate leads to the formation of ‘accordion-fan-like’ V-shaped cracks instead of U-shaped cracks that form in transferred films without chemical bonding (Fig. 26b).123 As a result, most conductivity pathways are reserved. The strong adhesion is due to the use of (3-aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane (APTMS) that serves as a bifunctional molecular glue. Its amine side strongly interacts with gold nanowires and its silane side covalently bonds to Ecoflex surfaces.
 Fig. 26  Chemical modification of the elastomer surface for anisotropic growth of AuNWs. (a) Comparison of electrical stretchability between chemically bonded V-AuNW (red) and directly transferred V-AuNW (black) films. (b) Schematic illustrations of structural changes of chemically bonded (up) and directly transferred V-AuNW films (down) during the stretching/releasing process. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society. 

4.2 Human/device interface control
The significant advances in the development of interface control between rigid gold and soft elastomers have laid a solid foundation toward future durable elastronic devices. However, the interfaces between gold-based elastronics and curvilinear biological surfaces including human skin and other tissues are more complicated than artificial elastomeric polymers. This is because additional requirements such as biocompatibility, long-term durability in biological conditions, or even gas permeability need to be considered.155 Strategies have recently been proposed for the practical considerations at the human/device interface, including superthin epidermal design,141 skin-conformal microhairy design,156 and substrate-free design37 (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of various strategies for gold-based device/human interface control. 

4.2.1 Superthin epidermal design. 
The mechanics and soft adhesion are two key considerations for the integration of gold based elastronics with human skin at the biotic/abiotic interface.157 The skin surface morphology could be assumed to be sinusoidal with characteristic amplitude and wavelength in an analytical mechanics model proposed by Rogers et al.141 In this model, the thickness of the device needs to be smaller than a critical value to make sure sufficiently large van der Waals forces to drive perfect, conformal contact with human skin. The total energy associated with interfacial contact (Uinterface) is defined as158 Uinterface = Udevice_bending + Uskin_elasticity + Uadhesion(2)where Udevice_bending, Uskin_elasticity, and Uadhesion are the bending energy of the device, the elastic energy of the skin, and the adhesion energy, respectively. Conformal contact results when the adhesion energy is larger than the sum of the bending and the elastic energies.141 Based on this model, a firm interface between biotic and abiotic systems could be achieved in the effort of reducing materials/device thickness and increasing adhesion energy. As shown in Fig. 28a–d, an epidermal electronic membrane with 5 μm thickness makes excellent conformal contact with a human skin replica.141 In comparison, air gaps can be observed at the interface with decreasing contact areas when a thicker film is applied. Such ultrathin conformal contact could effectively minimize the risk of slippage and delamination between human skin and devices in the circumstance of bio-monitoring, improving the accuracy and reliability of elastronics. An example includes the multifunctional epidermal electronic system35,159 with an overall device thickness of sub-10 μm based on a gold thin film.
 Fig. 28  Engineering approaches for achieving conformal contact at the skin/device interface. (a–d) Cross-sectional SEM images showing contacts between a silicone skin-replica (grey) and elastomer films with different thicknesses (blue). Scale bars: 1 mm. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration of a pressure sensor with microhair-structured PDMS substrates to achieve conformal contacts with skin. The right shows a SEM of a PDMS film with micro-pyramid structures. (f) SEM images of microhair arrays with different aspect ratios (AR) of (i) 3, (ii) 6, and (iii) 10. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the substrate-free gold nanomesh conductors prepared by dissolving PVA nanofiber templates. (h) A photo of gold nanomesh conductors with conformal contact with a fingertip. Scale bar: 1 mm. (i) A SEM image of the gold nanomesh conductor. Scale bar: 5 μm. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 


4.2.2 Microhairy design. 
The apparent dilemma between lighter/thinner design and highly integrated/multifunctional devices makes it challenging to simply decrease the thickness of the device without sacrificing its functionality. Apart from decreasing the overall thickness of the final device, efforts have also been devoted to enhance the adhesion energy of wearable devices by devising hairy microstructures.160,161 Inspired by the amazing climbing ability of geckos, microhairy design is involved to fundamentally enhance the adhesion energy between gold-based elastronics and biological surfaces.162 In this configuration, each hair provides a tiny force in the range of 10−7 N due to van der Waals force and/or capillary interactions, while a formidable force of ∼10 N cm−2 could be introduced when millions of hairs act together.163 Substrates with microhair structures could effectively fill the voids between rough skin and devices, resulting in an increased contact area. The adhesive force is also highly dependent on the morphology of micropillars (Fig. 28e and f).156 Substrates with microhair structures in a low-aspect-ratio configuration showed microsize voids to pig skin, whereas a high-aspect-ratio configuration exhibited excellent conformity. Benefiting from the enhanced contact between devices and the irregular surface of the epidermis, the resulting gold-based sensors displayed ∼12 times enhancement in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).156 Similarly, a mushroom-shaped micropillar array was introduced as a strongly adhesive layer on a discretely supported thin film.161 The proposed structures were experimentally proven to be able to generate stronger adhesion than the conventional single-level microhair structures, in particular on rough surfaces. The proposed design may be widely used in next-generation implantable applications with long shelf life as well as stable performance, given the fact that rough surfaces are more common in real biological circumstances.


4.2.3 Substrate-free design. 
As an interlayer between gold and the biological surface, the elastic substrate improved the wearability of gold based devices. However, manufacturing on-skin electronics with elastic substrates often results in poor air permeability. Consequently, efforts have been devoted to the design and fabrication of on-skin gold elastronics in a minimally invasive way. As mentioned above, conventional gold thin films produced by top-down methods could hardly sustain high stretchability of >5% without a well-bonded soft substrate. As a result, a high-aspect-ratio nanofiber structure was applied for the development of substrate-free on-skin elastronics (Fig. 28g–i).37 The gold nanofiber thin film could adhere to the skin after dissolving the supporting polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) layer on the bottom of the mesh. The nanofibers form a super-thin adhesion layer with a thickness of only several tens of nanometres (Fig. 28g). The mesh conductors can attach to irregular skin surfaces such as fingertips (Fig. 28h and i).37 The resistivity increases by a factor of 3 even after 10000 cycles of the finger bending test (40% elongation), demonstrating excellent adhesion between gold mesh and human skin. In addition, it could serve as a stretchable interconnect for pressure sensors and ECG electrodes, which exhibited stable performance when body movement resulted in elongation and folding of the skin.37

5. Design principles
Gold-based elastronics are required to remain functional in practical real-world conditions including complex deformation such as irregular skin movement or muscle contraction. As a result, it is a prerequisite to develop modulus-matching stretchable devices with minimum performance losses when they are deformed. To address the mismatch between the rigid nature of gold and the requirements for stretchable electronics, various strategies are applied either by extrinsic stretchable design164–166 or by intrinsic stretchable design.108,116
5.1 Extrinsic stretchable design
In general, the principle for extrinsic stretchable design is based on the fact that a material bending stiffness will decrease with the decrease in thickness. Consequently, rigid gold could afford out-of-plane shape rearrangement without introducing cracks or delamination if it is sufficiently thin. The most commonly used structural design strategies are (1) buckling design, (2) serpentine design, and (3) origami/kirigami design.

5.1.1 Buckling design. 
Buckled gold films can be obtained directly when sputtering gold onto elastomer substrates with appropriate thickness and elastic modulus under a certain deposition temperature,167 which is due to the natural expansion of the elastomer during gold deposition. The more controllable buckling structure of gold can be produced either by mechanical pre-strain61,168–170 or by thermal induced post-shrink.171–173 Either approach allows the introduction of a different initial strain between a soft substrate layer (e.g., PDMS, Ecoflex) and gold. Owing to the discrepancy of Young's modulus between them, periodic wavy structures can be formed upon strain release.174 The process of pre-strain induced buckling is illustrated in Fig. 29a. Upon stretching, the wavy structure accommodates the strain by the increased buckling wavelength and decreased buckling amplitude, rendering much less strain inside the gold layer (Fig. 29b).168 As a result, the electric resistance remains nearly constant during the stretching. The above strategy can be further extended to biaxial pre-strain to form a biaxial wavy geometry, which provides stretchability along all in-plane directions. Based on this concept, isotopically stretchable gold thin films were demonstrated (Fig. 29c).61
 Fig. 29  Buckling structures induced by pre-strain methods. (a) Schematic illustration of forming gold buckling structures by the mechanical pre-strain process. (b–e) SEM images of the deposited gold film after uniaxial pre-strain (b); biaxial pre-strain (c); uniaxial post-shrunk (d); and biaxial post-shrunk process (e). (b) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As for the post-shrink strategy, gold is firstly deposited on shape memory polymers (SMP), followed by uniaxial or biaxial shrinkage induced by heat.171–173 The buckling of gold occurs because of the stiffness mismatch between the SMP and the metal thin film during the shrinking process (Fig. 29d and e).171 Such wrinkled thin films have shown greatly decreased effective resistivity when compared with planar thin films, and are similar to bulk gold with respect to intrinsic properties. Furthermore, such thin films can be transferred from the rigid SMP carrier film to elastomeric silicone. The resulting hierarchal self-similar wrinkled structures provide large amounts of strain relief allowing a stretchability of up to 200% with almost no conductivity loss within the strain range of 0–50%.


5.1.2 Serpentine design. 
Serpentine design has been frequently used in stretchable interconnects between rigid non-stretchable components. In this method, gold was generally deposited onto serpentine polymers (i.e. polyimide), which have much lower effective stiffness when compared to rigid active components.153 When the entire device is deformed, the serpentine gold can accommodate most of the tensile strain to ensure the functionality of the non-stretched active components. Gold serpentine interconnects can be coplanar175 or non-coplanar176 to the elastomeric substrate. The coplanar configuration enables the serpentine polyimide/gold/polyimide interconnects to be fully bonded with stretchable substrates (Fig. 30a).141 In contrast, the non-coplanar configuration allows the serpentine interconnect to be partially bonded or completely non-bonded to the elastomeric substrates, which involves not only in-plane, but also out-of-plane deformations. For example, an out-of-plane ultra-stretchable serpentine gold electrode can offer an areal coverage as high as 81% and a biaxial stretchability as large as 170%, based on the optimization of the design layout.176
 Fig. 30  Serpentine design of stretchable gold mesh structures. (a) Images of a serpentine gold mesh structure at 0% strain (left) and 30% strain (right). The schematic in the middle illustrates that the gold films are located at the neutral mechanical plane (NMP) between two polyimide (PI) layers. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Finite element method (FEM) images of different structures under tensile strain. (c) Experimental microscale X-ray coherent tomography (MicroXCT) images corresponding to (b). Scale bars: 2 mm. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
In order to further optimize the performance of stretchable gold interconnects, Peano, Greek cross, Vicsek and other fractal constructs were designed and fabricated (Fig. 30b and c) to yield space-filling structures of electronic materials.159 Stretchable electrodes based on these fractal designs can be produced after gold deposition. Such fractal designs can be engineered to accommodate larger elastic strain along a selected dimension and to support biaxial, radial and other deformation modes compared with periodic serpentine design. Elastronic devices including electrophysiological sensors, precision monitors and actuators, and radio frequency antennas were demonstrated based on fractal design concepts, which exhibited unique properties such as invisibility under magnetic resonance imaging. A similar self-similar concept was applied to construct soft gold interconnects between rigid lithium-ion battery (LIB) arrays. The stretchable lithium-ion battery arrays exhibited a high stretchability of up to 300% by increasing the fractal order of serpentine gold electrodes.177 The superior stretchability of the LIB is demonstrated by full attachment onto human joints at bending states with almost no performance degradation.177


5.1.3 Origami and kirigami design. 
Origami is an ancient art of paper folding to transform 2D device sheets into a compact and deformable 3D architecture.178 Additional freedom of transformation can be introduced by folding, unfolding, twisting, and bending based on the designed creases,179–182 thus imparting high mechanical deformability to intrinsically brittle materials and delicate planar structures. Based on this approach, conventional planar LIBs were first constructed using layered materials of current collectors, anode, cathode, separator, and packaging. Then stretchable LIBs were realized by folding these layers into two specific origami patterns according to the difference in angles between adjacent creases. The folding and unfolding processes of the creases can release the strain caused by deformations, while the faces remained in rigid configurations and thus maintained the device performance. In addition, origami design has been applied for the construction of triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) using paper and metal thin films as the starting materials.183 Such doodlebug-shaped TENGs are able to provide an open-circuit voltage of 20 V and a short-circuit current of 2 μA when the 2D device turned into a 3D architecture with seven connected units. The generated electric outputs could directly light-up up to 4 light emitting diodes (LEDs). Similar to origami design, stretchability can also be achieved with rigid architectures via kirigami design, which is another form of paper art that involves cutting and folding.184,185 Gold mainly serves as a current collector of energy devices based on origami/kirigami design.186 For instance, a kirigami supercapacitor based on the gold electrode and graphite deposition can be stretched up to 215%, while the capacitance of the device is almost unchanged under continuous mechanical tensile strains from 0 to 100%.186

5.2 Intrinsic stretchable design
New topological structures of gold provide an alternative route to elastronics: utilizing the intrinsically flexible nanostructure of gold to replace the rigid bulk gold film. Novel nanostructures including gold nanowires,102,108,120 gold nanosheets,116,187 gold nanomesh,79 gold fractal networks188 and gold nanoparticles122 have been successfully used. In some cases, the above-mentioned strategies could be combined to accommodate significant deformation requirement for wearable or implantable applications.
Ultrathin 1D gold nanowires offer unique advantages for intrinsically stretchable electronics, due to their inherent high-aspect-ratio structural feature in conjunction with superior mechanical, electrical, and optical properties.85 In recent years, our group developed a variety of stretchable electronic devices based on ultrathin gold nanowires (AuNWs). For example, monolayer AuNWs could be formed at the air/water interface via the Langmuir–Blodgett method.108 The as-prepared thin film is highly transparent (T = 90% at a wavelength of 550 nm) and intrinsically stretchable, allowing a stretchability of 50% with reversible resistance changes of 45% without any extrinsic structural design. The superior stretchability of gold nanowires is much higher than their bulk counterpart with similar film thickness (8 nm), which is due to a strain induced well-aligned ripple morphology (Fig. 31a–d) that effectively accommodates tensile deformation by ripple expansion.102 Another intrinsically stretchable conductor was demonstrated based on multilayers of gold nanosheets. The electrodes patterned on a rubber substrate showed excellent electrical stability at 100% strain during the repeated stretching cycles. The patterned electrodes exhibited no difference in the resistivity at the strained and strain-released states up to ε = 40%, which is benefitted from the novel 2D sheet structure, where adjacent sheets are reversibly sliding over each other instead of irreversibly cracking when a strain is applied (Fig. 31e–g).116 Intrinsically stretchable electronics could also be achieved with gold nanoparticles. In the past, spherical nanoparticles were considered as unfavourable candidates for intrinsic stretchable design, due to a percolation threshold (Vc) 10 to 100 times higher than that of high-aspect-ratio nanometre-scale components.122 However, nanoparticles in a polymer matrix may have greater mobility than nanotubes or nanowires. Therefore, the conducting pathways lost upon deformation could potentially be recovered in a different particle configuration. The self-organized conductive pathways under tensile strain were confirmed by using gold nanoparticle/PU composite thin films fabricated by LBL assembly. A high conductivity of up to 11000 S cm−1 and a stretchability of up to 115% were observed in 5 × LBL composites despite the minimal aspect ratio of gold nanoparticles.122 The extraordinary electromechanical performances can be ascribed to the stress-induced NP organization. Consequently, the percolation threshold for the composite decreases and thus the conductivity is larger compared to the composite with the same volumetric fraction of the filler but without the self-organized network.122 Other intrinsically stretchable designs such as the fractal gold (F-Au) nanoframework can be stretched up to 110% strain without significant loss of conductivity yet with an optical transparency of 70% at 550 nm (Fig. 31h and i).188 Remarkably, the F-Au thin film shows the strain-insensitive behaviour up to 20% stretching strain. This originates from the unique nanomesh-like structure, which absorbs external mechanical forces and maintains electron pathways throughout the nanoframework. The F-Au network is obtained from the one-pot synthesis without any purification steps involved and can be transferred directly to arbitrary substrates like PET, food-wrap, PDMS and Ecoflex. Compared to other gold nanomaterials that are synthesized via the wet-chemistry method, the F-Au thin film is formed via a fusion process between adjacent nanoparticles, and thus no capping agent is involved, leading to a highly conductive thin film at room temperature without post-treatment.188
 Fig. 31  Assembled intrinsically stretchable gold nanostructures. (a and b) Schematic of the AuNWs/PDMS film before (a) and after (b) stretching. (c and d) Corresponding SEM images of the AuNWs before stretching (c) and after 5000 stretching/releasing cycles. The wrinkled structure is observed after repeated stretching cycles. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e–g) Optical images of the Au nanosheets during one stretching cycle. Wrinkle deformation and the sliding of nanosheets could be observed. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (h and i) Optical images of the fractal gold nanomesh on PDMS substrates at 0% (h) and 100% strain (i). Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society. 
6. Applications
This section presents some representative gold-based elastronic devices for wearable and implantable applications. The focus is on the discussion and comparison of performances of various materials and designs.
6.1 Interconnects
Interconnects are the most fundamental elements in electronic devices, which connect all the functional components with good conductivity. In soft electronics, interconnects are required to accommodate partial or complete deformation of the entire devices while remaining highly conductive. Gold electrodes and gold-coated electrodes have been widely used in traditional integrated circuits as interconnects between active components, mainly due to gold's chemical inertness to the ambient environment. The advantages of gold-based stretchable interconnects lie in their flexibility, biocompatibility, ease of fabrication/modification, and low electrochemical potential compared to their metallic counterparts as described earlier.

6.1.1 Transparent and stretchable conductors. 
Transparent and conductive mesh grids based on AuNWs have been recently developed either by nanoimprinting133 and directly by self-assembly101 methods, which hold great promise for the application of stretchable and invisible interconnects. The imprinted structure consists of bundled AuNWs that follow the predefined pattern of the stamp. There are large overlaps between the ultrathin wires in the bundles enabling percolation throughout the grid pattern. The material exhibited high conductivity (sheet resistance of 29 Ω sq−1) and transparency that can be controlled by changing wire concentration and bundle geometry. Mechanical bending tests showed that the conductivity dropped by only 5.6% after 450 bending cycles at a bending radius of 5 mm. However, the fabrication process required a soft nanoimprinting template, which is not favoured for large-scale fabrication. In this context, our group has developed a bottom-up approach to fabricate AuNWs at the air/water interface in large scale (Fig. 32a inset).101 The mesh film has a typical mesh pore size of 8–52 μm, with a sheet resistance of ∼40 times smaller compared to that of the non-meshed AuNW structure under similar optical transmittance (550 nm), which can be used for flexible touch screens (Fig. 32a). The mesh electrodes are mechanically flexible, exhibiting almost no conductivity changes under severe bending up to 2 mm in bending radius for more than 1000 cycles (Fig. 32b and c). In comparison, commercial ITO electrodes showed huge conductivity loss after a similar bending test (Fig. 32b and c). However, the conductivity of such gold nanowire based transparent electrodes is still low compared to that of ITO and silver nanowire electrodes at similar transmittance. This mainly originated from large nanowire-to-nanowire junction resistance due to the existence of surface ligands. Several methods including thermal annealing, chemical reduction, and light annealing may effectively reduce the junction resistance between nanowires.
 Fig. 32  Gold nanostructure based transparent and stretchable conductors. (a) Photos of the touch screen based on the self-assembled AuNW mesh film. (b) Relative resistance change of the AuNW mesh film and an ITO/PET film at different bending radius. (c) Resistance change of the AuNW mesh film and an ITO/PET film at different bending cycles. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Photos of gold nanotrough networks transferred on a PET film (left) and a paper (right). (e) Sheet resistance change of the gold nanotrough networks and an ITO/PET film at different bending radius. (f) The sheet resistance change of a gold film and the gold nanotrough film at different strain states. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photo of a wafer-size patterned transparent stretchable mesh conductor. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Institute of Physics. (h) Sheet resistance change of Au nanomeshes with different mesh-size to line-width ratios (M/W) of 8 and 18 as a function of tensile strain. (i) Resistance change and normalized resistance change of two Au nanomesh samples with M/W of 18 at different stretching cycles (up to 1000 cycles). Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
To further improve the conductivity while maintaining good flexibility, Au networks without junction resistance are desired. As a result, bulk gold, produced by top-down deposition with a novel 1D structure, was applied for the construction of transparent interconnects. In 2013, the Yi Cui group developed a freestanding metallic nanotrough network based on electrospinning and metal deposition. The gold nanotrough electrodes can be attached to different surfaces including a smooth PET sheet and a rough newspaper, making all the surfaces highly conducting (Fig. 32d).189 In addition, they also exhibited superior optoelectronic performances with a record low sheet resistance of ∼2 Ω sq−1 at 90% transmission. Further bending and stretching measurements (Fig. 32e and f) demonstrated that the electrodes could not only withstand a small bending radius as low as 2 mm, but also maintain good conductivity at a uniaxial tensile strain as large as 50%.189 In comparison, commercial indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes with similar transmittance showed severe degradation in conductivity after the bending and stretching test. To further improve the stretchability of such 1D gold fibrous electrodes, a buckled Au@polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) nanofiber network was fabricated by transferring Au-metallized electrospun PVP nanofibers onto a prestrained PDMS substrate.190 The buckled gold fibrous thin film shows considerably lower strain sensitivity of resistance than that of straight Au@PVP nanofiber network (Fig. 32e). This stretchable conductor also outperforms the widely used ITO conductors with regard to high optical transmittance and low sheet resistance.
Stretchable electrodes based on the gold nanomesh structure could also be achieved by combining top-down deposition and the lithography technique. In 2014, a grain boundary lithography method was introduced for making metal nanomesh electrodes. The nanomesh is a network of fully interconnected metal wires of gold, which is patternable, highly transparent, and conductive (Fig. 32g).73 When the nanomesh film is stretched, the substrate (PDMS) stabilizes the rupture of Au wires, forming distributed slits and out-of-plane deflection. Consequently, the change in the sheet resistance of Au nanomeshes is modest with a one-time strain of ∼160% (Fig. 32h), or after 1000 cycles at a strain of 50% (Fig. 32i).79


6.1.2 Integrated stretchable interconnects. 
Stretchable gold interconnects could be achieved by extrinsic stretchable design that we introduced in Section 5.1. For proof-of-concept, the extrinsic stretchable gold interconnects were firstly applied to a stretchable hemispherical eye system.191 In this system, stretchable circuits can be realized by transferring the planar gold thin film onto a pre-stretched elastomer, forming an out-of-plane bulking gold film when the strain is released.192–195 The as-prepared gold interconnects serve as soft and compressible bridges to their adjacent CMOS devices, which accommodate most of the strain when a complex deformation is applied.
The concept of stretchable hemispherical gold electrodes is further applied for the connection of multifunctional electronic components. In 2011, the Rogers group developed a multifunctional epidermal electronic device with an overall thickness of ∼37 μm.35 In this design, antenna, LED, strain gauge, temperature sensor, wireless power coil, radio frequency (RF) components, and ECG sensor are integrated and connected by serpentine-shaped gold electrodes. Serpentine gold interconnects exhibited larger stretchability than the straight pre-stretched bridge design due to the deformability of the large twist structures.196–202
However, the most well-developed component technologies are only available in rigid, planar formats, which restricted the functionality of epidermal electronics. As a result, the development of highly stretchable systems that incorporate both stretchable interconnects and high-modulus, state-of-the-art functional elements is required. In 2014, the same group described a highly stretchable system that combined soft microfluidics, structured adhesive surfaces, stretchable interconnects, and rigid functional components (Fig. 33a).17 In this hard–soft composite system, the self-similar structural design of gold electrodes is applied to provide hierarchical buckling mechanics and a large biaxial elastic strain range (Fig. 33b and c). Due to the soft nature of its structured elastomeric encapsulation, the system could be further laminated onto the surface of skin to enable advanced, multifunctional operation for physiological monitoring in a wireless mode.
 Fig. 33  An integrated soft/hard integrated system with serpentine gold interconnects. (a) Schematic illustration of key components in the integrated system. (b) Three-dimensional finite element analysis (3D-FEA) results of the system under different magnitudes of equal-biaxial tensile strain. (c) Optical images of the device at different equal-biaxial strains corresponding to the results analysed by 3D-FEA. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2014, AAAS. 
Moreover, circuit designs containing serpentine structures can be transferred onto a prestretched substrate to obtain buckled serpentine interconnections with enhanced deformability.202,203 Furthermore, the introduction of a multilevel self-similar structure can efficiently improve the mechanical stretchability while maintaining the areal capacity of active devices. For instance, a stretchable battery with stretchability up to 300% could be achieved by connecting a rechargeable LIB array with 4-levels of self-similar serpentine gold electrode. The capacity density of the battery could reach ∼1.1 mA h cm−2 with an areal capacity of 52%.177 The strategy combined the conventional well-established device units with the stretchable conductive gold interconnect, which opened up a new methodology for realizing stretchable electronics that can accommodate nearly any type of mechanical deformation while maintaining high performance.

6.2 Pressure sensors
A mechanical pressure sensor is a device for pressure measurement of external forces. Wearable pressure sensing devices are of paramount importance for various future applications including bio-monitoring, remote healthcare and soft robotics.19,204 Previously, gold was mainly used as an electrode material for pressure sensors, benefitting from its chemical inertness and electrical conductivity, while in recent years, gold has played a key role in the construction of next-generation wearable and implantable mechanical sensors. This is mainly because of its biocompatibility with human skin and tissue. On the basis of different types of electronic signals arising from applied mechanical forces, gold based pressure sensitive devices are mainly divided into piezoresistive,205–208 capacitive,209 piezoelectric210 and triboelectric211 sensors.
Most of the gold-based pressure sensors rely on the piezoresistive effect of active materials caused by pressure induced deformation. A straightforward method to fabricate such pressure sensors is to deposit an Au patterned thin film on a soft substrate (i.e. PDMS). The strain-induced piezoresistivity could be utilized to perform the quantitative measurement of absolute mechanical or air pressure when the film was attached to the wall of a sealed chamber.205 However, this layout is not optimal for the detection of pressure in the normal direction, as the pressure sensitivity of a Au thin film is highly dependent on the deformation of its soft substrates. In order to address this issue, a sandwiched layout of the pressure sensor is presented, which mainly relies on the contact resistance changes between two active layers when a pressure is applied in the normal direction.212 As shown in Fig. 34a, our group developed a wearable pressure sensor by sandwiching tissue paper impregnated ultrathin AuNWs (Fig. 34b) between two PDMS films with interdigitated electrodes.213 The pressure sensor exhibited high sensitivity (>1.14 kPa−1), fast response time (<17 ms), and good wearability due to the soft nature of both AuNWs, tissue paper, and PDMS. In addition, the device could effectively differentiate between pressing, bending, and torsional forces, which allowed real-time monitoring of tiny pressure changes, such as human wrist pulse and acoustic vibration detection (Fig. 34c).213 The sensitivity of a gold based wearable pressure sensor could be further improved by microstructural design of the contacted area. For instance, an Au-PDMS micropillar electrode showed much higher sensitivity than its flat counterpart.214 This is because a micropillar structure could lead to larger changes in the contact area when a pressure is applied. Following this concept, a wearable pressure sensor was fabricated based on the changes in contact resistance between an Au-coated micropillar electrode and a polyaniline electrode. The fabricated sensor exhibited a sensitivity of 2.0 kPa−1 in the pressure range below 0.22 kPa, a low detection limit of 15 Pa, a fast response time of 50 ms, and high stability over 10000 cycles of pressure loading/unloading with a low operating voltage of 1.0 V.
 Fig. 34  Gold nanomaterial based pressure sensors. (a) Schematic illustration of a resistive pressure sensor based on AuNWs. (b) Sensitivity of the pressure sensor in the range of 0–5 kPa. (c) Measuring heartbeats under normal (66 beats per minute) and exercise conditions (88 beats per minute) with the pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of a mimosa-inspired gold based pressure sensor. (e) Sensitivity of the pressure sensor in the range of 0–2 kPa. (f) A photo of the artificial mimosa leaflets touched by a finger. Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to pressure sensors based on gold and regular nano/micro structures fabricated by traditional lithography techniques, new routes have also been developed based on the microstructures of natural creatures and artefacts. For instance, the leaves of mimosa that show remarkable responsiveness under external stimuli are natural pressure sensors, which can serve as templates for microstructuring the PDMS surface by a two-step negative/positive molding process.206 Upon the deposition of gold, structural electrodes with an irregular pattern of microdomains would be formed, which constitute a piezoresistive pressure sensor with high sensitivity (50.17 kPa−1 in the regime of 0–70 Pa) and fast responses (<20 ms) (Fig. 34d and e).206 The artificial mimosa leaves connected with a built-in motor were demonstrated based on this sensor, which showed similar stimuli-response behaviour to real mimosa leaves (Fig. 34f). Another example is the micropatterned flexible PDMS/Au substrate duplicated from the lotus leaf, which forms an essential sensing element in a flexible capacitive tactile sensor.215
Recently, gold nanoparticles with a gradient structure were developed for pressure sensor applications.207 Such metallic thin films could not only measure the applied force based on the piezoresistive effect between adjacent particles, but also accurately locate the pressed position based on an antiparallel design of gradient nanoparticles (Fig. 35a).207 As shown in Fig. 35b, due to the variation in thickness, the conductivity changes along the longitudinal dimension exhibited opposite directions for sensor 1 and sensor 2. Consequently, the overall resistance increments of the two strips subjected to load at different steps enable accurate calculation of both the applied load and its location along the sensing strip (Fig. 35c). However, the gold nanoparticle gradient film could only sense location-specific pressure in the non-stretched state. Our group has developed a staircase standing gold nanowire film, which can recognize pressure in a highly location-specific manner for both non-stretched and stretched states up to 50% due to the intrinsically stretchable nature of high-aspect-ratio gold nanowires.124 Moreover, the staircased nanowire thin film could identify the sharpness of an external object based on a concentric design on the fingertip (Fig. 35d). When the top (sensor 1) and bottom (sensor 2) fingertip sensors were pressed by cylinders with various radius, the sensitivity ratio (S1/S2) was highly dependent on cylinder radius R but independent of the applied force (Fig. 35e).124
 Fig. 35  Pressure sensors based on gradient gold nanostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the sensors with gradient thickness of gold nanoparticles. (b) Location-specific response of sensor 1 (top) and sensor 2 (bottom) under a normal pressure. (c) The relationship between predicted position and the calculated actual position. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the standing AuNW based sensor with staircase concentric design. (e) The sensitivity ratio (S1/S2) of the sensors is independent of the applied forces. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared to the piezoresistive mode, the instantaneous generation of piezoelectric signals via the separation of dipoles in piezoelectric mode can enable interlocking sensors to quickly respond to external dynamic pressures, such as in real-time sound monitoring. For instance, an electrospun piezoelectric acoustic sensor based on poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) nanofiber webs and gold electrodes was reported with a high acoustic sensitivity of 266 mV Pa−1. The sensor can precisely distinguish sound waves in the low to middle frequency region. These features make it especially suitable for noise detection and harvesting.210 Moreover, gold is also used as an electrode material for the construction of self-powered pressure sensors based on the triboelectric effect. The performance of the triboelectric sensors could be evaluated either by static open-circuit voltage signal and by dynamic short-circuit current signal, which exhibited high consistency towards pressure changes applied on the device.216
6.3 Strain sensors
Strain sensors are devices used to measure strain on an object. In recent years, wearable strain sensors have attracted tremendous attention because of their capability for long-term biological monitoring of the human body.217 Strain sensors can respond to the applied strain by following different mechanisms. The strain-capacitance response of traditional strain gauges relies on geometrical effects, which is similar to the capacitance pressure sensors. The strain-resistance response sensors mainly originate from resistivity changes of materials themselves, percolation connectivity among sensing elements, and crack propagation.217 As far as gold is concerned, the strain-resistance response is mainly due to crack propagation of the gold thin film,63,143,218,219 and disconnection or sliding of other gold topological structures.79,120,187,207,220,221
In a percolated gold nanomaterial thin film system, electrons transport via overlapped nanomaterials. When a strain is applied to the film, the connected points between nanostructures will usually decrease, leading to the increase of electrical resistance. The disconnection of overlapped nanomaterials under stretching is caused by dislocation and slippage due to the weak interfacial adhesion and large stiffness mismatch between nanomaterials and stretchable polymers.139,217 In this case, highly stretchable strain sensors can be fabricated using high-aspect-ratio 1D nanomaterials. In 2015, our group developed a facile screen printing approach to fabricate ultrathin gold nanowire thin films on any elastomeric substrates for stretchable strain sensor application.120 The as-prepared device could detect strains as small as 0.01% and as large as 350% (Fig. 36a) with a typical gauge factor (GF) of 6.9–9.9. GF is regarded as the sensitivity of a strain sensor, which is defined as  where ε is the strain, and Roff and Ron are the resistance of the sensor before and after a strain is applied, respectively. The sensor also exhibits a fast response (<22 ms) and excellent durability, which can sustain over 5000 loading–unloading cycles of strain (50%) with negligible conductivity loss. The superior sensing performances enabled real-time monitoring of a wide range of human motions including fore arm muscle movement, cheek motions, throat muscle stretching, and finger flexion/extension, as well as human radial artery pulse. In addition, both the sensitivity and conductivity of the nanowire thin film could be further improved by polyaniline (PANI) microparticle doping.120 As shown in Fig. 36b, the AuNWs/PANI composite with 20% w/w PANI doping exhibited ∼8 times enhancement in sensitivity. The improvement of sensitivity is mainly because PANI is more vulnerable to disconnect than the nanowire film under tensile strain. The hybrid film also showed reversible and repeatable response of as much as 150% strain with low PANI concentration in the composite. The strain sensors can directly interface with the existing wireless circuitry, allowing for wirelessly human finger-controlled robotic arm systems (Fig. 36c).120 Based on a similar concept, highly sensitive, stretchable, patchable, and transparent strain sensors are achieved based on the hybrid films of the soft/hard Au/Ag NW network (Fig. 36d).221 They are mechanically stretchable, optically transparent, and electrically conductive, which can be fabricated using a simple and cost-effective solution process. The combination of soft AuNWs and more rigid AgNWs enables their use as high-performance strain sensors with a high gauge factor (GF) of ≈236 at low strain (<5%), high stretchability of up to 70% strain, and optical transparency from 58.7% to 66.7% (Fig. 36d and e). The highly sensitive and transparent AuNWs/AgNWs composite was further applied on various areas of the human face for the detection of tiny facial expression (Fig. 36f).221
 Fig. 36  Gold nanomaterial based strain sensors. (a) Photos of a strain sensor based on AuNWs under ∼150% tensile strain. The inset shows the sensor under 0% strain. (b) Relative resistance changes of AuNWs/PANI and AuNW strain sensors at various strain states. (c) Demonstration of remote control using AuNWs/PANI flexion sensors sewed on a textile glove. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society. (d) A SEM image of the AgNW/AuNW percolation networks on an elastomeric PDMS substrate. (e) Relative resistance change (ΔR/R0) of the AgNW/AuNW based strain sensor with different layers of gold nanowires. (f) Relative resistance change of the transparent strain sensor attached to the human forehead. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (g) A photo of a crack-based strain sensor. (h) The response of the crack-based strain sensor in the 0–1% strain range. (i) Real-time relative resistance change of the crack-based sensor under different musical notes. The inset shows the experimental set-up. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from 1D gold nanowires, 0D gold nanoparticles207,220 and 2D gold nanosheets187 have also been applied for the construction of highly sensitive and highly stretchable strain sensors. For instance, highly sensitive strain sensors can be fabricated via well-defined arrays of parallel, few micrometre wide wires of close-packed 18 nm gold nanoparticles.220 These nanoparticle wires are obtained by convective self-assembly (CSA) on flexible polyethylene terephthalate substrates, without any lithographic prepatterning. The fine control over the thickness and the width of the nanoparticle wires through the substrate temperature and the meniscus speed during the CSA process allows for understanding of how the dimensionality (2D or 3D) of the nanoparticle assembly influences the strain gauge sensitivity. Wires made of a single monolayer of nanoparticles turn out to give strain gauges about three times more sensitive than those made of multilayers.
Crack propagation in bulk gold thin films represents another design principle for highly sensitive wearable strain gauge sensors. For example, strain sensors could be achieved by engineering the connection channels in gold thin films. As shown in Fig. 36g, the formation of channel cracks on the gold surface could largely improve the sensitivity of wearable strain sensors. The developed strain sensor possesses gauge factors as high as 200 (ε = 0–0.5%), 1000 (ε = 0.5–0.7%), and greater than 5000 (ε = 0.7–1%), which are among the highest values reported thus far at such small deformation (Fig. 36h). Moreover, the cracked gold also exhibits good cyclic stability and fast dynamic response. Owing to the distinctive features of high sensitivity and a simple fabrication process, the strain sensor can be used for tiny vibration detection such as musical notes detection. Specifically, frequencies of notes are well detected by periodic resistance changes ranging from 523 to 988 Hz with a high signal-to-noise level (Fig. 36i).219
6.4 Energy devices
Energy devices, including batteries, supercapacitors, nanogenerators and photovoltaic devices, are designed to store and provide power to other electric components. The development of ultra-compliant power suppliers is crucial for seamless integration of future wearable and implantable biomedical systems for long-term health monitoring.23 The design of gold-based wearable elastronics requires a stretchable, lightweight, biocompatible, and continuous power-source device. In this section, the recent development of gold-based soft energy devices will be introduced.102,186,211,222 We will mainly focus on the performance, stretching reliability, long-term stability, and wearability of the gold-based energy devices.
Our group reported self-assembled monolayer gold nanowire-based transparent and stretchable electrodes of only 8 nm thickness. The resultant AuNW film could be used as an intrinsically stretchable electrode for transparent and wearable supercapacitors.102,223 The entire device showed a high transparency of 79% at the wavelength of 550 nm (Fig. 37a), and could be stretched up to 30% strain without degradation over 80 stretching cycles (Fig. 37b and c).102 However, the specific capacitance of such a gold nanowire based supercapacitor is relatively low (226.8 μF cm−2), restricting its future application as a power source of wearable elastronics. To improve the specific capacitance of the supercapacitor, gold is composited with carbon-based materials for the construction of both stretchable and efficient energy storage devices. As shown in Fig. 37d, Zhonglin Wang's group reported a kirigami paper based supercapacitor (KP-SC) based on gold electrodes with graphite deposition.186 The stretchability of the supercapacitor can be up to 215% when the kirigami geometric unit number reaches 12. Fig. 37e shows that the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of KP-SC are almost unchanged under continuous mechanical tensile strains from 0 to 100% at a scanning rate of 50 mV s−1, which proves that the performance of KP-SC is quite stable under dynamic deformation. The mass and surface capacitance of KP-SC are about ∼12 F g−1 and ∼1 mF cm−2 at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1, respectively (Fig. 37f), making it promising as an energy supplier for wearable and implantable electronics. Such KP-SC units can also be connected in series, providing a tunable operating voltage for driving various types of flexible electronics.186
 Fig. 37  Gold nanomaterial based soft energy devices. (a) A photo of an ultrathin AuNW based transparent stretchable supercapacitor. (b) CV curves of the device at 0% and 30% strain. (c) CV curves of the device at different scanning cycles. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) A photo of a gold based kirigami supercapacitor under stretching. (e) CV curves of the device (6 units) under mechanical strain in the range of 0–100%. The inset shows the photos of the device at 0% and 100% strain states. (f) Specific mass and areal capacitance of the supercapacitor under different scanning rates. The inset shows the stability test of the device for 5000 charging/discharging cycles. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society. (g) Schematic illustration of a triboelectric nanogenerator based on the gold nanoflower (AuNF) film. (h) Open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the AuNF TENG with different load resistance. (i) Comparison of output voltages of TENGs with different contact interfaces of flat Au, flat Cu, flat Al, and AuNF. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2013, American Chemistry Society. 
Apart from energy storage devices, stretchable energy conversion devices have the potential to produce a substantial amount of power to meet the typical power consumption of most biomedical devices.224 Gold mainly serves as the electrode material in this type of device. For example, novel gold topological structures have been applied to wearable nanogenerators (NG) to improve their energy conversion efficiency. A triboelectric nanogenerator with an active layer modified by gold nanoparticles was demonstrated with ultrahigh electric output. Activated by ambient mechanical energy such as human footfalls, a NG that is attached on the human palm can generate a maximum short-circuit current of 2 mA, delivering an instantaneous power output of 1.2 W to external load. The power output corresponds to an area power density of 313 W m−2 and a volume power density of 54268 W m−3 at an open-circuit voltage of ∼1200 V. An energy conversion efficiency of 14.9% has been achieved. The strategy of using nanoscale surface modification of gold showed great potential for harvesting large-scale mechanical energy, such as footsteps, rolling wheels, wind power, and ocean waves.211 Similarly, a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) composed of gold nanoflowers (AuNF) is demonstrated with improved output power via the enlargement of the effective surface area (Fig. 37g). Gold nanoflowers with a hierarchical morphology at a micro-to-nano scale were produced by electrodeposition. The maximum power is as high as 540 μW (150 μW cm−2) when the load resistance is 10 MΩ (Fig. 37h), which could turn on more than 70 LEDs directly without any rectifying circuit or storage capacitor. The optimal AuNF nanogenerator showed 1.5 to 2 times better performance than the flat gold electrode and other metals such as copper and aluminium (Fig. 37i).222
6.5 Organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs)
Transistors play a crucial role in serving as active units and driving other electrical components in integrated devices and systems, such as sensors, LEDs, and memories.16,225–227 Organic transistors and their integrated electronics have long been considered as complementary circuits of traditional rigid silicon-based circuits, because of mechanical flexibility, solution-processability, large scalability, and potential biointegration.228–233 Organic transistors can be fabricated on soft plastic substrates under mild conditions via printing or coating, rendering devices mechanically flexible or stretchable, offering great compatibility for being integrated into wearable and implantable electronics.234–236
Organic transistors commonly apply device configurations of thin-film transistors. Typically, an OTFT is composed of three basic components: (1) source/drain (S/D) and gate electrodes; (2) a thin organic semiconductor (OSC) film; and (3) a dielectric layer. The OSC film, separated from the gate electrode by a dielectric layer, serves as a conducting channel between the source and drain electrodes. The density of charge carriers in the OSC channel could be modulated by the voltage applied on the gate electrode.237–239 The S/D electrodes are in direct contact with the OSC film, where the contact resistance will greatly affect the electrical performance of OTFTs. Even though the current research efforts are more endeavoured to improve the channel resistance, the mobility of OTFTs is still not high enough to compete with silicon-based transistors or metal oxide thin-film transistors. The importance of electrode materials will become increasingly critical with the further advances in OSC materials. As discussed earlier, the work function of gold is close to the HOMO levels of pentacene and P3HT, offering a low contact resistance and a favourite interface for hole injection. Also, gold is chemically inert and gold materials are easy to be processed and patterned. Thus, gold is usually applied as the S/D electrode material in p-type OTFTs.
To make soft gold electrodes for stretchable OTFTs, structural and material engineering strategies are often employed. The current approaches of making gold contacts in stretchable OTFTs can be divided into three categories: (1) network structures; (2) buckling structures; and (3) intrinsic stretchable structures.

6.5.1 Stretchable OTFTs using network structures. 
It is an effective way to position rigid island structures in a mesh network to render the OTFE devices stretchable, as the islands will sustain much smaller strain than the applied external strain. Its feasibility has been demonstrated for more than a decade, where a sensor skin with an OTFT active matrix fabricated on inherently unstretchable polymers, such as polyimide (PI) and poly(ethylenenaphthalate) (PEN), was structured into a net-shape that can be conformably attached to three-dimensional (3D) surfaces.70Fig. 38a shows the overall layout of the device network of sensors and transistors under strain, and Fig. 38b shows an individual organic transistor with gold S/D electrodes.70 Because the transistor units are located at the centre of the intersections of the network with a much smaller area, the strains induced in the transistors can be greatly reduced. As a result, the device networks can be stretched up to 25% without losing electrical conductivity. The network structure is fairly robust. After a thin gold layer of 100 nm is deposited onto the network structure, the device is tested by stretching and relaxing cycles. No significant device degradation was observed after 2000 testing cycles at 20% strain (Fig. 38c).70
 Fig. 38  Stretchable OTFTs using network structures. (a) Digital photos of a sensor matrix network being stretched (upper). The lower image shows a magnified photo of the networks. (b) Optical image of an individual organic transistor. Scale bar: 1 mm. (c) Resistance changes of the network structure coated with a gold layer under 20% strain for 2000 testing cycles. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2005, National Academy of Sciences. (d) Schematic of OTFTs fabricated on PUA networks. The inset shows a photo of the network attached on a hemispherical surface. (e) Transfer characteristics of the OTFT on the PUA network. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015,240 Wiley-VCH. (f) Photo of a stretchable OTFT active matrix with printed elastic conductor wirings under 60% strain. Scale bar: 2 cm. (g) Photo of the stretchable OTFT cells. Scale bar: 5 mm. (h) Transfer characteristics of the OTFT under different strain. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Polymeric networks are another key aspect in order to build stretchable and patchable OTFTs and circuits. A photocurable polyurethaneacrylate (PUA) network can be prepared with dimensions readily tunable via a photolithography process.240 The PUA network contains intersection plates and spring-shaped bridges, offering a highly stretchable and mechanically robust substrate. OTFT devices, with Al as the bottom gate, Au as the S/D electrodes and pentacene as the active layer, are located on the intersection plates of the network (Fig. 38d).240 The soft and robust, serpentine structured PUA network can be attached on a plastic hemispherical surface. The spring-shaped bridges can relieve external strain applied to such PUA networks, enabling the maintenance of electrical performance of OTFTs under bending or stretching. On a planar surface under 0% strain, the OTFTs on the PUA network provide an average saturation mobility of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, an on/off ratio of 5 × 104, and a threshold voltage (Vth) of −20 V. Even under 70% lateral strain, little change in mobility (<4.5% decrease) is achieved. The strained devices show an average saturation mobility of 0.092 cm2 V−1 s−1, an on/off ratio of 3 × 104, and a threshold voltage (Vth) of −25 V, when attached on a hemispherical shape (Fig. 38e).240
Indeed, the network design strategy is compatible with printed electronics for building large-area stretchable OTFT circuits. A stretchable organic transistor active matrix (Fig. 38f), with Au S/D electrodes and dinaphtho[2,3-b:2′,3′-f]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DNTT) active layer, has been demonstrated with printed electrodes.241 The schematic of the device structure and the real-world appearance of an individual transistor are presented in Fig. 38g.241 OTFT cells are fabricated on relatively rigid polyimide (PI) islands, and the electrodes are connected with printed stretchable conductors. The whole matrix is embedded in a PDMS film. When being stretched, the OTFT cells on PI islands suffer very little strain compared with the printed elastic conductor wiring, while the latter showed a high conductivity of 182 S cm−1 even at large strain (215%). Such a rigid island design renders the OTFT matrix highly stretchable with significant deterioration of device performance. The transistor holds a high mobility of 1.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is stable up to 130% strain (Fig. 38h).241


6.5.2 Stretchable OTFTs via mechanical buckling. 
Compared with rigid/soft hybrid structures that require complicated fabrication processes, mechanical buckling represents a more simple and effective alternative. The feasibility of achieving stretchability via controllable mechanical buckling has been successfully demonstrated in many stretchable electronics ranging from conductors, solar cells, and supercapacitors. The buckling strategy with strain relief features works for both inorganic and organic materials, such as metals, CNTs, and OSC films, making it an excellent method for constructing stretchable OTFTs. Typically, the as-fabricated devices are firstly attached to thin pre-stretched elastomer substrates under a certain strain for achieving desired buckling features. When the pre-strain is released, periodical waving microstructures can be generated due to the mechanical mismatch between thin-film devices (with high Young's modulus) and underlying elastomers (with low Young's modulus). Generally, the fabrication flow contains three processes: (i) pre-stretch and fasten a flat elastomeric substrate, like PDMS, Ecoflex, etc.; (ii) attach thin-film devices on the prestretched substrate; and (iii) release the pre-strain to obtain sinusoidal buckling structures.
However, small molecular OSCs are easily fractured when suffering compressive stresses during the relaxing of pre-strain. To overcome the issue, an alternative buckling strategy is developed with topographically complex substrates with conformal deposition.242 A schematic of the fabrication procedure is shown in Fig. 39a. Briefly, a barrier layer of SiO was thermally evaporated on the pre-stretched PDMS substrate. After releasing the prestrain, buckling microstructures are formed on the SiO/PDMS film. Different from the conventional approach of attaching fabricated devices onto a pre-stretched elastomer, OTFT device layers, including gold electrodes, dielectric (parylene), and active layer (pentacene), are directly deposited on the buckled substrates via conformal coating. Devices with two different configurations, parallel and perpendicular, are fabricated to investigate the electrical performance under strain, where the parallel configuration indicates that the orientation of S/D electrodes is parallel to the buckling features, and the perpendicular configuration means that the orientation of S/D electrodes is perpendicular to grooves (Fig. 39b). The as-fabricated OTFTs showed an initial saturation mobility of 0.10 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.064 cm2 V−1 s−1 in parallel and perpendicular configurations, respectively. Interestingly, the devices could survive up to 12% strain in both perpendicular and parallel configurations, which is higher than the applied pre-strain (9%), because the bucking structures could accommodate applied strains and protect device layers from damage caused by mechanical deformation. At 12% strain, the devices showed adequate performance with a mobility of 0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 in parallel and perpendicular configurations (Fig. 39c and d).242 In comparison, devices fabricated on flat PDMS without pre-strain showed an initial saturation mobility of 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1, which decreased to 0.006 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 6% strain. The huge difference in device performance proves the feasibility of applying buckling structures to preserve device performance under strain.
 Fig. 39  Stretchable OTFTs via the mechanical buckling strategy. (a) Schematic of fabricating stretchable OTFTs with wavy structures. (i) Pre-stretch PDMS to 9% strain; (ii) deposit 100 nm SiO films; (iii) release the pre-strain to induce wavy structures; (iv) directly deposit OTFT device layers onto the waved PDMS substrate. (b) OTFTs fabricated on the waved PDMS substrate with two configurations: parallel (up, ‖) and perpendicular (down, ⊥). Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of fabricating stretchable ultrathin OTFTs with the pre-strain method. (f) The electrical performance of the device as a function of applied strain. Red circles: on current, green diamonds: mobility, blue triangles: threshold voltage. The inset shows a photo of the transistor in stretched (left) and compressed (right) states. (g) Performance of OTFTs under biaxial stretching. The inset shows a photo of the transistor at relaxed (left) and compressed (right) states. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Higher stretchability can be further achieved by fabricating OTFTs on ultra-thin polymer substrates, making the whole device ultralightweight with a few micrometers thick.243 By encapsulating the electronic layers at the neutral plane of the whole film, the device can be bent to a small radius of 5 μm without significant degradation in electrical performance.244 The ultra-thin devices can be attached conformably onto a pre-stretched elastomer substrate. After relaxing the pre-strain, buckling structures can be generated to adapt the compression strain transferred from the elastomer, enabling the stretchability of the devices along the pre-straining orientations (Fig. 39e). Because the devices are located at the neutral-plane, the transistors show no performance degradation even at 233% strain. The on-current, mobility and threshold voltage of the device as a function of applied strain are presented in Fig. 39f, showing no irreversible performance degradation over the entire strain regime (0% to 233%). Moreover, biaxial stretchability can be achieved by applying biaxially pre-stretched elastomers as substrates. As illustrated in the inset of Fig. 39g, random wrinkled structures formed after releasing the pre-strain. The device showed stable electrical performance even when the device area was decreased to 65% of initial area (Fig. 39g).244 Also the devices showed good stability with only 4% change in electrical performance after 200 compression/stretching cycles. Note that the fabrication procedure is compatible to conventional manufacturing of organic electronics; hence, it may represent a general method to achieve stretchable OTFTs.


6.5.3 Intrinsically stretchable OTFTs. 
Although several stretchable OTFTs with gold film electrodes via structural design have been demonstrated, intrinsically stretchable devices may be more favourable because of high durability, strain tolerance, and facile fabrication.245 However, the development of intrinsically stretchable OTFTs is still at the early stage. Carbon based materials, especially CNTs, are more widely applied as electrodes to construct intrinsically stretchable OTFTs.245–247 Compared with carbon materials, gold has higher conductivity and a low hole injection barrier with p-type semiconductors. However, intrinsically stretchable OTFTs with gold electrodes are rare.116 The challenge is that each component of the device, including electrodes, dielectric and active layer, should maintain its performance under strain.
By employing stretchable self-assembled gold nanosheet conductors and P3HT fibres, an intrinsically stretchable OTFT was developed on stretchable poly(styrene-b-butadiene-b-styrene) (SBS) nanofiber substrates.248 The device structure, consisting of gold nanosheet electrodes, P3HT fibre active layer, and ion gel dielectric, is illustrated in Fig. 40a. All the components of the device are stretchable. The SBS fibre substrate of ∼500 μm thickness was fabricated by electrospinning, which is elastic up to 40% strain. The stretchable electrodes were fabricated by transferring the gold nanosheets with PDMS stamps to the SBS substrates. The thickness of electrodes can be controlled by transferring times, being typically ∼80 nm thick after six transferring processes. P3HT fibres are directly electrospun on the gold nanosheet electrodes. An optical image of the gold nanosheet patterns with P3HT fibres is shown in Fig. 40b.248 A stretchable ion gel fabricated by incorporating an ionic liquid into a UV-crosslinked polymer matrix is applied as the gate dielectric.249,250 Because the ion gel can interpenetrate into the SBS substrates, high mechanical stability is achieved. An array of transistor SBS substrates can be stretched uniaxially up to 70% strain without delamination, as shown in the photo in Fig. 40c. The transfer curves of the device at different strain states from 0% to 70% are presented in Fig. 40d, demonstrating typical transfer characteristics at all strain levels. The devices hold an average on-current of 2 ± 0.46 mA at initial states (0% strain), showing an ultrahigh mobility of 22 ± 0.71 cm2 V−1 s−1. The devices showed a high mobility of 16 cm2 V−1 s−1 even at 70% strain. Moreover, the high electrical performance of the devices is stable over 1500 stretching/relaxing cycles.248
 Fig. 40  Intrinsically stretchable OTFTs with gold nanomaterials as electrodes. (a) Schematic of the device structure. (b) Optical image of P3HT fibres electrospun on gold nanosheet electrode arrays. (c) Photos of a device array at initial (up) and 70% strain states (down). (d) Transfer characteristics of the device at different strain from 0% to 70%. Reproduced with permission.248 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) A photo of stretchable patterned vertical AuNW electrodes with transferred P3HT film. (f) Optical images of the AuNW electrodes with P3HT film at initial (0% strain, left) and stretched states (100% strain, right). (g) Photos of the vertical AuNW based transistor with ion gel dielectric at 0% (up) and 100% strain (down). (h) Transfer characteristics of the vertical AuNW based transistor at different strain. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, patterned AuNW electrodes have been applied as S/D electrodes in intrinsically stretchable organic transistors.134 The electrodes were prepared by embedding patterned vertically grown AuNWs into PDMS films. The channel material of the P3HT film was attached onto the AuNW electrodes via a transferring process (Fig. 40e), showing ohmic contact in a wide strain range from 0 to 100% strain.134 The P3HT film holds seamless contact with the vertical AuNW electrodes, and no delamination was observed under strain (Fig. 40f). Also, a stretchable UV-crosslinked ion gel was applied as dielectric to construct a stretchable organic transistor (Fig. 40g). The whole device could be stretched up to 100% strain without serious degradation in electrical performance (Fig. 40h).134

6.6 Gold nanostructures for stretchable memory devices
Memory devices play key roles in the state-of-the-art electronic circuits and systems. Future elastronics systems will not only require various kinds of sensors to acquire electrical signals, but also need memory devices to store such information for further processing. Thus, it is essential to have stretchable memory devices integrated seamlessly in elastronics systems for information storage, which are important for health monitoring and biomedical applications.
Gold nanomaterials are widely used in memory devices. For example, gold electrodes are usually applied as contact electrodes in transistor based floating gate memories. And gold is widely as the counter electrode in a memristive cell due to its electrochemical inertness. Also, gold nanostructures are commonly used as floating gates for charge storage. More significantly, the facile fabrication of stretchable gold materials provides versatile choices for developing gold based stretchable memory devices. Based on different morphology and functionality, we divide the gold based stretchable memories into two categories, (1) structural gold electrodes and (2) gold nanoparticles. In the former case, gold materials are applied as contact electrodes in stretchable memories, while in the latter case, gold nanostructures serve as charge storage layers.

6.6.1 Structural gold electrodes in memory devices. 
Memristive devices are promising for constructing next-generation nonvolatile data storage devices with high density, outstanding scalability, low cost and high electrical performance.251–254 A typical cell has a two-terminal metal–insulator–metal (MIM) configuration, making it simple to fabricate and integrate memristive devices on flexible substrates.255–259 The resistive switching behaviours of a memory cell can be mostly attributed to the electron hopping and the formation/rupture of conductive filaments in the MIM structure, leading to low resistance state (LRS) and high resistance state (HRS). Information could be stored and operated in a memristive device by electrically switching between the two different resistance states, corresponding to different ON and OFF states.
Even though many flexible memristive devices have been reported, the development of stretchable memories is still at the early stage. One of the primary challenges lies in the poor mechanical stretchability of the brittle resistive switching materials, rendering it impossible for them to accommodate large mechanical deformations. To address this issue, mechanical hybrid structures composed of rigid islands and a soft elastomer substrate are developed.260–262 As illustrated in Fig. 41a, the hybrid substrate is formed by embedding rigid SU-8 patterns in the PDMS substrates.260 The fabrication process is compatible with the conventional photolithography process. A photo of the patterned hybrid substrate is illustrated in Fig. 41b. According to finite element modelling (FEM) analysis, the maximum strain on the SU-8 islands is <0.1% when the whole substrate is stretched to 50% uniaxial strain. Thus, memory cells with rigid resistive switching layers can be fabricated on top of the rigid SU-8 islands, without being damaged under strain. A memory cell with rigid zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) sandwiched between Ag top and Au bottom electrodes is fabricated to demonstrate the feasibility. To obtain memory arrays, stretchable microcracked gold films are deposited on the PDMS substrate as the bottom electrodes to connect each SU-8 island. The microcracks and transverse wrinkled structures formed on the gold film under strain can help in releasing the strain energy, making it highly stretchable with a maximum stretchability of 50% (Fig. 41c). The memory device on the hybrid substrate showed typical HRS and LRS of 2.1 × 1010 Ω and 1 × 103 Ω, respectively, with a large OFF/ON ratio of >107. The hybrid substrate made the device maintain good electrical performance at applied strains up to 50%, showing no obvious device degradation (Fig. 41d).260 The slight increase in LRS with applied strain may have resulted from the decrease in the conductivity of the microcracked gold electrodes. The stretchable memory devices fabricated on the hybrid substrate provide an effective designing route for integrating memory modules into future elastronics systems.
 Fig. 41  Structural gold electrodes in memory devices. (a) A schematic of stretchable memory devices on soft/rigid hybrid substrates. The right side shows a FEM analysis of a rigid island under 50% strain. (b) A photo of the patterned hybrid substrate with SU-8 rigid islands embedded in the PDMS matrix. (c) A SEM image of gold deposited on PDMS under 50% strain. (d) High and low resistance states of the stretchable memory device on a hybrid substrate as a function of strain. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) Photos and electrical switching curves of a stretchable organic memory at 10% (e) and 50% (f) strain. Modified with permission.263 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photos and optical images of a two-terminal floating-gate memory on the PI/PDMS substrate at 0% (up) and 20% strain (down). (h) I–V curves of the memory device at different strain states (0–50%). Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to the rigid/soft hybrid design, soft memory devices with buckling structures have also been reported. A stretchable write-once-read-many-times (WORM) memory is developed with gold as the bottom contact, Al/graphene as the top/bottom electrode, and a mixed switching layer of P3HT:PMMA.263 The device is fabricated on a pre-stretched (50%) PDMS substrate. After releasing the pre-strain, buckling structures formed on the films. The memory device showed a high ON/OFF ratio of 105, with retention over 104 s. As illustrated in Fig. 41e and f, after releasing the pre-strain, the device showed similar WORM behaviours under re-stretching from 10% (e) to 50% (f) strains. Also, the device maintained original switching performance after 500 stretching cycles of 30%, showing good endurance performance. The success of the stretchable WORM memory based on the pre-stretch method further demonstrates the feasibility of buckling design for stretchable memory devices.263
An alternate technique to develop stretchable memory devices is to fabricate two-terminal devices with planer configurations instead of the vertically aligned MIM structure. A two-terminal floating-gate memory device was developed based on a MoS2/hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)/graphene heterostructure, with Cr/Au electrodes contacting a monolayer MoS2 channel.264 A 10 nm thick h-BN layer was applied as the dielectric and graphene served as a floating gate. With the applied programme or erase voltages, charges can tunnel through the h-BN layer and be stored in and repelled out of the graphene gate. After programming with a voltage sweep from 0 to 8 V, the device could be switched from HRS to LRS. It can be switched back to HRS with a voltage sweep from 0 to −8 V. The device holds a low off-current of 10−14 A and a high ON/OFF ratio of 104. Moreover, the whole device can be transferred to a stretchable PI/PDMS substrate. The stretchable memory device holds an ON/OFF ratio of 103 at 0% strain, where the decrease could be attributed to the mechanical degradation of contacts between each device layer during the transferring process. The photos and optical images of the stretchable device at 0% and 20% strains are shown in Fig. 41g. The device showed an electrical stretchability up to 19% strain without performance degradation (Fig. 41h).264 The good stretchability could be attributed to ultrathin device layers, where the thicknesses of all components are in the nanometre regime. Such a 2-terminal device design based on ultrathin 2D materials is appealing for constructing next-generation soft and conformal memory devices.


6.6.2 Gold nanoparticle based active layers in memory devices. 
Integrated wearable electronic systems capable of health monitoring, signal transducing, biomedical therapy and data storage are promising platforms for constructing future consumer electronics and personalized healthcare. Wearable memory devices for data storage and access are important components in the future integrated systems. Although structured gold films have been applied in stretchable memory devices, mostly in resistive switching memory, the stretchability remained limited preventing their further integration into conformal bioelectronics for conformal contact with soft bio-interfaces like skin and organs.
Self-assembled gold nanoparticles have become an excellent material candidate for constructing highly stretchable memory devices. Large-area, dense and uniform monolayers and multilayers of AuNPs can be obtained via self-assembly, which are favourable for active memory layers providing highly reliable performance with low device-to-device variance. Also, self-assembled monolayer AuNP films can be incorporated in metal oxide films such as TiO2 with a few nanometres thick to serve as the active layer in memory devices.115 The memory performance can be readily adjusted by the diameters of AuNPs and layers of self-assembly. The AuNP based memory device can also be integrated with other elements like sensors to store electrical signals. A photo of an integrated wearable system is shown in Fig. 42a, which is composed of memory, strain sensor and drug delivery modules.115 The memory cell is fabricated by sandwiching a TiO2 nanomembrane embedded with assembled AuNP films between two Al electrodes. The memory cell is further located at the neutral mechanical plane by sandwiching it between two thin PI films to minimize bending-induced strains. Compared with a TiO2 memory cell without AuNPs, the AuNPs/TiO2 based cell shows almost one order lower set/reset currents, indicating the significance of the AuNP layer in reducing power consumption. As shown in Fig. 42b, the memory device can be stretched up to 25% strain, which is comparable to the stretchability of human epidermis (∼20%). The resistance switching performance at different strains of the device is presented in Fig. 42c.115 The memory device maintained stable switching behaviours from 3% to 25% strain (Fig. 42d), compatible with strain sensors for recording stretching signals. After being attached to skin, the memory arrays can deform conformally with bending and twisting actions. The results indicate that integration of AuNPs and oxide nanomembranes represents a promising strategy to design high performance stretchable memory devices.
 Fig. 42  Gold nanoparticle based active layers in memory devices. (a) A photo of a wearable memory array with a resistance switching layer of AuNPs embedded in TiO2. (b) An optical image of a stretchable memory device at 0% and 25% strain. (c) Resistive switching behaviours of the stretchable memory at different strains. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) A photo of an AuNP based floating-gate memory array. (e) Schematic illustration of the structure of an individual AuNP based floating-gate memory cell. (f) Photos of an integrated wearable system composed of memory arrays, amplifiers and ECG electrodes attached on human skin (left) and being stretched (right). (g) Transfer characteristics of the AuNW based floating-gate memory device at different strain states (0–20%). (h) Memory performance of the device with 20% strain at different testing cycles. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, AAAS. 
In addition to the resistive switching memory, the transistor based floating-gate memory is more appealing in constructing an active memory matrix. A typical floating gate transistor memory cell contains charge trapping/storage layers to trap electrons.265 By programming or erasing the electrons in the floating gate, different memory states of “0” or “1” could be achieved, respectively.266 Gold nanoparticles have been widely used as the floating gate in organic transistor memories due to their long retention time, high chemical stability and high charge confinement efficiency.267–269 A thin layer of AuNPs could be readily obtained by thermal deposition of ∼1.5 nm Au at a slow rate.270 However, it is a challenge to rationally integrate closely packed AuNP monolayers in stretchable floating-gate memory devices. Recently, a wearable Si transistor floating-gate array has been developed with the AuNP monolayer as the floating gate, which is fabricated via a LB method with high particle density (∼7100 AuNPs μm−2). The memory cells are located at the PI islands, suffering only ∼0.2% strain when ∼20% strain was applied to the whole device, where most of the strain can be accommodated by the serpentine interconnects. A representative memory cell is shown in Fig. 42d.114 The AuNP monolayer floating gate is sandwiched between two oxide dielectric layers, as illustrated in Fig. 42e. Due to the ultrathin nature (∼5 μm think) in conjunction with serpentine structures, the array can be attached on skin conformally even in stretching states (Fig. 42f). The AuNP floating gate based memory shows large memory windows and low device-to-device variance due to the uniform large-area self-assembly of AuNPs. The floating-gate memory demonstrates high stretchability up to 20%, without change in programme/erase performance (Fig. 42g). Moreover, the device showed negligible performance degradation even after 1200 stretching/relaxing cycles at 20% strain (Fig. 42h), indicating high durability for long-time data storage for applications in wearable systems.114

7. Conclusion and outlook
Apart from traditional applications of gold in jewellery or medals to bullion, bulk gold has also been widely used in the modern electronics industry due to its excellent optical, electrical, chemical and mechanical properties. In academia, nanophased gold is also an important class of building blocks in nanoscience and nanotechnology,271 due to its unconventional properties such as size- and shape-dependant plasmonics, quantum confinement, chemical reactivity, catalysis and photothermal effect. This has led to a myriad of technical applications in sensing,44 catalysis,272 encryption,273 drug delivery and nanophotonics.274
Recently, bulk gold and nanophased gold have been actively utilized in the emerging field of elastronics which may be the ultimate version of electronics after evolution from rigid to flexible paradigm shift. In elastronics, it is required to maintain outstanding properties of gold under various deformations, which is not a trivial task considering the rigid nature of inorganic gold. In this review, we systematically summarize the recent progress in how to design “soft” gold materials and structures for fabricating various elastronic devices including sensors, energy devices, transistors and memory devices. The excellent biocompatibility of gold materials indicates that it is possible to directly design stretchable gold on skin,37 indicating the potential to generate golden tattoos that simultaneously act as functional electronic devices beyond traditional aesthetic purposes.
The exciting progress made to date indicates that gold will continue to play key roles in future elastronics, yet with many opportunities and challenges ahead. From the fabrication standpoint, extrinsic stretchability (i.e. structural design) and intrinsic stretchability (i.e. nanomaterial-based design) or their combination may remain as viable strategies to realise stretchability for elastronics. The extrinsic design usually needs top-down photolithography to generate stretchable serpentine-like gold networks in a series of processing steps. Scalability and cost may be the limiting factors for some applications. In contrast, bottom-up synthesis of gold nanomaterials is a solution-based low-cost process. But gold nanomaterials usually suffer from low conductivity due to the presence of organic capping agents, which hinder the efficient electron transport. The post-annealing or sintering steps may be used to improve the conductivity but at the cost of destroying the initial nanostructures which often reduces mechanical stretchability. In addition, it is also non-trivial to achieve well-defined patterned bottom-up self-assembled structures with high resolution. In future, a powerful combined top-down and bottom-up strategy may be needed to overcome the existing limitations. Besides fabrication, it is highly challenging to seamlessly integrate the elastronics system with living organisms so that it becomes part of organs/tissues/cells in an imperceptible and invisible manner. The current success in skin-like or tattoo-like electronics remains limited to one or a few components achieved in the lab environments, and it remains a great challenge to achieve true epidermal elastronics at the system level in the real world. Apart from the above, biological compatibility of current elastronics in physiological conditions for a long term remains underexplored.
The answers to the above challenges may need materials innovation which is often the key to true breakthrough technologies. Advances in gold nanochemistry certainly open many potential opportunities for future elastronics. Spatially confined growth in conjunction with ligand-directed crystal-phase engineering has led to rich toolkits of various gold nanomaterials with accurate size and shape control.2–4,275 As for elastronic sensors and transistors, 1D gold nanostructures may be prime candidates.22 Some recent new building blocks such as gold nanohelix103 and vertically aligned AuNWs100 may offer new opportunities. Very recently, Janus properties have been observed in anisotropically grown vertical AuNW films due to the unique enokitake-like morphology.123 Combined with the patterning technique, vertical AuNW arrays with high conductivity may provide an excellent electrode candidate for stretchable organic electronics and electrochemical sensors. In addition, localized surface plasmon resonance properties of gold nanomaterials may also offer novel opportunities for future elastronics. Soft ligand-based 2D ordered gold nanocrystal assemblies (termed plasmene nanosheets) are bendable and stretchable to some degree,110,276 which may lead to novel stretchable plasmonic devices,277–280 and even 3D stretchable origami.281,282 All of these promising opportunities provided by gold will continuously contribute to the design and fabrication of future elastronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Australian Research Council (ARC)'s Discovery projects funding scheme (DP180101715 and LP160100521). B. Z. thanks ARC for the financial support of Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA, DE170101452). This work was performed in part at the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication (MCN) in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF).
Notes and references
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, M. J. Campolongo, D. Luo and W. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Macfarlane, M. N. O'Brien, S. H. Petrosko and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero-Martínez, M. Grzelczak and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3655 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Arvizo, S. Bhattacharyya, R. A. Kudgus, K. Giri, R. Bhattacharya and P. Mukherjee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2943 RSC .
E. C. Dreaden, A. M. Alkilany, X. Huang, C. J. Murphy and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2740 RSC .
D. H. Brown and W. E. Smith, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1980, 9, 217 RSC .
S. P. Pricker, Gold Bull., 1996, 29, 53 CrossRef .
D. E. Furst, Pharmacotherapy, 1983, 3, 284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Li, Z. Hu, Y. Ji, X. Wu and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Kennedy, L. R. Bickford, N. A. Lewinski, A. J. Coughlin, Y. Hu, E. S. Day, J. L. West and R. A. Drezek, Small, 2011, 7, 169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wagner and S. Bauer, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 207 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, R. Yerushalmi, K. Takei, A. C. Ford, Y.-L. Chueh and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3730 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, J. Liu and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Jia, K. E. Mathewson, K.-I. Jang, J. Kim, H. Fu, X. Huang, P. Chava, R. Wang, S. Bhole, L. Wang, Y. J. Na, Y. Guan, M. Flavin, Z. Han, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2014, 344, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Y. Hao, Y. Li, H. Hu, C. Wang, A. Nomoto, T. Pan, Y. Gu, Y. Chen, T. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Lei, N. Kim, C. Wang, L. Zhang, J. W. Ward, A. Maralani, X. Li, M. F. Durstock, A. Pisano, Y. Lin and S. Xu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 473 CrossRef .
S. Choi, H. Lee, R. Ghaffari, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 226 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, S. Fang, F. A. Moura, J. N. Ding, N. Jiang, J. Di, M. Zhang, X. Lepró, D. S. Galvão, C. S. Haines, N. Y. Yuan, S. G. Yin, D. W. Lee, R. Wang, H. Y. Wang, W. Lv, C. Dong, R. C. Zhang, M. J. Chen, Q. Yin, Y. T. Chong, R. Zhang, X. Wang, M. D. Lima, R. Ovalle-Robles, D. Qian, H. Lu and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2015, 349, 400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600314 CrossRef .
S. Gong and W. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700648 CrossRef .
B. Siegfried, B. G. Simona, G. Ingrid, K. Martin, K. Christoph and S. Reinhard, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 149 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, H. Joo, M. S. Raj, R. Ghaffari and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700053 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Ma and Y. Hao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600709 CrossRef .
D. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Lu, Z. Ma, C. Xie and Z. Zheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4611 RSC .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238 CrossRef CAS .
P. Neogrády, V. Kellö, M. Urban and A. J. Sadlej, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1997, 63, 557 CrossRef .
H. Schmidbaur, S. Cronje, B. Djordjevic and O. Schuster, Chem. Phys., 2005, 311, 151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, M. K. Choi, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 1006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, R. Ghaffari, L. B. Baker and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar3921 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Rapson, Contact Dermatitis., 1985, 13, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao and A. Islam, Science, 2011, 333, 838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y.-S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyamoto, S. Lee, N. F. Cooray, S. Lee, M. Mori, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jin, L. Yoda, T. Yokota, A. Itoh, M. Sekino, H. Kawasaki, T. Ebihara, M. Amagai and T. Someya, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, S. I. Han, D. Jung, H. J. Hwang, C. Lim, S. Bae, O. K. Park, C. M. Tschabrunn, M. Lee, S. Y. Bae, J. W. Yu, J. H. Ryu, S.-W. Lee, K. Park, P. M. Kang, W. B. Lee, R. Nezafat, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. Inoue, D. Kim, A. Reuveny, K. Kuribara, T. Yokota, J. Reeder, M. Sekino, T. Sekitani, Y. Abe and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Cobley, J. Chen, E. C. Cho, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 44 RSC .
J. Du, L. Jiang, Q. Shao, X. Liu, R. S. Marks, J. Ma and X. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, B. Zhu, X. Peng and X. Chen, Small, 2014, 10, 3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saha, S. S. Agasti, C. Kim, X. Li and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chandrasekaran, A. S. W. Lee, L. W. Yap, D. A. Jans, K. M. Wagstaff and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 187 RSC .
W. Cheng, S. Dong and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kahn, N. Koch and W. Gao, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 19, 1946 CrossRef .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, C. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5211 RSC .
H. Dong, X. Fu, J. Liu, Z. Wang and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, X. Zhang, L. Xie, D. Qi, B. K. Chandran, X. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Yu, M. D. Regulacio, E. Ye and M.-Y. Han, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6006 RSC .
Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, Z. Yan, Q. Ma, X. Li, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17019 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mijatovic, J. C. T. Eijkel and A. van den Berg, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 492 RSC .
W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Sun, C. Nowak, A. Kibrom, C. Zou, J. Ma, H. Fuchs, S. Li, L. Chi and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, Z. Huang, Z. Suo, S. P. Lacour and S. Wagner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3435 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bowden, S. Brittain, A. G. Evans, J. W. Hutchinson and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 1998, 393, 146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mei, R. Huang, J. Y. Chung, C. M. Stafford and H.-H. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 151902 CrossRef .
P. Görrn, W. Cao and S. Wagner, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7177 RSC .
S. P. Lacour, S. Wagner, Z. Huang and Z. Suo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2404 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Lacour, D. Chan, S. Wagner, T. Li and Z. Suo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 204103 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, M. Yu, J. Lv, Y. Li and Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, D. Qi, G. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, Y. Luo, X. J. Loh, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704229 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhu, H. Wang, W. Leow, Y. Cai, X. Loh, M. Han and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, N. Matsuhisa, Z. Liu, D. Qi, P. Cai, Y. Jiang, C. Wan, Y. Cui, W. R. Leow, Z. Liu, S. Gong, K. Q. Zhang, Y. Cheng and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800129 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi, Y. Murase, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 12321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mertens, R. W. Bowman, J. C. W. Willis, A. Robinson, D. Cotton, R. White, K. A. Seffen and J. J. Baumberg, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 044006 CrossRef .
T. Q. Trung and N.-E. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2202 RSC .
K. J. Seo, X. Han, Y. Qiang, X. Zhao, Y. Zhong, Z. Shi and H. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 263101 CrossRef .
H. Y. Jang, S.-K. Lee, S. H. Cho, J.-H. Ahn and S. Park, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3535 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Guo, Q. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Z. Suo, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Seo, Y. Qiang, I. Bilgin, S. Kar, C. Vinegoni, R. Weissleder and H. Fang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiang, K. J. Seo, X. Zhao, P. Artoni, N. H. Golshan, S. Culaclii, P.-M. Wang, W. Liu, K. S. Ziemer, M. Fagiolini and H. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704117 CrossRef .
Y. Qiang, P. Artoni, K. J. Seo, S. Culaclii, V. Hogan, X. Zhao, Y. Zhong, X. Han, P.-M. Wang, Y.-K. Lo, Y. Li, H. A. Patel, Y. Huang, A. Sambangi, J. S. V. Chu, W. Liu, M. Fagiolini and H. Fang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0626 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. Guo, T. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Suo and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3121 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lee, D. Kim, N. Matsuhisa, M. Nagase, M. Sekino, G. G. Malliaras, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, W. R. Leow, B. Zhu, H. Yang, J. Yu, W. Wang, H. Wang, S. Yin and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602802 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, W. R. Leow, M. Pal, S. Pan, H. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Yu, B. Li, Z. Yu, W. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702800 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, M. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Lv, Y. Li, J. Wei, B. Liedberg, Z. Yu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, M. J. Campolongo, S. J. Tan and D. Luo, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, J. Perez-Juste, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1783 RSC .
N. T. K. Thanh, N. Maclean and S. Mahiddine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, Z. Sun, Y. Li, Z. Pan, H. Wei, Y. Xie, M. Nomura, Y. Niwa, W. Yan, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, Q. Liu and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wiley, Y. Sun, J. Chen, H. Cang, Z.-Y. Li, X. Li and Y. Xia, MRS Bull., 2011, 30, 356 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Polte, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 6809 RSC .
Y. Tang and W. Cheng, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, B. Zhu, W. R. Leow, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, X. Peng and X. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 4104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, B. Zhu and X. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 4104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Jye, S. Debabrata, Y. L. Wei, F. J. K. Keong, G. Pengzhen, S. Qianqian, P. Malin and C. Wenlong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1710 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Wu, J.-F. Li, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1025 RSC .
Z. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Han, M. Bosman, Q. Wang, Y. Zhu, Q. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zeng, J. Wu, W. Shi, S. Li, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Tang, C. Liow, J. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, Z. Dong, S. Li, V. P. Dravid and X. Chen, Small, 2013, 9, 705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, D. Sikdar, L. W. Yap, P. Guo, M. Premaratne, X. Li and W. Cheng, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 415 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Wang, Y. Feng, X. Qi, Z. Zeng, Q. Liu, W. S. Teo, C. L. Gan, H. Zhang and H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, Y. Zhao, L. W. Yap, Q. Shi, Y. Wang, J. A. P. B. Bay, D. T. H. Lai, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600121 CrossRef .
S. Gong, Y. Zhao, Q. Shi, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 1298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. He, X. Mu, D. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Shen, M. Lin, C. Kubel, Y. Huang and H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, M. Bosman, X. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Yu, K. P. Ong, Y. A. Akimov, L. Wu, B. Li, J. Wu, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, C. Eng Png, C. Lip Gan, P. Yang and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Park, L. F. Drummy, R. C. Wadams, H. Koerner, D. Nepal, L. Fabris and R. A. Vaia, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 555 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, H. Joo, M. S. Raj, R. Ghaffari and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700053 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Z. Ouyang, M. Gu and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, S. Dong and E. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Si, D. Sikdar, Y. Chen, F. Eftekhari, Z. Xu, Y. Tang, W. Xiong, P. Guo, S. Zhang, Y. Lu, Q. Bao, W. Zhu, M. Premaratne and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Lenhert, M. Hirtz, N. Lu, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, X. Chen, N. Lu and L. Chi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dong, L. W. Yap, D. M. Smilgies, K. J. Si, Q. Shi and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5065 RSC .
J. Kim, D. Son, M. Lee, C. Song, J.-K. Song, J. H. Koo, D. J. Lee, H. J. Shim, J. H. Kim, M. Lee, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501101 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee, S. W. Jun, S. Yang, M. Park, J. Shin, K. Do, M. Lee, K. Kang, C. S. Hwang, N. Lu, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Moon, G. H. Lim, J. H. Song, M. Shin, T. Yu, B. Lim and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, D. T. H. Lai, B. Su, K. J. Si, Z. Ma, L. W. Yap, P. Guo and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400063 CrossRef .
N. N. Jason, W. Shen and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. McDonnell, N. N. Jason, L. Y. Yeo, J. R. Friend, W. Cheng and R. Prabhakar, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 8076 RSC .
S. Gong, D. T. Lai, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, K. J. Si, Q. Shi, N. N. Jason, T. Sridhar, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lyu, X. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Kim, E. K. Tanyi, H. Chi, W. Feng, L. Xu, T. Li, M. A. Noginov, C. Uher, M. D. Hammig and N. A. Kotov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8435 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, J. Zhu, B. Yeom, M. Di Prima, X. Su, J. G. Kim, S. J. Yoo, C. Uher and N. A. Kotov, Nature, 2013, 500, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, E. D. Gómez, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, P. G. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, Y. Ling, Y. Zhao, D. Dong, Q. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 640 RSC .
W. Cheng, M. Steinhart, U. Gösele and R. B. Wehrspohn, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3493 RSC .
X. Wang, C. Liow, A. Bisht, X. Liu, T. C. Sum, X. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Liow, D. Qi, B. Zhu, W. R. Leow, H. Wang, C. Xue, X. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, Y.-M. Hervault, Q. Shao, B. Hu, L. Norel, S. Rigaut and X. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3023 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meng, L. Jiang, K. Zheng, C. F. Goh, S. Lim, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, F. Boey and X. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 3016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Yoo and J. K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1097 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, D. Qi, C. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603382 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lee, C. Bae, J. Lee, S. Lee, S. H. Oh, J. Kim, G. S. Park, H. S. Jung and H. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706261 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. M. Maurer, L. González-García, B. Reiser, I. Kanelidis and T. Kraus, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, S. Gong, F. Lin, Y. Wang, Y. Ling, T. An and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800509 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, S. J. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, D. Dong, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiang, T. Li, Z. Suo and J. J. Vlassak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 161910 CrossRef .
N. Lu, X. Wang, Z. Suo and J. Vlassak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 221909 CrossRef .
J. S. Kong, D. J. Lee and H. D. Kim, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2001, 82, 1677 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amjadi, A. Pichitpajongkit, S. Lee, S. Ryu and I. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Adrega and S. P. Lacour, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 055025 CrossRef .
J. W. Jeong, W. H. Yeo, A. Akhtar, J. J. Norton, Y. J. Kwack, S. Li, S. Y. Jung, Y. Su, W. Lee, J. Xia, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, W. S. Choi, T. Bretl and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lambricht, T. Pardoen and S. Yunus, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 540 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mandlik, S. P. Lacour, J. W. Li, S. Y. Chou and S. Wagner, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2006, 27, 650 Search PubMed .
H. L. Filiatrault, R. S. Carmichael, R. A. Boutette and T. B. Carmichael, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schupbach and R. Glauser, J. Prosthet. Dent., 2007, 97, S15 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Subbaroyan, D. C. Martin and D. R. Kipke, J. Neural Eng., 2005, 2, 103 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. Bechtolsheim, V. Zaporojtchenko and F. Faupel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 151, 119 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Loo, R. L. Willett, K. W. Baldwin and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 562 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Li, R. B. Charters, B. Luther-Davies and L. Mar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 233, 227 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lee, D. R. Kim and X. Zheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 9950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Quast, F. Zhang, M. R. Linford and J. E. Patterson, Appl. Spectrosc., 2011, 65, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. M. Choi, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, J. Song, W. M. Choi, H.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, Y.-W. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 18675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ikjoo, W. C. Anthony and K. Beomjoon, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 085016 CrossRef .
J. Reeder, M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Ware, D. Arreaga-Salas, A. Avendano-Bolivar, T. Yokota, Y. Inoue, M. Sekino, W. Voit and T. Sekitani, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, J. H. Koo, A. Nguyen, J. M. Caves, M. G. Kim, A. Chortos, K. Kim, P. J. Wang, J. B. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Suo, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Li, J. Wu, D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, Y. Su, Z. Kang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, J. Appl. Mech., 2012, 79, 031022 CrossRef .
J. A. Fan, W. H. Yeo, Y. Su, Y. Hattori, W. Lee, S. Y. Jung, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Falgout, M. Bajema, T. Coleman, D. Gregoire, R. J. Larsen, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3266 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Kwak, H.-E. Jeong and K. Y. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, H. Tian, J. Shao, X. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Tian and B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Autumn, Y. A. Liang, S. T. Hsieh, W. Zesch, W. P. Chan, T. W. Kenny, R. Fearing and R. J. Full, Nature, 2000, 405, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, A. A. Zhukov and S. Y. Shapoval, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie and B. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, H. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2009, 27, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, IEEE Trans. Compon. Packaging Manuf. Technol., 2015, 5, 1201 CAS .
O. Graudejus, P. Gorrn and S. Wagner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watanabe, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2005, 16, 744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, H. Jiang and D.-Y. Khang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 2009, 27, L9 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Lacour, S. Wagner and Z. Suo, MRS Online Proc. Libr. Arc., 2003, 795, U6.9.1 Search PubMed .
S. Lin, E. K. Lee, N. Nguyen and M. Khine, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3475 RSC .
J. D. Pegan, A. Y. Ho, M. Bachman and M. Khine, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 4205 RSC .
J. Kim, S.-J. Park, T. Nguyen, M. Chu, J. D. Pegan and M. Khine, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 061901 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yao and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gonzalez, F. Axisa, M. V. Bulcke, D. Brosteaux, B. Vandevelde and J. Vanfleteren, Microelectron. Reliab., 2008, 48, 825 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Xu, H. Fu, J. Lee, J. Su, K.-C. Hwang, J. A. Rogers and Y. Huang, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 8062 RSC .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Turner, B. Goodwine and M. Sen, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part C J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 2016, 230, 2345 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, Z. Song, T. Ma, B. B. Smith, R. Tang, H. Yu, H. Jiang and C. K. Chan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Nam, G.-P. Kim, S. Park, J. W. Han and J. Yi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1095 RSC .
R. Tang, H. Huang, H. Tu, H. Liang, M. Liang, Z. Song, Y. Xu, H. Jiang and H. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 083501 CrossRef .
M. Kim, J. Park, S. Ji, S.-H. Shin, S.-Y. Kim, Y.-C. Kim, J.-Y. Kim and J.-U. Park, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9504 RSC .
P.-K. Yang, Z.-H. Lin, K. C. Pradel, L. Lin, X. Li, X. Wen, J.-H. He and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rafsanjani and K. Bertoldi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 084301 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, I.-S. Choi and R. D. Kamien, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 130 CrossRef .
H. Guo, M. H. Yeh, Y. C. Lai, Y. Zi, C. Wu, Z. Wen, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Lim, N.-E. Lee and B. Lim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5642 RSC .
M. D. Ho, Y. Liu, D. Dong, Y. Zhao and W. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, D. Kong, Z. Ruan, P.-C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. Hu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, S. Hwang, H. Ha, H. Park, S.-W. Kang, S. Hyun, S. Jeon and S.-H. Jeong, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500302 CrossRef .
H. C. Ko, M. P. Stoykovich, J. Song, V. Malyarchuk, W. M. Choi, C.-J. Yu, J. B. Geddes Iii, J. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2008, 454, 748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Ko, G. Shin, S. Wang, M. P. Stoykovich, J. W. Lee, D. H. Kim, J. S. Ha, Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2009, 5, 2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Wu, M. Shi, J. Yoon, S. I. Park, M. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Park, D.-K. Lee, B.-S. Kim, H. Jeon, N.-E. Lee, D. Whang, H.-J. Lee, Y. J. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3577 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, P. Krull, D. G. Bassel, K. Dowling, J. A. Rogers and W. J. Arora, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shin, C. H. Yoon, M. Y. Bae, Y. C. Kim, S. K. Hong, J. A. Rogers and J. S. Ha, Small, 2011, 7, 1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Son, J. H. Koo, J.-K. Song, J. Kim, M. Lee, H. J. Shim, M. Park, M. Lee, J. H. Kim and D.-H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. J. Norton, R. Qazi, Z. Zou, K. R. Ammann, H. Liu, L. Yan, P. L. Tran, K.-I. Jang and J. W. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601185 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, G. Shin, Y. J. Kang, W. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Cheng, J. Ren, W. Weng, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohan, N. Kim, Y. Gu, A. J. Bandodkar, J. M. You, R. Kumar, J. F. Kurniawan, S. Xu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600284 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim, Y. S. Kim, J. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Song, H. S. Kim, Y. Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3703 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, J. Xiao, J. Song, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Hammock, A. Chortos, B. C. K. Tee, J. B. H. Tok and Z. A. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Zhu, M. W. Nomani, X. Wen, T.-Y. Hsia and G. Koley, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 025022 CrossRef .
B. Su, S. Gong, Z. Ma, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, Small, 2015, 11, 1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Segev-Bar, G. Konvalina and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, Z. Niu, H. Wang, W. R. Leow, H. Wang, Y. Li, L. Zheng, J. Wei, F. Huo and X. Chen, Small, 2014, 10, 3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chiang, C.-C. K. Lin and M.-S. Ju, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 134, 382 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lang, J. Fang, H. Shao, X. Ding and T. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Z.-H. Lin, Q. Jing, P. Bai, C. Pan, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, H. Kim, M. Vosgueritchian, S. Cheon, H. Kim, J. H. Koo, T. R. Kim, S. Lee, G. Schwartz, H. Chang and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, W. Schwalb, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Si, B. Shirinzadeh and W. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, Y. R. Jeong, J. Yun, S. Y. Hong, S. Jin, S.-J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, H. Luo, L. Qin, X. Wang, Z. Xiong, H. Ding, Y. Gu, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Xie, S. Wang, W. Wu, S. Niu, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amjadi, K. U. Kyung, I. Park and M. Sitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1678 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Graz, D. P. J. Cotton and S. P. Lacour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 071902 CrossRef .
T. Yang, X. Li, X. Jiang, S. Lin, J. Lao, J. Shi, Z. Zhen, Z. Li and H. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 248 RSC .
C. Farcau, H. Moreira, B. Viallet, J. Grisolia, D. Ciuculescu-Pradines, C. Amiens and L. Ressier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14494 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Ho, Y. Ling, L. W. Yap, Y. Wang, D. Dong, Y. Zhao and W. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700845 CrossRef .
S. J. Park, M. L. Seol, S. B. Jeon, D. Kim, D. Lee and Y. K. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13866 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Gong, D. Dong, Y. Zhao, L. W. Yap, Q. Shi, T. An, Y. Ling, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15948 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250 RSC .
D. Braga and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1473 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Paterson, S. Singh, K. J. Fallon, T. Hodsden, Y. Han, B. C. Schroeder, H. Bronstein, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801079 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hotta, T. Yamao, S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 965 RSC .
B. Crone, A. Dodabalapur, Y. Y. Lin, R. W. Filas, Z. Bao, A. LaDuca, R. Sarpeshkar, H. E. Katz and W. Li, Nature, 2000, 403, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Torsi, M. Magliulo, K. Manoli and G. Palazzo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8612 RSC .
M. M. Ling and Z. N. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. L. Guo and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Klauk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2643 RSC .
S. Henning, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Xu, W. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, R. Rastak, F. Molina-Lopez, J. W. Chung, S. Niu, V. R. Feig, J. Lopez, T. Lei, S.-K. Kwon, Y. Kim, A. M. Foudeh, A. Ehrlich, A. Gasperini, Y. Yun, B. Murmann, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2018, 555, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cai, W. R. Leow, X. Wang, Y.-L. Wu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605529 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cai, B. Hu, W. R. Leow, X. Wang, X. J. Loh, Y.-L. Wu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800572 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gilles, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 365 CrossRef .
A. Facchetti, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 28 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2411 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, M. J. Han and S. Seo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 453 CrossRef CAS .
N. Matsuhisa, M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Yokota, H. Jinno, K. Kuribara, T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, S. Kustra, E. M. Gates and C. J. Bettinger, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1636 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Nawrocki, N. Matsuhisa, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500452 CrossRef .
M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Sekitani, J. Reeder, T. Yokota, K. Kuribara, T. Tokuhara, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, I. Graz, S. Bauer-Gogonea, S. Bauer and T. Someya, Nature, 2013, 499, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, S. Rondeau-Gagné, Y.-C. Chiu, A. Chortos, F. Lissel, G.-J. N. Wang, B. C. Schroeder, T. Kurosawa, J. Lopez, T. Katsumata, J. Xu, C. Zhu, X. Gu, W.-G. Bae, Y. Kim, L. Jin, J. W. Chung, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2016, 539, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Luo, L. Jin, X. Gu, S. Chen, V. R. Feig, J. W. F. To, S. Rondeau-Gagné, J. Park, B. C. Schroeder, C. Lu, J. Y. Oh, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Kim, H. Yan, R. Sinclair, D. Zhou, G. Xue, B. Murmann, C. Linder, W. Cai, J. B.-H. Tok, J. W. Chung and Z. Bao, Science, 2017, 355, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-J. N. Wang, A. Gasperini and Z. Bao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700429 CrossRef .
S. Minkwan, S. J. Hyuk, L. Guh-Hwan, L. Byungkwon, P. Jong-Jin and J. Unyong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3706 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Lee, H. J. Lee, J. H. Choi, W. G. Koh, J. M. Myoung, J. H. Hur, J. J. Park, J. H. Cho and U. Jeong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Lee, B. J. Kim, H. Jang, S. C. Yoon, C. Lee, B. H. Hong, J. A. Rogers, J. H. Cho and J.-H. Ahn, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Meng, B. Zhu, W. R. Leow, Y. Liu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7070 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Meng, Y. Cai, L. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, X. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yang, M. D. Pickett, X. Li, D. A. A. Ohlberg, D. R. Stewart and R. S. Williams, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. P. Wong and S. Salahuddin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. W. Zhu, X. H. Ma, Y. Hao and X. D. Chen, Small, 2016, 12, 2715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. W. Zhu, H. Wang, X. H. Ma, Y. Hao and X. D. Chen, Small, 2016, 12, 3360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Waser and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Qi, Z. Liu, H. Wang, J. Yu, M. Sherburne, Z. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 28, 1559 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Zhu, J. Yu, K. He, W. R. Leow, M. Wang, B. K. Chandran, D. Qi, H. Wang, G. Chen, C. Xu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701780 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lim, J. Yoon, J. Yun, D. Kim, S. Y. Hong, S.-J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Robinson, A. Aziz, Q. Liu, Z. Suo and S. P. Lacour, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 143511 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lai, Y.-C. Huang, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-X. Wang, C.-Y. Chang, Y. Li, T.-Y. Lin, B.-W. Ye, Y.-P. Hsieh, W.-F. Su, Y.-J. Yang and Y.-F. Chen, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e87 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Vu, Y. S. Shin, Y. R. Kim, V. L. Nguyen, W. T. Kang, H. Kim, D. H. Luong, I. M. Lee, K. Lee, D.-S. Ko, J. Heo, S. Park, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2011, 7, 175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, J. Mao, Y. Ren, S.-T. Han, V. A. L. Roy and Y. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, 1703126 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Ling, Y. Bao, M. Yang, Y. Yang, M. Hussain, H. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Xie, M. Yi, W. Huang, X. Xie and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800595 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S.-T. Han, Z.-X. Xu and V. A. L. Roy, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1972 RSC .
J.-S. Lee, J. Cho, C. Lee, I. Kim, J. Park, Y.-M. Kim, H. Shin, J. Lee and F. Caruso, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Ji, L. Shang, Y. Chen, M. Han, X. Liu, Y. Peng and M. Liu, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günter and C. Benedetto, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2003, 3081 Search PubMed .
P. Pyykko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1967 RSC .
K. J. Si, Y. Chen, Q. Shi and W. Cheng, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700179 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Si, D. Dong, Q. Shi, W. Zhu, M. Premaratne and W. Cheng, Mater. Today, 2018, 21 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2018.06.006 .
H. Cheng, N. Yang, Q. Lu, Z. Zhang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707189 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cheng, Eur. Phys. Lett., 2017, 119, 48004 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, S. Xiao, L. Shi, X. Liu, J. Zi, O. Hansen and N. A. Mortensen, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 5237 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Esteban, A. G. Borisov, J. J. Baumberg, P. Nordlander, H. J. Lezec, J. Aizpurua and K. B. Crozier, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Colea, S. Mahajan and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 154103 CrossRef .
M. Kolle and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702669 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Si, Y. Chen and W. Cheng, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 363 CrossRef .
F. M. Huang, J. K. Sinha, N. Gibbons, P. N. Bartlett and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193107 CrossRef .

Footnote† These two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Bowen Zhu
	Bowen Zhu received his BS degree in chemistry from Jilin University (China) in 2010. He obtained his PhD degree in materials science in 2016 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, under the supervision of Professor Xiaodong Chen. After his postdoctoral fellow training at Professor Yang Yang's research group, UCLA, he joined Professor Wenlong Cheng's group at Monash University in 2017, Australia, as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) fellow funded by Australian Research Council. His research is focused on soft electronics for sensing and energy conversion.

Shu Gong
	Shu Gong is a Research Fellow at Monash University, Australia, under the supervision of Professor Wenlong Cheng. He received his BS from Central South University, China, in 2011, and his PhD from Monash University in 2017. At Monash University, his research interests include the development of soft electronics based on nanomaterials.

Wenlong Cheng
	Wenlong Cheng is a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Monash University, Australia, and an Ambassador Technology Fellow in Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication. He earned his BS from Jilin University, China, in 1999, and his PhD from Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005. He held positions in the Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics and the Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering of Cornell University before joining Monash University in 2010. His research interests lie at the nano-bio interface, particularly addressing plasmonic nanomaterials, DNA nanotechnology, nanoparticle anticancer theragnostics, and electronic skin.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of gold materials in history and in modern society. (a) The Lycurgus Cup of the 5th to 4th century B.C, based on gold colloids. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Gold medals presented at the Games of the 2nd Olympiad (Paris, France; 1900). Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The distribution of global demand for gold in 2017. Source from World Gold Council.	 

Au	4.10 × 107
Ag	6.30 × 107
Cu	5.96 × 107
Carbon (graphite)	2.0 × 105

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of gold element. Gold element locates at Group 11, Period 6 of the periodic table.	 

 	Fig. 3  Gold nanostructures can be modified with a variety of functional groups, such as SAM layers, polymers, DNA, RNA, and others.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy level diagram of gold in comparison to the energy of the frontier orbitals of pentacene and P3HT. Data taken from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of top-down fabrication starting from a gold source.	 

 	Fig. 6  Wrinkled and microcracked gold films from top-down fabrication. (a) An optical image of gold films directly deposited on PDMS substrates, forming wrinkled structures. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics. (b) A SEM image of microcracked gold film on PDMS under 60% strain. (c) A SEM image of the microcracked gold film released from stretching. The cracks are recovered. (d) Electrical stretchablility of the microcracked gold film on PDMS, showing a maximum stretchability of 120%. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (e) Microcracked gold films deposited on PDMS fibres with microbeads. The strain distribution is different along the PDMS fibre because of beads’ structure. (f) The gold films on PDMS fibres show a maximum stretchability up to 125%. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Gold grid and mesh structures from top-down fabrication. (a) An optical image of a gold grid. Scale bar: 100 μm. Right: scheme of an individual gold grid. (b) The gold grid shows better electrical stretchability than ITO at different compression strain. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. (c) A gold nanomesh conductor connected with circuits and attached to a fingertip. Scale bar: 1 mm. (d) A SEM image showing the gold nanomesh structures, replicating the fibre structures of an electrospun PVA film. (e) The gold nanomesh shows a maximum stretchability up to 48%. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Gold nanobelts fabricated by the top-down approach. (a) Schematic of fabrication flow: (I) gold is deposited on a patterned Cu film; (II) spin-coating of a thin PDMS layer and laminating on the tripod PDMS substrate; (III) removal of Cu film and photoresist. (b) A picture of stretchable gold nanobelts sustained on the tripod PDMS film. (c and d) Optical images of the gold nanobelts in stretching (c) and relaxing (d) states. (e) Current–voltage curves of the gold nanobelts under different strain. The gold nanobelts show good conductivity even under 130% strain. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the bottom-up fabrication process. Starting with HAuCl4, a variety of gold nanostructures can be synthesized via wet chemistry. And the gold nanomaterial suspensions can serve as inks for assembling them into functional electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images of different gold nanostructures via bottom-up synthesis. (a) Gold nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼20 nm. (b) Gold nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼45 nm. (c) Gold nanorods. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Gold square sheets. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Gold nanoflower. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) Gold nanocage. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (g) Gold nanowires. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (h) Gold nanohelices. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) Gold nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Assembly of gold nanoparticles at the air/water interface via Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly. (a) Schematic of the assembling high-density AuNP monolayer via the LB process. (b) TEM images of the AuNP monolayer via LB assembly. The insets depict magnified images. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, AAAS. (c) Schematic of assembling multilayer AuNPs via the LB process. (d) Images showing the LB assembly process at dipping (left) and pulling (right). (e) TEM images of assembled AuNPs with one layer (left) and three layers (right). Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Assembly of gold nanowires at the air–water interface. (a) Schematic of assembling fresh and aged AuNWs at the air–water interface. The dashed areas show the corresponding TEM (top) and SEM (down) images of the assembled films. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) A SEM image of the assembled AuNW monolayer transferred onto a PDMS substrate. Scale bar: 1 μm. (c). Transmission spectra of assembled AuNWs transferred onto PDMS substrates with different layers of 1 layer (1L), 2 layers (2L), 3 layers (3L), and 4 layers (4L). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Assembly of gold nanosheets at the air–water interface. (a) A SEM image of synthesized gold nanosheets, with dimensions ranging from 20 to 50 μm. (b) A cross-section TEM image of an individual gold nanosheet, showing the thickness of nanosheet as ∼20 nm. (c) A photo of the gold nanosheets floating on the water surface. (d) SEM images of the gold nanosheets transferred onto a silicon wafer. The inset shows the enlarged SEM image. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  Assembly of AuNWs at the solid–liquid interface. (a) Schematic of a drop-casting process with a polyimide mask. (b) A photo showing assembled AuNW films on a latex substrate fabricated via drop casting attached on the little finger. The insets show the cross-section (up) and top-view (down) SEM images. (c) Electrical performance of the assembled AuNW films on latex up to 100% strain. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Direct-writing of AuNWs/PANI composite inks. (i) A photo showing the process. Photo of written features at 0% (ii) and 65% (iii) strain. (e) A photo of the written feature on an inflated glove. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Assembly of gold nanoparticles for stretchable conductors. (a) A top-view photo of the AuNWs/PU composite film. (b) A cross-section SEM image of the AuNPs/PU composite film. (c) The multilayer AuNPs/PU films via LBL assembly show a high conductivity of 11000 S cm−1. (d and e) TEM images of the assembled AuNPs/PU films at 0% (d) and 50% (e) strain. (f) The LBL assembled AuNPs/PU film holds a stretchability up to 110%. Modified with permission.122 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  Direct growth of AuNWs on elastomer substrates. (a) Schematic of fabricating standing AuNWs directly on elastomer substrates. (i) Surface modification of saline groups with amine moieties; (ii) attachment of citrate-stabilized colloidal gold seeds; (iii) seed-mediated growth of the standing AuNW arrays. (b) SEM image of the as-grown standing AuNW Janus film. Scale bar: 500 nm. (c) Schematic showing the structures of standing AuNWs. (d) A photo of a free standing AuNW Janus film. (e–g) Cross-section SEM images of AuNW Janus films with different assembled structures: (e) head-to-head, (f) tail-to-tail, and (g) layer-by-layer. Scale bars: 500 nm. Modified with permission.123 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Direct growth of multilayer standing AuNWs on elastomer substrates. (a) Schematic of fabricating multilayer standing AuNWs directly on Ecoflex. (b) A schematic showing the three-layer vertically aligned AuNWs (top). Height profiles and the corresponding AFM images of the boundary areas of the three-layer AuNW film. (c) Top-view SEM image of the boundary area of the multilayer AuNW film. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the AuNW film. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Template-assisted growth of gold nanowires. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of gold nanowires with the AAO template via thermal evaporation and subsequent electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of fabricating gold nanowires in AAO templates with thin TiO2 layers. TiO2 is first grown inside the AAO channel, and then Au is reduced by photochemical deposition. (c) SEM image of the AAO template after AuNW growth. The inset shows a digital photo. Scale bar: 200 nm. (d) Cross-section SEM image of template-grown AuNWs, showing a high aspect ratio. Scale bar: 5 μm. (e) TEM image of an AuNW with ncp structure fabricated with template-assisted growth. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  Patterning assembled gold nanowires. (a) Schematic of the template-assisted imprinting process for patterning ultrathin gold nanowires. (b) Schematic illustration of forming conductive AuNW grids. (c) SEM images of conductive AuNW grids. The inset shows a higher magnification image of bundled AuNWs. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of patterning the AuNW mesh by using masks. (e) A photo of the patterned AuNW mesh on the PET substrate. Scale bar: 1 cm. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Patterning gold nanosheets and vertical AuNWs. (a and c) Optical images of patterned gold nanosheets on Ecoflex substrates with line (a) and rectangular arrays (c), respectively. (b and d) Resistivity changes of the line (b) and rectangular (d) patterns of gold nanosheets at different strain states. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e) Fabrication flow of patterned vertically aligned AuNW electrodes: (1) patterning the photoresist via conventional photolithography; (2) seed-mediated vertical AuNW growth; (3) covering vertical AuNWs with PDMS; (4) curing and peeling off PDMS. (f) Photo of 4 in wafer-size stretchable electrodes under strain. (g) Optical image of the vertical AuNWs/PDMS electrodes under 100% strain. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
R = (L/L0)2R0	(1)

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of strain localization caused rupture of a metal film. (a) A freestanding metal film breaks into two parts to accommodate the local elongation. (b) The local elongation in the metal film could be compromised by the polymer substrate when bonding is strong. (c) The rupture of a metal film could be assisted by the debonding of the metal film from substrates when the bonding is weak. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of various strategies for gold/elastomer interface control.	 

 	Fig. 23  Structural design with the microstructure interface. (a) Optical images of PDMS films with increased levels of roughness from “1” to “4”. (b) Resistance changes of gold films deposited on PDMS with different levels of roughness as a function of applied strain. The inset shows an optical image of the gold film on a flat PDMS substrate at 5% strain. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2012, Acta Materialia Inc. (c) Schematic of an interlocking interface between gold and PDMS inspired by tree roots. (d) Cross-section SEM image of the stretchable gold film with nanopiles embedded in the PDMS substrate. The insets show the photos of the sample from front and reverse sides. (e) Comparison of adhesive strength and adhesion ratio among the nanopile gold film, flat nonstretchable film (NSGF), and normal crack-based stretchable gold film (CSGF). Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

2D gold composite	Gold nanosheets	2–3 Ω sq−1	200	
116

Gold nanowires	148.1 ± 78.2 kΩ sq−1	150	
120

Gold nanowires	6.1 Ω sq−1	800	
135



3D gold composite	Gold nanoparticles	Up to 11000 S cm−1	500	
122

Ag–Au core shell nanowires	Up to 72600 S cm−1	Up to 840	
38


 	Fig. 24  Interface control at the nanoscale via layer-by-layer assembly. (a) A photo of a freestanding film of (PU/NP)500 based on LBL stacking. (b) A photo of a freestanding PU/NP film made by VAF. (c) Top-view SEM image of a 1 × LBL PU/NP film. (d) Cross-section SEM image of a 1 × LBL PU/NP film. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  Interface control via chemical modification. (a) Chemical modification of MPTMS, hydrolysed MPTMS, and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (from left to right) on the gold film. (b) A schematic showing the dry peeling-off process to transfer the chemically modified Au film on PDMS. (c) A photo of PDMS embedded with Au micro-patterns. (d–f) Schematic illustration and corresponding photos of the tape adhesion test on the PDMS film embedded with Au micro-patterns. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 26  Chemical modification of the elastomer surface for anisotropic growth of AuNWs. (a) Comparison of electrical stretchability between chemically bonded V-AuNW (red) and directly transferred V-AuNW (black) films. (b) Schematic illustrations of structural changes of chemically bonded (up) and directly transferred V-AuNW films (down) during the stretching/releasing process. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of various strategies for gold-based device/human interface control.	 
Uinterface = Udevice_bending + Uskin_elasticity + Uadhesion	(2)

 	Fig. 28  Engineering approaches for achieving conformal contact at the skin/device interface. (a–d) Cross-sectional SEM images showing contacts between a silicone skin-replica (grey) and elastomer films with different thicknesses (blue). Scale bars: 1 mm. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration of a pressure sensor with microhair-structured PDMS substrates to achieve conformal contacts with skin. The right shows a SEM of a PDMS film with micro-pyramid structures. (f) SEM images of microhair arrays with different aspect ratios (AR) of (i) 3, (ii) 6, and (iii) 10. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the substrate-free gold nanomesh conductors prepared by dissolving PVA nanofiber templates. (h) A photo of gold nanomesh conductors with conformal contact with a fingertip. Scale bar: 1 mm. (i) A SEM image of the gold nanomesh conductor. Scale bar: 5 μm. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 29  Buckling structures induced by pre-strain methods. (a) Schematic illustration of forming gold buckling structures by the mechanical pre-strain process. (b–e) SEM images of the deposited gold film after uniaxial pre-strain (b); biaxial pre-strain (c); uniaxial post-shrunk (d); and biaxial post-shrunk process (e). (b) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Serpentine design of stretchable gold mesh structures. (a) Images of a serpentine gold mesh structure at 0% strain (left) and 30% strain (right). The schematic in the middle illustrates that the gold films are located at the neutral mechanical plane (NMP) between two polyimide (PI) layers. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (b) Finite element method (FEM) images of different structures under tensile strain. (c) Experimental microscale X-ray coherent tomography (MicroXCT) images corresponding to (b). Scale bars: 2 mm. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 31  Assembled intrinsically stretchable gold nanostructures. (a and b) Schematic of the AuNWs/PDMS film before (a) and after (b) stretching. (c and d) Corresponding SEM images of the AuNWs before stretching (c) and after 5000 stretching/releasing cycles. The wrinkled structure is observed after repeated stretching cycles. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (e–g) Optical images of the Au nanosheets during one stretching cycle. Wrinkle deformation and the sliding of nanosheets could be observed. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (h and i) Optical images of the fractal gold nanomesh on PDMS substrates at 0% (h) and 100% strain (i). Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Gold nanostructure based transparent and stretchable conductors. (a) Photos of the touch screen based on the self-assembled AuNW mesh film. (b) Relative resistance change of the AuNW mesh film and an ITO/PET film at different bending radius. (c) Resistance change of the AuNW mesh film and an ITO/PET film at different bending cycles. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Photos of gold nanotrough networks transferred on a PET film (left) and a paper (right). (e) Sheet resistance change of the gold nanotrough networks and an ITO/PET film at different bending radius. (f) The sheet resistance change of a gold film and the gold nanotrough film at different strain states. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photo of a wafer-size patterned transparent stretchable mesh conductor. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Institute of Physics. (h) Sheet resistance change of Au nanomeshes with different mesh-size to line-width ratios (M/W) of 8 and 18 as a function of tensile strain. (i) Resistance change and normalized resistance change of two Au nanomesh samples with M/W of 18 at different stretching cycles (up to 1000 cycles). Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 33  An integrated soft/hard integrated system with serpentine gold interconnects. (a) Schematic illustration of key components in the integrated system. (b) Three-dimensional finite element analysis (3D-FEA) results of the system under different magnitudes of equal-biaxial tensile strain. (c) Optical images of the device at different equal-biaxial strains corresponding to the results analysed by 3D-FEA. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2014, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 34  Gold nanomaterial based pressure sensors. (a) Schematic illustration of a resistive pressure sensor based on AuNWs. (b) Sensitivity of the pressure sensor in the range of 0–5 kPa. (c) Measuring heartbeats under normal (66 beats per minute) and exercise conditions (88 beats per minute) with the pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of a mimosa-inspired gold based pressure sensor. (e) Sensitivity of the pressure sensor in the range of 0–2 kPa. (f) A photo of the artificial mimosa leaflets touched by a finger. Reproduced with permission.206 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 35  Pressure sensors based on gradient gold nanostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of the sensors with gradient thickness of gold nanoparticles. (b) Location-specific response of sensor 1 (top) and sensor 2 (bottom) under a normal pressure. (c) The relationship between predicted position and the calculated actual position. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the standing AuNW based sensor with staircase concentric design. (e) The sensitivity ratio (S1/S2) of the sensors is independent of the applied forces. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 36  Gold nanomaterial based strain sensors. (a) Photos of a strain sensor based on AuNWs under ∼150% tensile strain. The inset shows the sensor under 0% strain. (b) Relative resistance changes of AuNWs/PANI and AuNW strain sensors at various strain states. (c) Demonstration of remote control using AuNWs/PANI flexion sensors sewed on a textile glove. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society. (d) A SEM image of the AgNW/AuNW percolation networks on an elastomeric PDMS substrate. (e) Relative resistance change (ΔR/R0) of the AgNW/AuNW based strain sensor with different layers of gold nanowires. (f) Relative resistance change of the transparent strain sensor attached to the human forehead. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (g) A photo of a crack-based strain sensor. (h) The response of the crack-based strain sensor in the 0–1% strain range. (i) Real-time relative resistance change of the crack-based sensor under different musical notes. The inset shows the experimental set-up. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Gold nanomaterial based soft energy devices. (a) A photo of an ultrathin AuNW based transparent stretchable supercapacitor. (b) CV curves of the device at 0% and 30% strain. (c) CV curves of the device at different scanning cycles. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) A photo of a gold based kirigami supercapacitor under stretching. (e) CV curves of the device (6 units) under mechanical strain in the range of 0–100%. The inset shows the photos of the device at 0% and 100% strain states. (f) Specific mass and areal capacitance of the supercapacitor under different scanning rates. The inset shows the stability test of the device for 5000 charging/discharging cycles. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society. (g) Schematic illustration of a triboelectric nanogenerator based on the gold nanoflower (AuNF) film. (h) Open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the AuNF TENG with different load resistance. (i) Comparison of output voltages of TENGs with different contact interfaces of flat Au, flat Cu, flat Al, and AuNF. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2013, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Stretchable OTFTs using network structures. (a) Digital photos of a sensor matrix network being stretched (upper). The lower image shows a magnified photo of the networks. (b) Optical image of an individual organic transistor. Scale bar: 1 mm. (c) Resistance changes of the network structure coated with a gold layer under 20% strain for 2000 testing cycles. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2005, National Academy of Sciences. (d) Schematic of OTFTs fabricated on PUA networks. The inset shows a photo of the network attached on a hemispherical surface. (e) Transfer characteristics of the OTFT on the PUA network. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015,240 Wiley-VCH. (f) Photo of a stretchable OTFT active matrix with printed elastic conductor wirings under 60% strain. Scale bar: 2 cm. (g) Photo of the stretchable OTFT cells. Scale bar: 5 mm. (h) Transfer characteristics of the OTFT under different strain. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 39  Stretchable OTFTs via the mechanical buckling strategy. (a) Schematic of fabricating stretchable OTFTs with wavy structures. (i) Pre-stretch PDMS to 9% strain; (ii) deposit 100 nm SiO films; (iii) release the pre-strain to induce wavy structures; (iv) directly deposit OTFT device layers onto the waved PDMS substrate. (b) OTFTs fabricated on the waved PDMS substrate with two configurations: parallel (up, ‖) and perpendicular (down, ⊥). Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Schematic of fabricating stretchable ultrathin OTFTs with the pre-strain method. (f) The electrical performance of the device as a function of applied strain. Red circles: on current, green diamonds: mobility, blue triangles: threshold voltage. The inset shows a photo of the transistor in stretched (left) and compressed (right) states. (g) Performance of OTFTs under biaxial stretching. The inset shows a photo of the transistor at relaxed (left) and compressed (right) states. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 40  Intrinsically stretchable OTFTs with gold nanomaterials as electrodes. (a) Schematic of the device structure. (b) Optical image of P3HT fibres electrospun on gold nanosheet electrode arrays. (c) Photos of a device array at initial (up) and 70% strain states (down). (d) Transfer characteristics of the device at different strain from 0% to 70%. Reproduced with permission.248 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) A photo of stretchable patterned vertical AuNW electrodes with transferred P3HT film. (f) Optical images of the AuNW electrodes with P3HT film at initial (0% strain, left) and stretched states (100% strain, right). (g) Photos of the vertical AuNW based transistor with ion gel dielectric at 0% (up) and 100% strain (down). (h) Transfer characteristics of the vertical AuNW based transistor at different strain. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 41  Structural gold electrodes in memory devices. (a) A schematic of stretchable memory devices on soft/rigid hybrid substrates. The right side shows a FEM analysis of a rigid island under 50% strain. (b) A photo of the patterned hybrid substrate with SU-8 rigid islands embedded in the PDMS matrix. (c) A SEM image of gold deposited on PDMS under 50% strain. (d) High and low resistance states of the stretchable memory device on a hybrid substrate as a function of strain. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (e and f) Photos and electrical switching curves of a stretchable organic memory at 10% (e) and 50% (f) strain. Modified with permission.263 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (g) Photos and optical images of a two-terminal floating-gate memory on the PI/PDMS substrate at 0% (up) and 20% strain (down). (h) I–V curves of the memory device at different strain states (0–50%). Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 42  Gold nanoparticle based active layers in memory devices. (a) A photo of a wearable memory array with a resistance switching layer of AuNPs embedded in TiO2. (b) An optical image of a stretchable memory device at 0% and 25% strain. (c) Resistive switching behaviours of the stretchable memory at different strains. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) A photo of an AuNP based floating-gate memory array. (e) Schematic illustration of the structure of an individual AuNP based floating-gate memory cell. (f) Photos of an integrated wearable system composed of memory arrays, amplifiers and ECG electrodes attached on human skin (left) and being stretched (right). (g) Transfer characteristics of the AuNW based floating-gate memory device at different strain states (0–20%). (h) Memory performance of the device with 20% strain at different testing cycles. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016, AAAS.	 
Footnote
† These two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
