All-in-one energy harvesting and storage devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01229A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01229A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7983-7999All-in-one energy harvesting and storage devices

        
          
            Ju-Hyuck 
            Lee†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jeonghun 
            Kim†
b, 
      
        
          
            Tae Yun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Md Shahriar 
            Al Hossain
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sang-Woo 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Jung Ho 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *b
aSKKU Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT), Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea
bInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), Australian Institute for Innovative Materials (AIIM), University of Wollongong, North Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: jhk@uow.edu.au
cSchool of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kimsw1@skku.edu
Received 
      9th February 2016
    , Accepted 24th April 2016First published on 25th April 2016AbstractCurrently, integration of energy harvesting and storage devices is considered to be one of the most important energy-related technologies due to the possibility of replacing batteries or at least extending the lifetime of a battery. This review aims to describe current progress in the various types of energy harvesters, hybrid energy harvesters, including multi-type energy harvesters with coupling of multiple energy sources, and hybridization of energy harvesters and energy storage devices for self-powered electronics. We summarize research on recent energy harvesters based on the piezoelectric, triboelectric, pyroelectric, thermoelectric, and photovoltaic effects. We also cover hybrid cell technologies to simultaneously generate electricity using multiple types of environmental energy, such as mechanical, thermal, and solar energy. Energy harvesters based on the coupling of multiple energy sources exhibit enhancement of power generation performance with synergetic effects. Finally, integration of energy harvesters and energy storage devices is introduced. In particular, self-charging power cells provide an innovative approach to the direct conversion of mechanical energy into electrochemical energy to decrease energy conversion loss.Ju-Hyuck LeeDr Ju-Hyuck Lee received his B.S. degree (2011) from the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU). Thereafter he received his Ph.D. degree (2016) under the supervision of Prof. Sang-Woo Kim in the Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT) at Sungkyunkwan University. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of California (UC), Berkeley. His current research interests include the design and development of bio/organic materials for energy harvesting/storage and sensor applications.Jeonghun KimDr Jeonghun Kim received his B.S. degree (2007) and Ph.D. degree (2012) from the Dept of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Yonsei University in Seoul, Korea. Up to 2015, he worked at Dongjin Semichem Co., Ltd, in the Electronic Materials Division, R&D Center as a senior researcher for the development of the synthesis and applications of conductive polymers for electronic and energy devices. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate under Prof. Jung Ho Kim at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), Australian Institute for Innovative Materials (AIIM), University of Wollongong, Australia. His major research interest is the design and development of functional organic and inorganic materials for electronic and energy storage applications.Tae Yun KimTae Yun Kim received his B.S. degree from the School of Advanced Materials Science & Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) in 2013. In March 2013, he started his graduate study under the supervision of Prof. Sang-Woo Kim at SKKU Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT). His research interests are FEM simulation of the piezoelectric and triboelectric effects and their applications in energy harvesting, and analysis of 2D materials using AFM.Md Shahriar Al HossainDr Md Shahriar Al Hossain received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), University of Wollongong, Australia in 2008. He was then employed as a Research Fellow at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. Currently he is working as a Senior Research Fellow at ISEM. He has accumulated extensive expertise in a number of areas in Materials Science and Engineering. His research experience in various institutes and in industry around the world has been mainly focused on the fabrication and characterization of superconducting materials and magnetically triggered nanoparticles for medical, power, and energy applications. He has published over 50 SCI articles.Sang-Woo KimProf. Sang-Woo Kim is Professor in the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU). He received his Ph.D. degree from Kyoto University in the Department of Electronic Science and Engineering in 2004. After working as a postdoctoral researcher at Kyoto University and the University of Cambridge, he spent four years as an Assistant Professor at the Kumoh National Institute of Technology. He joined the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, SKKU, Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT) in 2009. His recent research interest is focused on piezoelectric/triboelectric nanogenerators, photovoltaics, and two-dimensional nanomaterials. He is currently an Associate Editor of Nano Energy and an Executive Board Member of Advanced Electronic Materials.Jung Ho KimProf. Jung Ho Kim is currently Professor at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), Australian Institute for Innovative Materials (AIIM), University of Wollongong, Australia. He received his Bachelors (1998), Masters (2000), and Ph.D. (2005) degrees from Sungkyunkwan University, Korea. He has published more than 150 papers in international refereed journals. He is currently acting as an editorial board member for Scientific Reports (Nature Publishing Group). His major research interest is the rational design of materials with one-, two-, and three-dimensions with a view towards energy storage and harvesting applications.
1. Introduction
Exploring the possibilities of renewable, sustainable, green energy sources to replace fossil fuels is one of the most significant and challenging issues in energy research because of air/water pollution and oil depletion due to the use of fossil fuels. In particular, renewable forms of energy such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides/waves, and geothermal heat have been extensively studied as alternative energy sources to end the age of oil.1–5 Eventually, these forms of energy must be integrated with the major power grids to meet the requirements of megawatt to gigawatt power scales.
In recent years, smart electronics with multiple functionalities such as tablets, mobile phones, and various sensors have become widespread everywhere in our daily lives. Even if such devices are designed for high energy efficiency and can run on a battery for a long time period, the power consumption is often heavily loaded because of the relatively large size of devices. In these circumstances, therefore, sustainable power sources are very much required for the independent, maintenance-free, and continuous operation of such low-energy-consumption smart electronics.
Over the past decades, energy harvesters based on interesting phenomena, such as the piezoelectric6–8 and triboelectric9–11 effects for harvesting mechanical energy, the pyroelectric12–14 and thermoelectric15–17 effects for harvesting thermal energy, and the photovoltaic (PV)18–20 effect for harvesting solar energy, have been extensively studied for practical applications. These energy technologies are simply classified by their different energy conversion mechanisms, but the aim of all the energy harvesters is the conversion of wasted environmental energy to electricity. Nevertheless, all of the energy harvesters utilize only one type of energy, with the other types wasted. A PV cell, for example, is only designed to generate electricity under light illumination, and efficiency will be dramatically decreased under room light in indoor situations where sunlight is not available. Furthermore, thermal energy also appears in conjunction with mechanical and light energy. Thermal energy generated by mechanical and light energy will be wasted without a thermal energy harvester. Since micro/nanoscale smart systems can work under complicated environments and conditions, the use of only one type of energy harvester is insufficient to drive their operation. Thus, it is highly desirable to integrate energy harvesters so as to accumulate multiple types of energy for conversion into electricity, so that waste energy can be fully utilized and smart systems can be powered at any time and in any place.
Energy storage devices are just as important as energy harvesters in terms of energy technology today. This technology enables us to utilize energy to drive electronic devices/systems. Therefore, the integration of energy harvesting and storage devices (i.e. all in one) is the ultimate purpose following the rapid development of devices and technology, which offer a possible solution. This is a newly rising field in energy research, relating to the applications of nanomaterials and nanotechnology for harvesting energy to power micro-/nano-systems. It can be used to possibly replace batteries or at least extend the lifetime of batteries.
Herein, we introduce recent progress in research on the integration of energy harvesting and storage devices. First, different energy harvesters are categorized by their energy sources, such as mechanical energy, thermal energy, and solar energy, and their operating mechanisms, such as the piezoelectric, triboelectric, pyroelectric, thermoelectric, and PV effects. Second, research on various integrated multi-type energy harvesters is summarized, and enhancement of their output performance by the synergetic coupling effect of multiple energy sources is also described. Third, the integration of energy harvesters and energy storage devices is summarized, including simple integration and hybrid structures in a single cell. Finally, this review will give more practical guidelines for overcoming the current obstacles.
2. Energy harvesting
2.1 Mechanical energy harvesting

2.1.1 Piezoelectric effect. 
Mechanical energy such as stress/strain can be converted into electrical energy by the piezoelectric effect (Fig. 1a). This stress/strain can come from many different sources that exist everywhere, such as vibrations, body motion, acoustic noise, and air flow. The piezoelectric effect is known as a coupling phenomenon between mechanical and electrical states. When mechanical stress (or strain) is applied to a piezoelectric material, the crystal structure of the material is deformed, and this causes movement of electrical charges. The polarization charge density due to the electrical moment is proportional to the applied mechanical stress, which is given by eqn (1): ρ = dX(1)where ρ is the polarization charge density, d is the piezoelectric coefficient, and X is the applied stress. Then, the charge density results in electric field and potential as follows, eqn (2): (2)where ∇E is the divergence of the electric field, ρ is the charge density, and ε is the permittivity. Therefore, by designing a device that comprises a piezoelectric material, electrodes, and an external circuit, the electric potential due to the piezoelectric effect can generate electric current and can be used as a source of electrical energy. The so-called piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) was first invented in 2006 by Prof. Wang in the Georgia Institute of Technology by sweeping an atomic force microscope (AFM) tip across a vertically grown ZnO nanowire.6 Thenceforth, the PENG research field has received great attention, and various types of PENGs have been reported. Vertically grown piezoelectric nanostructure based PENGs,21–26 laterally aligned piezoelectric nanostructure based PENGs,27–31 stretching type PENGs,32–34 mechanically durable nanocomposite based PENGs,35–39 and highly sensitive nano-thin film-based PENGs40–43 were investigated. In addition, various semiconducting piezoelectric nanostructures in materials such as ZnO,44,45 GaN,46 CdS,47,48 InN,49 and insulating piezoelectric materials such as PbZrTiO3,50,51 BaTiO3,53,54 KNbO3,55 NaNbO3,56 and poly(vinylidene fluoride)-co-trifluoroethylene [P(VDF–TrFE)]31,42,57 have been intensively applied to fabricate PENGs. These fabricated PENGs are subjected to various forms of external mechanical energy such as vibrations, sound,43 rain drops,57 pressing,57 bending,51 stretching,32 heart beats,52 muscle movements,52 inhalation,52 and wind43 to generate electrical energy.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of energy harvesters based on (a) the piezoelectric effect, (b) the triboelectric effect, (c) the thermoelectric effect, (d) the pyroelectric effect and (e) the PV effect. 


2.1.2 Triboelectric effect. 
Newly invented triboelectric nanogenerators (NGs) (TENGs), based on the well-known contact electrification effect, provide a new approach to generating electricity from mechanical energy to operate small electronic devices. In 2012, TENGs were invented and explained on the basis of electrostatic and contact electrification physics (Fig. 1b).9 In the contact electrification effect, a material surface becomes electrically charged after it comes into contact with a different material through friction, owing to charge transfer between the two materials. These transferred charges remain for a long time on their respective surfaces. An electrostatically charged material causes a potential, and it drives induced electrons to flow between the electrodes by periodic contact and separation of the two materials. The generated electric potential V can be calculated using eqn (3): (3)where ρ is the triboelectric charge density, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and d is the interlayer distance in a given state. The current I generated across an external load can be defined as follows, eqn (4): (4)where C denotes the capacitance of the system and V is the voltage across the two electrodes. The first term is the change in potential between the top and bottom electrodes due to the triboelectric charges. The second term is the variation in the capacitance of the system when the distance between two electrodes is changed due to the mechanical deformation. Numerous advantages of TENGs, including superior power output performance, many material options, easy tailoring of device structures, cost-effectiveness, the facile fabrication of large areas for applications, and stability and robustness, as well as environmental friendliness, will bring more opportunities to our daily lives in the near future.
Depending on the configuration of the electrodes and the different ways in which the triboelectric layers can be arranged, four operation modes of TENGs have been developed: the vertical contact mode, the lateral sliding mode, the single electrode mode, and the free-standing mode.58 Their applications as various self-powered nanosystems, such as acceleration sensors, motion vector sensors,59 biomedical monitoring systems,60 electrochromic devices,61 sound recording systems,62 pressure sensors,63 angle measurement sensors,64 active tactile sensor systems,65 tactile imaging devices,66 electroluminescent systems,67 and mercury-ion detection systems,68 have been recently demonstrated. The triboelectric output can be further enhanced through control of electron affinity, as well as the work function, chemical structure, pressure, and surface roughness of the materials.

2.2 Thermal energy harvesting

2.2.1 Thermoelectric effect. 
There are two types of energy harvesters using thermal energy. One is based on the Seebeck effect, which utilizes a temperature difference between the two ends of the device to drive the diffusion of charge carriers, which is called the thermoelectric (TE) effect (Fig. 1c). The thermoelectric effect, known since the 19th century, provides an interesting perspective for the conversion of heat to electrical energy. Given a thermal gradient, a thermoelectric generator (TEG) is able to convert heat into electrical energy even with small temperature differences. TEGs are simple, compact, robust, and very reliable because they contain no moving mechanical parts. For all these reasons, TEGs are attractive for a large variety of applications, in particular in the fields of green and renewable energy harvesting. The Seebeck effect can be expressed as eqn (5): V = αΔ(5)where V is the thermoelectric voltage, ΔT is the temperature gradient, and α is the Seebeck coefficient. Based on the thermoelectric effect, the efficiency of thermoelectric devices is determined by the thermoelectric material's figure of merit, ZT, which is a function of several transport coefficients as follows, eqn (6): (6)where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the mean operating temperature, and κ is the thermal conductivity. The subscripts e and l on κ signify the electronic and lattice contributions, respectively. A high figure of merit corresponds to high efficiency of the TEG. Therefore, there is serious interest in improving the figure of merit of thermoelectric materials for many industrial and energy applications. The most common material for thermoelectricity has been Bi2Te3 since 1954, because its high electrical conductivity after doping and low thermal conductivity give a ZT of about 0.7–0.8 at room temperature.69–71 Furthermore, various thermoelectric materials such as BiSbTe3,72–74 PbTe,75,76 CoSb3,77,78 SiGe,79,80 and Mg2Si81,82 have been reported for TEGs.


2.2.2 Pyroelectric effect. 
The other energy harvesting technology using thermal energy is pyroelectric, based on the change in spontaneous polarization in certain anisotropic solids due to temperature fluctuation. Usually, harvesting thermal energy mainly relies on the Seebeck effect. When the temperature varies in a time-dependent way, however, without a spatial gradient, the Seebeck effect is not able to harvest thermal energy. In this case, the pyroelectric effect could be used to harvest waste thermal energy (Fig. 1d). The working mechanism of a pyroelectric nanogenerator (PNG) will be explained for two different cases: the primary pyroelectric effect and the secondary pyroelectric effect. The primary pyroelectric effect is related to the charge generation because of the change in polarization with temperature when the dimensions of the pyroelectric material are fixed. The secondary pyroelectric effect is an additional contribution of piezoelectrically induced charge by thermal expansion of a pyroelectric material with temperature change. The total pyroelectric effect is the sum of the primary and secondary pyroelectric effects. The pyroelectric coefficient, p, can be explained by eqn (7): (7)where e is the pyroelectric coefficient, ρ is the spontaneous polarization and T is the temperature. The electric current generated by the pyroelectric effect is expressed as eqn (8): (8)where Q is the induced charge, μ is the absorption coefficient of radiation, A is the surface area, and dT/dt is the rate of temperature change. Therefore, when pyroelectric materials are heated or cooled (dT/dt > 0, or dT/dt < 0), the overall polarization in the dipole moment is decreased or increased, which causes current to flow in the circuit. Usually, ferroelectric materials such as lead zirconate titanate (PZT),83,84 BaTiO3,85 P(VDF–TrFE),86–88 and KNbO3,89 and some piezoelectric materials which have spontaneous polarization, such as ZnO90 and CdS,91 are used to fabricate pyroelectric generators. By harvesting the waste thermal energy, pyroelectric nanogenerators have potential applications such as environmental monitoring, temperature imaging, medical diagnostics, and personal electronics.

2.3 Solar energy harvesting
Solar energy is regarded as one of the most important and realizable renewable energy sources due to its advantages of practically infinite quantity, a universal energy source, and cleanness.92 Among the various solar technologies, such as solar heating, PVs, photosynthesis, etc., the PV effect can convert light to usable electricity in the form of a voltage or electric current. A solar cell is an electrical device that converts the energy of light directly into electricity by using the PV effect,93,94 which is related to both the chemical and physical phenomena and the materials (Fig. 1e). When light is incident upon a solar cell, electricity is generated through the light absorption by the semiconductor, excitation, hole/electron separation, and the transport of charges to the electrodes.93,94 The conversion efficiency (η) of a solar cell is the most commonly used parameter to define a cell's performance and compare it to that of another cell. The efficiency is defined as the ratio of energy output from the solar cell to input energy from the sun.94 In addition to reflecting the performance of the solar cell itself, the efficiency depends on the spectrum and intensity of the incident sunlight and the temperature of the solar cell. Therefore, the conditions under which efficiency is measured must be carefully controlled in order to compare the performance of one device to another. Terrestrial solar cells are measured under AM 1.5 conditions and at a temperature of 25 °C. The efficiency of a solar cell is determined by the fraction of incident power which is converted to electricity and is defined as eqn (9):93,94 (9)where Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Jsc is the short-circuit current, and FF is the fill factor. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) is the maximum voltage available from a solar cell, and this occurs at zero current. The open-circuit voltage corresponds to the amount of forward bias on the solar cell due to the bias of the solar cell junction with the light-generated current. The short-circuit current (Jsc) is the current through the solar cell when the voltage across the solar cell is zero (i.e., when the solar cell is short-circuited). The short-circuit current is equal to the absolute number of photons converted to hole–electron pairs due to the generation and collection of light-generated carriers. For an ideal solar cell with, at most, moderate resistive loss mechanisms, the short-circuit current and the light-generated current are identical. Therefore, the short-circuit current is the largest current which may be drawn from the solar cell. The short-circuit current and the open-circuit voltage are the maximum current and voltage, respectively, from a solar cell. At both of these operating points, however, the power from the solar cell is zero. The fill factor (FF) is a parameter which, in conjunction with Voc and Jsc, determines the maximum power of a solar cell. The FF is defined as the ratio of the maximum power from the solar cell to the product of Voc and Jsc. Graphically, the FF is a measure of the “squareness” of the solar cell and is also the area of the largest rectangle which will fit into the I–V curve. As FF is a measure of the “squareness” of the I–V curve, a solar cell with a higher voltage has a larger possible FF, since the “rounded” portion of the I–V curve takes up less area. A commonly used expression for the FF can be determined empirically as eqn (10)93,94 (10)
In general, solar cells can be sorted according to the semiconductor materials used for the active layer.92 Typically, solar cells are classified as silicon-based solar cells,95,96 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),97–100 organic solar cells, including organic unit molecules101 and polymers,102,103 quantum-dot (QD) solar cells,104,105 and perovskite solar cells.106–108 In a specific cell, each of the factors Voc, Jsc, and FF is affected by the material species, cell structure, fabrication process, and other technologies.109–111 To increase the cell efficiency by improving Voc, Jsc, and FF, therefore, many approaches are used, such as the development of novel materials,112–115 light harvesting device structures,116–118 and processing119–121 and other techniques.122,123 The silicon-based solar cells have high η above 20%,92,95,96 but they have limitations of brittleness and difficult handling. Otherwise, other solar cells based on the coating process can be fabricated onto various electrodes, made of metal oxides (e.g. indium tin oxide (ITO), fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)), metals (Au, Ag, etc.), carbons (e.g. carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene), coated substrates (i.e. glass, polymer films, metal wire, textile, etc.).124–126 To fabricate “All-in-one energy harvesting and storage devices” through hybridization, the understanding and application of devices in terms of materials, electrodes, and processes utilized in fabrication are essential tasks, because the physical properties of flexibility, bendability, wiring, stacking, etc. are important for hybridization between devices.109,126,127 It cannot be emphasized enough that the solar cells should be one of the most important future renewable energy sources in our daily lives, for powering electrical devices, housing, automobiles, etc.
3. Hybridization of energy harvesters
3.1 Integration of various energy harvesters
Recently, hybrid energy harvesters for simultaneously harvesting multiple types of environmental energy have represented a new trend because of their synergetic output performances, and some hybrid cells have been accordingly demonstrated for harvesting mechanical and solar energy, mechanical and thermal energy, thermal and solar energy, and mechanical, thermal, and solar energy. For integrated energy harvesters of two or more such sources, electric circuit design should be considered, because solar cells and thermoelectric generators generate direct current (DC) electricity, while piezoelectric, triboelectric, and pyroelectric generators usually generate alternating current (AC) electricity (Fig. 2). In the case of AC electricity, a rectification diode is required to convert AC into DC electricity. Moreover, impedance matching depending on materials and operation frequencies using resistive load to the piezoelectric generators,128,129 pyroelectric generators130,131 and triboelectric generators132,133 is important to achieve maximum power output (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 2  Electric circuit designs for hybrid energy harvesters. (a) Mechanical energy + solar energy, (b) mechanical energy + thermal energy, and (c) thermal energy + solar energy. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Typical schematic of a measuring circuit for current and voltage as a function of load resistance. (b–d) Output power as a function of load resistance: (b) ZnO based piezoelectric energy harvester, (c) PVDF based pyroelectric energy harvester, and (d) triboelectric energy harvester. (b) Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, (c) from ref. 131 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (d) from ref. 132 with permission from the Elsevier. 

3.1.1 Mechanical and solar energy. 
Multi-type energy harvesters using both mechanical and solar energy have been especially intensively developed after a hybrid cell was first proposed in 2009 by Wang's group, based on piezoelectric and PV effects.134 The piezoelectric effect is driven by ultrasonic waves with a fixed frequency of ∼41 kHz. The range of various frequencies of mechanical energy in our living environment should be considered, however, for the study of PENGs for practical applications. Lee et al., in 2010, demonstrated a hybrid energy harvester fabricated by infiltrating CdS/CdTe quantum dots into vertically aligned ZnO nanowires driven by sound in the frequency range of 35–1000 Hz and solar energy as shown in Fig. 4a and b.135 After this architecture was proposed, various hybrid energy harvesters were suggested and demonstrated using acoustic waves and pressure for the piezoelectric effect, which were based on PVDF136,137 and ZnO,138 with various kinds of solar cells such as DSSCs,138 quantum dot solar cells,135 silicon (Si) solar cells,136 and organic–inorganic hybrid solar cells.137 Since the invention of TENGs by Fan et al. in 2012,9 TENG-based multi-type energy harvesters have also received great attention because of their high output power and easy hybridization with other energy harvesters.139–144 In 2013, Yang et al. demonstrated a hybrid energy harvester based on the triboelectric effect and the PV effect for the first time. Micro-pyramid Si solar cells were fabricated with a protective layer consisting of a thin film of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) nanowires, which not only worked as a protective layer, but also as a triboelectric layer for harvesting mechanical energy (Fig. 4c and d).139 The hybrid energy harvester can be used for self-powered electrodegradation of rhodamine B and can also charge lithium (Li) ion batteries for operating small electronic devices. A Si solar cell covered with the polymer showed decreased conversion efficiency from 16% to 14%, however. In 2014, Guo et al. improved the structural design and device performance with airflow-induced vibration of the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) film between the copper (Cu) electrodes and the DSSC (Fig. 5a and b).141 This airflow induced TENG can effectively prevent the mechanical damage caused by direct friction between the electrodes, and output power is also much enhanced. This device is also able to drive 46 commercial green light-emitting diodes connected in series and charge a capacitor (220 mF) to 2.5 V in 50 s. Based on these demonstrations of hybrid energy harvesters for concurrently harvesting solar and mechanical energy, in 2015, Fang et al. reported a solution processed flexible hybrid energy harvester based on integration of an organic solar cell and a single electrode TENG, for use as a wearable energy harvester (Fig. 5c and d).143 This prototype represents a possible approach to a power source that would work even on a rainy day or upgrade various wearable electronics, such as for epidermal healthcare monitoring without an external power supply.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram depicting a hybrid device with two different incoming energy sources, and (b) short-circuit current output signal of the hybrid cell. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabricated hybrid energy cell and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated Si pyramids, and (d) output voltage of the hybrid solar cell and TENG (after rectification) for harvesting both solar and mechanical energy. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c and d) from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of a hybrid device, and (b) the time–current signals of the hybrid device, with the modules working individually and simultaneously to harvest wind and light energy. (c) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of the hybrid cell hidden under the cloth fabric as a wearable power source. (d) Time required to charge a 10 mF commercial capacitor using the hybrid cell with and without single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (STENG) input. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (c and d) from ref. 143 with permission from the Elsevier. 


3.1.2 Mechanical and thermal energy. 
In some situations, mechanical vibrations or friction, and temperature fluctuations or a temperature gradient coexist, such as on the human body, during air flow, and in working engines/machines.32,137,140,145,146 In 2014 Lee et al. demonstrated a stretchable piezoelectric–pyroelectric hybrid energy harvester based on a micro-patterned ferroelectric polymer P(VDF–TrFE) thin film, a PDMS–CNT composite, and graphene electrodes, as shown in Fig. 6a.32 Harvesting mechanical and thermal energy from a single cell was successfully demonstrated, and the output electrical signals were integrated under simultaneous application of mechanical and thermal energy (Fig. 6b). The working mechanism for achieving the total output voltage was based on coupling of the piezoelectric and pyroelectric effects in terms of polarization and oscillation of the electric dipoles of P(VDF–TrFE). Stable pyroelectric output performance of the hybrid energy harvester for various stretchable modes was also demonstrated, which showed the stretchability, mechanical durability, and robustness of the device owing to the micro-patterned design. A Seebeck effect based hybrid energy harvester to harvest both mechanical and thermal energy was also developed to convert wasted temperature gradient energy into electrical energy. In 2013, Lee et al. demonstrated a hybrid energy harvester based on the piezoelectric and thermoelectric effects, by integration of the piezoelectric and thermoelectric component devices, which were mounted on a flexible substrate, as shown in Fig. 6c.145 The output performance of the two processes can be integrated without loss of the combined output, including the high output current from the TEG (I = 5 μA and V = 0.45 mV at ΔT = 3 °C) and the high output voltage from the PENG (I = 200 nA, V = 3 V), as shown in Fig. 6d and e. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the energy harvesting device can simultaneously harvest using both thermal and mechanical energy from the human body temperature gradient and mechanical movement. In 2013, Yang et al. also fabricated a hybrid generator that consisted of a TENG and a TEG, which could be used for self-powered water splitting to generate hydrogen (Fig. 7a).140 The hybrid energy harvester consisted of a polyamide (PA)–perfluoroalkoxy (PFA) polymer film-based TENG and a Bi2Te3-based TEG. The fabricated TENG generated output voltage and current of 110 V and 60 μA, and the TEG generated output voltage and current were 2.2 V and 0.1 A, respectively (Fig. 7b and c). This strategy provides a highly promising platform for harvesting both mechanical and thermal energy simultaneously and individually, and utilizing it for wireless sensors, temperature imaging, medical diagnostics, power sources for biomedical applications, personal electronics, sensor networks and micro-/nano-systems.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a hybrid device for harvesting mechanical and thermal energy; (b) piezoelectric output voltage from the device under stretch-release conditions (left), and pyroelectric output voltage under a thermal gradient (right). (c) Flexible hybrid cell, consisting of a piezoelectric generator above a thermoelectric generator, (d) output current when the TEG and the PENG are connected in parallel (left), and (e) output voltage when the TEG and the PENG are connected in series (right). (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (c–e) from ref. 145 with permission from the Elsevier. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated hybrid energy cell consisting of a triboelectric generator and a thermoelectric cell, (b) output voltage and current of the triboelectric generator, and (c) output voltage and current of the thermoelectric generator. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Thermal and solar energies. 
Hybrid cells for harvesting thermal and solar energy are also the most conventional energy harvesting technology which has been reported.87,137,140,147–154 A thermoelectric-solar hybrid generator was proposed in 2005 by Zhang et al., using a Si solar cell and a TEG.147 Sunlight collected by a lens is separated into two energy ranges of light, with the ultraviolet (UV)-visible light absorbed by a solar cell and the infrared light absorbed by a TEG to harvest electricity. In 2010, Guo and Chang designed a thermoelectric-solar energy harvesting system to increase output performance with a DSSC and a TEG.148,149 After this study, in 2011, Wang et al. reported a novel approach to a thermoelectric solar hybrid energy harvesting system with a series connected DSSC, a solar selective absorber (SSA), and a TEG, as shown in Fig. 8a.151 The conversion efficiency of the solar cell was greatly increased by using the SSA and the TEG to utilize residual sunlight transmitted through the DSSC. The hybrid device, comprising a DSSC for high-energy photons and an SSA-coated thermoelectric generator for low-energy photons, yielded overall conversion efficiency higher than 13% (Fig. 8b). In 2013, Yang et al. demonstrated a hybrid cell that was composed of a Bi2Te3 based TEG and a Si solar cell, which could be used to simultaneously and individually harvest thermal and solar energy (Fig. 8c).140 Under light illumination, the output voltage of the hybrid energy cell is about 3.5 V, and the output current is about 30 mA, based on the integration of 6 solar cells (Fig. 8d). Under light illumination on the solar cells and heat applied at the bottom of the thermoelectric cell, the total peak output voltage and current of these two components of the energy harvester reached 5.2 V and 34 mA, respectively. Using the hybrid energy harvester, the Li-ion battery could be easily charged from 1 V to 3.7 V in only about 376 s. Under a constant discharging current of 5 mA, the charged Li-ion battery can continue to operate for about 327 s before it gets back to the original value of 1 V, corresponding to total electric capacity of 0.45 mA h. In 2015, Park et al. reported a hybrid cell based on a DSSC solar cell with a pyroelectric and thermoelectric device operated by photothermally generated heat, as shown in Fig. 9a.87 The photoconversion efficiency (PCE) was increased up to 20% under sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5G) using the transmitted light through the DSSC as a heat source that was converted into electricity by the pyroelectric and thermoelectric effects simultaneously by the photothermal poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) electrodes. Interestingly, as PV works under sunlight, the output voltage from the PV device continuously decreased because of the fast recombination phenomenon during the PV operation (Fig. 9b). When the PV was combined with a TEG, however, the total output voltage increased, due to thermoelectric power generation. Consequently, the reduced PV output performance was enhanced by the output of the thermoelectric generator in the hybrid device. This result was also confirmed by the charging of the capacitor. The plot (Fig. 9c) of the cumulative charges and energies in the capacitors demonstrates the enhanced performance of the PV–TE hybrid system.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of a solar-thermoelectric hybrid device and (b) photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the DSSC/TEG hybrid device and of the component devices with the other component short-circuited. (c) Schematic diagram of the hybrid energy cell and (d) current–voltage characteristics of the hybrid energy cell under different conditions. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (c and d) from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a photovoltaic and photothermal pyro-thermoelectric device. (b) Output voltage of a PV and PV–TE series connected device. (c) Output and accumulated energy of a capacitor (10 F, 5.4 V) charged by PV and by the PV–TE series connected device in the hybrid system (filled circles and squares, charge; open circles and squares, energy). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Coupling of multiple energy sources
Since a hybrid generator was demonstrated in 2009 by Xu et al., the new concept of a piezoelectric potential enhanced PV cell was also suggested, with the mechanism called the piezo-phototronic effect. In 2009 and 2011, Xu et al. demonstrated that in a serially integrated DSSC solar cell and ZnO PENG, the open circuit voltage in AM 1.5G and ultrasonic waves could be enhanced.134,155 The working principle is explained using the electron energy band diagram, as shown in Fig. 10. The maximum achievable output voltage is the difference between the Fermi level of the ZnO nanowires (NWs) in the DSSC and that of the ZnO NWs in the NG. The maximum output voltage is an integration of the output voltages of the NG and DSSC. Yang et al. also demonstrated the so-called piezotronic effect on the output voltage of flexible solar cells using poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT)–ZnO microwire p–n heterojunctions on a flexible polystyrene (PS) substrate (Fig. 11a).156 The open-circuit voltage Voc of the solar cell was characterized by tuning the strain-induced polarization charges at the interface between ZnO and P3HT. Fig. 11b shows the mechanism of the piezotronic effect on solar cell performance under strain. The strain-induced piezoelectric potential is created under an externally applied strain, which modifies the energy band diagram at the interface of the p–n heterojunction, consequently modulating the performance of the device. The output power of solar cells could be enhanced by tuning the band profile under strain. In 2015, Yoon et al. reported a hybrid system consisting of a DC type PENG based on a two-dimensional (2D) ZnO nanosheet and an organic solar cell based on P3HT/[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), as shown in Fig. 11c.157 The power generation performance of the serially integrated hybrid cell is synergistically enhanced by the help of a PENG, compared with the output power generated independently from the solar cell component under illumination (Fig. 11d). Fig. 11e exhibits the mechanisms of power generation from the piezoelectric potential of the ZnO nanosheets. The energy band diagram in the ZnO nanosheet is modified under the influence of applied force and light. The photogenerated electrons from the organic solar cell can effectively flow through the PENG, owing to the reduced Schottky barrier height between the ZnO nanosheets and the Au electrode. Consequentially, Jsc from the solar-piezo hybrid cell also increases under application of pressure.
 Fig. 10  Electron energy band diagram of the solar-piezo hybrid cell, showing that the maximum output voltage is the sum of the voltages produced by the solar cell and the PENG. The abbreviations are as follows: conduction band (CB), valence band (VB), Fermi level (EF). Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Piezopotential distributions in the stretched device of [0001] type and compressed device of [000] type, and (b) schematic energy band diagram of P3HT/ZnO in the presence of negative piezoelectric charges. The blue line indicates the energy band diagram modified by the piezoelectric potential in ZnO. The negative piezoelectric charges can lift the energy band, resulting in a peak in the energy band. (c) Schematic illustration of the solar-piezo hybrid cell, (d) output voltage of the solar-piezo hybrid cell when pressure is applied periodically at intervals of 3.0 s for a period of 1.0 s, and (e) when pressure is applied to the PENG, the ZnO nanosheets exhibited a new band diagram: dashed and solid lines represent the band diagrams before and after applying the pressure on the PENG. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c–e) from ref. 157 with permission from the Elsevier. 
Moreover, coupling of thermal/mechanical energy and thermal/solar energy based energy harvesters and self-powered photocurrent were also reported. In 2015, Lee et al. reported a PNG enhanced by piezoelectric potential driven by thermally induced strain, as shown in Fig. 12a.158 Dramatic enhancement of the piezoelectric coupled PNG performance was observed, based on coupling of the piezoelectric and pyroelectric effects using different thermal expansion coefficients and micro-patterned architectures, as shown in Fig. 12b. Wang et al. reported using the light-self-induced pyroelectric effect in ZnO to modulate the optoelectronic processes and thus enhance the performance of ultraviolet sensors (Fig. 12c and d).159 Thus, the coupling effect between mechanical, thermal, and light energy in an enhanced synergetic energy harvesting system has attracted great attention, as it is not just simple multi-type energy harvesting, and because such devices will offer a promising approach for effectively harvesting multi-type energy for realizing multi-functional energy devices.134,138,155–164
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the piezo–pyro coupling NG, and (b) piezoelectric and pyroelectric coupled potential-generating mechanism of the patterned P(VDF–TrFE) on a PDMS substrate. (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of self-powered ZnO/perovskite-heterostructured photodetectors (ZPH PDs), with FTO acting as the transparent electrode, and (d) schematic illustration of the working mechanism of the pyroelectric effect-combined with photoexcitation processes. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (c and d) from ref. 159 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
4. Integration of energy harvesting and storage devices
Because of the naturally uncontrollable and unstable features of environmental mechanical, thermal, and solar energy sources, the converted electrical energy from energy harvesters is unstable and difficult to use as a direct power source for electronic devices. Usually, storage elements such as either capacitors or batteries are needed to stabilize and control the power output for direct applications.
4.1 Simple connection of energy harvester and storage device
The integration of energy harvesting and energy storage in one device not only enables the conversion of ambient energy into electricity, but also provides a sustainable power source for various electronic devices and systems. Therefore, there is considerable literature on the subject of various energy harvesters integrated with energy storage devices such as capacitors or batteries to demonstrate practical applications such as light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, electroluminescence, micro-heaters, mobile phones, sensors, pacemakers, deep brain stimulation, etc.165–185 Solar cells and TEGs can be connected directly with energy storage devices without any electrical circuit because of their DC behaviour.186–193 Nevertheless, PENGs, TENGs, and PNGs should be connected to energy storage devices with rectification diodes due to their AC behaviour. In order to effectively charge an energy storage device, the charging voltage and current should be constant with an appropriate value, whereas energy harvesters generate irregular and unstable electricity. Therefore, an optimized circuit including a capacitor filter, AC–DC and DC–DC converter is needed to economically charge the energy storage device using energy harvesters, as shown in Fig. 13.194–200
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of an energy harvesting module circuit, which includes energy harvesters, the power module circuit, energy storage, and applications. 
4.2 Hybrid structure of energy harvester and storage device
It is highly recommended that unnecessary energy loss should be minimized in the power-management circuits between energy harvesting and storage devices. In general, electricity generation and energy storage are two distinct processes that involve first the conversion from mechanical, thermal, or solar energy to electricity and then the conversion from electrical energy to electrochemical energy, respectively. In 2012, Xue et al. first introduced a self-charging power cell using a Li-ion battery consisting of a LiCoO3 cathode, TiO2 nanotube anode, and PVDF piezoelectric polymer film as the separator (Fig. 14a).201 The strain induced piezoelectric potential from the PVDF film acts as a charge pump to drive Li ions to migrate from the LiCoO3 cathode to the TiO2 nanotube anode with accompanying charging reactions at the electrodes, which can be defined as a piezo-electrochemical process. The fundamental mechanism that directly hybridizes the two processes into one, in which the mechanical energy is directly converted into electrochemical energy, without any intermediate step of first converting piezoelectric potential into electricity, is also proposed. Fig. 14b shows the charging mechanism in detail, in which the polarized PVDF film creates a positive piezoelectric potential on the cathode side and a negative piezoelectric potential on the anode side under a compressive stress on the device. Li ions in the electrolyte drift from the cathode to the anode along the pores within the PVDF film in order to screen the piezoelectric field. The decreased concentration of Li+ around the cathode will break the chemical equilibrium at the cathode (LiCoO2 ↔ Li1−xCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−), so that Li+ deintercalates from LiCoO2 to form Li1−xCoO2. Likewise, with increasing concentration of Li+ around the anode, the chemical equilibrium at the anode (TiO2 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixTiO2) is also broken, and the Li ions will move in the opposite direction, where Li+ will react with TiO2 to form LixTiO2. During this process, Li ions migrate from the cathode to the anode continuously, and the Li-ion battery is partially charged. When the distribution of Li+ can balance the piezoelectric field, a new equilibrium is achieved, and the self-charging process is completed. After this report, modification of the anode material of a lithium ion battery, using materials such as CuO,202 graphene,203 graphite,204 and CNTs,205 was demonstrated in a hybrid cell consisting of a Li-ion battery and a piezoelectric film. Zhang and Kim also reported a similar hybrid cell with the PVDF layer replaced by a PVDF–PZT nanocomposite film205 and a porous PVDF204 membrane to enhance the charging efficiency.
 Fig. 14  (a) Design of a self-charging power cell by hybridizing a PENG and a Li-ion battery, and (b) the working mechanism of the self-charging power cell driven by compressive strain. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In 2015, Song et al. and Ramadoss et al. fabricated a piezoelectricity driven self-charging supercapacitor power cell.206,207 In particular, Song et al. demonstrated a piezoelectric-supercapacitor hybrid cell with functionalized carbon cloth as the supercapacitor electrode, which shows the potential for wearable applications of hybrid cells, as shown in Fig. 15a.206 The working mechanism of the piezoelectric-supercapacitor hybrid cell is slightly different from that of the piezoelectric-battery hybrid cell (Fig. 15b). When the external stress is applied to the piezoelectric-supercapacitor hybrid device, the remnant polarization of the PVDF film is changed. In order to balance the changed remnant polarization, charge carriers will migrate towards the electrode of the supercapacitor. Two factors are considered for the charging process. First, the increased bound charge density of the PVDF surface affects the distribution of the positive ions and negative ions in the electrolyte. The piezoelectric potential causes the redistribution of the ions and causes charges to accumulate on the surface of the supercapacitor electrode. Second, the piezoelectric potential drives the migration of hydrogen ions (H+) and SO42− along the direction of the potential across the porous PVDF film. As the piezoelectric potential increases between the positive and negative electrodes due to an increasing external applied force, more electricity is stored on the electrodes in the form of electrochemical energy. The nonfaradaic and faradaic forces of the two electrodes reach a new equilibrium after the H+ ions and SO42− ions are redistributed in the electrolyte and balance the piezoelectric field in the PVDF film. This is an innovative approach to developing a new energy technology, which directly converts mechanical energy into electrochemical energy without energy being wasted on the outer circuitry and decreases energy conversion loss. Importantly, the development of both high performance energy storage devices208–214 and the materials215–222 used in the devices is essential for the fabrication of highly effective hybridized “all-in-one energy harvesting and storage devices” in the future.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the process flow of hybrid piezo-supercapacitor fabrication, and (b) proposed working mechanism of the hybrid piezo-supercapacitor. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Summary and perspective
In this review, we have summarized the recent progress in various types of energy harvesters and of hybrid energy harvesters, including multi-type energy harvesters, and coupling of multiple energy sources, as well as hybridization of energy harvesters and energy storage devices for self-powered systems. We believe that this review could be useful for designing energy harvesters, storage devices, and self-powered systems. To date, great advances have been achieved in developing various types of energy harvesters based on the piezoelectric, triboelectric, pyroelectric, thermoelectric, and photovoltaic effects in various energy conversion materials. The output performance of energy harvesters has reached the point where they are able to replace currently available batteries in portable electronics for self-powered systems. Hybrid cell technologies have been demonstrated that can simultaneously generate electricity everywhere and at any time, using multiple sources of environmental energy such as mechanical, thermal, and solar energy. In particular, energy harvesters based on the coupling of multiple energy sources exhibit not only multiple energy harvesting, but also enhancement of energy harvesting performance due to synergetic effects. Finally, integration of energy harvesters and energy storage devices for practical applications such as self-powered systems was introduced. Self-charging power cells provide an especially innovative approach to hybridizing an energy harvester with an energy storage unit, which can directly convert mechanical energy into electrochemical energy without energy being wasted on the outer circuitry so as to decrease energy conversion loss. The development of technologies for the direct conversion of mechanical, thermal, and solar energy into electrochemical energy is suggested as an important topic for future work towards sustainable and maintenance-free operation of micro-/nano-systems and mobile/portable electronics. In addition all-in-one technology could be applied for the development of self-powered wearable electronics by integration of wearable energy harvester/storage devices.177,184,193,223–232
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20152020104870) and “Human Resources Program in Energy Technology” of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20154030200870).
Notes and references
J. Oh, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2007, 451, 809–813 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Lingampalli, U. K. Gautam and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3589–3594 CAS .
A. C. Dilion, K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C. H. Kiang, D. S. Bethune and M. J. Heben, Nature, 1997, 386, 377–379 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Wei, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, T. Zhang, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3426 Search PubMed .
Q. Jing, Y. Xie, G. Zhu, R. P. S. Han and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 5, 8031 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, K. C. Pradel, G. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, G. S. Svechnikov and S. V. Kalinin, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 042009 CrossRef .
A. S. Mischenko, Q. Zhang, J. F. Scott, R. W. Whatmore and N. D. Mathur, Science, 2006, 311, 1270–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Kim, K. H. Lee, H. A. Mun, H. S. Kim, S. W. Hwang, J. W. Roh, D. J. Yang, W. H. Shin, X. S. Li, Y. H. Lee, G. J. Snyder and S. W. Kim, Science, 2015, 348, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen, M. Y. Tang, R. G. Yang, H. Lee, D. Z. Wang, Z. F. Ren, J.-P. Fleurial and P. Gogna, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1043–1053 CrossRef CAS .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-M. Shin, H. J. Han, W.-G. Kim, E. Kim, C. Kim, S. W. Hong, H. K. Kim, J.-W. Oh and Y.-H. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3198–3203 CAS .
M.-G. Kang, S.-M. Oh, W.-S. Jung, H. G. Moon, S.-H. Baek, S. Nahm, S.-J. Yoon and C.-Y. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Romano, G. Mantini, A. D. Carlo, A. D'Amico, C. Falconi and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 465401 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Choi, D. Choi, M.-J. Jin, I. Kim, S.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2185–2189 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao, J. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 19, 67–72 CrossRef .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Wei, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, R. Yang, S. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3151–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Xu, N. Yao and Y. Shi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y.-K. Fuh and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Persano, C. Dagdeviren, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, S. Girardo, D. Pisignano, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2012, 4, 1633 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Kang, S.-J. Yoon, J.-B. Yoo and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 765–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Duan, Y. A. Huang, Z. P. Yin, N. B. Bu and W. T. Dong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3289–3295 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Q. You and G. M. Sessler, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2014, 299, 290–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y.-W. Yeh, G. Poirier, M. C. McAlpine, R. A. Register and N. Yao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2393–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Shin, Y.-H. Kim, M. H. Lee, J.-Y. Jung and J. Nah, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2766–2773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, D. Kim, J.-H. Lee, T. Y. Kim, M. K. Gupta and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Park, C. K. Jeong, J. Ryu, G.-T. Hwang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1539–1544 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G.-T. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chung, S. Kim, J.-H. Lee, K. Kim, S.-W. Kim, C.-Y. Kang, S.-J. Yoon and Y. S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6022–6027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Park, S. Xu, Y. Liu, G.-T. Hwang, S.-J. L. Kang, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4933–4943 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, N. T. Tien, N.-E. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 169–175 CAS .
S. Cha, S. M. Kim, H. J. Kim, J. Ku, J. I. Sohn, Y. J. Park, B. G. Song, M. H. Jung, E. K. Lee, B. L. Choi, J. J. Park, Z. L. Wang, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5142–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-P. Lu, J. Song, M.-Y. Lu, M.-T. Chen, Y. Gao, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khan, M. A. Abbasi, M. Hussain, Z. H. Ibupoto, J. Wissting, O. Nur and M. Willander, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193506 CrossRef .
C.-T. Huang, J. Song, W.-F. Lee, Y. Ding, Z. Gao, Y. Hao, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S.-Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 022105 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S.-Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3127–3130 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Huang, J. Song, C.-M. Tsai, W.-F. Lee, D.-H. Lien, Z. Gao, Y. Hao, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4008–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-I. Park, J. H. Son, G.-T. Hwan, C. K. Jeong, J. Ryu, M. Koo, I. Choi, S. H. Lee, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2514–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, W. Seung, B. K. Sharma, S.-W. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8970–8975 CAS .
C. Dagdeviren, B. D. Yang, Y. Su, P. L. Tran, P. Joe, E. Anderson, J. Xia, V. Doraiswamy, B. Dehdashti, X. Feng, B. Lu, R. Poston, Z. Khalpey, R. Ghaffari, Y. Huang, M. J. Slepian and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin, Y. Yang, J. M. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3599–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Hu, A. P. Suryavanshi, K. Yum and M.-F. Yu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2966–2969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Jung, C.-Y. Chen, B. K. Yun, N. Lee, Y. Zhou, W. Jo, L.-J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 375401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Jung, M. Lee, J.-I. Hong, Y. Ding, C.-Y. Chen, L.-J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10041–10046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, H.-J. Yoon, T. Y. Kim, M. K. Gupta, J. H. Lee, W. Seung, H. Ryu and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3203–3209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 447–458 RSC .
Y. K. Pang, X. H. Li, M. X. Chen, C. B. Han, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19076–19082 CAS .
X.-S. Zhang, M.-D. Han, R.-X. Wang, F.-Y. Zhu, Z.-H. Li, W. Wang and H.-X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1168–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, G. Zhu, S. Wang, R. Zhang, L. Lin, W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9462–9466 CAS .
X. Fan, J. Chen, J. Yang, P. Bai, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4236–4243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, L. Lin, G. Zhu, W. Wu, R. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3109–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Q. Jing, J. Chen, P. Bai, J. Bai, G. Zhu, Y. Su and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2166–2174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Z.-H. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Q. Jing, Y. Su, J. Yang, J. Chen, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9213–9222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Xie, S. Wang, W. Wu, S. Niu, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8266–8274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wei, S. Y. Kuang, H. Y. Li, C. Pan, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13658 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-H. Lin, G. Zhu, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Yang, P. Bai, J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2013, 52, 5065–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Satterthwaite and R. W. Ure Jr, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 1164–1170 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Goldsmid and R. W. Douglass, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 5, 386–390 CrossRef .
H. J. Goldsmid, A. R. Sheard and D. A. Wright, Br. J. Appl. Phys., 1958, 9, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Cosgrove, J. P. McHugh and W. A. Tiller, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 621–623 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Jacobsen, S. V. Sinogeikin, R. S. Kumar and A. L. Cornelius, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2012, 73, 1154–1158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, X. Jia, K. Jie, H. Sun, Y. Zhang, B. Sun and H. Ma, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 7236–7242 RSC .
T. Ikeda, L. A. Collins, V. A. Ravi, F. S. Gascoin, S. M. Haile and G. J. Snyder, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 763–767 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Jaworski, M. D. Nielsen, H. Wang, S. N. Girard, W. Cai, W. D. Porter, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. P. Heremans, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 045203 CrossRef .
W.-S. Liu, B.-P. Zhang, L.-D. Zhao and J.-F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7526–7531 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, L. Chen, J. Yang and G. P. Meisner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2301 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Minnich, H. Lee, X. W. Wang, G. Joshi, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. F. Ren, G. Chen and D. Vashaee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 155327 CrossRef .
E. K. Lee, L. Yin, Y. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. J. Lee, J. Lee, S. N. Cha, D. Whang, G. S. Hwang, K. Hippalgaonkar, A. Majumdar, C. Yu, B. L. Choi, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2918–2923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ikeda, L. Haviez, Y. Li and G. J. Snyder, Small, 2012, 8, 2350–2355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Pulikkotil, D. J. Singh, S. Auluck, M. Saravanan, D. K. Misra, A. Dhar and R. C. Budhani, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 155204 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, T. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6408–6413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. M. Wu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8456–8461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. F. Wang, T. Feng, Y. Li, Z. Chi, X. Zhao and H. Luo, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 074101 CrossRef .
D. Zabek, J. Taylor, E. L. Boulbar and C. R. Bowen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401891 Search PubMed .
T. Park, J. Na, B. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Shin and E. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11830–11839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Bowen, J. Taylor, E. LeBoulbar, D. Zabek, A. Chaulchan and R. Vaish, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3836–3856 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. H. Jung, B. K. Yun, F. Zhang, K. C. Pradel, W. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5357–5362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, K. C. Pradel, G. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Shaldin and S. Matyjasik, Semiconductors, 2014, 48, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parida, S. Iniyan and R. Goic, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1625–1636 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 210–234 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Saga, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 96–102 CrossRef .
S. Zhong, Z. Huang, X. Lin, Y. Zeng, Y. Ma and W. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 555–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, L. Zhao, Y.-U. Heo, L. Wang, F. H. Bijarbooneh, A. J. Mozer, A. Nattestand, Y. Yamauchi, S. X. Dou and J. H. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 557–567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Y.-U. Heo, A. Nattestad, M. Shahabuddin, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7208–7213 RSC .
J. K. Koh, J. Kim, B. Kim, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1641–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Tan and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10465–10469 CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 863–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, L. Liu, A. Mei, X. Li and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501066 Search PubMed .
M. Ye, X. Hong and X.-Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6755–6771 CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Ji, S. Li, W. He, K. Wang, H. Hu and C. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14902–14909 CAS .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2015 DOI:10.1002/adma.201501629 .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Shi, H. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Lv, Y. Luo, D. Li, Q. Meng and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401943 Search PubMed .
D. Yoo, J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Nano Res., 2104, 7, 717–730 CrossRef .
L. Huo, T. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Cai, A. J. Heeger and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2938–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. K. Koh, B. Kim, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6864–6869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weickert, R. B. Dunbar, H. C. Hesse, W. Wiedemann and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1810–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. K. Koh, B. Kim, S. H. Ahn, H. Ahn, D. Y. Ryu, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zeng, C.-S. Jiang, N. P. Padture and K. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6363–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, W. Fu, M. Shi, J. Ling and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1902–1905 CAS .
J. Na, J. Kim, C. Park and E. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44555–44562 RSC .
J. Lin, A. Nattestand, H. Yu, Y. Bai, L. Wang, S. X. Dou and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8902–8909 CAS .
K. J. Tielrooij, J. C. W. Song, S. A. Jensen, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, A. Z. Elorza, M. Bonn, L. S. Levitov and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 248–252 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Y. Peng, A. R. Pascoe, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng, Y.-U. Heo, A. Nattestad, W. Seung, S. K. Kim, H. J. Yoon, S.-W. Kim, Y. Yamauchi, S. X. Dou and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4679–4686 CAS .
W.-C. Tsai, S. Thomas, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-C. Huang, J.-Y. Tseng, T.-T. Wu, C.-H. Chang, Z. Wang, J.-M. Shieh, C.-H. Shen and Y.-L. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6980–6988 CAS .
H. Kim, S. Priya, H. Stephanou and K. Uchino, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Eng., 2007, 54, 1851–1859 CrossRef .
J. Briscoe, N. Jalali, P. Woolliams, M. Stewart, P. M. Weaver, M. Cain and S. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3035–3045 CAS .
H. Yamazaki and T. Kitayama, Ferroelectrics, 1981, 33, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Leng, L. Chen, H. Guo, J. Liu, G. Liu, C. Hu and Y. Xi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11940–11947 CAS .
S. Niu, Y. S. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Lin, Y. Bando and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, W. Tang, C. Han, F. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3580–3591 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5866–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, R. Yang, C. Li and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2929–2935 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Lee, H. Kim, H.-M. Li, A.-R. Jang, Y.-D. Lim, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Park, D. J. Kang and W. J. Yoo, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 175402 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, G. Zhu, S. Lee, Z.-H. Lin and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 785–790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, W. Guo, L. Dong, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3356–3361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Lin, S. Lee, Z. Lin, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2808–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Z.-H. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2429–2434 CAS .
H. Guo, X. He, J. Zhong, Q. Zhong, Q. Leng, C. Hu, J. Chen, L. Tian, Y. Xi and J. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2079–2087 CAS .
L. Zheng, Z.-H. Lin, G. Cheng, W. Wu, X. Wen, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, J. Tong, Q. Zhong, Q. Chen, J. Zhou, Q. Luo, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang and B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Cheng, J. Chen, L. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501152 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, S.-H. Bae, L. Lin, S. Ahn, C. Park, S.-W. Kim, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Park and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 817–825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zi, L. Lin, J. Wang, S. Wang, J. Chen, X. Fan, P.-K. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2340–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Zhang, X. F. Tang, P. C. Zhai, M. Niino and C. Endo, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2005, 492–493, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, Y. Zhang, D. Qin, Y. Luo, D. Li, Y. Pang and Q. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7684–7690 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, M. J. Kao, K. D. Huang, S. L. Chen and Z. R. Yu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 06GG08 Search PubMed .
R. Amatya and R. J. Ram, J. Electron. Mater., 2010, 39, 1735–1740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, L. Han, H. He, N.-H. Park and K. Koumoto, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3676–3679 CAS .
D. Kraemer, B. Poudel, H.-P. Feng, J. C. Caylor, B. Yu, X. Yan, Y. Ma, X. Wang, D. Wang, A. Muto, K. McEnaney, M. Chiesa, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 532–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Chavez-Urbiola, Y. V. Vorobiev and L. P. Bulat, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 369–378 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, G. H. Guai, C. Gong, W. Hu, J. Zhu, H. Yang, Q. Yan and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6294–6298 CAS .
C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 873–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, Y. Zhang, Y. Ding, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4812–4817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Yoon, K.-S. Shin, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, J.-H. Lee, Z. L. Wang and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, H. Ryu, T.-Y. Kim, S.-S. Kwak, H.-J. Yoon, T.-H. Kim, W. Seung and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500704 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, R. Yu, C. Pan, Z. Li, J. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Choi, K. Y. Lee, M.-J. Jin, S. G. Ihn, S. Yun, X. Bulliard, W. Choi, S. Y. Lee, S.-W. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4607–4613 CAS .
C. Pan, S. Niu, Y. Ding, L. Dong, R. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3302–3307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, J.-S. Seo, K.-H. Kim, J. I. Sohn, S. N. Cha, D. Choi, Z. L. Wang and S.-W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1959–1964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kathalingam, S. Valanarasu, V. Senthilkumar and J. K. Rhee, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 262–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee, J. Bae, S. Kim, J.-H. Lee, G. C. Yoon, M. K. Gupta, S. Kim, H. Kim, J. Park and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
G.-T. Hwang, H. Park, J.-H. Lee, S. Oh, K.-I. Park, M. Byun, H. Park, G. Ahn, C. K. Jeong, K. No, H. Kwon, S.-G. Lee, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4880–4887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, D. Geng, E. Liang and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Jeong, K. M. Baek, S. Niu, T. W. Nam, Y. H. Hur, D. Y. Park, G.-T. Hwang, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang, Y. S. Jung and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7031–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, P. Zhao, G. McConohy, H. Yang, Y. Tong and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301624 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Wang, S. Gong and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4938–4944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Kim, J. Chun, J. W. Kim, K. Y. Lee, J.-U. Park, S.-W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6394–6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Kim, J. Chun, S. A. Chae, C. W. Ahn, I. W. Kim, S.-W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
B. U. Ye, B.-J. Kim, J. Ryu, J. Y. Lee, J. M. Baik and K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16189–16194 RSC .
J. Chun, J. W. Kim, W.-S. Jung, C.-Y. Kang, S.-W. Kim, Z. L. Wang and J. M. Baik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3006–3012 CAS .
C. K. Jeong, J. Lee, S. Han, J. Ryu, G.-T. Hwang, D. Y. Park, J. H. Park, S. S. Lee, M. Byun, S. H. Ko and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2866–2875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-T. Hwang, Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee, S. Oh, C. K. Jeong, D. Y. Park, J. Ryu, H. Kwon, S.-G. Lee, B. Joung, D. Kim and K. J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2677–2684 CAS .
S. Kim, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, A. Sohn, T. Y. Kim, K.-S. Shin, D. Kim, S. K. Kim, K. H. Lee, H.-J. Shin, D.-W. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3918–3925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Seung, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, K.-S. Shin, J.-H. Lee, T. Y. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lin, J. H. Kim and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3501–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, R. Hinchet, S. K. Kim, S. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3605–3613 CAS .
U. Khan, T.-H. Kim, K. H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, H.-J. Yoon, R. Bhatia, I. Sameera, W. Seung, H. Ryu, C. Falconi and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hambier, S. R. Anton, N. Kong, A. Erturk and D. J. Inman, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2012, 23, 015101 CrossRef .
W. Tong, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Luan, F. Lv, L. Liu and Q. An, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7029–7037 CrossRef CAS .
B.-U. Hwang, J.-H. Lee, T. Q. Trung, E. Roh, D.-I. Kim, S.-W. Kim and N.-E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8801–8810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Z.-H. Lin, S. Niu, L. Lin, Y. Xie, K. C. Pradel and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 7, 11263–11271 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pu, L. Li, H. Song, C. Du, Z. Zhao, C. Jiang, G. Cao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2472–2478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. Ding, J. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 5018–5022 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, S. Bereznev, D. Fichou, K. Holl, D. Ilic, R. Koeppe, M. Krebs, A. Labouret, C. Lungenschmied, A. Marchenko, D. Meissner, E. Mellikov, J. Meot, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, H. Neugebauer, A. Opik, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Taillemite and T. Wohrle, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 947–957 CrossRef CAS .
V. Leonov and R. J. M. Vullers, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2009, 1, 062701 CrossRef .
V. Leonov, T. Torfs, P. Fiorini and C. V. Hoof, IEEE Sens. J., 2007, 7, 650–657 CrossRef .
D. Dondi, A. Bertacchini, D. Brunelli, L. Larcher and L. Benini, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2008, 55, 2759–2766 CrossRef .
C. E. Kinsella, S. M. O'Shaughnessy, M. J. Deasy, M. Duffy and A. J. Robinson, Appl. Energy, 2014, 114, 80–90 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, J. Liu, W. Yang and B. E. Logan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 343–349 CAS .
J. H. We, S. J. Kim and B. J. Cho, Energy, 2014, 73, 506–512 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kim, J. H. We and B. J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1959–1965 CAS .
G. A. Lesieutre, G. K. Ottman and H. F. Hofmann, J. Sound Vib., 2004, 269, 991–1001 CrossRef .
G. K. Ottman, H. F. Hofmann, A. C. Bhatt and G. A. Lesieutre, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2002, 17, 669–676 CrossRef .
G. K. Ottman, H. F. Hofmann and G. A. Lesieutre, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2003, 18, 696–703 CrossRef .
E. O. Torre and G. A. Rincon-Mora, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., 2009, 56, 1938–1948 CrossRef .
K. Tutuncouglu and A. Yener, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 2012, 11, 1180–1189 CrossRef .
B. Devillers and D. Gunduz, J. Comm. Network, 2012, 14, 130–139 CrossRef .
C. Vankecke, L. Assouere, A. Wang, P. Durand-Estebe, F. Caignet, J.-M. Dilhac and M. Bafleur, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2015, 30, 3215–3227 CrossRef .
X. Xue, S. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5048–5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, P. Deng, S. Yuan, Y. Nie, B. He, L. Xing and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2615–2620 CAS .
X. Xue, P. Deng, B. He, Y. Nie, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301329 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Kim, Y. Xie, X. Wen, S. Wang, S. J. Kim, H.-K. Song and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Xue, C. Cui, B. He, Y. Nie, P. Deng and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 105401 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Song, H. Jin, X. Li, L. Fei, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, H. L.-W. Chan, Y. Wang and Y. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14963–14970 CAS .
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y.-S. Kim, S. J. Kim and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4337–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, J. Tang, Y. Kamachi, T. Nakato, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, Z. Tang, S. Huang, L. Chen, Y. Liang, W. Mai, H. Zhong, R. Fu and D. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7221 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-S. Park, E. Park, J. Lee, G. Jeong, K. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9608 CAS .
X. Fang and H. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 1488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-X. Wang, Y.-G. Lim, M.-S. Park, S.-L. Chou, J. H. Kim, H.-K. Liu, S.-X. Dou and Y.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 529 CAS .
M. Pramanik, Y. Tsujimoto, V. Malgras, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1082 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, J.-G. Kim, M.-S. Park, M. Seo, S. M. Hwang, Y.-U. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Malgras, Q. Ji, Y. Kamachi, T. Mori, F.-K. Shieh, K. C.-W. Wu, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 1171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2015, 25, 177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, B. Kim, C. Anand, A. Mano, J. S. M. Zaidi, K. Ariga, J. You, A. Vinu and E. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, W. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill and M. Aono, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 406 RSC .
W. Chaikittisilp, K. Muraoka, Q. Ji, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12096 CAS .
M. Aono and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2015, 28, 989–992 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, N. L. Torad, C. Li, M. Imura, N. Suzuki, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Park, J. Kim, K. J. Kim, J.-W. Lee, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30963–30977 RSC .
W. Wu, S. Bai, M. Yuan, Y. Qin, Z. L. Wang and T. Jing, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6231–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, C.-Y. Chen, S. Wang, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, L.-J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1759–1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Leonov and R. J. M. Vullers, J. Electron. Mater., 2009, 38, 1491–1498 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, C. Zhang, C. B. Han, F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14695–14701 CAS .
S. Pan, Z. Yang, P. Chen, J. Deng, H. Li and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6110–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 CAS .
Y.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, W. Ma, J. Tao, X. Zhang, J. Su, L. Li, C. Yang, Y. Gao, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4925–4931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Ju-Hyuck Lee	Dr Ju-Hyuck Lee received his B.S. degree (2011) from the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU). Thereafter he received his Ph.D. degree (2016) under the supervision of Prof. Sang-Woo Kim in the Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT) at Sungkyunkwan University. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of California (UC), Berkeley. His current research interests include the design and development of bio/organic materials for energy harvesting/storage and sensor applications.
Jeonghun Kim	Dr Jeonghun Kim received his B.S. degree (2007) and Ph.D. degree (2012) from the Dept of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Yonsei University in Seoul, Korea. Up to 2015, he worked at Dongjin Semichem Co., Ltd, in the Electronic Materials Division, R&D Center as a senior researcher for the development of the synthesis and applications of conductive polymers for electronic and energy devices. He is currently a postdoctoral research associate under Prof. Jung Ho Kim at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), Australian Institute for Innovative Materials (AIIM), University of Wollongong, Australia. His major research interest is the design and development of functional organic and inorganic materials for electronic and energy storage applications.
Tae Yun Kim	Tae Yun Kim received his B.S. degree from the School of Advanced Materials Science & Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) in 2013. In March 2013, he started his graduate study under the supervision of Prof. Sang-Woo Kim at SKKU Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT). His research interests are FEM simulation of the piezoelectric and triboelectric effects and their applications in energy harvesting, and analysis of 2D materials using AFM.
Md Shahriar Al Hossain	Dr Md Shahriar Al Hossain received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), University of Wollongong, Australia in 2008. He was then employed as a Research Fellow at the University of Geneva, Switzerland. Currently he is working as a Senior Research Fellow at ISEM. He has accumulated extensive expertise in a number of areas in Materials Science and Engineering. His research experience in various institutes and in industry around the world has been mainly focused on the fabrication and characterization of superconducting materials and magnetically triggered nanoparticles for medical, power, and energy applications. He has published over 50 SCI articles.
Sang-Woo Kim	Prof. Sang-Woo Kim is Professor in the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU). He received his Ph.D. degree from Kyoto University in the Department of Electronic Science and Engineering in 2004. After working as a postdoctoral researcher at Kyoto University and the University of Cambridge, he spent four years as an Assistant Professor at the Kumoh National Institute of Technology. He joined the School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, SKKU, Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT) in 2009. His recent research interest is focused on piezoelectric/triboelectric nanogenerators, photovoltaics, and two-dimensional nanomaterials. He is currently an Associate Editor of Nano Energy and an Executive Board Member of Advanced Electronic Materials.
Jung Ho Kim	Prof. Jung Ho Kim is currently Professor at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), Australian Institute for Innovative Materials (AIIM), University of Wollongong, Australia. He received his Bachelors (1998), Masters (2000), and Ph.D. (2005) degrees from Sungkyunkwan University, Korea. He has published more than 150 papers in international refereed journals. He is currently acting as an editorial board member for Scientific Reports (Nature Publishing Group). His major research interest is the rational design of materials with one-, two-, and three-dimensions with a view towards energy storage and harvesting applications.
ρ = dX	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of energy harvesters based on (a) the piezoelectric effect, (b) the triboelectric effect, (c) the thermoelectric effect, (d) the pyroelectric effect and (e) the PV effect.	 
	(3)
	(4)
V = αΔ	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 2  Electric circuit designs for hybrid energy harvesters. (a) Mechanical energy + solar energy, (b) mechanical energy + thermal energy, and (c) thermal energy + solar energy.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Typical schematic of a measuring circuit for current and voltage as a function of load resistance. (b–d) Output power as a function of load resistance: (b) ZnO based piezoelectric energy harvester, (c) PVDF based pyroelectric energy harvester, and (d) triboelectric energy harvester. (b) Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, (c) from ref. 131 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (d) from ref. 132 with permission from the Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram depicting a hybrid device with two different incoming energy sources, and (b) short-circuit current output signal of the hybrid cell. (c) Schematic diagram of the fabricated hybrid energy cell and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated Si pyramids, and (d) output voltage of the hybrid solar cell and TENG (after rectification) for harvesting both solar and mechanical energy. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c and d) from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of a hybrid device, and (b) the time–current signals of the hybrid device, with the modules working individually and simultaneously to harvest wind and light energy. (c) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of the hybrid cell hidden under the cloth fabric as a wearable power source. (d) Time required to charge a 10 mF commercial capacitor using the hybrid cell with and without single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (STENG) input. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (c and d) from ref. 143 with permission from the Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a hybrid device for harvesting mechanical and thermal energy; (b) piezoelectric output voltage from the device under stretch-release conditions (left), and pyroelectric output voltage under a thermal gradient (right). (c) Flexible hybrid cell, consisting of a piezoelectric generator above a thermoelectric generator, (d) output current when the TEG and the PENG are connected in parallel (left), and (e) output voltage when the TEG and the PENG are connected in series (right). (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (c–e) from ref. 145 with permission from the Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated hybrid energy cell consisting of a triboelectric generator and a thermoelectric cell, (b) output voltage and current of the triboelectric generator, and (c) output voltage and current of the thermoelectric generator. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of a solar-thermoelectric hybrid device and (b) photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the DSSC/TEG hybrid device and of the component devices with the other component short-circuited. (c) Schematic diagram of the hybrid energy cell and (d) current–voltage characteristics of the hybrid energy cell under different conditions. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and (c and d) from ref. 140 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of a photovoltaic and photothermal pyro-thermoelectric device. (b) Output voltage of a PV and PV–TE series connected device. (c) Output and accumulated energy of a capacitor (10 F, 5.4 V) charged by PV and by the PV–TE series connected device in the hybrid system (filled circles and squares, charge; open circles and squares, energy). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electron energy band diagram of the solar-piezo hybrid cell, showing that the maximum output voltage is the sum of the voltages produced by the solar cell and the PENG. The abbreviations are as follows: conduction band (CB), valence band (VB), Fermi level (EF). Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Piezopotential distributions in the stretched device of [0001] type and compressed device of [000] type, and (b) schematic energy band diagram of P3HT/ZnO in the presence of negative piezoelectric charges. The blue line indicates the energy band diagram modified by the piezoelectric potential in ZnO. The negative piezoelectric charges can lift the energy band, resulting in a peak in the energy band. (c) Schematic illustration of the solar-piezo hybrid cell, (d) output voltage of the solar-piezo hybrid cell when pressure is applied periodically at intervals of 3.0 s for a period of 1.0 s, and (e) when pressure is applied to the PENG, the ZnO nanosheets exhibited a new band diagram: dashed and solid lines represent the band diagrams before and after applying the pressure on the PENG. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c–e) from ref. 157 with permission from the Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the piezo–pyro coupling NG, and (b) piezoelectric and pyroelectric coupled potential-generating mechanism of the patterned P(VDF–TrFE) on a PDMS substrate. (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of self-powered ZnO/perovskite-heterostructured photodetectors (ZPH PDs), with FTO acting as the transparent electrode, and (d) schematic illustration of the working mechanism of the pyroelectric effect-combined with photoexcitation processes. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and (c and d) from ref. 159 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of an energy harvesting module circuit, which includes energy harvesters, the power module circuit, energy storage, and applications.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Design of a self-charging power cell by hybridizing a PENG and a Li-ion battery, and (b) the working mechanism of the self-charging power cell driven by compressive strain. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the process flow of hybrid piezo-supercapacitor fabrication, and (b) proposed working mechanism of the hybrid piezo-supercapacitor. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
