2D graphdiyne: an emerging carbon material  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00592H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00592H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 2681-27092D graphdiyne: an emerging carbon material

        
          
            Yan 
            Fang†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Yuxin 
            Liu†
ac, 
      
        
          
            Lu 
            Qi
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yurui 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yuliang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: yrxue@sdu.edu.cn; ylli@iccas.ac.cn
bScience Center for Material Creation and Energy Conversion, Institute of Frontier and Interdisciplinary Science, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P. R. China
cUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      19th October 2021
    First published on 7th March 2022AbstractAs a new member of carbon allotropes, graphdiyne (GDY) has the characteristics of being one-atom-thick with two-dimensional layers comprising sp and sp2 hybridized carbon atoms, and represents a trend in the development of carbon materials. Its unique chemical and electronic structures give GDY many unique and fascinating properties such as rich chemical bonds, highly conjugated and super-large π structures, infinitely distributed pores and high inhomogeneity of charge distribution. GDY has entered a period of rapid development, especially with the significant emergence of fundamental research and applied research achievements over the past five years. As one of the frontiers of chemistry and materials science, graphdiyne was listed in the Top 10 research areas in the 2020 Research Frontiers report and was jointly released in the Top 10 in the world by Clarivate and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The research results have shown the great potential of GDY in the applications of energy, catalysis, environmental science, electronic devices, detectors, biomedicine and therapy, etc. Scientists are eager to explore and fully reveal the new properties, discover new scientific concepts and phenomena, discover the new conversion modes and mechanisms of GDY in photoelectricity, energy, and catalysis, etc., and build the important scientific value of new conversion devices. This review covers research on the foundation and application of GDY, such as the controlled preparation of new methods of GDY and GDY-based materials, studies on new mechanisms and properties in chemistry and physics, and the foundation and applications in energy, catalysis, photoelectric and devices.
Yan Fang
Yan Fang received her BS degree in Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University. Now she is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Yuliang Li at ICCAS, working on the synthesis and application of 2D-graphdiyne-based materials.
Yuxin Liu
Yuxin Liu received his bachelor's degree in Applied Chemistry from Jilin University in 2017. Now, he is a doctoral student in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the synthesis and application of graphdiyne-based nanomaterials.
Lu Qi
Lu Qi obtained her PhD at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology. She is currently undertaking postdoctoral study in Prof. Yuliang Li's group in the Science Center for Material Creation and Energy Conversion, Shandong University. Her current research interests mainly focus on the advanced transmission electron microscopy study of graphdiyne-based electrocatalysts.
Yurui Xue
Yurui Xue received his PhD at College of Chemistry, Jilin University. Then he started his Postdoctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li at ICCAS, China. He is now a Professor in Science Center for Material Creation and Energy Conversion of Shandong University, China. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of graphdiyne-based materials and applications in the fields of catalysis, energy conversion and storage.
Yuliang Li
Yuliang Li is a professor at ICCAS and academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields on design and synthesis of functional molecules, self-assembly methodologies of low dimension and large size molecular aggregations structures, and chemistry of carbon and carbon-rich material, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.
1. Introduction
The development of new materials is an important aspect of promoting social development and human progress, and represents the frontiers of scientific research. Carbon, the star element in the periodic table with diverse hybridization states (sp, sp2, and sp3), has greatly attracted numerous researchers dedicated to finding and developing new carbon-based materials with important mechanical and electronic properties.1–9 Carbon materials have exhibited outstanding performances in various fields over the past few decades. However, these traditional carbon materials are all single sp2 hybridized states. Based on this, scientists cannot obtain a comprehensive understanding of carbon materials, which requires us to discover more carbon materials, such as sp and sp2 mixed hybrid states. The sp-hybridized carbon–carbon triple bond (–CC–) with many fascinating properties (e.g., no cis–trans isomers, linear structure, the high conjugation, etc.),10,11 especially its inhomogeneity of distribution of surface charges, can trigger peculiar properties that transitional carbon materials do not possess. As a result, scientists have long been laying out the synthesis of highly sp-hybridized new carbon allotropes with transformative properties.
Graphdiyne (GDY), a new sp/sp2-cohybridized carbon allotrope,4–9,12–27 was first successfully synthesized on a flat copper (Cu) foil using a hexaethynylbenzene (HEB) precursor in 2010.4 In GDY's structure, each hexagonal benzene ring is bridged by six –CC–CC– bonds, forming a one-atom-thick 2D planar network structure. The special atomic arrangement in GDY endows it with numerous unique and fascinating properties, including abundant chemical bonds, highly conjugated and super-large π structures, infinite natural pores, natural bandgap, high charge carrier mobility, electronic conductivity,12 and stability. The successful synthesis of GDY provides a precedent for the artificial synthesis of new carbon allotropes and has attracted wide interest from different fields. Various synthetic methods (e.g., interfacial synthesis,4,17 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),18 explosion method,19etc.) and morphologies (e.g., nanofilms, nanowires, nanotubes, nanosheets, ordered nanoarrays, etc.) of GDY have been reported. Based on these, large numbers of GDY-based nanostructures have been achieved in GDY-involved catalysis, energy storage, solar cells, optoelectronic devices, biological applications, and environmental applications, etc.
In the current review, the unique properties and various synthetic methods of GDY are introduced, and a systematic overview is provided of the recent advances in GDY-based nanostructures for the fascinating structural and electronic properties and the versatile applications of GDY in energy, catalysis, optoelectronics and devices. Finally, the opportunities and challenges to the fundamental and applied research of GDY are comprehensively discussed.
2. The structures and electronic properties of graphdiyne
2.1 The structures of graphdiyne
The geometric structure of GDY is formed by inserting sp-hybridized acetylenic linkages between two adjacent sp2-hybridized benzene rings (Fig. 1a). In GDY, the lengths of the Csp–Csp bond (between two adjacent triple bonds), aromatic Csp2–Csp2 bond, Csp2–Csp bonds and triple bonds were calculated to be 1.33, 1.41, 1.40 and 1.24 Å, respectively. The optimized lattice parameters a, b, c, and θ for GDY are 9.38 Å, 9.38 Å, 3.63 Å, and 120°, respectively. Compared with graphene, GDY exhibits greater structural flexibility and high chemical reactivity.20 Additional modification or defect engineering would enhance its reactivity, which is important and helpful in controlling the properties of GDY and GDY-based devices. The abundant large pores in GDY benefit the anchoring/through-sheet transport of various metal ions/gases.
 Fig. 1  (a) Structures and ACS maps of GDY. Adapted from ref. 20 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2015]. (b–d) Electron microscope results, and (e) AA, (f) AB, and (g) ABC stacking modes of GDY. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017]. (h–j) Electron microscope images. (k–m) Simulated SAED. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the [Nature Research], copyright [2018]. (n) TEM, (o) HRTEM and (p) STEM images. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (q) Aberration-corrected HRTEM image, (r) enlarged image of the marked area, (s) Simulated HRTEM image, (t) CTF-corrected image and (u) simulated projected potential map images of GDY domain. (v and w) Energetically preferred geometry of the sample. (x) ABC stacking mode of GDY. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the [American Association for the Advancement of Science], copyright [2018]. 
The hexagonal primitive cell of GDY belongs to the space group P6/MMM. The molecular dynamics simulation (VASP)-optimized lattice constant was calculated to be 9.48 Å by Shuai et al.12 and 9.44 Å by Narita et al.21 Experimental and theoretical studies showed that GDY had the ABC stacking mode (Fig. 1b–g).17,22 Tang and Liu et al.23 simulated distances (d) of AA-, AB-, and ABC-stacking modes to be 0.85 nm, 0.85 nm, and 0.48 nm, respectively. By using low-voltage TEM, Lu and coworkers24 observed the six-layered GDY crystal (Fig. 1h–m). Recently, Mao and coworkers25 obtained the crystalline single- or few-layer GDY by exfoliating the bulk GDY, with a lattice fringe of 0.455 nm (Fig. 1n–p). Recently, Zhang, Liu and co-workers synthesized ultrathin single-crystalline GDY film. Their results showed that the ABC-stacked GDY had higher stability than the AA-/AB-stacked ones (Fig. 1q–x).26
2.2 The electronic properties of graphdiyne
The electronic structure is the critical factor of materials. GDY possesses Dirac cones and direct bandgaps and has demonstrated excellent properties.28 GDY has a direct bandgap of 0.44 eV and 1.10 eV, respectively.29–32 The differences in the calculated bandgap values mainly originated from the different calculation methods. Despite this, the band structures of GDY still show the same characteristics. Theoretical results also show that GDY has the quasiparticle bandgap close to silicon.33 However, because of the presence of the direct bandgap, which is quite beneficial for semiconductor and optoelectronic devices, GDY might have superior properties to silicon. Notably, the small energy gaps limit the practical applications of GDY. The bandgap of GDY can be effectively tuned by various strategies, such as the construction of nanoribbons,12,34 the application of external strain in the system,35 the changing of the morphology of GDY,36 the chemical functionalization,37–39 and applied electric field.40 Afshan Mohajeri et al. revealed that N or N,S-doping could change the energy gap over a range of ∼1.0 eV.39 Zhao and colleagues41 revealed that the hydrogen coverage variation would result in the change in the bandgaps (from 0.45 eV to 4.43 eV).
The layer number and stacking modes could also influence the electronic properties of GDY. The stacking behaviours and related electronic properties (bandgap and mobility) of bilayer and trilayer GDY were studied by Lu and co-workers using the density functional method (Fig. 2a–j).42 Their results showed that the bandgaps of the most stable GDY structures were 0.35 eV and 0.33 eV, respectively, which are smaller than that of the one-layer GDY. Interestingly, as the GDY is stacked in its AA- and AAA modes, GDY is metallic (Fig. 2i and j). Moreover, the bandgap of GDY depends on the stacking style (Fig. 2k–m).23 These provide chances for precisely tuning GDY's bandgap for versatile applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration and (b) band structure of monolayer GDY. (c and d) bilayer GDY. (e–g) for trilayer GDY. Bandgap of (h) three possible trilayer GDY, (i) bilayer GDY with AA configuration and (j) trilayer GDY with AAA configuration under zero field. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2012]. (k) Top and (l) side views, and (m) band structures of GDY with ABC stacking. Adapted from ref. 23 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2019]. 
The electronic properties of graphynes (GYs) are also influenced by their morphologies. For example, the bandgaps of GY nanoribbons (GYNB)43 decreased with the increase of the widths. Houshmand and co-workers44 showed that the GDY-based nanotubes (GDNTs) had a direct bandgap (Fig. 3a and b). Additionally, GDY possesses an extremely high charge transfer property.12,45 Remarkably, at room temperature, GDY exhibits high in-plane electron mobility (μe, 2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1)12,46 and high hole mobility (μh, 2 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1). This can be explained by the fact that the LUMO of GDY is more extended than the HOMO. The GDNRs show high carrier mobility (102–106 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can be increased by increasing the nanoribbon widths (Table 1).47 Besides, the μe of GDNRs can reach up to 104 cm2 V−1 s−1, larger than μh. These fascinating properties make GDY a promising candidate for various applications.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Schematic illustration of GDNT. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2020]. 
Table 1 Calculated parameters for the ZGDNRs (Z1, Z2, Z3) and AGDNRs (A1, A2) at 300 K







A1

A2

Z1

Z2

Z3




Band gap (eV)
0.954
0.817
1.205
0.895
1.015





0.086
0.087
0.216
0.149
0.174





0.081
0.086
0.281
0.174
0.207



E
v (eV)
7.406
6.790
4.386
4.786
4.776



E
e (eV)
2.006
1.730
1.972
2.000
2.054



C (1010 eV cm−1)
1.244
1.864
1.035
1.787
1.420



μ
h (103 cm2 V−1 s−1)
1.696
2.088
0.755
1.815
1.194



μ
e (103 cm2 V−1 s−1)
18.590
34.241
2.692
9.127
5.329





0.711
1.253
0.426
1.073
0.679





10.580
19.731
1.418
5.015
2.829




3. Synthesis and characterization of graphdiyne and its derivatives
Following the pioneering synthetic strategy reported by Li and coworkers, large numbers of studies were carried out toward the controllable synthesis of GDY with well-defined nanostructures (e.g., 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanowires/nanotubes, 2D films/nanosheets, and 3D structures) and fascinating properties.
3.1 Developed synthetic methods of graphdiyne
The two-dimensional 2D GDY film was first synthesized by Li and co-workers by coupling hexaethynylbenzene (HEB) to Cu foil. In the presence of pyridine, Cu ions are released from the Cu foil to form the pyridine–Cu complex to catalyze the GDY film growth on Cu foil. The interfaces provide an ideal platform for the controllable growth of GDY. Following this pioneering work, scientists including chemists, material scientists, biologists and physicists have been focusing on new preparation methods and the processing of materials.
With the joint efforts of everyone, relevant new preparation methods and technologies have been generated, and these achievements greatly promote the GDY research. Nishihara et al. reported the growth of crystalline GDY at liquid/liquid or gas/liquid interfaces.17 For instance, the single-crystalline GDY nanosheets (3.0 nm in thickness, 1.5 μm in lateral size) were obtained at the gas/liquid interfaces. By the chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) method, an ultrathin GDY film with a thickness of only 0.6 nm was obtained.18 The ultrathin GDY film could be transferred from the silver foil onto the surfaces of different materials allowing for the preparation of electronic devices. Similarly, GDY films with different thicknesses from 22 to 540 nm with a smooth surface could be obtained through the vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) method.48
Due to the instability of the HEB monomers, there remains a big challenge in controllably synthesizing mono- or few-layer GDY with high crystallinity. In 2018, Gao and co-workers26 reported a solution-phase van der Waals epitaxial method for growing single-crystalline GDY ultrathin film. Their results confirmed the single-crystalline and ultrathin characteristics of the resulting GDY film (1.74 nm in thickness), featuring an ABC stacking mode. More recently, Zhang, Tong and coworkers reported a rapid and catalyst-free synthetic method for the synthesis of few-layer GDY with high crystallinity, involving the use of a microwave-induced temperature gradient at a solid/liquid interface (Fig. 4a–e).49 TEM (Fig. 4b) and SEM (Fig. 4c) images show that the as-synthesized GDY films have smooth and continuous morphology, and a thickness ≈1–2 nm (Fig. 4d). HRTEM analyses revealed the high crystallinity of the GDY films (Fig. 4d). The experimental results verified that the as-synthesized GDY film exclusively matches the ABC stacking mode. Li and co-workers developed a confined water/oil/organogel triphasic system, during which the monomers were released slowly, for synthesizing highly crystalline GDY (Fig. 4f–j).50
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis and (b) TEM images of GDY boxes. (c) SEM, (d) AFM, (e) HRTEM images of GDY. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. (f and g) Schematic to the confined synthesis of the GDY thin film. (h) AFM, (i) TEM, and (j) high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images. Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
Exploring strategies for the large-scale synthesis of GDY is an important job related to its practical applications. To this end, Li and co-workers developed a large-scale GDY synthesis method19 by which three kinds of GDY with different morphologies were obtained. In addition to the GDY film, the synthesis of GDY with various nanostructures was also achieved. For example, Li and co-workers successfully prepared GDY nanowires (GDYNW), using ZnO nanorod arrays as the substrate,51 with high charge mobility and conductivity. Later, the GDNT arrays were obtained by using anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) as the template.52 The precisely patterned GDY stripes were recently synthesized by Jiang and co-workers53 using grooved silicon as the substrate (Fig. 5a). By tailoring the reaction conditions, GDY patterns with controllable micro-shapes could be obtained and applied in electronic devices. Recently, Zhang and Liu and co-workers realized the growth of nanowall-structured GDY on the surface of Cu using the mixed acetone:pyridine:TMEDA (100:5:1) solution at 50 °C.54 The as-prepared nanowall had a thickness of ∼15 nm and high crystallinity with the space between the lattice fringes of 0.466 nm (Fig. 5b and c). The authors also obtained well-defined GDY nanowalls on different dimensional (1D, 2D and 3D) substrates (Fig. 5d–f). Li and co-workers achieved the scalable synthesis of high-quality GDY nanotubes and GDY nanosheets (average thickness: ca. 1.9 nm) using CuNWs as growing substrates (Fig. 5g). More recently, Li and co-workers achieved the controlled growth of ultrathin GDY (ca. 1.0–1.6 nm) nanosheet arrays on carbon fiber (CF). These findings revealed the unique advantage of GDY that can be grown on arbitrary substrates (e.g., SnO2,55 Cu foam,56 Cu nanowires (Fig. 5d),57,58 CuO coaxial nanowires,59 Si nanowires,60 Au foil,60 nickel foam,60 carbon cloth (Fig. 5h),61,62 metal oxides (MOs),63 CuS,64etc.) in a controllable manner, which is beneficial for the construction of ideal electrochemical interface structure and brings new enlightenment to effectively solve the scientific problems of the electrochemical interface.
 Fig. 5  (a) GDY stripes. Adapted from ref. 53 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2016]. (b and c) GDY nanowall. Adapted from ref. 54 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2015]. GDY on (d) 1D silicon nanowires, (e) Au foil, (f) Ni foam. Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2016]. GDY on (g) Cu nanowires. Adapted from ref. 58 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2017]. GDY on (h and i) carbon fibers. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
3.2 Developed synthetic methods for graphdiyne derivatives
To date, great numbers of GDY derivatives have been reported. One of the outstanding works is the synthesis of carbon ene-yne (CEY) through the coupling reaction of tetraethynylethene (TEE).65 CEY has a small bandgap (0.05 eV), and high conductivity (1.4 × 10−2 S m−1 for CEY film), which facilitate its application in electronic devices. By using a similar method, Yang et al. synthesized the 3D silicon-diamondyne (Si-DY) using tetraethynylsilane (TES) as a precursor (Fig. 6a–c). In the Si-DY structure, an sp3-hybridized Si atom was bridged by four linear acetylenic bonds, which allows for the construction of an ordered diamond-like framework.66 The HRTEM image (Fig. 6d) together with the SAED pattern (Fig. 6e) confirmed the crystalline nature of the 3D diamond-like Si-DY, which was ascribed to the (1, 2, 2) spacing of 0.429 nm. Zhang and co-workers reported the synthesis of β-GDY film with good crystallinity on graphene (Fig. 6f–h) and on the SiO2/Si-based hBN substrate with high conductivity.67 The highly ordered crystalline graphtetrayne (GTTY) monomer was synthesized by Pan et al. at −20 °C (Fig. 6i).68 Both SAED (Fig. 6j) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM; Fig. 6k) demonstrated the high crystallinity of the 2D GTTY film. Feng and co-workers synthesized poly(1,3,5-triethynylbenzene) (PTEB) nanofibers on different substrates including the conducting and nonconducting substrates (Fig. 6l–p),69 exhibiting different morphologies on different types of substrates, which could have originated from the heterogeneous nucleation/growth processes at different surfaces (Fig. 6l).
 Fig. 6  (a) The synthetic process for Si-DY. (b and c) SEM images, (d) HRTEM and (e) SAED results of Si-DY films. Adapted from ref. 66 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. (f) The experimental setup, (g) SEM, and (h) AFM images for the samples. Adapted from ref. 67 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (i) GTTY synthesis. (j) SAED and (k) HRTEM images of GTTY. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the [Chinese Chemical Society], copyright [2020]. (l and m) Growth of PTEB nanofibers on Cu foil. (n-p) SEM images of PTEB on 2D graphite, nickel, and Kapton substrates. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2018]. 
Recently, interfacial synthetic strategies were employed to synthesize nitrogen-substituted GDY (N-GDY, Fig. 7a) and tetrathiafulvalene-GDY (TTF-GDY, Fig. 7b) at mild temperatures.70–72,74 The obtained GDY derivatives all featured thin film morphologies and high crystallinity. Ultra-high vacuum (UHV) also provides another way for controllably synthesizing different GDY nanostructures.73,75,76 GDY analogues were also synthesized by sublimating 1,3,5-tris-(4-ethynylphenyl)benzene (Ext-TEB, Fig. 7c) on the substrate under the UHV system.73 Recently, Klappenberger's group75 synthesized functionalized GDY (f-GDY) nanowires via the surface-confined coupling of specifically designed precursors, diethynyl-terphenyl (DETP) and CN-functionalized diethynyl-terphenyl (CN-DETP), on well-defined silver surfaces under UHV conditions (Fig. 7d). Li and co-workers77 revealed that the supramolecular interactions (e.g., π–π/CH–π) could lead to high crystallinity. GDNB with well-defined width (4 nm) and lengths (Fig. 7e and f) were prepared by the first stepwise intermolecular polymerization and subsequent intramolecular coupling of ethynyl groups.78 By using 1,1,2,2-tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)ethane (TEPE), Zhao, Li and co-workers prepared a fluorescent yellow film (∼4.5 nm in thickness),79 with high quantum yield.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Synthesis of N-, CN-GDY. Adapted from ref. 70 and 71 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. Synthesis of (c) TTH-GDY. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2012]. (d) STM images of f-GDY nanowires. Adapted from ref. 75 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (e) Synthesis and (f) AFM characterization of GDY nanoribbons. Adapted from ref. 78 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
The acetylenic bonds in GDY endow it with many superior unique and fascinating properties as compared to traditional carbon materials. Inspired by this, Wang and co-workers designed and synthesized two types of GDY with different acetylenic linkage numbers using tetraphenylmethane (TPM) and triphenylamine (TPN) as precursors, respectively (Fig. 8a and b).80 Their synthesis method simultaneously changed the proportion of acetylenic bonds in GDY and the morphologies. Huang and co-workers81 reported the preparation of pyridinegraphyne (PY-GY), pyrimidine-graphyne (PM-GY) and triazinegraphyne (TA-GY), in which each acetylenic bond was linked by two adjacent aza-aromatic rings (Fig. 8c and d). Their results demonstrated that N-doping tuned the properties (e.g., conductivity, bandgap, charge distribution) and performances.
 Fig. 8   Schematic representation of (a) TPM-GDY, (b) TPN-GDY. Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2021]. Schematic representation of (c and d) N-substituted GYs (N-GYs). Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2021]. Synthesis of (e) F-GDY. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2018]. Synthesis of (f–h) sulfur doped GDY (S-GDY). Adapted from ref. 83 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (i) H-/N-co-doping GDY. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2020]. 
Heteroatom doping offers an efficient method for modulating the properties of carbon materials. GDY provides unique properties for heteroatom-doping, such as nitrogen- (N-GDY),81,84,85 fluorine- (F-GDY),82,86,87 chlorine- (Cl-GDY),88,89 boron-GDYs (B-GDY),90–94 phosphorus-GDYs (P-GDY),95 hydrogen- (H-GDY),96–100 and sulfur- (S-GDY)101,102 doped GDYs. These heteroatom-doped GDY were either prepared via a top-down or a bottom-up approach. For example, Zhao et al. obtained sp-N GDY by doping nitrogen to replace sp carbon atoms in GDY.85 Besides, the bottom-up approach provides a controllable method for the synthesis of heteroatom-doped GDY with a more accurate structure. For example, the fluorine-doped GDY (F-GDY) was obtained by the coupling reaction of 1,3,5-triethynyl-2,4,6-trifluorinebenzene (Fig. 8e).82,103,104 Similarly, S-GDY could be obtained through annealing the GDY/S8 mixture at 600 °C (Fig. 8f–h).83 In addition to the doping of one heteroatom into GDY, the co-doping of different heteroatoms has also attracted extensive attention. Huang et al. reported the synthesis of H-/N-co-doped GDY (Fig. 8i).96 The introduction of heteroatoms into GDY has been demonstrated to be an effective way to tune the structures and improve the properties for versatile applications.
4. Graphdiyne-based catalytic materials
High-performance catalysts are important for different energy conversion processes, such as H2 production, O2 reduction reaction (ORR), ammonia synthesis, CO2 fixation, synthesis of organic molecules, etc. GDY features intriguing unique structures and properties and provides an ideal opportunity for the research and preparation of high-performance catalysts.105,106
4.1 Graphdiyne-based atomic catalysts
Single-metal atomic catalysts have shown many unique and captivating properties (e.g., maximum atomic efficiency, increased number of active sites, high activity, high selectivity, etc.), and have been regarded as one of the hottest research frontiers.61,107–115 However, the complicated and harsh synthesis conditions (e.g., pyrolysis, acidic treatments, high temperatures and pressures) are still the critical challenges for traditional single-atom catalysts (TSAC). The easy migration and aggregation of single-metal atoms, the limited loading of metal atoms on traditional supporting materials and undetermined structures and valence states are also required to be solved. An appropriate substrate is critical for improving the loading, dispersion, stability, and activity of the single atoms. GDY possesses both sp (px–py π/π* states) and sp2 (pz π/π* state) hybridization, allowing the rotation of the π/π* orbitals toward any direction perpendicular to the acetylene bond (−CC−). These unique properties of GDY make it a suitable support for anchoring single-metal atoms.
Li and co-workers reported the successful anchoring of atomic catalysts (ACs) based on GDY (Fig. 9a), stabilized by specific incomplete charge transfer between individual metal atoms and GDY. The appearance of ACs has been regarded as a great breakthrough in the field of catalysis. In 2018, our group initially anchored zero-valent Ni0 (mass loading: 0.278 wt%) and Fe0 (mass loading: 0.680 wt%) on GDY through a simple and green electrochemical reduction method in an aqueous solution at room temperature.61 HAADF-STEM (Fig. 9b–d) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS, Fig. 9e and f) results verified the single and isolated dispersion of Ni and Fe atoms on GDY. Additional X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES, Fig. 9g and h) measurements and theoretical calculation results (Fig. 9i–l) further demonstrated the zero-valent states of Ni and Fe atoms on GDY. Their results revealed the electrocatalytic activities originating from the unique incomplete charge transfer properties of GDY-based ACs (Fig. 9m). When being applied in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in acidic conditions, Fe0/GDY showed the best activity as compared to Ni0/GDY, pure GDY, and benchmarked catalysts (e.g., Ni2P,116 MoS2,117etc.118,119 Remarkably, zero-valent Ni and Fe atoms were well preserved on GDY without any aggregation after catalysis. The appearance of GDY-based ACs overcame the migration and aggregation issues of traditional single-atom catalysts. Various ACs (e.g., Ni,61 Fe,61 Mo,110 Cu,109 Pd,109,113,120 Co,121 Rh,122 and Ru,122etc.) have been successfully anchored onto GDY. Using a similar in situ electroreduction method, the zero-valent Cu0/GDY114 and Pd0/GDY109 atomic electrocatalysts were synthesized by Li and co-workers for efficient HER. Detailed HAADF, EXAFS, HRTEM, XPS, and XANES characterizations were conducted and solidly demonstrated the isolated dispersion of Cu and Pd atoms. The metal atoms are zero-valent, which originates from the charge compensation induced by the strong p–d coupling. Cu0/GDY114 and Pd0/GDY109 showed better HER performances than Pt/C. Apart from experimental research, the excellent catalytic performances of GDY-based ACs have also been demonstrated theoretically.123
 Fig. 9  (a) GDY based atomic catalysts. HAADF images of (b) Ni0/GDY, (c and d) Fe0/GDY; ex situ EXAFS spectra for (e) Ni0/GDY and (f) Fe0/GDY. The XANES spectra for (g) Ni0/GDY and (h) Fe0/GDY. (i) Top and lower views of the adsorption of Ni and Fe atoms along route A and route B between GDY layers. (j) Binding energies of metal atoms moving along the routes. (k) The most favourable anchoring site. (l) Electrostatic potential maps. (m) Charge distribution of ACs. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2018]. 
Efficient ammonia (NH3) synthesis has been drawing increasing attention across the world. However, the traditional NH3 production was generally conducted under harsh conditions. Developing highly active and selective catalysts for NH3 synthesis is still challenging. Besides, the reported electrocatalysts are also limited by their low reaction selectivity and low NH3 yielding rates. Regarding this challenge, Li and coworkers innovatively synthesized GDY-based zero-valent Mo ACs (Mo0/GDY, mass loading: 7.5 wt%) by a simple solvothermal reduction strategy.110 HAADF-STEM images (Fig. 10a–d) showed the anchoring site of single Mo atoms on GDY (Fig. 10c and d), consistent with the theoretical calculation results. XANES and detailed theoretical results revealed that Mo atoms are zero-valent. Mo0/GDY exhibited excellent electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction (ECNRR) activity and selectivity in both acidic and neutral electrolytes (Fig. 10e and f). The Mo0/GDY catalyst exhibited high faradaic efficiency, ammonia yield rate YNH3), and excellent cycling durability (Fig. 10h and i).
 Fig. 10  (a–d) HAADF images of Mo0/GDY. (e) The catalysis processes. (f) Isotope labeling experiments. (g–i) The catalytic performances. Adapted from ref. 110 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. 
A GDY-based zero-valent Pd atomic catalyst, Pd0/GDY, was synthesized via the self-reduction strategy (Fig. 11a).113 HAADF images (Fig. 11b–e), EXAFS, and XANES confirmed the successful synthesis of zero-valent Pd0/GDY. DFT results showed that the Pd0/GDY showed mainly a downhill energetic trend for ECNRR (Fig. 11f). Further H-chemisorption energies concluded that both C1 and C2 are optimal sites for H-adsorption for electron-proton charge exchange (Fig. 11g and h). Pd-GDY showed a higher YNH3 (4.45 ± 0.30mgNH3 mgPd−1 h−1) than the reported materials (Fig. 11I and j). The 15N isotope labelling experiments (Fig. 11k) further confirmed the high reaction selectivity and activity of Pd-GDY.
 Fig. 11  (a) Typical synthesis route to the Pd-GDY (Pd0/GDY). (b–e) HAADF images, (f) ECNRR energetic pathway, (g and h) free energies and (i) catalytic performances of GDY-Pd. (j) Comparison of the ECNRR performances. (k) Isotope labelling experiment. Adapted from ref. 113 with permissions from the [Oxford University Press], copyright [2021]. 
Duan and coworkers anchored zerovalent single atoms (Rh, Ru) on GDY (MSA/GDY) and realized the efficient NRR in a pressurized reaction system (Fig. 12a–c).122 Isotope labeling experiments using 15N2 as feeding gas verified that the detected NH3 originated from the reduction of N2. The Rh SA/GDY showed the YNH3 (74.15 μg h−1·cm−2), FE (20.36% at 55 atm), and high cycling stability. Experimental results demonstrated that the HER of MSA/GDY was effectively suppressed under the pressurized environment, thus leading to the improvement in the NRR performances. Du and co-workers reported N-doped graphyne-based tungsten (W) ACs for NRR and demonstrated its reaction mechanism through DFT calculations.124 Liu, Zhang and colleagues120 expanded the application of GDY-based zero-valent Pd ACs to reduce 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP), giving a much higher rate constant (0.953 min−1) than that of Pd/C and excellent long-time stability (Fig. 12d–g). Most recently, Zheng et al.121 proposed a preadsorption-reduction strategy to anchor zero-valent cobalt atoms on GDY (Co0/GDY) for efficient and selective CO2 fixation (Fig. 12h–j). Through this strategy, approximately 100% conversion for CO2 fixation (80 °C, 1 atm) and high turnover frequency (TOF, 3024.8 h−1) were achieved. Significantly, the as-prepared Co0/GDY ACs showed great performance regarding different reactants (Fig. 5f). Du and co-workers also conducted systematic investigations of CO2 electrochemical reduction activity/selectivity over Fe atoms doped GDY by ab initio studies.125
 Fig. 12  (a) ENRR setup. (b) Catalytic performances at different exerted N2 pressures. (c) Cycling stability tests. Adapted from ref. 122 with permissions from the [National Academy of Sciences], copyright [2020]. (d) The synthesis and application of Pd1/GDY/G. (e) HAADF images. (f) Stability tests. (g) Catalysis setup. Adapted from ref. 120 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (h) Carbonates synthesis. (i) Performance comparison. (j) Synthesized carbonates. Adapted from ref. 121 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021]. 
In addition to zero-valent ACs, many GDY-based ACs with determined structures and valence states were also prepared and applied in various reactions. For example, Lu et al.126 anchored single Pt atoms on GDY through the reaction of GDY with K2PtCl4 (Pt-GDY1), followed by annealing in an Ar atmosphere (Pt-GDY2). The Pt atoms were isolatedly and uniformly distributed on GDY. When being used for HER, the Pt-GDY2 exhibited higher catalytic activity than Pt-GDY1 and Pt/C. Wu et al.127 anchored Fe atoms on GDY through the reduction of Fe3+ using NaBH4. In accordance with the theoretical results, the obtained Fe-GDY exhibited an excellent Pt-like ORR performance.
4.2 Graphdiyne-based quantum dot catalysts
Quantum dots (QDs) have shown impressive performances in various practical applications due to their unique advantages. However, the application of QDs is still restricted by harsh synthetic processes, easy aggregation, and low stability. Until now, efficient acidic water oxidation remains a tricky bottleneck for hydrogen production. To this end, iridium oxide quantum dots with highly uniform size distribution were synthesized based on GDY (IrOx QD/GDY, Fig. 13a and b; 1.48 ± 0.04 nm in size, Fig. 13f).128 HRTEM (Fig. 13c) and HAADF-STEM (Fig. 13d and e) images indicate the lattice spacing (0.22 nm) of roughly spherical and single-crystalline QDs. As expected, the IrOxQD/GDY exhibited excellent OER (Fig. 13g), HER (Fig. 13h), and OWS (Fig. 13i) performances in acidic aqueous electrolytes. When being used for acidic OWS, the electrolyzer exhibited much better performances (1.49 V at 10 mA cm−2) and higher stability than the previously reported ones. The uniform distribution and size effect of IrOx QDs, increased number of active sites, improved electrical conductivity, and the interactions between IrOx QDs and GDY all benefit the enhancement of the performances. Du et al.129 grew OsOx quantum dots on 3D flexible GDY for photoelectrocatalysis, showing greatly improved HER activity under illumination (Fig. 13j). Under the irradiation of a 300 W Xe lamp, the catalytic activities and stabilities were increased (Fig. 13k and l). It is worth noting that GDY has a significant influence on the distribution and stability of QDs, the hole transportation capability, and the number of active sites of the catalysts, thus resulting in superior photo/electrocatalytic activity. Zhang and Wu et al.130 prepared CdSe QDs/GDY nanosheets via the interactions between GDY and mercaptopyridine. This photocathode achieved impressive photoactivity and hydrogen production efficiency. Recently, Luan et al. used GDY for the in situ growth of QDs of CdSe on GDY (CdSe/GDY). The results showed that the CdSe/GDY as grown on GDY can achieve greatly enhanced photoactivity and oxygen production under light illumination.131
 Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images, (c) HRTEM, and (d and e) HAADF characterizations. (f) Size histogram. (g) OER, (h) HER, and (i) OWS performances. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. (j) OsOx QDs/GDY synthesis. (k) HRTEM image of OsOx QDs/GDY. (l) LSV curves of the samples recorded with (solid lines) and without (dashed doted lines) the illumination.  Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
Inspired by the controllable synthesis of GDY-based quantum dot catalysts, metal clusters have also been successfully loaded on GDY for efficient catalysis. Gao et al.132 grew VRu0.027Ox clusters (2.75 ± 0.04 nm) that were uniformly dispersed on the surface of GDY without agglomeration. When used for electrocatalytic HER, it showed a much higher catalytic activity than other control samples, and excellent long-term stability. Shi et al.133 reported the loading of Co clusters on GDY to obtain a nanoarray of Cu@GDY-Co electrocatalysts (Fig. 14) with high catalytic performances due to the strong p–d charge transfer brought by GDY.
 Fig. 14  (a) Sample fabrication. Morphological characterizations on (b–d) Cu@GDY and (e–g) Cu@GDY-Co. (h) OER activity and (i) Tafel slopes of the samples. Adapted from ref. 133 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2020]. 
Ammonia (NH3) acts as the feedstock for the nitrogen fertilizer industry and chemical production. The conventional energy-consuming Haber-Bosh process carried out under extreme conditions (300–500 °C, 150–200 atm) does not meet the requirements of sustainable development. Considering this, the urgent need is to establish new strategies for ammonia synthesis. Using sunlight to drive the conversion of N2 and water (H2O) to NH3 is expected to be a promising method. Recently, Li and co-workers135 synthesized GDY-based CoOx QDs (GDY@CoOxQD) for NH3 production at ambient temperatures and pressures. Experimental results revealed that the high charge transfer-ability and GDY-enhanced surface plasmon resonance property endow the obtained catalysts with excellent photocatalytic performances for the synthesis of ammonia, exhibiting an ultrahigh average YNH3 (19583 μmolNH3 gcat.−1 h−1 obtained from 46 independent experiments).
4.3 Graphdiyne-based heterojunction catalysts
Heterojunction catalysts are important materials that have been widely used in many fields but still suffer from low reaction selectivity and activity. As discussed above, GDY possesses infinite active sites and high intrinsic activity and might solve the problems of heterojunction catalysts. Li and co-workers prepared the MoS2-GDY heterostructures on the surface of GDY (eGDY/MDS).136 In alkaline conditions, the HER activity of eGDY/MDS was compared favourably to that of Pt/C. Later, Hui and co-workers137 developed a novel e-ICLDH@GDY/NF heterojunction by the controlled synthesis of GDY in the spaces between adjacent LDH sheets, with excellent HER activities and stabilities. Other GDY-based heterostructures, including GDY-coated sulfides (GDY-MoS2 NS/CF141), metal oxides (NiO-GDY NC138), nitrides (CoNx@GDY139), hydroxides (FeCH@GDY140), etc., have also been reported. Most recently, to develop cost-effective HER electrocatalysts, Guo et al.142 reported an original strategy for fabricating self-assisting GDY/MoO3 with an interfacial “sp C–O–Mo hybridization” for the HER (Fig. 15a–e). Their results verified that the special interface had more active sites and improved charge transfer-ability, thus leading to a great increase in the HER activity (Fig. 15f–h) and stability.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) GDY/MoO3 sample. (c) HAADF, (d) TEM (inset: particle distribution), and (e) HRTEM characterizations. (f) Calculation model. (g) Difference charge density for GDY/MoO3. (h) LSV curves. Adapted from ref. 142 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021]. 
Water splitting under illumination to produce hydrogen also has the potential to address environmental issues and energy shortages. By utilizing the growth characteristic of GDY, more recently, Jin and co-workers143 prepared a GDY-encapsulated CuI catalyst (GDY-CuI) for photocatalytic HER, with greatly enhanced activity of 465.95 mol/5 h, which was 15.8 and 3.0 times better than that of CuI (156.49 mol/5 h) and GDY (29.42 mol/5 h). Shen et al.144 reported crystalline dehydrobenzoannulene-based GDY (PDBA) for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with high activity. They calculated the energy level required for water reduction and oxidation and revealed the favourable sites with higher activity for H2 evolution. These results show that the formation of heterojunctions contributes to the high catalytic activity.
GDY-based heterostructured catalysts were also applied to improve the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). NiFe layered double hydroxides (NiFeLDH) supported on GDY were obtained through different methods involving hydrothermal reaction146 and the electrochemical deposition method,147 which showed better OER activity than pure NiFeLDH. Moreover, metal clusters/GDY heterostructures also exhibited high OER performances. Zhang and Wu et al.148 used oxidized GDY for synthesizing CoAl (CO32−) LDHs nanosheets and realized the improvement of the charge transfer-ability, catalytic activity and stability. Li and co-workers for the first time achieved the in situ growth of GDY on ultrathin iron/cobalt layered double-hydroxide (ICLDH) nanosheet arrays (eICLDH@GDY/NF).137 Remarkably, eICLDH@GDY/NF exhibited superior OER performance, exhibiting ultralow overpotentials and excellent long-term durability. Many GDY-based heterostructures were successfully prepared according to a similar strategy. For instance, the growth of GDY on iron carbonate hydroxide nanosheets (FeCH@GDY/NF)140 led to high-performance OER in alkaline media. A new type of metal nitride/GDY heterostructure, CoNx@GDY NS/NF, was also obtained and used for efficient OER.139 Later, a 3D architecture in which GDY served as scaffolds for growing NiFe LDH nanodots was constructed by Jia and co-workers.149 The optimized 0D/3D structure exhibited significantly improved OER performances, with only 252 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Besides, by using nickel oxide nanocubes as the growing template, Yu et al.138 achieved the synthesis of the NiO-GDY NC heterostructure, which showed high alkaline OER activity and stability. Cui et al.150 recently reported the heterostructure of GDY and CoCu-ZIF for electrochemical OER with the catalytic activity superior to commercial RuO2. Li and co-workers reported a MnCo2O4/GDY electrocatalyst featuring a core/shell-nanowire structure (Fig. 16a–e).134 Its electric conductivity and mass/ion transport as well as gas emission were all improved owing to the synergistic interaction between GDY and MnCo2O4 nanowire, giving impressive activity and stability toward the OER (Fig. 16f–h).
 Fig. 16  (a) NW-MnCo2O4/GDY preparation. (b–d) Electron microscope pictures. (e) Mapping of NW-MnCo2O4/GDY. (f) Presentation of the water splitting mechanism of NW-MnCo2O4/GDY. (g) Performance comparison. (h) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 134 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021] 
As discussed above, GDY has been demonstrated to be an excellent hole transport layer. Based on this, many GDY-based materials were synthesized and applied for the photo/photoelectrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Zhang and Wu et al.148 designed and synthesized the CoAl-LDH/GDY/BiVO4 as a photoanode, with higher photocurrent density (3.15 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M Na2SO4) than its precursors. Zhang and coworkers designed a Si heterojunction (SiHJ)-based SiHJ/GDY/NiOx heterojunction material for water splitting (Fig. 17a–f).151 In the procedure of the PEC system fabrication, they coated both sides of the n-type single crystal with different types of a-Si:H coating, followed by the sputtering of conductive ITO layers and addition of a silver electrode on the backside. SiHJ/GDY/NiOx-10 nm had better PEC activity than that of SiHJ/NiOx-10 nm, suggesting the critical role of GDY in PEC cells. Mao et al.152 reported a new type of Ag3PO4/GDY-based emulsion for photocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 17g–i). The Ag3PO4/GDY-based emulsion exhibited better performance toward to degradation of methylene blue and oxidation of water under visible-light irradiation than Ag3PO4/CNT and Ag3PO4/graphene (Fig. 17j–l). Later, a novel Z-type Ag3PO4/GDY/g-C3N4 nanocomposite was synthesized by Si et al.153 for excellent photocatalytic OER.
 Fig. 17  (a) SiHJ photoanode. (b and c) SEM images of GDY. LSV tests for (d) SiHJ/GDY and (e) SiHJ-10 nm (with/without GDY). (f) Photocurrent density curves of SiHJ/GDY-10 nm and SiHJ-10 nm. Adapted from ref. 51 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (g) Ag3PO4/GDY photocatalysis. (h) Imaging on the emulsions. (i) O2 evolution under irradiation. (j) O2 concentration evaluation test. (k and l) MB degradation tests. Adapted from ref. 152 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. 
Charge-transfer complexes (CTs) show great potential for efficient catalysis because of their tunable electron-transfer properties and abundant active sites. However, the simple and controllable synthesis of CTs is still needed to gain large-area, high-order structures for efficient catalysis. To this end, we report a facile method for the controlled synthesis of 2D CT nanosheets on GDY (Fig. 18).154 Very interestingly, the unique advantages of the CT-GDY heterostructures could lead to changes in the geometric and electronic structures, and high OER performances.
 Fig. 18  (a) Ultrathin CTNS/GDY synthesis. (b) SEM and (c) AFM results for CTNS/GDY; (d) LSV and (e) Tafel plots of the samples. (f) Stability measurements. Adapted from ref. 154 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
Inspired by the excellent HER and OER performances of GDY-based catalysts, several electrolyzers were fabricated for overall water splitting (OWS).133,138–140,145,146 For example, e-ICLDH@GDYNF for OWS in alkaline electrolyzer exhibited smaller cell voltages than commercial electrode couples. We also designed and synthesised the non-precious electrocatalyst NW-MnCo2O4/GDY.155 The catalyst required only 1.47 V at 10 mA cm−2. The GDY-metal oxides (e.g., NiO-GDY NC)-based electrolyzer showed a small cell voltage of 1.52 V at 10 mA cm−2.138 The CoNx@GDY NS/NF electrode reported by Fang et al. also acted as a bifunctional electrocatalyst towards efficient water splitting,139 with an ultralow cell voltage of 1.48 V at 10 mA cm−2. Liu and Zhang et al.156 showed that GDY promoted the efficient extraction of photogenerated carriers from BiVO4, significantly prolonging the electron–hole separation, which significantly enhanced the photoelectrochemical performance.
GDY-based heterostructured catalysts have also been successfully applied in NH3 production at ambient conditions. Fang et al. reported a 3D GDY-based electrode (GDY/Co2N NWs, Fig. 19a–d) to realize the high-performance ammonia synthesis.103 GDY/Co2N showed the highest YNH3 and FE of 219.72 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 and 58.60% in 0.1 M HCl (Fig. 19e and f), and 0.1 M Na2SO4 (Fig. 19g). More recently, the heterojunction of magnetite/graphdiyne was synthesized by Li and co-workers.157 Remarkably, the GDY@Fe-B catalyst exhibited the highest PCNRR performance with high YNH3 up to 1762.35 ± 153.71 μmol h−1 gcat.−1. 15N isotope labelling experiments confirmed that our detected ammonia only came from the nitrogen reduction.
 Fig. 19  
 (a) Self-standing GDY/Co2N. (b–d) GDY/Co2N. Performance comparison in (e) acidic and (g) neutral media. (f) Cycling life for GDY/Co2N. Adapted from ref. 103 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
GDY-based heterostructures also showed excellent performances in many other reactions.158–163 For instance, research results by Mao et al.158 showed that the Pd/GDYO exhibited a much higher activity and rate constant than Pd/GO, Pd/C, and Pd/MWNT for 4-nitrophenol reduction. Li et al. anchored Pd nanoparticles on N-doped graphdiyne to form a heterostructure through the microwave process. The catalyst was applied in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction with high performance and a TOF value of 1287 h−1, attributed to the enhanced charge transfer between NGDY and the nanoparticles.159 By using pyrenyl GDY (Pyr-GDY) as the substrate, Lu and co-workers160 realized the synthesis of the Pd sub-nanometric catalysts (SNCs, average size: 0.83 nm) for reactions, with much higher activity than Pd/C and Pd/GO. Li and coworkers161 synthesized an ultra-stable Pt-GDY catalyst by incorporating Pt NPs (2–3 nm) with GDY to directly convert aldehydes and ketones into alcohols. Ramakrishnan et al.162 further demonstrated that the hole transportation process could be optimized and the photocurrent density of the catalyst could be enhanced by the strong interaction between TiO2 and GDY (or GDYO), leading to better catalytic performance.152
Constructing an efficient catalytic system for CO2 reduction is still a challenge due to the insufficient active sites for CO2 adsorption and activation and thus the low reaction performances. In recent years, GDY-based heterostructures have provided promising application potential in CO2 reduction.164–170 Gu et al.171 reported a 2D GDY/graphene (GDY/G) heterostructure to anchor cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc) (Fig. 20a–d). This material exhibited selective and durable CO2 reduction performance, demonstrating remarkable activity, selectivity, and durability. Through an acetylenic bond-directed site-directed site-trapping strategy, Duan's group obtained a series of Cu catalysts on a GDY matrix in a size gradient from single atoms (SAs) to subnanometric clusters (SCs, 0.5–1 nm), and to nanoclusters (NCs, 1–1.5 nm) (Fig. 20e–g).172 This catalyst achieved a higher C2+ conversion rate (312 mA cm−2) and larger faradaic efficiency of 91.2% at −1.0 V (vs. RHE) than Cu NCs (Fig. 20h). Recently, Lu et al. designed and synthesized CsPbBr3@GDY material by the in situ coating of a GDY layer onto the surface of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. The obtained catalyst could be directly applied to a photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction. Experimental results revealed a remarkable improvement in CO2 adsorption capacity (1.3 cm3 g−1), which was 4.2 times that of CsPbBr3. Besides, cobalt doping can further inhibit the recombination of photogenerated carriers and increase the number of active sites for CO2 reduction. Experimental results showed that when using water as an electron source, the cobalt-doped CsPbBr3@GDY achieved a high yield of 27.7 μmol g−1 h−1 for photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO.
 Fig. 20  (a) GDY/G-loaded monodispersed CoPc. (b) HADDF imaging on CoPc/GDY/G. (c) Performance comparison of CoPc/GDY/G and CoPc/G. (d) TOFCO values. Adapted from ref. 171 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021]. (e) Catalyst models. (f) HAADF image. (g) FE results. (h) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 172 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
The above universal strategies for synthesizing GDY-supported heterojunction are also applicable for the preparation of other GDY-based heterostructures including eGDY/MoS2,136 MoS2/NGDY,173 WS2/GDY,174 CoPor-GDY,175 CeNiLDH@GDY,176 OsOx QDs/GDY,177etc. Based on these works, we firmly believed that GDY-based heterostructures possess promising catalytic performance in versatile fields.
4.4 Graphdiyne-based metal-free catalysts
Metal-free carbon materials are a superior class of catalysts.79,178–187 However, the intrinsic deficiency of most conventional carbon materials lies in harsh and complicated synthetic processes, which generally result in ambiguous structures and difficulties in understanding the reaction mechanisms.
The sp- and sp2-hybridized carbon atoms in GDY allow the specific inhomogeneous distribution of surface charge and high intrinsic activity of GDY.89,96,180–183 Particularly, carbon atoms with a positive/negative charge favourably tend to adsorb reaction intermediates. The suitable pore sizes of GDY also provide beneficial conditions for mass/ion adsorption/transport. Li and coworkers reported a bifunctional metal-free electrocatalyst through in situ growth of fluorographdiyne on carbon cloth (p-FGDY/CC).184 DFT results showed that C2 sites in FGDY had efficient electron transfer capability and higher catalytic activity. When used for electrolysis, FGDY exhibited high HER, OER and OWS performances under both alkaline and acidic conditions. Hui et al.62 reported the growth of ultrathin GDY nanosheets with three to five layers (≈1.0–1.6 nm) (UGNS/CF) for highly active and stable HER (Fig. 21). The UGNS significantly facilitated electron and mass/gas diffusion, increased the specific surface area, and maximized the number of active sites. The fascinating catalytic performance of the GDY arrays suggested great superiority as compared to the reported electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 21  Pictures for (a) CF, (b–d) UGNS/CF, and (e and f) GDY nanosheet/substrate interface. (g) LSV curves and (h) Tafel plots of the samples. (i) Performance comparison. (j) LSV and (l) stability measurements of UGNS/CF. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
Lu and coworkers185 used g-C3N4/GDY as a metal-free photoelectrocatalyst for water splitting, with significantly promoted catalytic activity as compared to g-C3N4 (88 μs and −32 μA cm−2). Si et al.186 further applied the heterojunction of g-C3N4/GDY for photocatalytic H2 production with a high H2 evolution rate (454.28 μmol h−1). Very recently, Li and co-workers80 demonstrated the important role of sp-C in enhancing catalytic performances; for example, tetraphenylmethane-graphdiyne (TPM-GDY) with more active sp carbon exhibited higher HER performance as compared to triphenylamine-graphdiyne (TPN-GDY) with smaller sp-C.
In 2018, Wang, Li and coworkers reported a novel sp-hybridized nitrogen (sp-N)-doped ultrathin GDY as the metal-free catalyst applied in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).85 The results showed that the metal-free GDY catalyst doped with sp-N at acetylenic sites exhibited a good overall ORR performance. Several GDY-based metal-free catalysts have been fabricated for efficient PCRR processes. Yang and co-workers fabricated atomically thin 2D/2D van der Waals heterostructures of metal-free graphdiyne (denoted as CNs/GDY) through a facile electrostatic self-assembly method. The obtained catalyst CNs/GDY exhibited a much higher CO yielding rate than CNs, indicating that the introduction of GDY into CNs can effectively promote the transportation of photogenerated carriers between chains, thus benefiting the photocatalytic activity. Moreover, Li's group also applied N-GDY as a metal-free photocatalyst for NADH regeneration. The catalytic activity was reported to increase with the increase in N content.71
5. Graphdiyne-based advanced energy conversion systems
5.1 Graphdiyne-based intelligent systems
The network of GDY with porous structure and sp-hybridized carbon atoms provides numerous storage sites and rapid diffusion channels for various ions. In particular, the relatively low ion diffusion barrier in GDY facilitates surface adsorption and interlayer insertion. These intriguing characteristics of GDY inspire the construction of GDY-based intelligent materials. By employing the novel carbon material GDY and metal/oxide core–shell NPs, Li and coworkers fabricated a three-state organic resistive random access memory (RRAM) with high reproducibility and stability for multilevel memory observations.188 Chen et al. designed and prepared an electrochemical actuator based on GDY, and carried out a comprehensive and systematic study on the microscopic molecular actuation mechanism of GDY-based materials and the energy conversion properties of macroscopic actuator devices.189 Benefiting from the unique alkene–alkyne complex transition mechanism of GDY, which is completely different from the conventional capacitive actuation mechanism, the obtained actuator exhibited a specific capacitance and energy conversion efficiency for this GDY-based actuator of 237 F g−1 and 6.03%, respectively, much higher than that of similar electrochemical transducers. Later, by combining GDY with the dynamic movement of micromotors, Escarpa and co-workers190 innovatively established a GDY-Ni/Pt micromotors for DOX delivery and cancer cell killing and fluorescence “OFF–ON” sensing of toxins.
The mimicking synapses as building blocks for neural processing are important for fabricating efficient intelligent systems. Xu and co-workers191 reported junction-type GDY-based artificial synapses (GASs) to emulate multiple short-term plasticity, giving impressive pulse responsiveness and femtowatt-level energy consumption (Fig. 22a–e). Very importantly, the GAS can identify the frequency of presynaptic pulses to a certain extent to infer and analyze the sensory information transmitted from afferent nerves. Their results demonstrated that the GAS is capable of parallelly processing signals transmitted from multiple pre-neurons and realizing dynamic logic and spatiotemporal rules (Fig. 22f–h). Most recently, Lu and co-workers192 fabricated the optoelectronic synapse based on GDY/Gr heterostructures grown on a wafer-scale (6 cm × 6 cm) for mimicking synaptic behaviors (Fig. 23). These results demonstrate that the unique properties of GDY pave the way for developing novel intelligent systems for versatile applications such as soft electronics, neurorobotics, and smart prostheses.
 Fig. 22  (a) Signal transmission. (b) Ion movements. (c) GAS. (d) Ion transports. (e) Biological sensorimotor and (f) artificial efferent nerves. (g) Currents at different time periods. (h) Actuator flexion for synapses. The scale bar corresponds to 2 cm. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2021]. 
 Fig. 23  (a and b) The GDY/Gr-based transistor. Scale bar, 20 μm. (c) Electrical circuit for the GDY/Gr synapse. (d) Device tests. (e) EPSC and IPCS tests. (f) Aversion learning. (g) EPSC and IPSC. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2021]. 
5.2 Advances in graphdiyne-based solar cells
GDY has achieved important results in the research on solar cells including perovskite, polymer and quantum dots solar cells in recent years. Li et al. showed that doping the perovskite layer with GDY had the advantages of high-crystallinity, large-domain and fewer grain boundaries, which resulted in high efficiency of up to 21.01%. It should be noted that perovskite with poor crystallinity tends to generate iodide vacancies during heat treatment. Through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements, it was found that more electrons can be afforded by Pb atoms, which suppress the formation of iodide vacancies and improve the crystal quality and stability of MAPbI3 (Fig. 24a–d). Both the current–voltage hysteresis and device stability were improved. GDY significantly affects the crystallization, film morphology and optoelectronic properties of the perovskite active layer. Meng et al. introduced GDY into the FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite film and fabricated a PVSK/GDY heterojunction applied in planar perovskite solar cells,193 achieving a PCE of up to 20.54% and stability of 140 days (Fig. 24e and f). Li et al. reported that the incorporation of GDY with PCBM and ZnO of perovskite solar cells with an inverted structure based on MAPbI3194 could reach a high efficiency of 20.0% in MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells. Meng et al. used GDY to modify the P3HT hole transport layer of perovskite solar cells195 and showed that the addition of GDY can effectively improve the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and short-circuit current (Jsc). The HOMO of the P3HT/GDY thin layer (−4.9 eV) was lower than the original P3HT (−4.7 eV), indicating that the GDY particles could lower the HOMO energy level of P3HT. In order to improve the performance of perovskite solar cells, Jiu et al. proposed a strategy for synthesizing GDY-doped P3CT-K thin film and the PCE increased from 16.8% to 19.5%, and the J–V hysteresis of GDY-doped devices was significantly improved.196
 Fig. 24  (a) GDY–PbI2 mixture. (b) Pb 4f XPS spectra. (c) Current density measurements. (d) EQE spectra. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2018]. (e and f) Model and morphologies of PVSK/GDY heterojunction. Adapted from ref. 193 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. 
SnO2 has demonstrated high performance in PSCs. However, SnO2 solar cells commonly exhibit low performance because the photogenerated electron extraction rate was mismatched with that of holes. Zhang et al. carried out research to maximize the collocation between SnO2 and perovskite via incorporating GDY with multi-roles.55 The electron extraction rate was significantly improved due to the promoted electron mobility of SnO2 and facilitated interfacial energy band alignment (Fig. 25). Simultaneously, the enhanced hydrophobicity effectively restrained the nucleation of heterogeneous perovskite and diminished grain boundaries and defects, resulting in a high-quality film. This work demonstrates the crucial role of acetylene bonds in perovskite growth.
 Fig. 25  (a) TEM and HRTEM images. (b) Raman. (c) Electronic properties. (d) Energy band alignment. (e) Electron mobility evaluation, (f) c-AFM images. (g) Hysteresis performances. (h) EQE tests. (i) Nyquist plots. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
To enhance the environmental stability and charge extraction rate of PSCs, Ho et al. developed a one-step strategy to synthesize perovskite, in which graphdiyne-containing chlorobenzene was utilized as an antisolvent on the upper part of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layer (Fig. 26a–c).197 The oxygen-containing groups on GDY endow it with a higher Fermi level than perovskite and favourable contact with the perovskite film. The unidirectional hole transport from the perovskite to GDY led to further extraction to the hole transport layer. The assembled device exhibited an enhanced Jsc of 24.21 mA cm−2 with a PCE of 19.6%. Chlorine-substituted GDY (ClGDY) featuring a well-defined 2D framework showed potential for photovoltaic devices. Liu et al. successfully applied ClGDY in polymer solar cells as a multifunctional solid additive (Fig. 26d and e),198 exhibiting a high efficiency of 17.3%. Wang et al.199 used GDY as a hole transport layer for solar cells and found that GDY could reduce the work function and significantly facilitate the transfer of holes.
 Fig. 26   (a) Charge transport in PSK/GDY. (b) Performance tests. (c) Stability test under humidity of 50% ± 5%. Adapted from ref. 198 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. (d) ClGDY-PCBM solution. (e) Charge transfer after ClGDY addition. Adapted from ref. 199 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
5.3 Advances in graphdiyne-based electrochemical energy storage devices
The capacity of the anode material is the key factor for the further improvement of the energy density of metal-ion batterie.64,87,200–216 The large surface area and porous channels of GDY make it an ideal platform for metal ion accommodation. Huang et al. successfully prepared H-graphdiyne (H-GDY) using triethylbenzene as the precursor and used it as an anode for LIBs (Fig. 27a–c),96 with high reversible storage-specific capacity performances (Fig. 27d). The H-GDY anode also exhibited robust cycling stability at 0.1 and 1 A g−1 (Fig. 27e and f). Li et al. realized the controllable growth of GDY on Cu with seamless contact, large specific surface area and high dispersion (Fig. 27g–i).217 The obtained all-carbon LIB anode showed excellent reversible specific capacity (1388 mA h g−1) and stability (Fig. 27j–l).
 Fig. 27  (a) GDY-based flexible electrodes. (b and c) HsGDY characterization. (d) Rate capability. (e and f) The cycle performance tests. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2017]. (g) Possible mechanism for Cu@GDY paper. (h and i) Morphological characterizations of Cu@GDY. (j) Performance measurements. (k and l) long-term stability measurements. Adapted from ref. 218 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. 
GDY has shown many unique and promising properties for controllable fabrication of active and stable electrodes and plays a vital role in electrochemical devices. Serious volume changes (greater than 300%) and the interface instability of silicon electrodes seriously deteriorate their reversibility and safety. Shang et al. used copper nanowires to initiate the formation of seamless GDY films on the outside of the silicon nanoparticles (Fig. 28a–c),200 which not only effectively protected the silicon nanoparticles but also formed an enhanced three-dimensional mechanical and electrical network structure. The obtained silicon anode had a high specific capacity and long-time stability (Fig. 28d–f). In order to adapt to the conventional electrode processing and preparation technology, Li et al. carried out exploratory work (Fig. 28g–l).201 The current collector and the active material were closely connected via chemical bonds, which effectively improved the large volume changes in the silicon anode during the cycling process, and inhibited the separation of active material from the current collector. Wang et al. reported that the encapsulation of metal oxides by GDY under ambient conditions could effectively prevent the structural degradation of traditional electrodes.63 Both experimental and theoretical results indicated that GDY acts as a protective layer for MOs and plays a crucial role in inhibiting the structural and interfacial degradation of electrodes, having more extended electrochemical applications in the energy-related fields besides LIBs.
 Fig. 28  (a) GDY-modified Si anode. (b and c) Morphological characterizations. (d) Charge–discharge curves. (e) Performance and (f) lifespan measurements. Adapted from ref. 201 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (g) Electrode model. (h and i) Morphological characterizations. (j) Charge–discharge for GDY-Si3. (k) Specific capacity of GDY-Si. (l) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 202 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2018]. 
The fast-charging capability of lithium (Li)-ion batteries is seriously limited by the sluggish kinetics of Li-ion transport in battery systems. Regarding this challenge, Li et al. proposed the concept of self-expanding Li-ion channels for fast-charging Li-ion batteries with high-performance (Fig. 29).218 Their results revealed that the self-reversible conversion of alkyne–alkene complex transitions could self-expand the lithium-ion channel and finally lead to fast-charging batteries. The effective coating of the LIB cathode is a feasible strategy for solving the problems including irreversible structural phase changes, interface instability and poor stability. Wang et al. conducted good theoretical exploration work on GDY-coated LiCoO2.202 Regarding the organic LIB cathode, Li et al. achieved the seamless GDY coating of the organic molecule cathode with high active mass loading (up to 93%), (Fig. 30), greatly improving the power density and stability of the battery.203 The specific capacity of the perylene anhydride electrode for LIB was 140 mA h g−1 due to its low working potential (2.5 V), while its energy density could still reach 310 W h kg−1. Besides, the GDY-coated organic cathode also exhibited excellent electrochemical performance for sodium-ion storage (Fig. 30g–j).
 Fig. 29  (a) Self-expanding ion-transport. (b) Li-ion transport channels. (c) Alkyne–alkene transition. (d) Structural variations. (e) Deformation experiments. (f and g) DFT calculations. Cycling tests under 0 °C (h) and −10 °C (i). (j and k) Performance comparison. Adapted from ref. 219 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
 Fig. 30  (a) Organic batteries. (b) Structure composition. (c–e) Performances and stability tests. (f) EIS data at the 1st cycle and the 50th cycle. (g–j) Performances and stability as the SIB cathode. Adapted from ref. 204 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020] 
For sodium-ion batteries (SIB), researchers also did many pioneering studies.207,208 Wang et al. showed that the 3D architecture GDY nanosheets (GDY-NSs) could be used for Na-ion batteries with excellent performance and cyclability. Huang et al. prepared boron-graphdiyne (BGDY) with a unique π-conjugated structure and demonstrated that all sp-carbon structures and boron species could enhance the overall performance. Sulfur is a high-energy-density (up to 1670 mA h g−1) cathode material. In view of the critical technical problems related to lithium-sulfur batteries, researchers carried out a series of studies.209–212,219–223 Zhang et al. prepared hydrogenated GDY for the sulfur storage medium, showing high reversible specific capacity.209 Wang et al. reported the controllable fabrication of GDY-based hollow carbon nanostructures (Fig. 31a–e),210 and showed that the interactions between polysulfides and the acetylene bond restrained the shuttle effect of polysulfides, which endowed the battery with high capacity (Fig. 31f–j).219 GDY also has great advantages in the surface modification of metal anodes in various energy storage devices. Shang et al. used GDY as a selective lithium ion separator to achieve the atomic-level diffusion of Li ions,220 effectively inhibiting the formation of lithium dendrites (Fig. 32a–c). Yang et al. designed HsGDY as the interface to solve the zinc dendrite formation issue in zinc-ion batteries (Fig. 32d–g).212 Remarkably, their strategy significantly prolonged the lifespan of the device.
 Fig. 31  (a) The preparation of Nafion@GDY. (b and c) Morphological characterizations of Cu@Nafion@GDY. (d) Performance and (e) stability tests of S@GDY@Nafion. Adapted from ref. 211 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2020]. (f) Preparation of GDY-PP separator. (g and h) Morphological characterizations of GDY-PP separator. (i and j) Performances and stability tests. Adapted from ref. 220 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2020]. 
 Fig. 32  (a) GDY film synthesis. (b and c) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 221 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2018]. (d) HsGDY synthesis. (e) The color evolution before and after HsGDY growth. (f) Stability test. (g) cycling performances. Adapted from ref. 213 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
5.4 Advances in graphdiyne-based fuel cells
The design and fabrication of high-performance membranes play important roles in the practical applications of fuel cells. Zhao and coworkers222 theoretically demonstrated that 2D graphyne was promising for the fabrication of proton-selective zero-crossover membranes (Fig. 33a–c). In order to realize the selective proton transport function of GDY and inhibit the shuttle of methanol experimentally, Pan et al. synthesized high-quality aminated graphdiyne (Fig. 33d–i),224 and revealed that NH2-GDY could effectively improve the performance (Fig. 33g). Particularly, the OCV of the single-cell assembled by NH2-GDY@Nafion-60 was 0.54, 0.58, 0.59 V at 25, 65, and 80°C, respectively (Fig. 33h). The cell assembled with NH2-GDY also exhibited much better long-term stability than that of pure Nafion (Fig. 33i). Li's group recently realized the large-scale fabrication of a GDY-based anode by anchoring highly active Pt4.4Cu alloy nanoparticles (∼4.2 nm) on the inside wall of GDY nanochannels. Their results revealed that the electrode achieved robust catalytic performance (0.8 mg cm−2), and 500 h long-term stability for DMFC.224
 Fig. 33  (a) Geometric structures of two-dimensional graphyne. (b) Water distribution on GY. (c) Proton conduction mechanisms. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2019]. (d–f) NH2-GDY@Nafion synthesis. Performance tests for (g) NH2-GDY@Nafion-25, and (h) NH2-GDY@Nafion-60. (i) Stability test. Adapted from ref. 225 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. 
5.5 Advances in graphdiyne-based electronic devices
GDY not only possesses high mobility comparable to graphene and high conductivity surpassing doped silicon but also exhibits an adjustable intrinsic bandgap that is required in the semiconductor industry, which makes it one of the alternative materials in high-performance electronic logic devices. Based on these, Pan et al. selected the Al electrode and GDY to fabricate a field-effect transistor (FET) theoretically.225 Using quantum transfer calculation simulation, the results showed a good on/off ratio and large on-state current of the FET device. Experimental studies also show that FET devices based on highly ordered large-area GDY film have excellent conductivity and high carrier mobility (Fig. 34).227,228 Zhang et al. fabricated the GDY/graphene heterostructure and fabricated a FET with SiO2 as the gate dielectric.226 They also synthesized GDY on hexagonal boron nitride to construct FET with high mobility.
 Fig. 34  (a) Heterostructure of GDY/graphene. (b) I–Vds characterization. (c) Ids–Vds curves. (d) Transport characteristics. (e) GDY transistor model. Adapted from ref. 227 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (f) Structures and performance tests (g and h). (i) GDY-based FET model. Adapted from ref. 228 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017]. 
5.6 Advances in graphdiyne-based optical devices
The intrinsic fascinating properties of GDY materials give them great application potential in the field of nonlinear optical materials and devices.227 Wu et al. demonstrated that 2D GDY had a broadband Kerr nonlinear optical response that was useful for nonreciprocal light propagation in passive photonic diodes (Fig. 35a–c).228 Zhang's group reported a photodetector (PD) prepared by coating GDY onto PET surfaces, which showed high photoresponsivity (Rph), photocurrent, and long-term stability (Fig. 35d–i).229 Zheng's group reported the heterostructure of s-SWNTs and GDY for the efficient separation of the photogenerated excitons with a small response time below 1 ms.230 In the field of UV photodetectors, Wang and Li et al. reported the use of GD/ZnO nanocomposites with greatly promoted performance as compared to the ZnO device, for UV PDs.231 The excellent molecular adsorption property of GDY made it superior for improving the detection sensitivity. Wang et al. developed a multiplexed DNA sensor based on GDY nanosheets and proposed a new GDY-based detection path,232 which had higher sensitivity and shorter detection time than MoS2 nanoparticles (Fig. 36a–f). Recently, Mao et al. found that GDY oxide in which the acetylene bonds were partially oxidized had a rapid response speed to humidity,233 which is better than GO (Fig. 36g–i).
 Fig. 35  (a) GDY-PMMA preparation. (b and c) Experimental setups. Adapted from ref. 230 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (d) GDY-based photodetection system. (e) Digital and (f) SEM graphs, and (g) photo-response behaviours of the sample. (h and i) Performance tests. Adapted from ref. 231 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
 Fig. 36  (a) Detection routes. (b) Fluorescence spectra. (c) Comparison of fluorescence intensities of different samples. (d–f) Fluorescence spectra for DNA detection. Adapted from ref. 234 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2017]. (g) Structure illustration. (h) Dynamic response curves of the samples. (i) Normalized responses. Adapted from ref. 235 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. 
5.7 Advances in graphdiyne-based materials for environmental applications
Superhydrophobic materials and cleaning materials are widely utilized in oil–water separation, self-cleaning, pollutant degradation, etc. Liu and colleagues234 constructed GDY-based 3D porous super-hydrophobic foams and realized effective oil–water separation (water purification). Liu and coworkers also prepared a GDY-modified sponge that can effectively adsorb different kinds of organic solvents or oils.235 Fan et al.236 and Yang et al.237 further proved the desalination and purification properties of GDY-based materials theoretically.
The superiority of GDY for gas separation and capture is attributed to its porous, mechanically stable, and unique electronic structure as compared with other conventional materials, which allow it to meet various separation requirements and objectives. Guo et al.,238 Buehler et al.,239 and Bartolomei et al.240 have predicted the separation and capture capability of graphdiyne and graphyne toward CO2, N2, CH4 and H2 gas molecules. Specifically. Zhu et al.241 revealed that organic unit (-NH2, -OH, -COOH, and -F)-functionalized GDY-based nanostructures could achieve CO2 capture and sequestration.
6. Biochemical effects of graphdiyne-based materials
GDY-based materials were developed and for the first time used for biomolecule detection in 2016.242 Their results showed that the interactions between nucleobases and GDY would quench the fluorescence of organic dye-labelled single-stranded DNA (ssDNA). Wang and coworkers243 demonstrated that GDY had a stable photothermal performance, photoacoustic response, good biocompatibility, and efficient photothermal ablation of cancer cells. Wang's group recently reported a new polymer/GDY nanocatalyst (CP@GDY/DSPE-PEG) (Fig. 37)169 to realize cancer cell apoptosis through photocatalyzing CO2 into CO, thus affecting mitochondrial respiration. Chen and coworkers reported the preparation of PdNPs/GDY as a high-performance oxygen generator for attenuating tumor hypoxia and inhibiting tumor growth (Fig. 38).244 By the combination of experimental and theoretical analysis, the catalysis mechanism and the energy profiles for the catalytic reactions were well studied. Their results revealed that the structures of the catalysts played a crucial role in effective therapy. Very recently, Chen et al.240 showed that the GDY-CeO2 nanocomposites had excellent activity in generating O2 from H2O2 to inhibit tumor growth in vivo (Fig. 39a–c). A GDY-based drug delivery platform was developed for effective cancer inhibition (Fig. 39d and e).245 GDY-Py QDs were also synthesized for effective cell imaging.246
 Fig. 37  (a) CP@GDY/DSPE-PEG for cancer therapy. (b) CO production rates. (c) CLSM image of 4T1 cells after irradiation. (d) ATP level of 4T1 cells measured using the ATP kit assay. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright. 
 Fig. 38  (a) Sample synthesis. (b) Morphology and (c) NP size of the samples. (d) ln(C/C0)-time course curves of H2O2 decomposition. (e) Catalytic activity of PdNPs/GDY. (f) Detecting strategy. (g) CLSM images (bars, 20 μm). (h) Protein expression. (i) Immunofluorescence images (bars, 200 μm). Adapted from ref. 246 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. 
 Fig. 39  (a) Illustration of the synthesis and radiotherapy. (b) Therapeutic experiments. (c) Measurements on tumor growth. (d) Cleaved caspase-3 and γH2AX staining of tumor tissues. Adapted from ref. 242 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. 
7. Perspectives
The rapid development of carbon science has deeply affected the progress of science and technology, promoted the development of multidisciplinary and high-tech fields, and extensively affected social civilization; it has established its strategic position in the 21st century. In the past two decades, carbon material science and technology have received attention from all countries in the world, realizing the rapid development of carbon nanoscience and widely influencing the progress of fundamental science and applied technology of carbon nanomaterials in chemistry, condensed matter physics, materials and other fields. In recent years, the discovery of GDY has brought new vitality to the family of carbon materials and provided valuable sources and opportunities for realizing revolutionary breakthroughs in optics, magnetism, electricity, photoelectricity, catalysis, energy storage and new-model energy conversion technologies. As an emerging carbon material, GDY has shown outstanding characteristics in fundamental and applied research in the early stages, and we believe that it will also show great potential in future scientific development.
In this review, we have discussed the research progress in the synthesis, properties and applications of GDY and GDY-based materials comprehensively and in detail. Despite its short development history, the discovery of GDY has brought new vitality to the family of carbon materials and it has already demonstrated broad application prospects in many important fields such as chemistry, physics, materials, biomedical and environmental engineering, due to their unique chemical and electronic structures (controlled cavity structure, reversible chemical bond conversion, extremely high carrier mobility, fast charge transfer, excellent mechanical property etc.). Specifically, the in situ growth on an arbitrary substrate under ambient conditions is the remarkable feature of GDY, which makes up for the inferior conventional carbon materials in achieving low-temperature processing, patterning and manufacture. Additionally, the successful synthesis of a series of GDY-based heterostructures and composite materials with tunable structures and properties has provided new guidance to scientists, and novel concepts and strategies have emerged in recent years to tackle various bottleneck problems in the scientific field.
Despite the above-mentioned remarkable progress, GDY studies are still in their infancy and some fundamental issues need to be deeply understood. Retrospection on the research in this field in recent years has led us to believe that the main challenges and opportunities for graphdiyne in the next decade are as follows: new methods for the controlled preparation of graphdiyne; continuous preparation and application of controllable monolayer and thickness films; the development of new and efficient reaction methods, controlled growth and conversion of all-crystalline materials; efficient utilization devices for electrons, photons and optoelectronics, etc.; the foundation and application of information fields such as efficient intelligence and chips arising from the alkene-alkyne complex transition effect of graphdiyne; high-orientation and uniformity of graphdiyne films; the establishment of a standardized evaluation system for GDY products. The research and efficient utilization of GDY are still far from meeting the requirements of human beings.
GDY research is still in its primary stages, and several fundamental scientific issues are still unknown. We should do our best to solve relevant major scientific issues from different points of view and achieve rapid progress in GDY research. The rich research results from different fields and regions have shown the great advantages of GDY. Undoubtedly, as a transformative material in the next 10–20 years, GDY will rapidly develop in the multi-disciplinary direction, and play an important role in interdisciplinary research, becoming a key material for the development of high-performance and new technologies, as well as a leading example of interdisciplinary development in some important fields. We are looking forward to a better tomorrow for GDY research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (21790050, 21790051, 22021002), the National Key Research and Development Project of China (2018YFA0703501), and the Key Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (QYZDY-SSW-SLH015).
References
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .
C. Huang, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Xue, Z. Zuo, H. Liu and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7744–7803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, Y. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhao, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 765–786 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, H. Liu, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 908–936 RSC .
Y. Du, W. Zhou, J. Gao, X. Pan and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 459–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 899–903 CrossRef .
P. Serafini, A. Milani, M. Tommasini, C. E. Bottani and C. S. Casari, Carbon, 2021, 180, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
P. Serafini, A. Milani, D. M. Proserpio and C. S. Casari, J. Chem. Phys. C, 2021, 125, 18456–18466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang, Y. L. Li and Z. G. Shuai, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, L. Xu, H. B. Liu and Y. L. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2572–2586 RSC .
Y. Li, Sci. Sin.: Chim., 2017, 47, 1045–1056 Search PubMed .
Z. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Zuo, H. Liu, C. Huang and Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2470–2478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Acta Phys. -Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 977–991 CAS .
R. Matsuoka, R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko, S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, K. Nagashio and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, X. Gao, J. Zhou, H. Xu, Z. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Xie, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604665 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zuo, H. Shang, Y. Chen, J. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8074–8077 RSC .

          E. Sheka, Chapter Four - Stretching and Breaking of Chemical Bonds, Correlation of Electrons, and Radical Properties of Covalent Species. in Adv. Quantum Chem., ed. Sabin, J. R. and Brändas, E. J., Academic Press,  2015, Vol. 70, pp. 111–161 Search PubMed .
N. Narita, S. Nagai, S. Suzuki and K. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 11146–11151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, Y. Han, S. Tang, Y. Ding, R. Liu, H. Bao, Y. Li, J. Luo and T. Lu, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 1714–1721 CrossRef .
L. Lin, H. Pan, Y. Chen, X. Song, J. Xu, H. Liu, S. Tang, Y. Du and N. Tang, Carbon, 2019, 143, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, Y. Han, S. Tang, Y. Ding, R. Liu, H. Bao, Y. Li, J. Luo and T. Lu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1714–1721 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, P. Yu, G. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, Y. Yi, H. Liu, Y. Li and L. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Zhu, D. Yi, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, C. Yin, F. Ding, S. Zhang, X. Yi, J. Wang, L. Tong, Y. Han, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat6378 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, C. Pan, C. Wang, S. Hu, W. Xiao, X. Chi, Y. Fang, J. Yang, H. Deng, S. Xiao, J. Li, Z. Luo and Y. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8720–8730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Malko, C. Neiss, F. Viñes and A. Görling, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 086804 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Narita, S. Nagai, S. Suzuki and K. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 11009–11014 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, S. Chang, J. Kang, J. Tan, S. Qin and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 136, 244702 Search PubMed .
J. Kang, J. Li, F. Wu, S.-S. Li and J.-B. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20466–20470 CAS .
J. Zhou, K. Lv, Q. Wang, X. S. Chen, Q. Sun and P. Jena, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 134, 174701 Search PubMed .
M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 5390–5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Pan, L. Z. Zhang, B. Q. Song, S. X. Du and H. J. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98 Search PubMed .
B. G. Shohany, M. R. Roknabadi and A. Kompany, Phys. E, 2016, 84, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Koo, B. Huang, H. Lee, G. Kim, J. Nam, Y. Kwon and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2463–2468 CAS .

          B. Bhattacharya, N. B. Singh and U. Sarkar, Iop, Tuning of band gap due to fluorination of graphyne and graphdiyne, 5th Young Researcher Meeting,  2014, vol. 566 Search PubMed .
J. Koo, M. Park, S. Hwang, B. Huang, B. Jang, Y. Kwon and H. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8935–8939 RSC .
A. Mohajeri and A. Shahsavar, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 5366–5379 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, F. M. Wu and J. B. Li, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 165301 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tan, X. He and M. Zhao, Diam. Relat. Mater., 2012, 29, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Zheng, G. F. Luo, Q. H. Liu, R. Quhe, J. X. Zheng, K. C. Tang, Z. X. Gao, S. Nagase and J. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3990–3996 RSC .
M. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Shuai, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Houshmand, R. Friedman, S. Jalili and J. Schofield, J. Mol. Model., 2020, 26, 171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Bai, Y. Zhu, W. Y. Qiao and Y. H. Huang, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 768–775 RSC .
M.-Q. Long, L. Tang, D. Wang, L. Wang and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17728–17729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, Y. Zhu, W. Qiao and Y. Huang, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 768–775 RSC .
X. Qian, H. Liu, C. Huang, S. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7756 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yin, J. Li, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Kong, P. Gao, H. Peng, L. Tong and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001396 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kan, D. Wang, Q. Pan, Y. Wang, Y. Xiao, J. Liu, Y. Zhao and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 7801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Qian, Z. Y. Ning, Y. L. Li, H. B. Liu, C. B. Ouyang, Q. Chen and Y. J. Li, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 730–733 RSC .
G. X. Li, Y. L. Li, X. M. Qian, H. B. Liu, H. W. Lin, N. Chen and Y. J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2611–2615 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Wang, H.-B. Liu, X.-N. Kan, L. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, B. Su, Y.-L. Li and L. Jiang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602265 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Gao, R. Liu, Z. Xie, J. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7596–7599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Si, W. Fan, M. Shi, M. Li, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, A. Sattar, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11573–11582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, J. Y. Zhou, R. Du, Z. Q. Xie, S. B. Deng, R. Liu, Z. F. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 168–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, Y. Guo, Y. Yi, Y. Li, H. Liu, D. Li, W. Yang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 858–866 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, F. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 774–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Ren, J. Zhou, R. Du, C. Yin, R. Liu, H. Peng, L. Tong, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5777–5781 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, J. Li, R. Du, J. Zhou, M.-Y. Huang, R. Liu, J. Li, Z. Xie, L.-Z. Wu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605308 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, Y. Liu and Y. Li, Small, 2021, 17, 2006136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, F. He, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806272 Search PubMed .
G. Shi, Z. Fan, L. Du, X. Fu, C. Dong, W. Xie, D. Zhao, M. Wang and M. Yuan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 821–828 RSC .
Z. Jia, Z. Zuo, Y. Yi, H. Liu, D. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 343–349 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Song, C. Zhang, J. He, X. Li, X. Wang, N. Wang, Y. Li and C. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Xiong, Z. Xie, X. Gao, J. Zhou, C. Yin, L. Tong, C. Chen, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2734–2739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pan, S. Chen, C. Wu, F. Shao, J. Sun, L. Sun, Z. Zhang, Y. Man, Z. Li, L. He and Y. Zhao, CCS Chem., 2020, 3, 1368–1375 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, Y. Hou, V. Dzhagan, Z. Liao, G. Chai, M. Loffler, D. Olianas, A. Milani, S. Xu, M. Tommasini, D. R. T. Zahn, Z. Zheng, E. Zschech, R. Jordan and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1140 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Pan, S. Chen, C. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46070–46076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pan, H. Liu, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, B. Xue, X. Kan, X. Huang, J. Liu and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2740–2744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Wu, Q. Pan, F. Shao, Q. Sun, S. Chen, Z. Li and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3210–3213 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhang, N. Kepcija, M. Kleinschrodt, K. Diller, S. Fischer, A. C. Papageorgiou, F. Allegretti, J. Bjork, S. Klyatskaya, F. Klappenberger, M. Ruben and J. V. Barth, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1286 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kan, Y. Ban, C. Wu, Q. Pan, H. Liu, J. Song, Z. Zuo, Z. Li and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Klappenberger, R. Hellwig, P. Du, T. Paintner, M. Uphoff, L. Zhang, T. Lin, B. A. Moghanaki, M. Paszkiewicz, I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, O. Fuhr, Y.-Q. Zhang, F. Allegretti, M. Ruben and J. V. Barth, Small, 2018, 14, 1704321 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Sun, L. Cai, H. Ma, C. Yuan and W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7023–7030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, H. Shen, C. Wu, Z. Tu, F. He, Y. Gu, Y. Xue, Y. Zhao, Y. Yi, Y. Li and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 48–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, H. Shen, Y. Zeng, Y. Yi, Z. Zuo, Y. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4908–4913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Zhang, C. Wu, Q. Pan, Y. Zhao and Z. Li, Small, 2019, 15, 1804519 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bai, Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, F. He, Y. Xue and N. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2247–2254 RSC .
Z. Yang, Y. Song, X. Ren, C. Zhang, X. Hu, X. Li, K. Wang, J. Li and C. Huang, Carbon, 2021, 182, 413–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Shen, K. Wang, C. Huang, Y. Yi, Z. Tu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2893–2903 RSC .
Z. Yang, W. Cui, K. Wang, Y. Song, F. Zhao, N. Wang, Y. Long, H. Wang and C. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5643–5647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, N. Wang, J. He, Z. Yang and C. Huang, 2D Mater., 2020, 7, 025032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Wan, H. Yao, L. Zhang, K. Lin, L. Wang, N. Yang, D. Liu, L. Song, J. Zhu, L. Gu, L. Liu, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 924–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, Y. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Lin, Q. Feng, H. Yao and Y. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 31406–31412 RSC .
X. Shen, J. He, K. Wang, X. Li, X. Wang, Z. Yang, N. Wang, Y. Zhang and C. Huang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1342–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zou, W. Rong, B. Long, Y. Ji and L. Duan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10649–10655 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, J. He, Z. Tu, Z. Yang, F. Zhao, X. Li, C. Huang, K. Wang, T. Jiu, Y. Yi and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10740–10745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bu, M. Zhao, H. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Xi and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 3934–3939 CAS .
B. K. Das, D. Sen and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 2949–2958 RSC .
B. Mortazavi, M. Shahrokhi, X. Zhuang and T. Rabczuk, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11022–11036 RSC .
N. Wang, X. Li, Z. Tu, F. Zhao, J. He, Z. Guan, C. Huang, Y. Yi and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Muhammad, S. Wang, J. Liu, H. Xie and Q. Sun, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2019, 11, 014106 CrossRef .
X. Shen, X. Li, F. Zhao, N. Wang, C. Xie, J. He, W. Si, Y. Yi, Z. Yang, X. Li, F. Lu and C. Huang, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 035020 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, N. Wang, Z. Cui, H. Du, L. Fu, C. Huang, Z. Yang, X. Shen, Y. Yi, Z. Tu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1172 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qiu and X. Sheng, Phys. Lett. A, 2018, 382, 662–666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuo, Y. Shi, L. Liu, R. Li, L. Shi, D. H. Anjum, Y. Han and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Matsuoka, R. Toyoda, R. Shiotsuki, N. Fukui, K. Wada, H. Maeda, R. Sakamoto, S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, K. Nagashio and H. Nishihara, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2730–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wang, X. L. Yao, A. Narita and K. Mullen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2491–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Du, Z. Zhang, J. He, Z. Cui, J. Chai, J. Ma, Z. Yang, C. Huang and G. Cui, Small, 2017, 13, 1702277 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Sun, X. Wang, H. Du, J. He, Y. Long, Y. Zhang and C. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5010–5016 CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, Y. Li, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Liu, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Gao, B. Huang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13021–13027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13897–13903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803762 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Achilli, A. Milani, G. Fratesi, F. Tumino, N. Manini, G. Onida and C. S. Casari, 2D Mater., 2021, 8, 044014 CrossRef .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, B. Huang, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, iScience, 2018, 11, 31–41 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Ji, Y. Liu, X. Cao, S. Tian, Y. Chen, Z. Niu and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 623–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, J. Dong, Z.-Q. Huang, P. Xin, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jin, W. Xing, Z. Zhuang, J. Ye, X. Wei, R. Cao, L. Gu, S. Sun, L. Zhuang, X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C.-R. Chang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 390–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, X. Chen, D. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, C. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2020, 21, 2145–2149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Du, Z. Wang, Y. Gao, B. Huang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104667 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Zhong, L. Tong, Y. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, C. Yin, L. Qiao, S. Li, R. Si and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905423 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, Y. Xue, F. He and Y. Li, ACS Mater. Au, 2021, 1, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, W. Rong, S. Wei, Y. Ji and L. Duan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 29462–29468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, S. K. Matta, G. Will and A. Du, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800419 CrossRef .
T. He, S. K. Matta and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 1546–1551 RSC .
T. He, L. Zhang, G. Kour and A. Du, J. CO2 Utilization, 2020, 37, 272–277 CrossRef CAS .
X.-P. Yin, H.-J. Wang, S.-F. Tang, X.-L. Lu, M. Shu, R. Si and T. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9382–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Cai, X. Wu, Z. Lv, P. Wu and C. Cai, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10364–10374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Xue, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, Y. Xue, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Gao, B. Liu, Q. Feng, X.-B. Li, M.-Y. Huang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3954–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luan, Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, Y. Gao, S. Zhao, Y. Xue and Y. Li, 2D Mater., 2021, 8, 044017 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, Y. Xue, T. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Xing, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2102777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shi, Y. Xie, L. Du, Z. Fan, X. Chen, X. Fu, W. Xie, M. Wang and M. Yuan, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104852 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, Z. Zheng, C. Xing, Z. Wang, X. Luan, Y. Xue, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2107179 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Fang, F. He and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106333 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Zuo, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1707082 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, D. Jia, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, F. He, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Xing, F. Lu, F. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hui, D. Jia, H. Yu, Y. Xue and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2618–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, F. He, D. Jia and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, C. Pan, C. Wang, S. Hu, W. Xiao, X. Chi, Y. Fang, J. Yang, H. Deng, S. Xiao, J. Li, Z. Luo and Y. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8720–8730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Yang, G. Wang, B. Ma and Z. Jin, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1985–1995 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, W. Zhou, F. He, Y. Gu, Y. Li and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4850–4855 RSC .
X.-P. Yin, D. Lu, J.-W. Wang and X.-L. Lu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5407–5411 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Si, Q.-X. Deng, L.-C. Chen, L. Wang, X.-Y. Liu, W.-S. Wu, Y.-H. Zhang, J.-M. Zhou and H.-L. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 794, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shi, C. Yu, Z. Fan, J. Li and M. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2662–2669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Gao, Z. Li, J.-H. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Yin, Y. Wang, X.-B. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808079 CrossRef .
Y. Lv, X. Wu, W. Jia, J. Guo, H. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Jia and F. Tong, Carbon, 2020, 169, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, J. Liu, C. Wang, F. Rong, L. He, Y. Song, Z. Zhang and S. Fang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135577 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Yin, Z. Kang, P. Wu, J. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, J. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2745–2749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, Y. Jiang, F. Wu, P. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li and L. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2684–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Si, C.-J. Mao, J.-Y. Zhou, X.-F. Rong, Q.-X. Deng, S.-L. Chen, J.-J. Zhao, X.-G. Sun, Y. M. Shen, W.-J. Feng, P. Gao and J. Zhang, Carbon, 2018, 132, 598–605 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Xue, H. Yu, L. Hui, B. Huang and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, Z. Zheng, C. Xing, Z. Wang, X. Luan, Y. Xue, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2107179 CrossRef .
X. Gao, J. Li, R. Du, J. Zhou, M. Y. Huang, R. Liu, J. Li, Z. Xie, L. Z. Wu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 Search PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3170–3174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, J. He, F. He, Y. Xue, Y. Li and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2021, 623, 118244 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Yang, H.-J. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Li, W. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13142–13148 RSC .
H. Shen, Y. Li and Z. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2563–2570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ramakrishnan, H. Kim and B. Yang, N. J. Chem., 2019, 43, 12896–12899 RSC .
S. Guo, P. Yu, W. Li, Y. Yi, F. Wu and L. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2074–2082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Zeng, M. Sun, D. Yang, K. Cao, H. Pan, Y. Wu, H. Liu and R. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 40629–40637 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-F. Tang, X.-L. Lu, C. Zhang, Z.-W. Wei, R. Si and T.-B. Lu, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 1533–1541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, Y. Wang, B. Zhu, G. Xie, J. Yu and J. R. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7671–7676 RSC .
Y.-B. Chang, C. Zhang, X.-L. Lu, W. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Su, G.-X. Dong, W. Zhang, Z.-L. Liu, M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50464–50471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhang, Z. Zuo, W. Yu, H. Zhao, S. Xia, Y. Huang, F. Lv, L. Liu, Y. Li and S. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front, 2021, 5, 5841–5845 RSC .
C. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. Cheng, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 868, 159045 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gu, L. Zhong, G. Shi, J. Li, K. Yu, J. Li, S. Zhang, C. Zhu, S. Chen, C. Yang, Y. Kong, C. Chen, S. Li, J. Zhang and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8679–8688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rong, H. Zou, W. Zang, S. Xi, S. Wei, B. Long, J. Hu, Y. Ji and L. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 466–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Hui, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 0, 1707564 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, Z. Jin, Y. Chen, Z. Gao, J. Yan, H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 129, 228–235 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, X. Chen, H. Liu, W. Gan, N. Ding and Y. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Front, 2021, 5, 4596–4603 RSC .
S. Zhao, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, X. Luan, Y. Gao and Y. Li, Mater. Chem. Front, 2021, 5, 4153–4159 RSC .
Y. Du, Y. Xue, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100234 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900973 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sakamoto, R. Shiotsuki, K. Wada, N. Fukui, H. Maeda, J. Komeda, R. Sekine, K. Harano and H. Nishihara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22189–22194 RSC .
Q. Lv, W. Si, J. He, L. Sun, C. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Li, X. Wang, W. Deng, Y. Long, C. Huang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3376 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Hou, V. Dzhagan, Z. Liao, G. Chai, M. Löffler, D. Olianas, A. Milani, S. Xu, M. Tommasini, D. R. T. Zahn, Z. Zheng, E. Zschech, R. Jordan and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1140 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ning, L. Xiaodong, T. Zeyi, Z. Fuhua, H. Jianjiang, G. Zhaoyong, H. Changshui, Y. Yuanping and L. Yuliang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3968–3973 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, L. Hui, Y. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13897–13903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Han, X.-L. Lu, S.-F. Tang, X.-P. Yin, Z.-W. Wei and T.-B. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702992 CrossRef .
H. Si, Q. Deng, C. Yin, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Zhang and J. Kong, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 833, 155054 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Shi, G. L. Wen, Y. Nie, G. H. Zhang and H. G. Duan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5261–5285 RSC .
Z. Jin, Y. Chen, Q. Zhou, P. Mao, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Li, Mater. Chem. Front, 2017, 1, 1338–1341 RSC .
C. Lu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, R. Fu, X. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Ming, Y. Hu, H. Lin, X. Tao, Y. Li and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 752 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yuan, V. de la Asunción-Nadal, Y. Li, B. Jurado-Sánchez and A. Escarpa, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 8471–8477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, R. Shi, L. Sun, H. Yu, J. Gong, C. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. Ni, J. Xu and W. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Zhang, Y. Li, J.-J. Wang, D.-H. Qi, B.-W. Yao, M.-X. Yu, X.-D. Chen and T.-B. Lu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 4591–4600 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, J. Shi, H. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, Y. Li and Q. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802012 CrossRef .
J. Li, T. Jiu, C. Duan, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Jian, Y. Zhao, N. Wang, C. Huang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 331–337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Xiao, J. J. Shi, H. B. Liu, Y. Z. Xu, S. T. Lv, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li, Q. B. Meng and Y. L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401943 CrossRef .
J. Li, M. Zhao, C. Zhao, H. Jian, N. Wang, L. Yao, C. Huang, Y. Zhao and T. Jiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2626–2631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, J. W. Tian, J. J. Fan, J. G. Yu and W. K. Ho, Small, 2020, 16 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Kan, K. Gao, J. Wang, M. Zhao, H. Chen, C. Zhao, T. Jiu, A.-K. Y. Jen and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, M. Yuan, H. Li, H. Yang, Q. Zhou, H. Liu, X. Lan, M. Liu, J. Wang, E. H. Sargent and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5284–5289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, L. Yu, F. Wang, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801459 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Zuo, H. Shang, F. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, S. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Guo and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12630–12636 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Zuo, F. Wang, J. Gao, A. Cao, F. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu, J. He, R. Li, K. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Shen, Y. Li, J. Xiao and C. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 29, 131–139 CrossRef .
J. Li, J. Xu, Z. Xie, X. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. Xiong, C. Chen, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800548 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, G. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Lin and Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22655–22661 RSC .
H. Huang, K. Li, X. Fan, D. J. Singh and W. T. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25609–25618 RSC .
Z. Yang, C. Zhang, Z. Hou, X. Wang, J. He, X. Li, Y. Song, N. Wang, K. Wang, H. Wang and C. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11186–11194 RSC .
J. Li, S. Li, Q. Liu, C. Yin, L. Tong, C. Chen and J. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805344 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, F. He and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. He, Z. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Huang and Y. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35738–35745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Y. Guo, B. Yan, C. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Song, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 468–477 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, H. Yang, C. Huang, J. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Z. Zuo, H. Shang, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2599–2607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, H. Zheng, K. Li, Z. Tu, Y. Yi, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, F. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 774–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. An, H. Zhang, L. Qi, G. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2–10 CrossRef .
S. Kong, D. Cai, G. Li, X. Xu, S. Zhou, X. Ding, Y. Zhang, S. Yang, X. Zhou, H. Nie, S. Huang, P. Peng and Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 3817–3826 RSC .
J. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Li, J. Gao, J. He, N. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang and C. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1741–1750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, Z. Zuo, X. Dong, F. Wang, F. Lu, H. Zheng, K. Li and Y. Li, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 191–199 CrossRef .
L. Shi, A. Xu, D. Pan and T. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1165 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Zuo, L. Li, K. Li, F. He, Z. Jiang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15010–15015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Z. Jiang, Z. Zuo, F. He, F. Wang, L. Li, Q. Chang, B. Guan and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2021, 39, 101213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Wang, L. Wang, H. Zhong, R. Quhe, Z. Ni, M. Ye, W.-N. Mei, J. Shi, W. Guo, J. Yang and J. Lu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2116–2127 RSC .
J. Zhou, Z. Xie, R. Liu, X. Gao, J. Li, Y. Xiong, L. Tong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2632–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, R. Shi, R. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Chen, C. Ma, Z. Wang, Y. Ge, Y. Song, Z. Luo, D. Fan, X. Jiang, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Laser Photon. Rev., 2020, 14, 1900367 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Y. Dong, J. Zhao, D. Ma, W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Xiang, J. Li, Y. Feng, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807981 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Huang, J. Guo, R. Shi, W. Huang, Z. Shi, L. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Gao, C. Li, X. Zhang, J. Xu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, H. Fang, D. Liu, Z. Tan, X. Gao, W. Hu, H. Peng, L. Tong, W. Hu and J. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700472 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Mao, H. Li, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3697–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Parvin, Q. Jin, Y. Wei, R. Yu, B. Zheng, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Gao, H. Zhao, W. Hu, Y. Li and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606755 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, S. Guo, F. Wu, P. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li and L. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3922–3926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Zhou, X. Gao, J. Li, Z. Xie, Z. Li, S. Zhang, L. Tong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700122 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Chen, J. Gao, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2591–2598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kou, X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Wu and J. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1865–1870 RSC .
F. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Xu and X. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci, 2016, 387, 1080–1087 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, P. Sang, S. Guo, X. Liu, J. Li, H. Zhu and W. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 405, 455–464 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Cranford and M. J. Buehler, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4587–4593 RSC .
M. Bartolomei, E. Carmona-Novillo and G. Giorgi, Carbon, 2015, 95, 1076–1081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dang, W. Guo, L. Zhao and H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30002–30013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, P. Yu, S. Guo, L. Mao, H. Liu and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5629–5632 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Li and S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6087–6094 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, M. You, F. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Gao, C. Jing, J. Liu, M. Guo, J. Li, A. Luo, H. Liu, Z. Liu and C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, M. Guo, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Li, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, M. Guo, F. Wang, W. Jin, C. Chen, H. Liu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16712–16716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yan Fang
	Yan Fang received her BS degree in Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University. Now she is pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Yuliang Li at ICCAS, working on the synthesis and application of 2D-graphdiyne-based materials.

Yuxin Liu
	Yuxin Liu received his bachelor's degree in Applied Chemistry from Jilin University in 2017. Now, he is a doctoral student in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the synthesis and application of graphdiyne-based nanomaterials.

Lu Qi
	Lu Qi obtained her PhD at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology. She is currently undertaking postdoctoral study in Prof. Yuliang Li's group in the Science Center for Material Creation and Energy Conversion, Shandong University. Her current research interests mainly focus on the advanced transmission electron microscopy study of graphdiyne-based electrocatalysts.

Yurui Xue
	Yurui Xue received his PhD at College of Chemistry, Jilin University. Then he started his Postdoctoral research under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li at ICCAS, China. He is now a Professor in Science Center for Material Creation and Energy Conversion of Shandong University, China. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of graphdiyne-based materials and applications in the fields of catalysis, energy conversion and storage.

Yuliang Li
	Yuliang Li is a professor at ICCAS and academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields on design and synthesis of functional molecules, self-assembly methodologies of low dimension and large size molecular aggregations structures, and chemistry of carbon and carbon-rich material, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structures and ACS maps of GDY. Adapted from ref. 20 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2015]. (b–d) Electron microscope results, and (e) AA, (f) AB, and (g) ABC stacking modes of GDY. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017]. (h–j) Electron microscope images. (k–m) Simulated SAED. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the [Nature Research], copyright [2018]. (n) TEM, (o) HRTEM and (p) STEM images. Adapted from ref. 25 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (q) Aberration-corrected HRTEM image, (r) enlarged image of the marked area, (s) Simulated HRTEM image, (t) CTF-corrected image and (u) simulated projected potential map images of GDY domain. (v and w) Energetically preferred geometry of the sample. (x) ABC stacking mode of GDY. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the [American Association for the Advancement of Science], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration and (b) band structure of monolayer GDY. (c and d) bilayer GDY. (e–g) for trilayer GDY. Bandgap of (h) three possible trilayer GDY, (i) bilayer GDY with AA configuration and (j) trilayer GDY with AAA configuration under zero field. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2012]. (k) Top and (l) side views, and (m) band structures of GDY with ABC stacking. Adapted from ref. 23 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Schematic illustration of GDNT. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2020].	 

Band gap (eV)	0.954	0.817	1.205	0.895	1.015


	0.086	0.087	0.216	0.149	0.174


	0.081	0.086	0.281	0.174	0.207

E
v (eV)	7.406	6.790	4.386	4.786	4.776

E
e (eV)	2.006	1.730	1.972	2.000	2.054

C (1010 eV cm−1)	1.244	1.864	1.035	1.787	1.420

μ
h (103 cm2 V−1 s−1)	1.696	2.088	0.755	1.815	1.194

μ
e (103 cm2 V−1 s−1)	18.590	34.241	2.692	9.127	5.329


	0.711	1.253	0.426	1.073	0.679


	10.580	19.731	1.418	5.015	2.829

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis and (b) TEM images of GDY boxes. (c) SEM, (d) AFM, (e) HRTEM images of GDY. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. (f and g) Schematic to the confined synthesis of the GDY thin film. (h) AFM, (i) TEM, and (j) high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images. Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) GDY stripes. Adapted from ref. 53 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2016]. (b and c) GDY nanowall. Adapted from ref. 54 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2015]. GDY on (d) 1D silicon nanowires, (e) Au foil, (f) Ni foam. Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2016]. GDY on (g) Cu nanowires. Adapted from ref. 58 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2017]. GDY on (h and i) carbon fibers. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The synthetic process for Si-DY. (b and c) SEM images, (d) HRTEM and (e) SAED results of Si-DY films. Adapted from ref. 66 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. (f) The experimental setup, (g) SEM, and (h) AFM images for the samples. Adapted from ref. 67 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (i) GTTY synthesis. (j) SAED and (k) HRTEM images of GTTY. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the [Chinese Chemical Society], copyright [2020]. (l and m) Growth of PTEB nanofibers on Cu foil. (n-p) SEM images of PTEB on 2D graphite, nickel, and Kapton substrates. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Synthesis of N-, CN-GDY. Adapted from ref. 70 and 71 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. Synthesis of (c) TTH-GDY. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2012]. (d) STM images of f-GDY nanowires. Adapted from ref. 75 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (e) Synthesis and (f) AFM characterization of GDY nanoribbons. Adapted from ref. 78 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 8   Schematic representation of (a) TPM-GDY, (b) TPN-GDY. Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2021]. Schematic representation of (c and d) N-substituted GYs (N-GYs). Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2021]. Synthesis of (e) F-GDY. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2018]. Synthesis of (f–h) sulfur doped GDY (S-GDY). Adapted from ref. 83 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (i) H-/N-co-doping GDY. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) GDY based atomic catalysts. HAADF images of (b) Ni0/GDY, (c and d) Fe0/GDY; ex situ EXAFS spectra for (e) Ni0/GDY and (f) Fe0/GDY. The XANES spectra for (g) Ni0/GDY and (h) Fe0/GDY. (i) Top and lower views of the adsorption of Ni and Fe atoms along route A and route B between GDY layers. (j) Binding energies of metal atoms moving along the routes. (k) The most favourable anchoring site. (l) Electrostatic potential maps. (m) Charge distribution of ACs. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–d) HAADF images of Mo0/GDY. (e) The catalysis processes. (f) Isotope labeling experiments. (g–i) The catalytic performances. Adapted from ref. 110 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Typical synthesis route to the Pd-GDY (Pd0/GDY). (b–e) HAADF images, (f) ECNRR energetic pathway, (g and h) free energies and (i) catalytic performances of GDY-Pd. (j) Comparison of the ECNRR performances. (k) Isotope labelling experiment. Adapted from ref. 113 with permissions from the [Oxford University Press], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) ENRR setup. (b) Catalytic performances at different exerted N2 pressures. (c) Cycling stability tests. Adapted from ref. 122 with permissions from the [National Academy of Sciences], copyright [2020]. (d) The synthesis and application of Pd1/GDY/G. (e) HAADF images. (f) Stability tests. (g) Catalysis setup. Adapted from ref. 120 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (h) Carbonates synthesis. (i) Performance comparison. (j) Synthesized carbonates. Adapted from ref. 121 with permissions from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) SEM images, (c) HRTEM, and (d and e) HAADF characterizations. (f) Size histogram. (g) OER, (h) HER, and (i) OWS performances. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]. (j) OsOx QDs/GDY synthesis. (k) HRTEM image of OsOx QDs/GDY. (l) LSV curves of the samples recorded with (solid lines) and without (dashed doted lines) the illumination.  Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Sample fabrication. Morphological characterizations on (b–d) Cu@GDY and (e–g) Cu@GDY-Co. (h) OER activity and (i) Tafel slopes of the samples. Adapted from ref. 133 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) GDY/MoO3 sample. (c) HAADF, (d) TEM (inset: particle distribution), and (e) HRTEM characterizations. (f) Calculation model. (g) Difference charge density for GDY/MoO3. (h) LSV curves. Adapted from ref. 142 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) NW-MnCo2O4/GDY preparation. (b–d) Electron microscope pictures. (e) Mapping of NW-MnCo2O4/GDY. (f) Presentation of the water splitting mechanism of NW-MnCo2O4/GDY. (g) Performance comparison. (h) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 134 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021]	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SiHJ photoanode. (b and c) SEM images of GDY. LSV tests for (d) SiHJ/GDY and (e) SiHJ-10 nm (with/without GDY). (f) Photocurrent density curves of SiHJ/GDY-10 nm and SiHJ-10 nm. Adapted from ref. 51 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (g) Ag3PO4/GDY photocatalysis. (h) Imaging on the emulsions. (i) O2 evolution under irradiation. (j) O2 concentration evaluation test. (k and l) MB degradation tests. Adapted from ref. 152 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Ultrathin CTNS/GDY synthesis. (b) SEM and (c) AFM results for CTNS/GDY; (d) LSV and (e) Tafel plots of the samples. (f) Stability measurements. Adapted from ref. 154 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 19  
 (a) Self-standing GDY/Co2N. (b–d) GDY/Co2N. Performance comparison in (e) acidic and (g) neutral media. (f) Cycling life for GDY/Co2N. Adapted from ref. 103 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) GDY/G-loaded monodispersed CoPc. (b) HADDF imaging on CoPc/GDY/G. (c) Performance comparison of CoPc/GDY/G and CoPc/G. (d) TOFCO values. Adapted from ref. 171 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2021]. (e) Catalyst models. (f) HAADF image. (g) FE results. (h) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 172 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 21  Pictures for (a) CF, (b–d) UGNS/CF, and (e and f) GDY nanosheet/substrate interface. (g) LSV curves and (h) Tafel plots of the samples. (i) Performance comparison. (j) LSV and (l) stability measurements of UGNS/CF. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Signal transmission. (b) Ion movements. (c) GAS. (d) Ion transports. (e) Biological sensorimotor and (f) artificial efferent nerves. (g) Currents at different time periods. (h) Actuator flexion for synapses. The scale bar corresponds to 2 cm. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 23  (a and b) The GDY/Gr-based transistor. Scale bar, 20 μm. (c) Electrical circuit for the GDY/Gr synapse. (d) Device tests. (e) EPSC and IPCS tests. (f) Aversion learning. (g) EPSC and IPSC. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) GDY–PbI2 mixture. (b) Pb 4f XPS spectra. (c) Current density measurements. (d) EQE spectra. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2018]. (e and f) Model and morphologies of PVSK/GDY heterojunction. Adapted from ref. 193 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) TEM and HRTEM images. (b) Raman. (c) Electronic properties. (d) Energy band alignment. (e) Electron mobility evaluation, (f) c-AFM images. (g) Hysteresis performances. (h) EQE tests. (i) Nyquist plots. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 26   (a) Charge transport in PSK/GDY. (b) Performance tests. (c) Stability test under humidity of 50% ± 5%. Adapted from ref. 198 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]. (d) ClGDY-PCBM solution. (e) Charge transfer after ClGDY addition. Adapted from ref. 199 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) GDY-based flexible electrodes. (b and c) HsGDY characterization. (d) Rate capability. (e and f) The cycle performance tests. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2017]. (g) Possible mechanism for Cu@GDY paper. (h and i) Morphological characterizations of Cu@GDY. (j) Performance measurements. (k and l) long-term stability measurements. Adapted from ref. 218 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) GDY-modified Si anode. (b and c) Morphological characterizations. (d) Charge–discharge curves. (e) Performance and (f) lifespan measurements. Adapted from ref. 201 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018]. (g) Electrode model. (h and i) Morphological characterizations. (j) Charge–discharge for GDY-Si3. (k) Specific capacity of GDY-Si. (l) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 202 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Self-expanding ion-transport. (b) Li-ion transport channels. (c) Alkyne–alkene transition. (d) Structural variations. (e) Deformation experiments. (f and g) DFT calculations. Cycling tests under 0 °C (h) and −10 °C (i). (j and k) Performance comparison. Adapted from ref. 219 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Organic batteries. (b) Structure composition. (c–e) Performances and stability tests. (f) EIS data at the 1st cycle and the 50th cycle. (g–j) Performances and stability as the SIB cathode. Adapted from ref. 204 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020]	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) The preparation of Nafion@GDY. (b and c) Morphological characterizations of Cu@Nafion@GDY. (d) Performance and (e) stability tests of S@GDY@Nafion. Adapted from ref. 211 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2020]. (f) Preparation of GDY-PP separator. (g and h) Morphological characterizations of GDY-PP separator. (i and j) Performances and stability tests. Adapted from ref. 220 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) GDY film synthesis. (b and c) Stability tests. Adapted from ref. 221 with permission from the [Elsevier], copyright [2018]. (d) HsGDY synthesis. (e) The color evolution before and after HsGDY growth. (f) Stability test. (g) cycling performances. Adapted from ref. 213 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Geometric structures of two-dimensional graphyne. (b) Water distribution on GY. (c) Proton conduction mechanisms. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from the [Springer Nature], copyright [2019]. (d–f) NH2-GDY@Nafion synthesis. Performance tests for (g) NH2-GDY@Nafion-25, and (h) NH2-GDY@Nafion-60. (i) Stability test. Adapted from ref. 225 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Heterostructure of GDY/graphene. (b) I–Vds characterization. (c) Ids–Vds curves. (d) Transport characteristics. (e) GDY transistor model. Adapted from ref. 227 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. (f) Structures and performance tests (g and h). (i) GDY-based FET model. Adapted from ref. 228 with permission from the [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017].	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) GDY-PMMA preparation. (b and c) Experimental setups. Adapted from ref. 230 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. (d) GDY-based photodetection system. (e) Digital and (f) SEM graphs, and (g) photo-response behaviours of the sample. (h and i) Performance tests. Adapted from ref. 231 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Detection routes. (b) Fluorescence spectra. (c) Comparison of fluorescence intensities of different samples. (d–f) Fluorescence spectra for DNA detection. Adapted from ref. 234 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2017]. (g) Structure illustration. (h) Dynamic response curves of the samples. (i) Normalized responses. Adapted from ref. 235 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) CP@GDY/DSPE-PEG for cancer therapy. (b) CO production rates. (c) CLSM image of 4T1 cells after irradiation. (d) ATP level of 4T1 cells measured using the ATP kit assay. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from the [Royal Society of Chemistry], copyright.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Sample synthesis. (b) Morphology and (c) NP size of the samples. (d) ln(C/C0)-time course curves of H2O2 decomposition. (e) Catalytic activity of PdNPs/GDY. (f) Detecting strategy. (g) CLSM images (bars, 20 μm). (h) Protein expression. (i) Immunofluorescence images (bars, 200 μm). Adapted from ref. 246 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2020].	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Illustration of the synthesis and radiotherapy. (b) Therapeutic experiments. (c) Measurements on tumor growth. (d) Cleaved caspase-3 and γH2AX staining of tumor tissues. Adapted from ref. 242 with permission from the [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2021].	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
