Recent research on the luminous mechanism, synthetic strategies, and applications of CuInS 2 quantum dots  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QI01228A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QI01228A
(Review Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 880-897Recent research on the luminous mechanism, synthetic strategies, and applications of CuInS2 quantum dots

        
          
            Zhiwei 
            Long
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wenda 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Junhang 
            Tian
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guantong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuanhong 
            Liu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ronghui 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *
      National Engineering Research Center for Rare Earth Materials, General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals, Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd., Beijing, 100088, P. R China. E-mail: griremlrh@126.com
Received 
      11th October 2020
    , Accepted 20th November 2020First published on 24th November 2020AbstractCopper indium sulfide colloidal quantum dots (CuInS2 QDs) have drawn lots of attention in recent years, due to their traits of nontoxic elements, low synthesis cost, and easily tunable bandgap. CuInS2 is a direct semiconductor with the bulk bandgap between 1.45 eV and 1.53 eV. The emitting wavelength of CuInS2 QDs can be tuned by their size or composition, covering a range from visible to near-infrared (NIR). Besides, CuInS2 QDs possess a high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1) which makes it an interesting candidate for solar energy conversion applications. However, as a kind of versatile “green” materials, the property of CuInS2 QDs is still at a low level compared to well-studied Cd-based or InP QDs. In this review, we first discuss the research of the luminescence mechanisms of CuInS2 QDs. Then, we summarize the methods to synthesize CuInS2 QDs and the strategies to improve their luminous performances and stability developed recently. Also, we introduce the potential applications of CuInS2 QDs in light-emitting devices, solar energy conversion, and the biomedical field. Finally, we propose the existing issues and further prospects of CuInS2 QDs.Zhiwei LongZhiwei Long received his bachelor's degree of metallurgical engineering from Jiangxi University of Science and Technology in 2018. Now he is studying for a PhD degree at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals under the guidance of Prof. Ronghui Liu.Wenda ZhangWenda Zhang received his PhD of metallurgical engineering from University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2020. Currently, he is a postdoc at Southern University of Science and Technology. His research focus on the synthesis and characterization of cadmium-free quantum dots.Junhang TianJunhang Tian received his bachelor's degree of metallurgical engineering from Northeastern University in 2014. Now he is pursuing his PhD degree at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals under the guidance of Prof. Weidong Zhuang.Guantong ChenGuantong Chen received his PhD from General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals in 2013. Now he is working at Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd.Yuanhong LiuYuanhong Liu received her PhD from General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals in 2010. Now she is working at Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd.Ronghui LiuRonghui Liu received his PhD from Kunming University of Science and Technology in 2007. Later, he worked at the National Engineering Research Center for Rare Earth Materials. Currently, he is a professor at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals and is also the vice-general manager of Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd. His research interests include lnorganic luminescent materials, display and lighting technology. ResearcherID: AAW-9881-2020.
1 Introduction
The emergence of quantum dots (QDs) has greatly caught people's interests due to their excellent luminous properties since 1984.1 They are a kind of semiconductor nanocrystals (generally less than 10 nm in diameter) that exhibit unique optical properties. QDs have become a large group after more than 30 years of research in materials engineering.2–8 For example, there are group II–VI elements (e.g., CdX9(X = S, Se, Te), ZnSe,10 ZnO,11 HgTe12), group IV–VI elements (e.g., PbS,13 SnS14), group III–V elements (e.g., InP,15 InAs,16 InSb17), group I–III–VI elements (e.g., CuInS2,18 AgInS219), and new perovskite (e.g., MAPbX3,20 CsPbX321(X = Cl, Br, I)). The main optical properties of current mainstream quantum dots materials are listed in Table 1. Because of people's demand for green and environment-friendly materials, the halo is gradually transferred from Cd,Pb-based QDs to Cd,Pb-free QDs. CuInS2 (CIS) QDs have drawn lots of attention in recent years, due to their traits of nontoxic elements, low synthesis cost, and easily tunable bandgap. Their wavelengths that range from visible to near-infrared (NIR) (500–1100 nm) benefit from their size and composition related optical properties.22,23 Compared with InP QDs, CIS QDs are a new-type “green” QD material without expensive and hazard precursors reagents involved in the synthesis process. Additionally, CIS QDs with NIR luminous performance can be obtained in the aqueous phase system,24 so they have high biological compatibility, which greatly promoted its development in the field of biomedicine.
Table 1 A summary of representative QDs materials




QDs
PL QY (%)
Wavelength (nm)
FWHM (nm)
Ref.




CdSe/CdS
>90
640
28
Dai et al. (2014)4


ZnO
61
450–550
—
Asok et al. (2012)31


ZnS:Al
28
393
37
Kim et al. (2014)32


PbS
40–70
990–1600
40–120
Chan et al. (2017)33


InP/ZnS
51–53
532–612
60–64
Song et al. (2013)34


50
510–630
46–63
Tessier et al. (2015)35


InP/ZnSe/ZnS
45–65
533–625
36–39
Ramasamy et al. (2018)36


CuInS2
23
760
140
Yu et al. (2013)37


CuInS2/ZnS
61.4
561
92
Lee et al. (2014)28


80
550–800
—
Deng et al. (2012)38


25–75
750–1100
—
Xia et al. (2017)23


MAPbBr3
50–70
400–750
20–50
Zhang et al. (2015)20


74–93
475–520
28–36
Huang et al. (2015)39


FAPbX3
85
530
22
Cheng et al. (2019)40


CsPbBr3
95
513
20
Li et al. (2016)21




As the representative I–III–VI QDs, CIS QDs are direct bandgap semiconductors with the range of bulk bandgap only 1.45–1.53 eV.25,26 The Bohr exciton radius of CIS is 4.1 nm, and quantum confinement effects can be observed in CIS nanocrystals when their size reduced to 8 nm.27 Their optical bandgap can be controlled by size and composition, resulting in their emitting wavelength covering visible toward NIR. Generally, the emission wavelength could be easily adjusted to near-infrared by increasing [Cu]/[In] ratios close to 1:1 during the synthesis process of CIS QDs.23 Thus, CIS QDs would be an alternative to the environmentally unfriendly NIR QDs of InAs and PbS. In terms of the visible light window, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of CIS QDs (>90 nm (ref. 28)) is much wider than that of CdSe (28 nm (ref. 4)), InP (35 nm (ref. 29)) and perovskite QDs (20 nm (ref. 21)). Luminous mechanisms of CIS QDs are based on Cu-related defect state levels between the conduction band and valence band, which is different from cadmium- or lead-containing QDs that are originated from band edge recombination emission. At this stage, CIS QDs have no advantage in display applications. However, CIS QDs can be used as color conversion materials for fabricating full-spectrum white LEDs and standard light source device owing to their wide FWHM and acceptable level of emission intensity. In addition, CIS QDs possess merits of high absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1)30 in the visible spectral range which makes them promising materials for applications in solar energy conversion like luminescent solar concentrators, QDs sensitized solar cells and solar photocatalytic applications.
There are few reviews on CIS QDs, which mainly focus on synthesis or applications of a certain aspect. In this review, we comprehensively address the progress in ternary CIS QDs luminous mechanisms and focus on the synthetic strategies to improve their luminous performances and stability developed in recent years. Furthermore, the potential applications of CIS QDs in light-emitting devices, solar energy conversion, and biomedical are discussed. At last, some possible solutions for the existing issues and future research trends in this field are proposed.
2 Luminous mechanisms of CIS QDs
CIS QDs are of larger Stokes shifts (>150 nm (ref. 41)), longer PL lifetimes, and wider FWHM compared with other QDs such as Cd-based or InP QDs. Thus, there also have been plentiful research in this area, exploring the luminous mechanisms of CIS QDs. It is widely accepted that the optical properties of Cu-containing I–III–VI QDs is derived from the Cu-related defect state levels.42–46
The annihilation of photon-generated electrons in the Cu-based emission centers of CIS QDs involves both non-radiative and radiative recombination. Electrons capture on the surface and Förster resonance energy transfer of CIS QDs results in the non-radiative recombination pathway. And two models to radiative recombination have been proposed.42,44 One is a delocalized conduction band (CB) electron bonding with a localized Cu-related hole which terms 1Sh–1Se exciton transition, which is related to the large apparent Stokes shift and the long PL lifetimes.47,48 The other is a delocalized donor state electron bonding with a hole localized in acceptor level which terms donor–acceptor pair (DAP) recombination. Copper vacancy (VCu) is believed to be the acceptor state, whereas sulfur vacancy (VS) or copper indium substitution(InCu) act as the donor.49,50 Such deep defect levels are weakly dimensionally correlated, accounting well for the composition-dependent fluorescence properties. The DAP recombination pathways is predominated due to the faster relaxation pathways compared to band edge recombination.51,52
Zhong's group demonstrated that there is no fluorescence in Cu-rich CIS QDs after the [Cu]/[In] ratio exceeds a certain value. The emission intensity decreases exponentially due to excessive Cu-related inherent defects, which is similar to the concentration quenching effect of rare-earth doped phosphors.53 This phenomenon can be simply explained by the quenching effects that induced the interaction of nearest-neighbor DAP.44 Thus, to synthesize CIS QDs with good luminescence quality, the Cu-deficient strategy that benefited from the off-stoichiometry property of CIS crystals was proposed. In Cu-deficient QDs, the main internal defects are VCu, InCu and VS.18,54 Note that Cu–S binding is weaker than In–S binding, which is more likely to form VCu and dislocation defects.18
The luminescence properties of CIS QDs are related to the oxidation state of Cu-related defects. The ideal model is that two oxidation states of the copper exist in CIS QDs: Cu+ and Cu2+. Recently, several research groups have made efforts to confirm the trap state distribution, and luminescent centers in CIS QDs by means of in situ spectroelectrochemistry.55–58
One theory holds that both Cu+ and Cu2+-related trap states are luminous centers, but are characterized by distinct activation mechanisms and slightly different emission energies due to different crystal lattice environments.56,57 We could term that bright excitons and dark excitons if given the fine structure of excitons of nonspherical CIS QDs (Cu+ and Cu2+ correspond to bright excitons and dark excitons respectively).48 Fuhr et al. proposed that Cu+ and Cu2+ defect states could be controlled by altering QDs stoichiometry (+1 for stoichiometric QDs and +2 for Cu-deficient QDs, as shown in Fig. 1). The Cu1+ emission mechanism was susceptible to both hole and electron trapping, and stoichiometric QDs seem to favor the Cu1+ states that might occur together with the charge-compensating In3+ defects in the form of anti-site defect pairs (CuIn–InCu). While the mechanism involving the Cu2+ defect was only affected by electron trapping, the formation of Cu2+ defects was facilitated by the requirement of charge compensation in the presence of a large number of Cu vacancies (VCu) expected for these types of Cu-deficient samples.56 While another theory claims that Cu+-related trap state is the luminescence center while Cu2+ counterpart resulting in excitons degradation. Namely, oxidizing some of the QDs results in deactivation of the bright Cu+ centers, and the presence of Cu2+ cations renders the PL quenching, due to efficient trap-assisted Auger recombination.58 As we can see in Fig. 2, efficient Auger recombination of the electron with the excess hole and the photogenerated hole in the VB edge results in additional non-radiative recombination and hence, quenching of the PL. In the absence of a Cu2+ center, the single CIS NC is bright after quick localization of the photogenerated hole on the Cu+ center, and radiative recombination with the delocalized CB electron.58
 Fig. 1  Schematic depictions of relaxation processes in stoichiometric (left) and Cu-deficient (middle) core-only CIS QDs, and stoichiometric CIS/ZnS core/shell samples (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.56 
 Fig. 2  Auger recombination lead to PL quenching of Cu2+ (left), and radiative recombination lead to bright of Cu+ (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.58 
The wide FWHM characteristics of PL spectrum of CIS QDs have also been studied extensively. To shed light on the reasons of the wide FWHM characteristics of CIS QDs PL spectrum, Zang et al.59 made single-particle measurements for CIS QDs with a thick ZnS shell. Results showed that random positioning of the emitting center in the QD could lead to more than 300 meV variation in the PL energy, which represented at least one of the reasons for large PL broadening of the ensemble samples. From a certain perspective, the broad FWHM indicates the wide distribution of defect state energy levels in the mid-gap. Previous study reported that Cu doping in ZnSe QDs led to the broadening of their emission spectra due to the inhomogeneity of bonding. The spectra broadening could be controlled if the single QD concentration of impurities and their spatial distribution across the ensemble were uniform.60 There are four reasons account for the wide FWHM of CIS QDs. (1) The chemical composition of each quantum dot may be different, and its wide size distribution results in a wide FWHM.30,61 (2) The environment of Cu-based QDs may be different, especially in the core–shell interface. (3) Strong coupling between electrons and photons results in large nuclear distortion around the light-excited Cu atoms.62 (4) The random distribution of the positions of emission center energy levels in the bandgap.
3 The synthesis of CIS QDs
3.1 Synthetic methods
Synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals is a combination of solution chemistry and crystal growth.63 The synthesis of CIS nanocrystals has undergone a transformation from the molecular single-source precursor like (PPh3)2CuIn(SEt)449 to a multi-precursors (separate sources of copper, indium, and sulfur), which greatly simplifies the experimental process and reduces the cost because the molecular precursor was difficult to synthesize. Nevertheless, multi-precursors synthesis of CIS QDs requires the reactivity of three different precursors(Cu, In, S) to achieve a strict balance that prevents the formation of binary by-products (Cu2S and In2S3) or other heterogeneous nanocrystals such as Cu2S-CIS.64,65 Ternary CIS QDs own the property of off-stoichiometry, which could bear a larger stoichiometric ratio deviation while keeping the crystal shape unchanged, thus forming a high-density defect state energy level and improving its photoelectric performance.53 There are three crystal types of CIS: chalcopyrite (CP), zinc blende (ZB) and wurtzite (WZ) (as shown in Fig. 3). According to previous reports, stable CP crystals are more likely to form at low temperature (∼150 °C), while metastable ZB and WZ crystals are more likely to form at high temperature (∼230 °C).66,67 Many studies have shown that the geometry and crystal shape of CIS QDs were affected by the reaction temperature, precursor reactivity, ligand type, and reaction solvent.68,69 Synthesis of CIS colloidal QDs could be divided into organic and aqueous phase methods according to different synthetic media. The following is a brief introduction to typical synthesis methods of CIS QDs.
 Fig. 3  Three crystal types of CuInS2. 

3.1.1 Organic phase methods. 
The methods for synthesizing CIS QDs in organic media include thermal injection methods, one-pot methods, and template methods. The thermal injection method is to inject the cold solution of anion precursor into the hot solution of cationic precursor, and then nucleate rapidly. This method could better control the nucleation and growth process of QDs, to ensure the monodisperse QDs.73 In one-pot non-injection methods, cationic precursor solution, organic solvent and 1-dodecanethiol(DDT) are mixed and heated above 220 °C to synthesize CIS QDs. DDT decomposes to produce S ions at high temperatures and acts as a ligand and sulfur source.38,74 Recently, Marin et al. reported that 3-mercaptopropyl trimethoxysilane (MPTS) was used simultaneously as a solvent, sulfur source, and capping agent for the QDs synthesis.75 It could reduce the number of reagents and simplify the process. To obtain large-sized CIS QDs, the template method can be applied. The template method is to synthesize binary sulfide nanocrystals (like Cu2−xS or In2S3) first, and then obtain CIS through cation exchange reaction.65 It can increase the crystallinity of the QDs and reduce their size distribution simultaneously. The synthesis and size distribution control of binary nanocrystals is simpler than that of ternary nanocrystals. Therefore, the CIS QDs synthesized by the template method have narrower size distribution, and giants-QDs could be obtained which show strong PL characteristics in the near-infrared region.23,76


3.1.2 Aqueous phase methods. 
Water-soluble CIS QDs have high biocompatibility that are commonly used for fluorescent probes bioimaging. Although hydrophobic CIS QDs could be converted to water-soluble by surface ligands exchange, a large number of surface defects would be introduced. During the progress, the size of the QDs may change and affect the optical characteristics of the QDs.77 Therefore, directly synthesizing CIS QDs in an aqueous solution is considered to be the wisest way to obtain water-soluble and biocompatible QDs. The aqueous phase synthesis process has low toxicity and low cost, however, still the quality of the obtained QDs in the aqueous phase is not able to run parallel to that in the organic phase.78–80 Aqueous phase synthesis generally used water-soluble thiols (L-glutathione (GSH), mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), thioglycolic acid (TGA) as ligands or stabilizers. Such short-chain thiol ligands exhibit high and specific affinity. To improve the synthesis efficiency and control the synthesis temperature accurately, the microwave-assisted synthesis methods developed in recent years have been favored by many research groups.81–85 Such rapid and facile synthetic approaches are essential for scientists to perform more accurate experiments.

3.2 Strategies for improving luminescence properties

3.2.1 Surface ligands modification. 
In both organic and aqueous synthesis, the quality of QDs depends on the ligands used in the synthesis process. Surface ligands enhance the chemical stability of the QDs and prevent them from agglomerating. Besides, the vibration of ligands molecules have obvious Fermion bleaching properties, and they were coupled by vibration and participate in the photophysical process in which the additional surface polarons are formed.86 DDT is the most widely used ligand reagent in organic phase synthesis which plays a crucial role in the synthesis process with relatively simple steps.68,87–89 It was reported that the synthesis of CIS QDs using DDT was divided into two stages: the first stage was the complexation reaction about 100 °C and the metal cations in combination with DDT to form an intermediate lamellar 2D polymer; the second stage was nucleation and growth around 230 °C (as shown in Fig. 4). The resulting ligands shell was composed of a double layer consisting of DDT and didodecyl sulfide (DS) molecules in 1:1 ratio, assembled in a head-to-tail manner (R–S–R), in which DDT was the inner layer and DS was the outer.89 Organic solvent ODE reacted with DDT at high temperatures to form DS, which would introduce additional impurities and cause trouble to the subsequent purification process.90 Furthermore, the diversity of surface ligands increased the complexity of QDs composition and structure control, leading to large size distribution or even heterogeneous nanostructures. Meantime, protons transferred between different ligands also reduced the ink stability and efficiency of QLEDs.52,91 Therefore, Wang et al. adopted a single-ligand strategy that only DDT was used as a single ligand, sulfur source, and reaction solvent during the synthesis of CIS QDs. This avoided the use of different ligands to transfer protons, thereby improving the stability of CIS/ZnS QDs, the PL QY of resulting CIS/ZnS QDs exceeds 80%. The EQE of QLEDs prepared by using resultant QDs as a light-emitting layer reached 7.8%, which was the highest level among QLEDs based on CIS QDs recently.92
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the formation of CIS QDs in DDT solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.89 
Oil-soluble QDs capped with high-density organic long carbon chain ligands cannot be used directly in electroluminescent devices, because organic ligands could form an insulating shell around the CIS QDs, which will reduce the electroluminescence efficiency of QLEDs by hindering the transport of excitons.89,91,93 This issue can be addressed through surface ligands exchange. However, there exists a contradiction between high PL QY and ligands exchangeability because strongly bonded ligands like DDT, which easily grant high PL QY, requiring more energy to be converted to other ligands.94 Due to the strong bonding force between DDT and CIS surfaces, the conversion rate is not very ideal when the ligands exchange process is involved. Thus, a suitable hybrid-ligand synthesis approach that contain strongly bonded ligand and weakly bonded counterparts would ensure both high efficiency and facile ligand exchangeability. In aqueous phase synthesis, a variety of surface ligands are usually introduced to increase the stability of QDs.95 Another ligand is terminated by a hydroxyl group, which makes the QDs alcohol-soluble, and this newly developed synthetic method has gained the interests of researchers.96–98 Alcohol-soluble QDs have good dispersibility in polar organic solvents such as methanol, ethanol, and isopropanol, while maintaining their optical properties. Moreover, the energy barrier between the charge transfer and emitting layer of the light-emitting diode based on alcohol-soluble QDs is smaller and the charge injection rate is larger, thus improving the efficiency of QLEDs.97


3.2.2 Core–shell structure. 
Numerous dangling bonds and defects on the surface of CIS QDs could lead to an increase in the probability of non-radiative recombination of excitons, and seriously affect the luminescence performances of QDs. Therefore, it is necessary to coat one or more protective shells on the surface of CIS QDs to suppress the non-radiative recombination process and Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) of excitons. Besides, QDs are sensitive to surface chemical conditions (oxidation, ligands damage, etc.) and chemical environments (light, oxygen, moisture, and temperature).99 Compared with organic ligand coated naked QDs, inorganic core–shell QDs could significantly improve quantum yield (QY) and considerably improve chemical, thermal, and photochemical or photophysical stability.100–102 ZnS is the most widely used shell material due to its large bandgap (3.54 eV) and small mismatch (only 2%) with the CIS core. CIS/ZnS QDs are type-I core–shell structures which suppress leakage of electrons and confined them in the shell.38,103,104 Li et al.105 synthesized CIS QDs with PL wavelength between 630 nm and 780 nm, and QY could reach 80% after coating ZnS shell. The outer ZnS shell helped to confine excitons to the core, also served as a passivation layer to prevent photodegradation.106
The mechanisms of ZnS shell growth of CIS QDs are different from that of binary QDs like CdSe and InP QDs where the shell is to deposit epitaxial growth. The growth of ZnS shell on CIS QDs involves the competition of multiple processes such as cation exchange, epitaxial growth, and internal diffusion that is depicted in Fig. 5.106 Cation exchange leads to a decrease of the luminescent core, resulting in blue-shifts in the spectrum, and internal diffusion tends to form alloyed shells. Furthermore, epitaxial growth to form true ZnS shell on CIS QDs usually have lower photoluminescence(PL) QY than cation exchange.59,104 The dominant process is determined by the nature of the precursors used and reaction conditions.59,105,107 The reactivity of zinc source precursor greatly affected the growth of the shell. Hansen et al. proved zinc-carboxylates with low reactivity tend to obtain alloyed shell by cation exchange reaction, while zinc-thiolate with higher reactivity was more likely to deposit ZnS on the surface of CIS core to form a true shell. With the strategy of using zinc-thiol to generate a true shell and then using zinc-carboxylate to obtaining an alloy shell adopted, the PL QY of resulting QDs samples reached 90%.108 Most recently, by continuous shell deposition to obtain thick shell, Huang et al.109 increased PL QY of near-infrared CIS/ZnS to 94.8%, which is the highest ever reported. Among numerous core–shell QDs, such thick shell “giant-QDs” exhibit excellent photoelectric properties, largely due to their very thick shell thickness.110–113 The core material could be effectively separated from the surface of the QDs and the surrounding chemical environment, thus showing high chemical stability.112 Wu et al. made PL QY reach 77% by preparing CuInZnS/ZnS//ZnS QDs with a thick shell to make them highly stable.114 Giant-QDs could ensure the high quantum efficiency of the luminescent core while greatly increasing its chemical stability. These synthetic strategies have laid the foundation for the commercialization of CIS QDs.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a CIS NC surface depicting the chemical processes that can take place during a ZnS shelling reaction. (A) [ZnS] monomers (B) alloying (C) heteroepitaxial shell overgrowth. (D) Cation exchange (E) etching (F) homogeneous ZnS NCs nucleation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.107 
The above type-I core–shell structures can effectively passivate surface defects of the core, thus improving the quantum efficiency. Another type-II core–shell structures can weaken the quantum confinement effect (QCE) and consequently leading to a red-shifted PL. This phenomenon of spectral redshift has been reported in many literatures, such as type II structures CdSe/ZnSe,115 CdSe/CdS,116 ZnTe/ZnSe,117 and CuAlS2/CdS QDs.118 Very recently, Rogach et al. reported a kind of CP/WZ core/shell CuInS2 nanocrystals, which showed red-shifts in both absorption and photoluminescence spectra. Such behaviour similar to that of the typical type II core–shell structures effect.119


3.2.3 Doping and alloying. 
Doping plays an important role in the history of chemical synthesis, through which properties that the host material originally did not possess can be realized. Ternary CIS QDs have the characteristics of off-stoichiometry and large lattice tolerance, so the doping strategy can successfully be implemented. The doping strategy is used to obtain alloyed CIS QDs with a homogeneous structure, and the optical bandgap of QDs can be regulated, but the lattice matching between the doped element and the host material must be satisfied. There are three main purposes of doping: tune optical bandgap, improve quantum efficiency, and enhance stability. According to the existing literature reports, optical bandgap can be regulated by doping metallic cation (such as zinc,120 silver,121 gallium122) into the CIS core.
Moreover, the doping of zinc can reduce the lattice mismatch between the CIS core and ZnS shell, thus improving the luminous efficiency. And the stability can be improved by modifying the shell, such as doping aluminium into the ZnS shell.123,124
Noting that introduced Zn into CIS to form alloyed Zn–Cu–In–S (ZCIS) could greatly increase PL strength.120 Chung et al. proved that the addition of zinc significantly increased the quantum yield and the obtained Zn-doped CIS QDs with a quantum yield of 45.1% without forming a shell.125 Yang et al. reported a Zn–Cu–In–S/ZnS core/gradient shell structure with a PL QY of up to 74% and the emission wavelength could be tuned from 550 to 700 nm.126
Alloyed Ag–Cu–In–S (ACIS) QDs could be obtained by doped Cu in AgInS2 or doped Ag in CuInS2.121,127 The bandgap of alloyed ACIS/ZnS QDs was larger than CIS/ZnS cause AgInS2 (1.87 eV) had a larger bandgap than CIS (1.53 eV), thus theoretically its luminous wavelength should be blue-shifted.128 Conversely, according to the experimental results of Suk-Young Yoon et al., the luminescence wavelength gradually shifted from 744 nm to 806 nm with increasing concentrations of alloyed Ag, while the PL QYs could reach 81–90% (as shown in Fig. 6). It was speculated that the formation of Ag2S phase on the core surface of QDs, which acted as an adsorption layer, led to the increasing of core size, which dominated the control of bandgap.129
 Fig. 6  Systematically, widely tuned PL spectra ranging from visible green (534 nm) to deep NIR (868 nm), which were achievable by diversifying the synthetic parameters of CIS core QDs with the identical shelling applied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.129 
It is impossible for CIS QDs to exhibit PL characteristics in the blue light region by controlling the proportion of components and controlling the size, while the introduction of gallium (Ga) or manganese (Mn) element could make this possible.122,130,131 Moreover, Mn-doped CIS/ZnS QDs usually exhibit an Mn2+ d–d emission thus present a dual emission peak.132,133 Chen et al. prepared Cu–Sn–In–S QDs via doping Sn into CIS crystal lattice, and the emission wavelength of resulting samples ranges from 701 to 894 nm. At 740 nm in the NIR, the FWHM was 125 nm and QY up to 75%.134 Rare earth element gadolinium (Gd) doping in CIS QDs possessed relatively narrow FWHM and maximum emission.135,136 Due to its seven unpaired electrons in their 4f orbitals (4f7), which gives the strongest T1 contrast effect compared to other paramagnetic ions such as Mn2+ (five unpaired electrons).135
Previously, Li et al.123 reported that doped Al into the shell of CdSe/CdS QDs makes it exhibited more stable optical properties. The reason was that the Al in the shell could be oxidized to Al2O3, which acted as a self-passivation layer on the core/shell QDs surface, and could effectively prevent further light degradation under long-term irradiation. Based on this, Rao et al.124 reported the preparation of Al-doped CIS/ZnS. Based on the same mechanism, its optical stability was greatly enhanced, and the optimal molar ratio of Al/Zn was 0.5. Adding too much Al will lead to the formation of the Al–S bond, thus reducing the stability of the ZnS/Al shell. The strategy Schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for enhancing the photostability of CIS/ZnS QDs by doping Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.124 

4 Application of CIS QDs
4.1 Light emitting devices
QDs emit light in two ways, i.e., photoluminescence (PL) and electroluminescence (EL). Nowadays, the light emitting applications of CIS QDs are mainly based on PL, among them the most reported is color-converting white light emitting diodes. While QLEDs technology based on EL is still in the laboratory stage, and there has been a research hotspot in this field.

4.1.1 Color-converting white light emitting diodes (W-LEDs). 
CIS QDs materials have a wide luminescence spectrum and show strong PL characteristics in the red area. They were introduced into the LED to replace or cooperate with the phosphors, because they could achieve a higher color rendering index (CRI) and correlated color temperature (CCT) of the white LED. Chuang et al. used CIS/ZnS QDs as a color converter, combined with Ba2SiO4:Eu2+ phosphor and blue chip, prepared the white LED with a CRI of 90.137 Zhong's group combined CIS QDs with blue-light chips to prepare white LEDs with a CRI of 95, luminous efficiency of 70 lm W−1, and a CCT adjustable in the range of 4600–5600 K.138 Kim et al. embedded red-orange emitting CIS/ZnS QDs into polymer nanofibers, prepared color conversion films (CCFs), and assembled them with blue LEDs into white light LED devices.139 Aboulaich et al. mixed CIS QDs with YAG: Ce phosphor and combined with an InGaN blue light chip to prepare a warm white LED.140 The layered LED device doped with CIS QDs could effectively improve the stability of YAG warm white LED. Compared with rare-earth phosphor WLEDs, CIS QDs-based WLEDs are cheaper to prepare and could alleviate the shortage of rare-earth resources.


4.1.2 Quantum dots light emitting diodes (QLEDs). 
QLEDs based on Cd-free QDs have developed rapidly in recent years. The research on electroluminescent devices based on CIS QDs started relatively late compared to the CdSe-based or InP-based QLEDs. In 2016, Liu et al. used Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS QDs as the luminous layer to prepared yellow QLEDs with a brightness of 3061 cd m−2, turn-on voltage of 1.8 V, and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 2.42%.141 Zhong's group obtained hydroxyl-terminated CIS-MCH QDs through ligands exchange, and using this as a light-emitting layer, the QLEDs device prepared with an inverted structure had a brightness of 8735 cd m−2 and an EQE of 3.22%. It was proved that hydroxyl-terminated QDs exhibited better performance in the preparation of QLED devices.96 Soon after, Kim et al. increased the EQE of CIS QLEDs to 7.3% for the first time, with a brightness of 8464 cd m−2.142 In 2018, the maximum EQE of CIS-based QLEDs prepared by Wang et al. reached 7.8% with the brightness of 4490 cd m−2 and the current efficiency of 8.3 cd A−1.6 However, this is far from other Cd-free based QLED like InP and CsPbX3(X = Cl, Br, I) QDs (the record EQE of both InP and CsPbX3-based QLED exceeded 20%29,143).

4.2 Solar energy conversion
CIS has a bandgap of about 1.45–1.53 eV, which is very close to the energy conversion of the solar spectrum, and its large absorption coefficient makes it an excellent light-absorbing material.25 Therefore, the applications of CIS as a kind of optical absorption material in solar energy conversion have become popular in recent years.144

4.2.1 Luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs). 
The LSCs have been developed as a solution to reduce photovoltaic (PV) materials consumption and make more full use of solar energy, thus realized the purpose of cost-reduction of silicon-based solar cells. Fluorophores are the most essential part of LSCs devices, which have a large extent effect on power conversion efficiency (PCE).145 Using Cu-based ternary or quaternary QDs as fluorophores have drawn increasing interest of researchers in the last decade, due to its superior optical properties in solar energy techniques such as broad absorption spectra range, high absorption coefficient, large Stokes shifts and high PL QY (up to 80%). Li et al. reported for the first time that CIS/ZnS QDs were used as fluorophores of LSCs, the schematic illustration for this design as shown in Fig. 8.41 Recently, to overcome the drawback of narrower light absorption range and blue-shifted PL peak of core–shell structured QDs, Zhu et al. adopted Zn and Al co-doped pure core-only CIS QDs to fabricated LSCs which showed an optical efficiency of 6.97% and PCE of 3.18%.146 In addition to improving the properties of fluorophores, a new method of scattering enhancement to realize better performance for LSC. Liu et al. introduced 5 μm SiO2 particles as scattering material in CIS/ZnS QDs based LSCs and achieved a PCE of 4.20%, which showed an improvement of 60.3% compared with the pure QDs based LSCs without SiO2 particles.147 Bergren et al. fabricated laminated glass LSCs coupled with high PL QY (>90%) near-infrared (NIR) CIS/ZnS QDs demonstrated with a record high optical efficiency of 8.1% and certified PCE of 2.94%.148 This new LSCs design exhibiting a high capability of integration into the outer wall surface of the building could be a new tendency in the future.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the conventional flat QDs-LSC-PV device and illustrates the principle of the device. (b) Three behaviors of light in this device: light converting, Rayleigh scattering and light guiding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature Limited, the Author(s).41 


4.2.2 QDs sensitized solar cells (QDSCs). 
As a third-generation solar cell, QDSCs have advantages such as easy adjustment of bandgap, high molar extinction (absorption) coefficient of light, and multiple exciton generation.149 The device structure of QDSCs as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Sketch depicts the working principle of QDSCs. The dashed arrows show the undesirable carrier recombination pathways. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.150 
The CIS QDs-sensitized solar cells have a simpler preparation process and greatly reduced cost. Their theoretical PCE could reach 34%, which is higher than that of silicon-based solar cells. Santra et al. found that coating the CdS layer on the surface of CIS QDs could increase the PCE of their QDSCs from 1.14% to 3.91%. That is because the synergy effect between CdS and CIS QDs makes the light absorption of CIS/CdS QDs extend to the red region.151 Yang et al. demonstrated that the annealing process was conducive to the effective charge transport and reduced charge recombination between CIS sensitizer and TiO2 photoanode, thus improving the PCE.152 Cai et al. introduced defect states by reducing Cu content in CIS, thereby changing its photovoltaic performance. Improving the photovoltaic performance of CIS QDSCs was mainly achieved by expanding the photoelectron response range (∼950 nm) and rapid electron injection. The final result showed PCE reached 5.71%, and the light response was more than 60% in the light region below 700 nm.153
Pan et al. first applied CIS/ZnS QDs with type-I core/shell structure as sensitizers in QDSCs. After self-assembly and fixing on the TiO2 substrate, the obtained PCE was 7.04% (with certified efficiency of 6.66%).93 Zhong's group reported that Zn–Cu–In–Se (ZCISe) and CdSe co-sensitized QDSCs devices exhibited a wide photocurrent response range, and the maximum response wavelength was in the near infrared (NIR) region (∼1100 nm). Because of the broad-spectrum light absorption of ZCISe and the high extinction coefficient of CdSe QDs in visible light, the PCE reached 12.75% under standard AM1.5G sunlight, which broke the record.154 The number of QDs loaded on the TiO2 substrate has a decisive influence on the PCE of QDSCs, which construed as the size of QDs impact the performance of QDSCs. It was reported that when the size of CIS QDs assembled into TiO2 exceeds 5 nm, the PCE of QDSCs started to decrease significantly. Since the number of QDs loaded on the TiO2 substrate declines after the size increases, the PCE declines as a result.155


4.2.3 Solar photocatalytic applications. 
CIS QDs based photocatalytic applications, mainly involoving solar photocatalytic hydrogen (H2) evolution and contaminant removal, have received increasing attention. In 2013, Li et al. demonstrated that MPA-capped CIS QDs could serve as a medium for photosynthetic reactions, the resulting TiO2/CIS-QDs/CdS nanoparticles could produce hydrogen through a photocatalytic reaction at an apparent quantum efficiency of 41% without using Ru cocatalyst.156 Their study revealed the viability of using suspended QDs as the photosynthesis or photosensing media. After that, CIS/TiO2 heterojunction could also exhibit photocatalytic hydrogen evolution characteristics.157 Wu et al. demonstrated quasi-type II CIS/CdS core/shell QDs possessing long-lived excitons which were promising for photocatalytic applications.158 And Yuan et al. expand the photoresponse range of MoS2/TiO2-based photocatalysts via embedding CIS-QDs, thus the as-prepared CIS/TiO2/MoS2 composites possessed impressive photocatalytic performance for solar H2 generation. The highest H2 evolution rate with a value of 1034 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).159 Recently, Zheng et al. coupled polymeric carbon nitride (CN) with CIS-QDs to form p–n heterojunction photocatalyst with a higher H2 evolution rate than crude CN and CIS that attributed to stronger light-harvesting capability and the accelerated charge separation rate.160
There are also many studies on the photocatalytic degradation of contaminants. Kong et al.161 encapsulated CIS/ZnS-TiO2 heterostructures in amorphous TiO2 matrix, the resultant CIS/ZnS-TiO2 gel via co-gelation approach, exhibiting photocatalytic activity for Cr(VI) reduction. Yang et al. prepared recyclable CIS QDs sensitized ZnO nanorod arrays film photocatalyst which could degrade organic contaminants into inorganic products.162 Luo et al. reported CIS-QDs/Bi2WO6 3D p–n heterojunction displayed enhanced photocatalytic performance for oxidizing toluene and reducing Cr(VI) under visible light irradiation.163 Xu et al. developed a new ZnO nanorods/reduced graphene oxide (RGO)/CIS-QDs ternary system, which showed enhanced photocatalytic performance for degradation of Rhodamine B after the incorporation of CIS-QDs with ZnO-RGO improved light absorbance of the nanocomposite.164
The multiple studies mentioned above suggest that CIS-QDs are excellent photocatalysts due to their high absorption efficiency of visible light toward NIR. The photocatalytic performance of the matrix material could be greatly improved when CIS-QDs are combined with other semiconductors to form heterojunctions.

4.3 Biomedical applications
CIS QDs have been intensively tested on their application in fluorescent probes and biological cell imaging. Besides the photoluminescence properties of CIS QDs, after modification of the surface ligands of QDs, their biocompatibility could increase and achieve specific functionalization, which is another reason making the biomedical application of CIS QDs very attractive.

4.3.1 Fluorescent probes. 
Mechanism designs of CIS QDs based fluorescent probes are mainly based on Electron Energy Transfer (EET) and Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET), and the greatest advantage of CIS QDs based fluorescent probes is their rapid detection.165 So far, many research groups have reported using water-soluble CIS QDs as fluorescent probes to detect biological macromolecules in organisms. Su's group reported NIR MPA-capped CIS QDs fluorescence probe for selective detection of dopamine,166 thrombin,167 parathion-methyl,168 acid phosphatases169 and alkaline phosphatase.170 Zhang et al. found glutathione-capped water-soluble CIS/ZnS QDs could be quenched by H2O2 which is produced by the uricase catalyzed oxidation of uric acid (UA), and this method could be used for the determination of UA with the detection limit of 50 nM.171 Chen et al. used dopamine (DA)-functionalized CIS/ZnS QDs as the fluorescence probes to detect tau protein, which is a new approach for the detection of disease biomarkers.172 Niu et al. reported that CIS/ZnS QDs conjugated with lysine-proline-valine tripeptide (KPV) could transport into colorectal cancer cells (CRC) via oligopeptide transporter 1 (PepT1) selectively, thus successfully achieved accurate detection of CRC.173 Liu et al. developed a new simple fluorescent nanosensor using L-cysteine-modified CIS QDs, which was applied to the dual detection and quantitative analysis of heparin and heparinase in serum.174 Then they modified CIS QDs with aminobenzobic acid, which has a symmetrical fluorescence emission peak at 742 nm, and prepared a novel and convenient near-infrared fluorescent “switch” nano sensor that could be used to detect glucose and fluoride.175 In addition to the detection of biological macromolecules, CIS QDs based fluorescence probe could also be used for detecting heavy metal ions in aqueous solution. Zi et al. developed a fluorescent probe based on thioglycolic acid-capped CIS/ZnS QDs for Co2+ detection, and the detection limit for Co2+ was 0.16 μmolL−1.176 This method could realize the rapid, cheap, and sensitive detection of Co2+. Furthermore, CIS/ZnS QDs could also be applied to study the dynamics of large molecules as well.177


4.3.2 Cell imaging. 
The NIR region(650–900 nm) is very useful for biological imaging and detection, while CIS QDs has good optical performance in this region.78,178,179 Pons et al. demonstrated the potential of these QDs for tissue imaging in vivo by imaging lymph nodes (LNs) in mice.180 Yong et al. encapsulated CIS QDs in a functionalized phospholipid micelle, which promoted their binding with folic acid, thus achieving targeted delivery and achieving directional and multipath optical imaging of mouse tumors.181 Deng et al.38 prepared a multicolor fluorescent probe based on CIS/ZnS QDs for the first time to achieve multicolor imaging in vivo and in vitro. The synthesized CIS/ZnS core–shell QDs, after interacting with sodium silicate, obtain CIS/ZnS@SiO2 QDs, which can resist the complex acid-base environment in the organism, thus ensuring its chemical stability and providing conditions for further imaging of cancer cells(as seen in Fig. 10).182 The application of CIS/ZnS QDs to in vitro/vivo cell imaging has been developed rapidly in the past few years.183–185 But two key issues need to be addressed, which are the cytotoxicity and metabolic pathways of QDs in biological organisms.
 Fig. 10  Silica-coated CIS/ZnS QDs used for cell imaging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.182 

5 Conclusions and prospects
In summary, CIS QDs have drawn increasing interest due to their non-toxic, low-cost properties, and the excellent optical properties in the long-wavelength region. In particular, as compared with other QDs, CIS QDs show many advantages on the application in solar energy conversion and biomedical field, which have been extensively studied in recent years. In this review, we introduced the main research hotspots, discussed luminescent mechanisms, summarized synthesis methods, and prospected potential applications of CIS QDs materials. Although huge progresses have been made in CIS QDs research during the past few years, there are still some remaining issues to be solved by further research, especially in the performance and application of CIS QDs materials.
(1) The experimentally synthesized CIS QDs have broad-spectrum characteristics, which are based on the defect state luminescence. By adjusting the position of the emission center of the defect state energy level, the spectrum of the CIS QDs could be regulated to a narrower range. CIS QDs have a prominent advantage in the lighting field because of their wide spectrum characteristics, which can greatly improve the color rendering index. However, the efficiency and stability of CIS-WLEDs devices have not reached the commercial standard. Preparing CIS QDs with thick shells, selecting more stable surface ligands such as DDT or other mercaptan ligands with longer carbon chains, and combining with more advanced packaging technology are expected to improve the stability and service life of CIS-WLEDs.
(2) The synthesis process of CIS QDs lacks accurate size and composition control, which limit their large-scale synthesis and remain to be challenges for mass synthesis. Thus, simplifying the synthesis process, seeking a more suitable reaction solvent with high viscosity to reduce the reactivity of metal precursors, and increasing synthesis temperature are conducive to the formation of CIS QDs with better crystallization performance and lower size dispersion. Given the complex electron orbits of rare earth ions and their unique luminous energy levels, doping rare earth element into CIS QDs may change their intrinsic luminescence properties.
(3) For CIS QDSCs, the energy conversion efficiency of the currently prepared devices is only about 3%, which is far lower than the theoretical conversion efficiency of 34%. The main reasons are the small loading amount of QDs on the photo-anode TiO2 substrate and the high recombination probability between photogenic carriers. Therefore, larger specific surface photo-anode materials are required to satisfy a larger QDs loading, and the introduction of an electronic barrier layer between the QDs and the photo-anode or electrolyte matrix could improve the energy conversion efficiency of CIS QDSCs. In terms of photocatalytic applications of CIS QDs, non-oxide semiconductor photoanodes are unstable since they can be easily oxidized by photo-generated holes.186 Coating p-type semiconductor material on the surface of CIS QDs core can effectively inhibit such photocorrosion.
The theranostic applications of CIS QDs-based NIR mini light-emitting diodes have been reported recently.109 To our best knowledge, there has been no report on CIS QDs NIR electroluminescent devices so far. Due to the preeminent NIR characteristics, CIS QDs would be a good choice for fabricating NIR electroluminescent devices that apply to the food detection, security monitoring and standard light source. However, in order to achieve that, the synthesis of longer-wavelength, wider-spectrum NIR CIS QDs need to be accomplished first. To obtain longer-wavelength emitting CIS QDs, type II core–shell structures would be an implemented strategy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB0701003).
Notes and references
L. E. Brus, Electro-electron and electron-hole interactions in small semiconductor crystallites: The size dependence of the lowest excited electronic state, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Semiconductor clusters, nanocrystals, and quantum dots, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
J. McKittrick and L. E. Shea-Rohwer, Down conversion materials for solid-state lighting, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 1327–1352 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Solution-processed, high-performance light-emitting diodes based on quantum dots, Nature, 2014, 515, 96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Chen and X. W. Sun, Efficient red/green/blue tandem quantum-dot light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency exceeding 21%, ACS Nano, 2017, 12, 697–704 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xin, D. Yao, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Zheng and B. Yang, Facile Synthesis of Cu–In–S/ZnS Core/Shell Quantum Dots in 1-Dodecanethiol for Efficient Light-Emitting Diodes with an External Quantum Efficiency of 7.8%, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8939–8947 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kuo, S. T. Hung, Y. T. Lin, T. L. Chou, M. C. Kuo, Y. P. Kuo and C. C. Chen, Green Synthesis of InP/ZnS Core/Shell Quantum Dots for Application in Heavy-Metal-Free Light-Emitting Diodes, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 537 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cao, S. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Wu, D. Zhao and X. Yang, A layer-by-layer growth strategy for large-size InP/ZnSe/ZnS core–shell quantum dots enabling high-efficiency light-emitting diodes, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8002–8007 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, Synthesis and Characterization of Nearly Monodisperse CdE (E = S, Se, Te) Semiconductor Nanocrystallites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-w. Jun, J.-E. Koo and J. Cheon, One-step synthesis of size tuned zinc selenide quantum dots via a temperature controlled molecular precursor approach, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1243–1244 RSC .
L. Zhang, L. Yin, C. Wang, N. Lun, Y. Qi and D. Xiang, Origin of visible photoluminescence of ZnO quantum dots: defect-dependent and size-dependent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9651–9658 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keuleyan, E. Lhuillier, V. Brajuskovic and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Mid-infrared HgTe colloidal quantum dot photodetectors, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 489 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Colloidal PbS nanocrystals with size-tunable near-infrared emission: observation of post-synthesis self-narrowing of the particle size distribution, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, N. Al-Salim, C. W. Bumby and R. D. Tilley, Synthesis of SnS quantum dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15990–15991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, S. Kumar and T. Nann, Rapid synthesis of high-quality InP nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1054–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Grigel, D. Dupont, K. De Nolf, Z. Hens and M. D. Tessier, InAs colloidal quantum dots synthesis via aminopnictogen precursor chemistry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13485–13488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Evans, S. L. Castro, J. J. Worman and R. P. Raffaelle, Synthesis and Use of Tris (trimethylsilyl) antimony for the Preparation of InSb Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5727–5730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uehara, K. Watanabe, Y. Tajiri, H. Nakamura and H. Maeda, Synthesis of CuInS2 fluorescent nanocrystals and enhancement of fluorescence by controlling crystal defect, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 134709 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki and T. Kuzuya, Photoluminescence properties and its origin of AgInS2 quantum dots with chalcopyrite structure, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1786–1792 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, Brightly luminescent and color-tunable colloidal CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I, Cl) quantum dots: potential alternatives for display technology, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, CsPbX3Quantum Dots for Lighting and Displays: Room-Temperature Synthesis, Photoluminescence Superiorities, Underlying Origins and White Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, Formation of high-quality I-III-VI semiconductor nanocrystals by tuning relative reactivity of cationic precursors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, J. D. Meeldijk, H. C. Gerritsen and C. de Mello Donega, Highly luminescent water-dispersible NIR-emitting wurtzite CuInS2/ZnS core/shell colloidal quantum dots, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4940–4951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Li, L. Huang and D. Pan, Low-cost and gram-scale synthesis of water-soluble Cu–In–S/ZnS core/shell quantum dots in an electric pressure cooker, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1295–1298 RSC .
D. Braunger, D. Hariskos, T. Walter and H. Schock, An 11.4% efficient polycrystalline thin film solar cell based on CuInS2 with a Cd-free buffer layer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 40, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Booth, A. P. Brown, S. D. Evans and K. Critchley, Determining the concentration of CuInS2 quantum dots from the size-dependent molar extinction coefficient, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2064–2070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, Synthesis and application of colloidal CuInS2 semiconductor nanocrystals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee and C.-S. Han, Large-scale synthesis of highly emissive and photostable CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals through hybrid flow reactor, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 78 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-H. Won, O. Cho, T. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T. Kim, H. Chung, H. Jang, J. Lee, D. Kim and E. Jang, Highly efficient and stable InP/ZnSe/ZnS quantum dot light-emitting diodes, Nature, 2019, 575, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, F. Purcell-Milton and Y. K. Gun'ko, Optical properties, synthesis, and potential applications of Cu-based ternary or quaternary anisotropic quantum dots, polytypic nanocrystals, and core/shell heterostructures, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 85 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Asok, M. N. Gandhi and A. Kulkarni, Enhanced visible photoluminescence in ZnO quantum dots by promotion of oxygen vacancy formation, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4943–4946 RSC .
Y. Kim, C. Ippen, T. Greco, I. Jang, S. Park, M. S. Oh, C. J. Han, J. Lee, A. Wedel and J. Kim, Electrical aging effect of ZnS based quantum dots for white light-emitting diodes, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2014, 10, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chan, M. Liu, K. Latham, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, T. Teranishi and Y. Tachibana, Monodisperse and size-tunable PbS colloidal quantum dots via heterogeneous precursors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2182–2187 RSC .
W.-S. Song, H.-S. Lee, J. C. Lee, D. S. Jang, Y. Choi, M. Choi and H. Yang, Amine-derived synthetic approach to color-tunable InP/ZnS quantum dots with high fluorescent qualities, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15(6), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tessier, D. Dupont, K. De Nolf, J. De Roo and Z. Hens, Economic and Size-Tunable Synthesis of InP/ZnE (E = S, Se) Colloidal Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4893–4898 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ramasamy, K.-J. Ko, J.-W. Kang and J.-S. Lee, Two-Step “Seed-Mediated” Synthetic Approach to Colloidal Indium Phosphide Quantum Dots with High-Purity Photo- and Electroluminescence, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3643–3647 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, P. Ng, J. Ouyang, M. B. Zaman, A. Abulrob, T. N. Baral, D. Fatehi, Z. J. Jakubek, D. Kingston, X. Wu, X. Liu, C. Hebert, D. M. Leek and D. M. Whitfield, Low-temperature approach to highly emissive copper indium sulfide colloidal nanocrystals and their bioimaging applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2870–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, Y. Chen, J. Cao, J. Tian, Z. Qian, S. Achilefu and Y. Gu, High-quality CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots for in vitro and in vivo bioimaging, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3029–3037 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, A. S. Susha, S. V. Kershaw, T. F. Hung and A. L. Rogach, Control of Emission Color of High Quantum Yield CH3NH3PbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots by Precipitation Temperature, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cheng, G. Li, H. Li, E. Xu, D. Li, H. Wang, F. Wu, H. Zhong and Y. Jiang, Full visible waveband tunable formamidinium halides hybrid perovskite QDs via anion-exchange route and their high luminous efficiency LEDs, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 791, 814–821 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, W. Chen, D. Wu, D. Quan, Z. Zhou, J. Hao, J. Qin, Y. Li, Z. He and K. Wang, Large Stokes shift and high efficiency luminescent solar concentrator incorporated with CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, M. Ko, S. Jeong, S. Y. Shin, S. M. Park, Y. R. Do and J. K. Song, Optical Transitions of CuInS2 Nanoparticles: Two Types of Absorption and Two Types of Emission, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(26), 14400–14408 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Nam, W. S. Song and H. Yang, Noninjection, one-pot synthesis of Cu-deficient CuInS2/ZnS core/shell quantum dots and their fluorescent properties, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 361, 491–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Z. Bai and B. Zou, Tuning the luminescence properties of colloidal I–III–VI semiconductor nanocrystals for optoelectronics and biotechnology applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3167–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, Y. Li, Y. Ding, Y. Li and G. D. Scholes, Noninjection gram-scale synthesis of monodisperse pyramidal CuInS2 nanocrystals and their size-dependent properties, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5253–5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Jara, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Two Distinct Transitions in CuxInS2 Quantum Dots. Bandgap versus Sub-Bandgap Excitations in Copper-Deficient Structures, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1452–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Berends, F. T. Rabouw, F. C. Spoor, E. Bladt, F. C. Grozema, A. J. Houtepen, L. D. Siebbeles and C. de Mello Donegá, Radiative and nonradiative recombination in CuInS2 nanocrystals and CuInS2-based core/shell nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shabaev, M. Mehl and A. L. Efros, Energy band structure of CuInS2 and optical spectra of CuInS2 nanocrystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 035431 CrossRef .
S. L. Castro, S. G. Bailey, R. P. Raffaelle, K. K. Banger and A. F. Hepp, Synthesis and characterization of colloidal CuInS2 nanoparticles from a molecular single-source precursor, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12429–12435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, Synthesis and application of colloidal CuInS2 semiconductor nanocrystals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Ueng and H. L. Hwang, The defect structure of CuInS2. part III: Extrinsic impurities, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1990, 51(1), 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Binsma, L. J. Giling and J. Bloem, Luminescence of CuInS2: I. The broad band emission and its dependence on the defect chemistry, J. Lumin., 1982, 27(1), 35–53 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Z. a. Tan, Y. Li, C. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, S. Yang and B. Zou, Highly emissive and color-tunable CuInS2-based colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals: off-stoichiometry effects and improved electroluminescence performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2081–2088 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nose, T. Omata and S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, Colloidal synthesis of ternary copper indium diselenide quantum dots and their optical properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3455–3460 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pinchetti, M. Lorenzon, H. McDaniel, R. Lorenzi, F. Meinardi, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Spectro-electrochemical Probing of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Processes in Exciton Recombination in I-III-VI2 Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4508–4517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fuhr, H. J. Yun, N. S. Makarov, H. Li, H. McDaniel and V. I. Klimov, Light Emission Mechanisms in CuInS2 Quantum Dots Evaluated by Spectral Electrochemistry, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2425–2435 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fuhr, H. J. Yun, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, Spectroscopic and Magneto-Optical Signatures of Cu1+ and Cu2+ Defects in Copper Indium Sulfide Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2212–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, M. de Graaf, S. Gudjonsdottir, J. J. Geuchies, J. J. Dijkema, N. Kirkwood, W. H. Evers, A. Longo and A. J. Houtepen, Tuning and Probing the Distribution of Cu+ and Cu2+ Trap States Responsible for Broad-Band Photoluminescence in CuInS2 Nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11244–11253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zang, H. Li, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, K. Wu, Y.-S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Thick-shell CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots with suppressed “Blinking” and narrow single-particle emission line widths, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1787–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fuhr, P. Sautet and A. N. Alexandrova, Heterogeneity in Local Chemical Bonding Explains Spectral Broadening in Quantum Dots with Cu Impurities, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5705–5713 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brovelli, C. Galland, R. Viswanatha and V. I. Klimov, Tuning radiative recombination in Cu-doped nanocrystals via electrochemical control of surface trapping, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4372–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Whitham, K. E. Knowles, P. J. Reid and D. R. Gamelin, Photoluminescence blinking and reversible electron trapping in copper-doped CdSe nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4045–4051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, An essay on synthetic chemistry of colloidal nanocrystals, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 425–447 CrossRef CAS .
W. van der Stam, A. C. Berends and C. de Mello Donega, Prospects of colloidal copper chalcogenide nanocrystals, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 559–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, W. Wu, T. Yu, X. Xie, C. van Oversteeg, H. C. Gerritsen and C. de Mello Donega, Size-Dependent Band-Gap and Molar Absorption Coefficients of Colloidal CuInS2 Quantum Dots, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8350–8361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-B. Xie, B.-B. Hu, L.-F. Jiang, G. Li and Z.-L. Du, The phase transformation of CuInS2 from chalcopyrite to wurtzite, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 86 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jindal, S. M. Giripunje, S. B. Kondawar and P. Koinkar, Green synthesis of CuInS2/ZnS core-shell quantum dots by facile solvothermal route with enhanced optical properties, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2018, 114, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tang, Z. Hu, Z. Yin, H. Ye, C. Yang and F. Teng, One-pot synthesis of CuInS2 nanocrystals using different anions to engineer their morphology and crystal phase, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9251–9259 RSC .
Y. Vahidshad, M. N. Tahir, S. M. Mirkazemi, A. I. Zad, R. Ghasemzadeh and W. Tremel, One-pot thermolysis synthesis of CuInS2 nanoparticles with chalcopyrite-wurtzite polytypism structure, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 8960–8972 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, B. W. Rudyk, C. D. Brunetta, K. B. Knorr, H. A. Figore, A. Mar and J. A. Aitken, Mn incorporation in CuInS2 chalcopyrites: Structure, magnetism and optical properties, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 415–423 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, Q. Liu, K. Tang, Z. Liang, Z. Ren and X. Liu, Synthesis and characterization of nanostructured wurtzite CuInS2: a new cation disordered polymorph of CuInS2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3939–3944 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gastaldi and L. Scaramuzza, Single-crystal structure analysis of the spinel copper pentaindium octasulphide, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1980, 36, 2751–2753 CrossRef .
D.-E. Nam, W.-S. Song and H. Yang, Facile, air-insensitive solvothermal synthesis of emission-tunable CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots with high quantum yields, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(45), 18220–18226 RSC .
N. Razgoniaeva, M. Yang, P. Garrett, N. Kholmicheva, P. Moroz, H. Eckard, L. Royo Romero, D. Porotnikov, D. Khon and M. Zamkov, Just add ligands: self-sustained size focusing of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1391–1398 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marin, A. Vivian, A. Skripka, A. Migliori, V. Morandi, F. Enrichi, F. Vetrone, P. Ceroni, C. Aprile and P. Canton, Mercaptosilane-Passivated CuInS2 Quantum Dots for Luminescence Thermometry and Luminescent Labels, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2426–2436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, X. T. Kong, Y. Zhou, F. Navarro-Pardo, G. S. Selopal, S. Sun, A. O. Govorov, H. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Near-Infrared, Heavy Metal-Free Colloidal “Giant” Core/Shell Quantum Dots, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701432 CrossRef .
A. D. Leach and J. E. Macdonald, Optoelectronic properties of CuInS2 nanocrystals and their origin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 572–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Arshad, H. Chen, X. Bai, S. Xu and L. Wang, One-Pot Aqueous Synthesis of Highly Biocompatible Near Infrared CuInS2 Quantum Dots for Target Cell Imaging, Chin. J. Chem., 2016, 34, 576–582 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, Y. Wang, Q. Nie, B. Liu, E. Liu, X. Hu and J. Fan, Aqueous-synthesis of CuInS2 core and CuInS2/ZnS core/shell quantum dots and their optical properties, Mater. Lett., 2017, 200, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Li, L. Huang and D. Pan, Green and facile synthesis of water-soluble Cu–In–S/ZnS core/shell quantum dots, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 7819–7821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-T. Xuan, J.-Q. Liu, R.-J. Xie, H.-L. Li and Z. Sun, Microwave-assisted synthesis of CdS/ZnS: Cu quantum dots for white light-emitting diodes with high color rendition, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1187–1193 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Fitzmorris, R. P. Oleksak, Z. Zhou, B. D. Mangum, J. N. Kurtin and G. S. Herman, Structural and optical characterization of CuInS2 quantum dots synthesized by microwave-assisted continuous flow methods, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 319 CrossRef .
S. Mei, J. Zhu, W. Yang, X. Wei, W. Zhang, Q. Chen, L. He, Y. Jiang and R. Guo, Tunable emission and morphology control of the Cu-In-S/ZnS quantum dots with dual stabilizer via microwave-assisted aqueous synthesis, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 729, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, X. He, P. Ma, Y. Sun, X. Wang and D. Song, Rapid aqueous synthesis of CuInS/ZnS quantum dots as sensor probe for alkaline phosphatase detection and targeted imaging in cancer cells, Talanta, 2018, 189, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-W. Xiong, G.-H. Yang, X.-C. Wu and J.-J. Zhu, Aqueous synthesis of color-tunable CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals for the detection of human interleukin 6, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, F. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Tang, H. Zhong, A. Yu, J. Wang and B. Zou, Direct Observation of Surface Polarons in Capped CuInS2 Quantum Dots by Ultrafast Pump-Probe Spectroscopies, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5297–5301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. L. Sobhana, M. V. Devi, T. P. Sastry and A. B. Mandal, CdS quantum dots for measurement of the size-dependent optical properties of thiol capping, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 1747–1757 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Hu, H. Shen, Q. Lin, L. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhao and L. Li, Efficient and long-life green light-emitting diodes comprising tridentate thiol capped quantum dots, Laser Photonics Rev., 2017, 11(1), 1600227 CrossRef .
M. Gromova, A. l. Lefrançois, L. Vaure, F. Agnese, D. Aldakov, A. Maurice, D. Djurado, C. Lebrun, A. de Geyer and T. U. Schülli, Growth mechanism and surface state of CuInS2 nanocrystals synthesized with dodecanethiol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15748–15759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Akdas, M. Distaso, S. Kuhri, B. Winter, B. Birajdar, E. Spiecker, D. M. Guldi and W. Peukert, The effects of post-processing on the surface and the optical properties of copper indium sulfide quantum dots, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 445, 337–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dierick, F. Van den Broeck, K. De Nolf, Q. Zhao, A. Vantomme, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Surface chemistry of CuInS2 colloidal nanocrystals, tight binding of L-type ligands, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5950–5957 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xin, D. Yao, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, B. Yang and H. Zhang, Facile Synthesis of Cu–In–S/ZnS Core/Shell Quantum Dots in 1-Dodecanethiol for Efficient Light-Emitting Diodes with an External Quantum Efficiency of 7.8%, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8939–8947 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, I. n. Mora-Seró, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, High-efficiency “green” quantum dot solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, W. Choi and D. Y. Jeon, Ligand Exchange-Ready CuInS2/ZnS Quantum Dots via Surface Ligand Composition Control for Film Type Display Devices, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5504–5511 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Zhao, H. Xu, Z. Wang and Z. Dai, Amino Acids-Capped Water-Soluble Near Infrared Region CuInS2/ZnS Quantum Dots for Selective Cadmium Ion Determination and Multicolor Cell Imaging, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91(14), 8987–8993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bai, W. Ji, D. Han, L. Chen, B. Chen, H. Shen, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Hydroxyl-terminated CuInS2 based quantum dots: toward efficient and bright light emitting diodes, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1085–1091 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Han, J. Tang, Z. Bai and H. Zhong, Alcohol-soluble quantum dots: enhanced solution processability and charge injection for electroluminescence devices, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, P. Chao, D. Han, H. Wang, J. Miao, H. Zhong, H. Meng and F. He, Hydroxyl-terminated CuInS2-based quantum dots: potential cathode interfacial modifiers for efficient inverted polymer solar cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7362–7367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath and D. Cha, Colloidal-quantum-dot photovoltaics using atomic-ligand passivation, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, H. Qin, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Solar cells sensitized with type-II ZnSe–CdS core/shell colloidal quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1536–1538 RSC .
L. Etgar, D. Yanover, R. K. Čapek, R. Vaxenburg, Z. Xue, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Lifshitz and M. Grätzel, Core/Shell PbSe/PbS QDs TiO2 Heterojunction Solar Cell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2736–2741 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W.-K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Electroluminescence from single monolayers of nanocrystals in molecular organic devices, Nature, 2002, 420, 800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, T. J. Daou, I. Texier, T. T. Kim Chi, N. Q. Liem and P. Reiss, Highly luminescent CuInS2/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals: cadmium-free quantum dots for in vivo imaging, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2422–2429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park and S.-W. Kim, CuInS2/ZnS core/shell quantum dots by cation exchange and their blue-shifted photoluminescence, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(11), 3745–3750 RSC .
L. Li, A. Pandey, D. J. Werder, B. P. Khanal, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Efficient synthesis of highly luminescent copper indium sulfide-based core/shell nanocrystals with surprisingly long-lived emission, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1176–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, S. Zeng, B. Zhang, M. T. Swihart, K. T. Yong and P. N. Prasad, New Generation Cadmium-Free Quantum Dots for Biophotonics and Nanomedicine, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(19), 12234–12327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Berends, W. Van Der Stam, J. P. Hofmann, E. Bladt, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Bals and C. de Mello Donega, Interplay between surface chemistry, precursor reactivity, and temperature determines outcome of ZnS shelling reactions on CuInS2 nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2400–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Hansen, S. N. Bertram, J. J. Yoo and M. G. Bawendi, Zinc Thiolate Enables Bright Cu-Deficient
Cu-In-S/ZnS Quantum Dots, Small, 2019, 1901462 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-T. Huang, S.-Y. Yoon, B.-H. Wu, K.-M. Lu, C.-M. Lin, H. Yang and R.-S. Liu, Ultra-Broadband Near-Infrared Emission CuInS2/ZnS Quantum Dots with High Power Efficiency and Stability for the Theranostic Applications of Mini Light-Emitting Diodes, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8285 RSC .
J. A. Hollingsworth, Heterostructuring nanocrystal quantum dots toward intentional suppression of blinking and auger recombination, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1318–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ghosh, B. D. Mangum, J. L. Casson, D. J. Williams, H. Htoon and J. A. Hollingsworth, New insights into the complexities of shell growth and the strong influence of particle volume in nonblinking “giant” core/shell nanocrystal quantum dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9634–9643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, “Giant” multishell CdSe nanocrystal quantum dots with suppressed blinking, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Selopal, H. Zhao, G. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Tong, K. Wang, J. Tang, X. Sun, S. Sun and F. Vidal, Interfacial engineering in colloidal “giant” quantum dots for high-performance photovoltaics, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 377–388 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, T. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Lv, X. Liu, J. Li, H. Shen and L. S. Li, Synthesis of highly stable CuInZnS/ZnS//ZnS quantum dots with thick shell and its application to quantitative immunoassay, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, J. L. Bleuse and A. Pron, Highly Luminescent CdSe/ZnSe Core/Shell Nanocrystals of Low Size Dispersion, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 781–784 CrossRef CAS .
F. García-Santamaría, S. Brovelli, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, Breakdown of volume scaling in Auger recombination in CdSe/CdS heteronanocrystals: the role of the core-shell interface, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 687 CrossRef .
M. Kim and J. Bang, Fabrication of Visible-Light Sensitized ZnTe/ZnSe (Core/Shell) Type-II Quantum Dots, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2018, 55(5), 510–514 CrossRef CAS .
B. Biswajit, P. Triloki, R. G. Pratheep and P. Anshu, Optical Transparency Enabled by Anomalous Stokes Shift in Visible Emitting CuAlS2 Based Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4451–4456 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ning, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Synthesis and Optical Properties of Cubic Chalcopyrite/Hexagonal Wurtzite Core/Shell Copper Indium Sulfide Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20516–20524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakamura, W. Kato, M. Uehara, K. Nose, T. Omata, S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, M. Miyazaki and H. Maeda, Tunable photoluminescence wavelength of chalcopyrite CuInS2-based semiconductor nanocrystals synthesized in a colloidal system, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3330–3335 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raevskaya, O. Rozovik, A. Novikova, O. Selyshchev, O. Stroyuk, V. Dzhagan, I. Goryacheva, N. Gaponik, D. R. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, Luminescence and photoelectrochemical properties of size-selected aqueous copper-doped Ag–In–S quantum dots, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 7550–7557 RSC .
B.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Kim, K.-H. Lee, E.-P. Jang, C.-Y. Han, J.-H. Jo, H. S. Jang and H. Yang, Synthesis of highly efficient azure-to-blue-emitting Zn-Cu-Ga-S quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4088–4091 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Yao, L. Kong, Y. Zhao and L. Li, General method for the synthesis of ultrastable core/shell quantum dots by aluminum doping, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12430–12433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rao, W. Yao, Z. Li, L. Kong, W. Zhang and L. Li, Highly stable CuInS2@ZnS:Al core@shell quantum dots: the role of aluminium self-passivation, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8757–8760 RSC .
W. Chung, H. Jung, C. H. Lee and S. H. Kim, Fabrication of high color rendering index white LED using Cd-free wavelength tunable Zn doped CuInS2 nanocrystals, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 25071–25076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, A. Antanovich, A. Prudnikau, O. S. Taniya, K. V. Grzhegorzhevskii, P. Zelenovskiy, T. Terpinskaya, J. Tang and M. Artemyev, Highly luminescent Zn-Cu-In-S/ZnS core/gradient shell quantum dots prepared from indium sulfide by cation exchange for cell labeling and polymer composites, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 395603 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Hughes, S. R. Ostheller, H. D. Nelson and D. R. Gamelin, Copper's Role in the Photoluminescence of Ag1–xCuxInS2 Nanocrystals, from Copper-Doped AgInS2 (x∼0) to CuInS2 (x = 1), Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 1318–1325 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, J. Herbich, B. Golec, I. Wielgus and A. Pron, A simple route to alloyed quaternary nanocrystals Ag–In–Zn–S with shape and size control, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5002–5012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Yoon, J.-H. Kim, E.-P. Jang, S.-H. Lee, D.-Y. Jo, Y. Kim, Y. R. Do and H. Yang, Systematic and Extensive Emission Tuning of Highly Efficient Cu–In–S-Based Quantum Dots from Visible to Near Infrared, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2627–2634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Hu, G. T. Fei and L. De Zhang, Synthesis of green-to-red-emitting Cu-Ga-S/ZnS core/shell quantum dots for application in white light-emitting diodes, J. Lumin., 2019, 208, 18–23 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, K.-H. Kim, S.-Y. Yoon, Y. Kim, S.-H. Lee, H.-S. Kim and H. Yang, Tunable Emission of Bluish Zn-Cu-Ga-S Quantum Dots by Mn Doping and Their Electroluminescence, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8250–8257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, C. Li, L. Wang, M. Shang, G. Wei, J. Zheng and W. Yang, Long-lived and well-resolved Mn2+ ion emissions in CuInS-ZnS quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7510 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Huang, Q. Dai, N. Zhuo, Q. Jiang, F. Shi, H. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Liao, Y. Cui and J. Zhang, Bicolor Mn-doped CuInS2/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals for white light-emitting diode with high color rendering index, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 094303 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Li, L. Wang, T. Zhou and R.-J. Xie, Achieving deep-red-to-near-infrared emissions in Sn-doped Cu–In–S/ZnS quantum dots for red-enhanced white LEDs and near-infrared LEDs, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9788–9795 RSC .
J.-Y. Chang, G.-R. Chen and J.-D. Li, Synthesis of magnetofluorescence Gd-doped CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots with enhanced longitudinal relaxivity, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7132–7140 RSC .
C. Yu, T. Xuan, S. Lou and X. Liu, Guohai and LIAN, Gd3+ doped CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals with high quantum yield for bimodal fluorescence/magnetic resonance imaging, J. Rare Earths, 2017, 35(4), 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Chuang, C. C. Lin and R. S. Liu, Emission-tunable CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots: structure, optical properties, and application in white light-emitting diodes with high color rendering index, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15379–15387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, H. Zhong, M. Wang, R. Liu and B. Zou, Integration of CuInS2-based nanocrystals for high efficiency and high colour rendering white light-emitting diodes, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3514–3519 RSC .
N. Kim, W. Na, W. Yin, H. Jin, T. K. Ahn, S. M. Cho and H. Chae, CuInS2/ZnS quantum dot-embedded polymer nanofibers for color conversion films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2457–2462 RSC .
A. Aboulaich, M. Michalska, R. l. Schneider, A. Potdevin, J. r. m. Deschamps, R. Deloncle, G. v. Chadeyron and R. Mahiou, Ce-doped YAG nanophosphor and red emitting CuInS2/ZnS core/shell quantum dots for warm white light-emitting diode with high color rendering index, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 6, 252–258 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Zhao, A. Tang, Y. Xie, L. Qian, W. Cao, Y. Yang, Y. Chen and F. Teng, Solution-processed high-efficiency cadmium-free Cu-Zn-In-S-based quantum-dot light-emitting diodes with low turn-on voltage, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, High-efficiency Cu–In–S quantum-dot-light-emitting device exceeding 7%, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Perovskite light-emitting diodes with external quantum efficiency exceeding 20 per cent, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu and T. Lian, Quantum confined colloidal nanorod heterostructures for solar-to-fuel conversion, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3781–3810 RSC .
F. Purcell-Milton and Y. K. Gun'ko, Quantum dots for Luminescent Solar Concentrators, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16687 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, S. Tian, Y. Xie, X. Zhao and X. Gong, Deep-red emitting zinc and aluminium co-doped copper indium sulfide quantum dots for luminescent solar concentrators, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 509–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, S. Li, W. Chen, D. Wang, C. Li, D. Wu, J. Hao, Z. Zhou, X. Wang and K. Wang, Scattering enhanced quantum dots based luminescent solar concentrators by silica microparticles, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 380–385 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Bergren, N. S. Makarov, K. Ramasamy, A. Jackson, R. Guglielmetti and H. McDaniel, High-performance CuInS2 quantum dot laminated glass luminescent solar concentrators for windows, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 520–525 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kouhnavard, S. Ikeda, N. A. Ludin, N. A. Khairudin, B. Ghaffari, M. Mat-Teridi, M. A. Ibrahim, S. Sepeai and K. Sopian, A review of semiconductor materials as sensitizers for quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 37, 397–407 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Li, Z. Liu and Y.-H. Xie, The conversion of CuInS2/ZnS core/shell structure from type I to quasi-type II and the shell thickness-dependent solar cell performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 276–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra, P. V. Nair, K. George Thomas and P. V. Kamat, CuInS2-sensitized quantum dot solar cell. Electrophoretic deposition, excited-state dynamics, and photovoltaic performance, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 722–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Ma, J. Liu and Y. Mai, Improving the performance of solid-state quantum dot-sensitized solar cells based on TiO2/CuInS2 photoelectrodes with annealing treatment, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 92869–92873 RSC .
C. Cai, L. Zhai, Q. Wu, Y. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Zou and S. Huang, Tailoring defects of CuInS2 quantum dots for sensitized solar cells, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 719, 227–235 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, W. Feng, J. Du, W. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhong, Cosensitized quantum dot solar cells with conversion efficiency over 12%, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705746 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Jara, S. J. Yoon, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Size-dependent photovoltaic performance of CuInS2 quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7221–7228 CrossRef CAS .
T.-L. Li, C.-D. Cai, T.-F. Yeh and H. Teng, Capped CuInS2 quantum dots for H2 evolution from water under visible light illumination, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 550, 326–330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Xi, W. Fang, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity of CuInS2 loaded TiO2 under solar light irradiation, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 226, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, G. Liang, D. Kong, J. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Shan, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Quasi-type II CuInS2/CdS core/shell quantum dots, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1238–1244 RSC .
Y.-J. Yuan, G. Fang, D. Chen, Y. Huang, L.-X. Yang, D.-P. Cao, J. Wang, Z.-T. Yu and Z.-G. Zou, High light harvesting efficiency CuInS2 quantum dots/TiO2/MoS2 photocatalysts for enhanced visible light photocatalytic H2 production, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5652–5659 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Chen, B. Gao, J. Chen, Z. Du and B. Lin, Polymeric carbon nitride hybridized by CuInS2 quantum dots for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Mater. Lett., 2019, 254, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, Z. Li, S. Huang, J. Jia and L. Li, Boosting photocatalytic performance and stability of CuInS2/ZnS-TiO2 heterostructures via sol-gel processed integrate amorphous titania gel, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 403–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Que, X. Zhang, Y. Xing, X. Yin and Y. Du, Facile synthesis of ZnO/CuInS2 nanorod arrays for photocatalytic pollutants degradation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 317, 430–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, J. Ke, M. Yuan, Q. Zhang, P. Xie, L. Deng and S. Wang, CuInS2 quantum dots embedded in Bi2WO6 nanoflowers for enhanced visible light photocatalytic removal of contaminants, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, J. Hu, Y. Yang, W. Que, X. Yin, H. Wu and L. Chen, Ternary system of ZnO nanorods/reduced graphene oxide/CuInS2 quantum dots for enhanced photocatalytic performance, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 734, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhu, J. Zhu and Z. Zhang, Selective detection of glufosinate using CuInS2 quantum dots as a fluorescence probe, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 48077–48082 RSC .
S. Liu, F. Shi, X. Zhao, L. Chen and X. Su, 3-Aminophenyl boronic acid-functionalized CuInS2 quantum dots as a near-infrared fluorescence probe for the determination of dopamine, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 379–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Liu, Z. Lin, S. Liu and X. Su, CuInS2 quantum dots as a near-infrared fluorescent probe for detecting thrombin in human serum, Analyst, 2012, 137, 5620–5624 RSC .
X. Yan, H. Li, Y. Yan and X. Su, Selective detection of parathion-methyl based on near-infrared CuInS2 quantum dots, Food Chem., 2015, 173, 179–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Z. Liu, H. Zhang and X. Su, Near-infrared fluorescence probe for the determination of acid phosphatase and imaging of prostate cancer cells, Analyst, 2015, 140, 1629–1636 RSC .
S. Liu, S. Pang, W. Na and X. Su, Near-infrared fluorescence probe for the determination of alkaline phosphatase, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 249–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, P. Ma, X. Deng, Y. Sun, X. Wang and D. Song, Enzymatic determination of uric acid using water-soluble CuInS/ZnS quantum dots as a fluorescent probe, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185, 499 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Lin, J. Yi, Q. Weng, Y. Zhou, Z. Han, C. Li, J. Chen and Q. Zhang, A tyrosinase-induced fluorescence immunoassay for detection of tau protein using dopamine-functionalized CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 5277–5285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Niu, X. Yu, Q. Yuan, W. Hu, D. Yu and Q. Zhang, Quantum dots based near-infrared fluorescent probe for the detection of PepT1 expression in colorectal cancer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 739, 136977 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Ma, X. Wang, Z. Lin, H. Zhang, L. Liu and X. Su, A novel fluorescent nanosensor for detection of heparin and heparinase based on CuInS2 quantum dots, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 54, 617–622 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Liu, M. Sun and X. Su, A novel and convenient near-infrared fluorescence “turn off–on” nanosensor for detection of glucose and fluoride anions, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 145–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zi, Y. Huang, Z. Yan and S. Liao, Thioglycolic acid-capped CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots as fluorescent probe for cobalt ion detection, J. Lumin., 2014, 148, 359–363 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Mir, K. Das, T. Akhter, R. Ranjan, R. Patel and H. B. Bohidar, Eco-friendly synthesis of CuInS2 and CuInS2@ZnS quantum dots and their effect on enzyme activity of lysozyme, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 30589–30599 RSC .
F. Zhang, X.-W. He, W.-Y. Li and Y.-K. Zhang, One-pot aqueous synthesis of composition-tunable near-infrared emitting Cu-doped CdS quantum dots as fluorescence imaging probes in living cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22250–22257 RSC .
Z. Lin, X. Fei, Q. Ma, X. Gao and X. Su, CuInS2 quantum dots@ silica near-infrared fluorescent nanoprobe for cell imaging, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 90–96 RSC .
T. Pons, E. Pic, N. Lequeux, E. Cassette, L. Bezdetnaya, F. Guillemin, F. Marchal and B. Dubertret, Cadmium-free CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots for sentinel lymph node imaging with reduced toxicity, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2531–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Yong, I. Roy, R. Hu, H. Ding, H. Cai, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Synthesis of ternary CuInS2/ZnS quantum dot bioconjugates and their applications for targeted cancer bioimaging, Integr. Biol., 2010, 2, 121–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Foda, L. Huang, F. Shao and H.-Y. Han, Biocompatible and highly luminescent near-infrared CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots embedded silica beads for cancer cell imaging, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2011–2017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. su Kim, Y. Lee, Y. Kim, D. Kim, H. S. Choi, J. C. Park, Y. S. Nam and D. Y. Jeon, Synthesis of efficient near-infrared-emitting CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots by inhibiting cation-exchange for bio application, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10675–10682 RSC .
C. Zhao, Z. Bai, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Small GSH-capped CuInS2 quantum dots: MPA-assisted aqueous phase transfer and bioimaging applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17623–17629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Yang, J. Hong, Y. Zhang, Z. Gao, T.-T. Jiang, J.-L. Song, X.-L. Xu and L.-X. Zhu, Bio-compatibility and cytotoxicity studies of water-soluble CuInS2-ZnS-AFP fluorescence probe in liver cancer cells, Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Dis. Int., 2016, 15, 406–411 CrossRef .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Thermodynamic oxidation and reduction potentials of photocatalytic semiconductors in aqueous solution, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:
Zhiwei Long	Zhiwei Long received his bachelor's degree of metallurgical engineering from Jiangxi University of Science and Technology in 2018. Now he is studying for a PhD degree at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals under the guidance of Prof. Ronghui Liu.
Wenda Zhang	Wenda Zhang received his PhD of metallurgical engineering from University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2020. Currently, he is a postdoc at Southern University of Science and Technology. His research focus on the synthesis and characterization of cadmium-free quantum dots.
Junhang Tian	Junhang Tian received his bachelor's degree of metallurgical engineering from Northeastern University in 2014. Now he is pursuing his PhD degree at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals under the guidance of Prof. Weidong Zhuang.
Guantong Chen	Guantong Chen received his PhD from General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals in 2013. Now he is working at Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd.
Yuanhong Liu	Yuanhong Liu received her PhD from General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals in 2010. Now she is working at Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd.
Ronghui Liu	Ronghui Liu received his PhD from Kunming University of Science and Technology in 2007. Later, he worked at the National Engineering Research Center for Rare Earth Materials. Currently, he is a professor at General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals and is also the vice-general manager of Grirem Advanced Materials Co. Ltd. His research interests include lnorganic luminescent materials, display and lighting technology. ResearcherID: AAW-9881-2020.

CdSe/CdS	>90	640	28	Dai et al. (2014)4
ZnO	61	450–550	—	Asok et al. (2012)31
ZnS:Al	28	393	37	Kim et al. (2014)32
PbS	40–70	990–1600	40–120	Chan et al. (2017)33
InP/ZnS	51–53	532–612	60–64	Song et al. (2013)34
50	510–630	46–63	Tessier et al. (2015)35
InP/ZnSe/ZnS	45–65	533–625	36–39	Ramasamy et al. (2018)36
CuInS2	23	760	140	Yu et al. (2013)37
CuInS2/ZnS	61.4	561	92	Lee et al. (2014)28
80	550–800	—	Deng et al. (2012)38
25–75	750–1100	—	Xia et al. (2017)23
MAPbBr3	50–70	400–750	20–50	Zhang et al. (2015)20
74–93	475–520	28–36	Huang et al. (2015)39
FAPbX3	85	530	22	Cheng et al. (2019)40
CsPbBr3	95	513	20	Li et al. (2016)21

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depictions of relaxation processes in stoichiometric (left) and Cu-deficient (middle) core-only CIS QDs, and stoichiometric CIS/ZnS core/shell samples (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.56	 

 	Fig. 2  Auger recombination lead to PL quenching of Cu2+ (left), and radiative recombination lead to bright of Cu+ (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.58	 

 	Fig. 3  Three crystal types of CuInS2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the formation of CIS QDs in DDT solvent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.89	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a CIS NC surface depicting the chemical processes that can take place during a ZnS shelling reaction. (A) [ZnS] monomers (B) alloying (C) heteroepitaxial shell overgrowth. (D) Cation exchange (E) etching (F) homogeneous ZnS NCs nucleation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.107	 

 	Fig. 6  Systematically, widely tuned PL spectra ranging from visible green (534 nm) to deep NIR (868 nm), which were achievable by diversifying the synthetic parameters of CIS core QDs with the identical shelling applied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.129	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for enhancing the photostability of CIS/ZnS QDs by doping Al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.124	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the conventional flat QDs-LSC-PV device and illustrates the principle of the device. (b) Three behaviors of light in this device: light converting, Rayleigh scattering and light guiding. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature Limited, the Author(s).41	 

 	Fig. 9  Sketch depicts the working principle of QDSCs. The dashed arrows show the undesirable carrier recombination pathways. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.150	 

 	Fig. 10  Silica-coated CIS/ZnS QDs used for cell imaging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.182	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
