8.01% CuInGaSe 2 solar cells fabricated by air-stable low-cost inks  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP41969F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP41969F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11154-11159Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms8.01% CuInGaSe2 solar cells fabricated by air-stable low-cost inks

        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Seung-Yeol 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi-Joon 
            Sung
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dae-Hwan 
            Kim
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Chih-Hung 
            Chang
          
        
      a
aSchool of Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. E-mail: chih-hung.chang@oregonstate.edu;  Fax: +1-541-737-4600;   Tel: +1-541-737-8548
bGreen Energy Research Division, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science & Technology, Daegu, Korea
Received 
      13th June 2012
    , Accepted 22nd June 2012First published on 22nd June 2012AbstractCuInGaSe2 (CIGS), a promising thin film solar cell material, has gained lots of attention in decades due to its high energy conversion efficiency and potential lower manufacture cost over conventional Si solar cells. As a cheaper processing method compared to vacuum-based techniques, solution-based deposition has been successfully applied to fabricate electronic devices, such as transistors and solar cells. In this paper, we reported CIGS thin film solar cells with an energy conversion efficiency reaching up to 8.01% using air-stable, low-cost inks. The newly developed inks consist of commercially available, low-cost compounds and solvents and can be processed using a variety of printing and coating techniques. More importantly, the inks can produce CIGS films free of copper selenides and amorphous carbon, two common by-products from solution-based CIGS processes. The mechanism for the transformation from metal salt precursor films to CIGS absorber thin films and the influence of selenium vapour pressure on absorber film quality and photovoltaic device performance were investigated and discussed. High-quality CIGS films with micrometer-sized crystals were obtained by using higher selenization partial pressure.
1. Introduction
CuInGaSe2 (CIGS), one of the most promising solar cell materials, has reached up to 20.3% efficiency which is comparable with the energy conversion efficiency of multicrystalline Si solar cells.1 Considering the high cost of vacuum equipment used in conventional CIGS deposition processes, solution processing is a potentially low-cost technique to reduce the manufacture cost of solar cells. Nanosolar Inc.2 utilizing formulated inks containing binary copper/indium/gallium selenide nanoparticles successfully fabricated 15% CIGS thin film solar cells via high throughput roll-to-roll printing. Guo et al.3 synthesized CuInS2 and CuInGaS2 nanoparticles by a hot injection method and converted nanoparticle-stacked sulfide films to densified selenide thin films. The resulting cells demonstrate a maximum energy conversion efficiency of 12.5%. Kapur et al.4 reduced oxide nanoparticles using pure hydrogen to metal films which were then converted to chalcopyrite CuInGaSe2 films by selenization. A maximum cell efficiency of 13.6% was achieved from these films. All these methods using precursor films made of nanoparticles require extra preparation steps such as mechanical milling or chemical synthesis. The final absorber films were deprived of their initial nano-structured features. These additional steps for the preparation of nanoparticles and hydrogen reduction are likely to increase the manufacture cost and decrease the production yield. Bhattacharya et al.5 used an electroplating method to fabricate CIGS thin film solar cells with an efficiency of 15.4%. However, a post composition adjustment by physical vapour deposition is required to ensure Cu-poor CIGS films. Guillemoles et al.6 fabricated CIGSSe solar cells using precursor films by electrodeposition followed by sulfurization. Hydrazine is a powerful solvent which can dissolve various binary metal selenides and sulfides with additional chalcogen elements. Todorov et al.7 demonstrated CIGS cells with 15.2% energy conversion efficiency using this method. However, due to the toxic and explosive nature of hydrazine and slow dissolution rates of chalcogenides, the wide application of this method will require careful engineering work to ensure the safety of the working environment. In comparison with the higher cost of precursor preparation, our approach is to use low-cost dissoluble compounds (i.e. metal salts) as starting materials. These compounds can be directly printed on the substrate and then transformed into desirable products. The film composition can be easily controlled by simply adjusting the ratio of dissolved salts compared to other deposition processes.
Previously, we have demonstrated the use of metal salts for the fabrication of 5%-efficient CIGS thin film solar cells by inkjet printing.8 The obtained CIGS suffered from carbon contamination and incomplete selenization which prevented CIGS from being completely crystallized to micrometer-sized grains, which are common issues for solution-based CIGS deposition processes.9,10 A chloride ion was believed to be an oxidizing agent which oxidized alcohol solvents resulting in carbon contamination. In order to reduce residual carbon in the CIGS film, metal acetates/acetylacetonates were chosen to substitute metal chlorides.11 By eliminating the residual carbon in the CIGS layers, the efficiency of CIGS solar cells increased to around 6%. The resulting film mostly consists of micrometer-sized CIGS grains. However, smaller crystals still existed near the back contact Mo layer and contributed to the potential electron–hole recombination center.
In this paper, we demonstrated the influence of Se vapor pressure on CIGS crystal growth and device performance. The mechanism of CIGS formation from metal acetates/acetylacetonates is studied using various analysis tools. The reaction pathway was proposed for this low-cost route.
2. Experiment
Ink preparation
1 mmol copper(II) acetate monohydrate (Aldrich 99.99%), 0.7 mmol indium(III) acetate (Alfa Aesar 99.99%), and 0.3 mmol gallium(III) acetylacetonate (Aldrich 99.999%) were added to a mixture of ethanol-based solvent (containing 1 ml propylene glycol and 2 ml ethanol) and subjected to continuous stirring until the ink solution became clear.
Deposition of the absorber layer
Spin coating was used to deposit the precursor ink on the substrate in this study. For large scale manufacturing, other solution-deposition techniques, such as spray deposition, and inkjet printing, would be suitable for this process after a proper adjustment of the ink's rheological properties. The as-deposited films were annealed in a 350 °C preheated furnace for several minutes to evaporate the solvents. Repeat the spin-coating and air-annealing processes for a few times until the desired thickness was achieved. Finally a post-selenization process was utilized to convert the precursor film into the CIGS film using Se vapour generated from the evaporation of powder Se mixed with 20% H2 and 80% N2 in a 500–530 °C quartz tube furnace for 30 min.
Device fabrication
Corning 1737 glass coated with 500 nm molybdenum was used as a substrate for solar cells. The air-annealed precursor films were subjected to selenization at 500–530 °C in a quartz tube furnace for 30 min. A highly uniform ∼50 nm solution-processed CdS buffer layer was then deposited using a continuous flow microreactor process.12 80 nm i-ZnO and 300 nm Al:ZnO window layers were deposited by sputtering. Finally, mechanical scribing was used to isolate the devices with an area of 0.09 cm2. The aluminium top-contacts were deposited by a thermal evaporator. Fig. 1 illustrates the device fabrication process.
 Fig. 1  The schematic of fabrication of CIGS solar cells. 
Characterization
Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted using TA Q600. Elemental composition was analyzed using a Cameca SX-100 Electron Microprobe. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra and grazing incidence XRD were collected using a Bruker D8 Discover Diffractometer. Witec Confocal Raman with a 514 nm laser was used to collect the Raman spectra. SEM and TEM images were taken using a FEI Quanta 3D Dual Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and a JEOL JEM-ARM200F Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). An Oriel 96000 Full spectrum solar simulator calibrated with a standard Si solar cell and Newport radiant power meter and PVIV-200 test station were used to analyze the device performance. Quantum Efficiency was measured by a Tau Science FlashQE system.
3. Results and discussion
In order to form a dense precursor film, after each spin casting, the solvents and anions were removed by thermal evaporation and decomposed by air annealing, respectively. Thermal gravimetric analysis was used to analyze the ink weight loss and the decomposition of metal acetate/acetylacetonate precursors during annealing (see Fig. 2). Pure copper acetate monohydrate lost water at 120 °C and completely decomposed at 267 °C where the remaining weight was 36.28% of the initial mass indicating the formation of Cu2O. After this point, the weight of the copper precursor actually increased to 40.77% of the initial mass due to the transformation of Cu2O to CuO. The transformation of Cu2+ → Cu1+ → Cu2+ for copper acetate under air annealing is consistent with the previously reported results.13,14 Pure indium acetate completely decomposed at 300 °C with 52% remaining weight, whereas gallium acetylacetonate sublimed at around 200 °C. The TGA curve of a formulated ink composed of these three metal salts and solvents shows a major weight loss due to the evaporation of solvents before 100 °C and anion decomposition before 350 °C. This result indicates that 350 °C air annealing after each cycle of spin casting is high enough to remove almost all the organic species in the precursor film without amorphous carbon residues, which was confirmed by the Raman spectrum as well. The results of wavelength dispersive X-ray spectroscopy reveal that the gallium atomic percent decreased from 30% in precursor films to about 24% after selenization, which is likely a result from the sublimation of gallium acetylacetonate.
 Fig. 2  Thermal gravimetric analysis of copper(II) acetate monohydrate, indium(III) acetate, gallium(III) acetylacetonate, and the precursor ink. 
X-Ray diffraction and Raman microscopy were used to determine the phase of CIGS films on silicon substrates after different selenization temperatures (Fig. 3). The precursor films after 350 °C air annealing were amorphous as indicated by the flat XRD spectrum. After selenization at 250 °C, Cu2−xSe and CuSe phases were formed with elemental Se according to both XRD and Raman spectra. To resolve the potential overlapping of XRD signals for CIS and Cu2−xSe, Raman spectroscopy was usually utilized to distinguish these two phases. The Raman spectrum of the film after selenization at 250 °C does not have a peak at 173 cm−1 which indicates the absence of CIS phase. The spectrum shows a peak at 257 cm−1 which could come from a mixture of copper selenide and selenium.15–17 At an annealing temperature higher than 300 °C, peaks from Cu2−xSe and CuSe disappear from the Raman spectrum. Instead peaks from CuInSe2 phase could be identified from both XRD and Raman spectra. Small bumps at the right shoulders of peaks with 2θ at around 26.69°, 44.26° and 52.45° were observed in the XRD spectrum. This indicates the incorporation of gallium into the ternary CIS phase and forms the quaternary CIGS phase.
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction patterns (a) and Raman spectra (b) of deposited films selenized at different temperatures. JCPDS files: CuInSe2 (87-2265), Cu2−xSe (06-0680), CuSe (49-1457), and Se (51-1389). 
When annealing temperature increased to 350 °C, the intensities of XRD peaks of CIGS phase increased significantly along with the intensities of peaks of CIS phase decreasing. In the Raman spectrum, the A1 peak of CIS phase at 173 cm−1 shifted to 176 cm−1 indicating the domination of CIGS phase.15 Peaks of CIS phase disappeared in the XRD spectrum while only peaks of CIGS phase could be found after 400 °C annealing. The peaks of CIGS phases become narrower which indicated the formation of films with better crystallinity. Moreover, small shoulders at peaks around 150 cm−1 were contributed to the formation of ordered defect compounds (ODC) which is beneficial for the CIGS solar cells.16
In contrast to the results of forming metal oxide crystals from air annealing precursors made of metal chlorides, films made from metal acetate/acetylacetonate precursors did not show any peaks in the XRD spectrum even after being annealed at 350 °C for 30 min in the air. This may result from the low annealing temperature which is insufficient to crystallize the precursor films. No amorphous carbon residue was detected before or after the selenization according to the Raman spectra (not shown here). The elimination of amorphous carbon in the CIGS films could enhance grain growth thus reduce carrier recombination through grain boundaries.11
Defects existing on grain boundaries will act as recombination centers for electron–hole pairs. In order to suppress current loss via grain boundaries, columnar micrometer-sized CIGS grains are necessary to decrease grain surface areas. Cu2Se, owning to its relatively low melting temperature, was often used as a flux agent to promote CIGS grain growth. The drawback of this approach is the formation of copper-rich CIGS phase which has lower photovoltaic performance. It requires either a composition adjustment by the addition of indium selenide deposition or a KCN etching for the removal of excess Cu2Se phase. Using our metal salt method, slightly Cu-deficient precursor ink is used to avoid these extra steps. Instead, selenium vapor is chosen to react with precursors for the formation of CIGS thin films following a substitution reaction, which in the mean time promote the grain growth of CIGS phase through the existence of a low temperature liquid phase.
In the previous paper, we have shown that by using selenium substitution reaction, 100 nm-sized CIGS grains were formed with relatively small crystals sitting at the interface of CIGS and Mo layers.8 By replacing GaCl3 with GaAcac3,11 carbon contamination was eliminated resulting in a better grain growth and better I–V performance. However, small CIGS crystals near Mo layers still existed and potentially acted as recombination centers which prevent the minority carriers from reaching the junctions. Two possible reasons could explain the formation of small CIGS crystals near the Mo back contact; Ga concentration gradient and insufficient Se annealing vapor.

Fig. 4 shows TEM images (a and b), elemental profiles (c and d) and elemental mappings (e and f) of CIS and CIGS thin films with a thickness of around 200 nm. The CIS film shows a relatively uniform degree of crystallinity with fairly large grain size across the film whereas the CIGS film exhibits a dual-layer structure: a large-crystal layer at top and a small-crystal layer below. Based on the results of chemical mapping analysis and EDS line scans across both films shown in the figure, it is evident that the distribution of all elements is relatively even in both films. These results indicate that the separated dual-layer structure in the CIGS film is not resulting from the non-uniform elemental distribution, such as gallium gradient. XRD and Raman spectra shown in Fig. 5 also confirm the chemical purity of both films and exclude the existence of binary selenides. Seyrling et al.18 found that by increasing the Ga content in the CIGS films, the CIGS grain size decreases. Although a different deposition technique (i.e. co-evaporation) was used in their study, a similar influence of the Ga content on grain size and structure could also occur in our films. Therefore, the incorporation of gallium into CIS is one of the possible reasons for the small CIGS crystals at the interface.
 Fig. 4  TEM cross-section image (a and b), elemental profiles (c and d), and elemental mappings (e and f) of CIS and CIGS films, (a, c and e) for CIS and (b, d and f) for CIGS. 
 Fig. 5  X-ray diffraction patterns of CIS and CIGS films. Inset: Raman spectra for the same films. 
Kaelin et al.19 have studied the influence of Se vapor pressure on CIGS grain growth from metal nanoparticle precursors during selenization. They found that low Se vapor pressure resulted in small CIGS crystals at the interface of the CIGS absorber layer and Mo back contact layer whereas the high Se vapour pressure resulted in much larger CIGS crystals. In our experiment, we found that Se vapour pressure has a similar impact on CIGS grain growth. Fig. 6 shows SEM cross-sectional images of CIGS films annealed under low Se vapor pressure (Fig. 6a) and high Se pressure (Fig. 6b). Compared with the CIGS film selenized under lower Se vapour pressure, the high Se vapour pressure improves the crystallization and enlarges the CIGS grain size dramatically. An interesting observation about the selenization is that increasing the duration of selenization does not improve the crystallization of these small crystals under low selenium pressure conditions. This observation suggests that once the top dense part of CIGS films is formed, it may potentially behave as a barrier for the transport of selenium to the interface of CIGS and Mo layers thus the selenium concentration at the bottom part of film is not high enough for enhanced grain growth. Therefore high selenium vapor pressure is needed to ensure sufficient amounts of selenium for the enhanced grain growth throughout the entire absorber film. We were able to fabricate highly crystalline CIGS thin films with micron-sized grains after selenization at high Se vapour pressure.
 Fig. 6  SEM cross-section images of CIGS films selenized at low Se pressure (a) and high Se pressure (b). 
Current–voltage and device characteristics of different selenized samples are presented in Fig. 7 and Table 1. The energy conversion efficiency increased to 8.01% for cells fabricated using CIGS films annealed at high Se pressure. In contrast to the energy conversion efficiency of 6.10% for cells fabricated using lower Se pressure, the improvement of cell performance mainly results from the increase in Voc and fill factor. The high Se pressure benefits the grain growth of CIGS and produces larger grains with less grain boundary areas which reduce minority carrier recombination rates and improve the quality of absorber films in terms of diode ideality factor A and saturation current density J0 leading to the increase in Voc according to eqn (1). Considering the similar cell structures in these two devices, the reason for the decrease in series resistance Rseries and the increase in shunt resistance Rshunt is attributed to the improved crystallinity of CIGS films. Compared to solar cells with 19.9% efficiency,20 the large value of Rseries is likely a result of the top contact Al:ZnO with higher resistance (56 Ω sq−1). The smaller Rshunt could be attributed to pinholes and cracks in the absorber film. (1)
 Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of CIGS solar cells selenized at different Se pressures. 
Table 1 Device characteristics of CIGS solar cells selenized at different Se pressures




Cell

V
oc/mV

J
sc/mA cm−2

η%
FF%

R
series/Ω cm2

R
shunt/Ω cm2

A


J
0/mA cm−2




Low Se
473
26.05
6.10
49
3.7
266
2.9
3.9 × 10−2


High Se
525
25.69
8.01
59
2.3
614
2.24
2.5 × 10−3




In Fig. 8a, the External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) of a solar cell selenized at high Se pressure shows that the efficiency stays at around 70% in the range of 500–650 nm and decreases gradually afterwards. The bandgap of the absorber layer is estimated to be 1.13 eV which is consistent with the bandgap extracted from the absorption measurement (Fig. 8b). The efficiency loss below 500 nm is by virtue of CdS and ZnO absorption. Based on the EQE curve, one can conclude that the major energy loss of short circuit current is a result of poor carrier collection efficiency in the range of 650 nm to 1100 nm which could be attributed to severe backside recombination, short minority carrier lifetime and the insufficient thickness of the absorber layer. This poor minor-carrier collection problem is also indicated by the EQE voltage bias dependence shown in Fig. 8a, top inset, where at a reverse bias of 1 V, the collection of carriers at longer wavelength becomes more efficient compared to the values at 0 V bias. The short carrier lifetime and backside recombination may result from defects at the back side of absorber films. In Fig. 6b, the cross-sectional image shows voids at the backside of the absorber film. These voids may potentially contribute more grain boundaries where defects are likely to accumulate. The thickness of CIGS films in our devices is around 1000 nm which is about half of the typical thickness of CIGS films used in state-of-the-art cells deposited by a conventional co-evaporation method. Longer wavelength photons travel further distance in the absorber layer and are absorbed mostly at the back of the absorber layer. Therefore, void-free and thicker CIGS films are needed to improve the collection efficiency of longer wavelength photons.
 Fig. 8  (a) External quantum efficiency of CIGS solar cells at 0 V bias. Top inset: EQE ratio at −1 V and 0 V bias, (b) (αhν)2vs. hν characteristics of the CIGS layer. 
Grazing incidence XRD was used to detect the composition uniformity as a function of film depth. In Fig. 9, the (112) peak of CIGS centred near 27° keeps constant for incident angles from 5° to 0.5°. The XRD results indicate a uniform elemental distribution across the CIGS film that was synthesized by our solution method.21,22 The result of uniform elemental distributions is also consistent with the cross-sectional TEM elemental analysis shown in Fig. 4. Gallium gradients were intentionally introduced to optimize the electronic properties of CIGS devices for high performance CIGS thin film solar cells.21,22 Therefore gallium gradients can be applied to further improve the solar cell performance. In our approach, gallium grading can potentially be controlled by simply adjusting the ratios of dissolved metal compounds in the precursor inks.
 Fig. 9  Grazing incidence XRD of a CIGS film at different angles. 
4. Conclusions
Dense CIGS films have been successfully fabricated using newly developed air-stable, low-cost inks. The inks consist of commercially available low-cost compounds and can be processed using various printing and coating techniques. The precursor films prepared from the inks could be transformed into CIGS thin films via substitution reactions. It was found that CuSe and Cu2−xSe were formed at lower temperature and transformed into CuInSe2 and CuInGaSe2 at higher temperature during the selenization process. Dense, highly crystalline CIGS films with micrometer-sized grains could be fabricated using higher selenium vapor pressure during selenization. With a conventional Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO device structure, 8.01% energy conversion efficiency could be achieved. Adjustments in selenization strategy, film thickness and contact layers are needed to further improve the cell performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry Education, Science and Technology of Korea (12-BD-0101), US Department of Energy, Industrial Technologies Program, through award #NT08847, under contract DE-AC-05-RL01830 and OSU Venture fund. The authors like to thank Kathy Han for her help in Flash QE measurement which is funded by the Oregon BEST. The glass substrate is provided by the Sharp Laboratories of America.
Notes and references
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12 Search PubMed .
17th International Photovoltaic Science and Engineering Conference, Nanosolar Inc., Tokyo, Japan, 2007.

          Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Proceeding of 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Seattle, US, 003522,  2011 Search PubMed .

          V. Kapur, R. Kemmerle, A. Bansal, J. Haber, J. Schmitzberger, P. Le, D. Guevarra, V. Kapur and T. Stempien, Proceeding of 33rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, San Diego, US,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. N. Bhattacharya, W. Batchelor, J. F. Hiltner and J. R. Sites, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1431 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Guillemoles, J. P. Connolly, O. Ramdani, O. Roussel, D. Guimard, V. Bermudez, N. Naghavi, P. P. Grand, L. Parissi, J. Kurdi, J. Kessler, O. Kerrec and D. Lincot, J. Nano Res., 2008, 4, 79 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012 DOI:10.1002/pip.1253 .
W. Wang, Y.-W. Su and C.-H. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2616 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, A. Chirila, M. R. Kaelin, L. Karvonen, A. Wedenkaff, C. N. Borca, D. Grolimund, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012 DOI:10.1002/pip.1246 .
S. Jeong, B.-S. Lee, S. Ahn, K. Yoon, Y.-H. Seo, Y. Choi and B.-H. Ryu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7539 CAS .

          W. Wang and C.-H. Chang, Proceeding of 37th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Seattle, US, 002829,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y.-J. Chang, P.-H. Mugdur, S.-Y. Han, A. A. Morrone, S.-O. Ryu, T. J. Lee and C.-H. Chang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, G174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, D. Han and S. Li, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2012, 107, 471 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Judd, B. A. Plunkett and M. I. Pope, J. Therm. Anal., 1974, 6, 555 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, P. Guha, S. N. Kundu, H. Hanzawa, S. Chaudhuri and A. K. Pal, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 73, 24 CrossRef CAS .
W. Witte, R. Kniese and M. Powalla, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 517, 867 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Poborchii, A. V. Kolobov, J. Caro, V. V. Zhuravlev and K. Tanaka, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 280, 17 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seyrling, S. Calnan, S. Bucheler, J. Hupkes, S. Wenger, D. Bremaud, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2411 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaelin, D. Rudmann, F. Kurdesau, T. Meyer, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 58 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Rerkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235 CAS .
B. E. McCandless, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2005, 865, F4.1.1 CrossRef .

          I. Repins, M. Contreras, M. Romero, Y. Yan, W. Metzger, J. Li, S. Johnston, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, B. E. McCandless and R. Noufi, Proceeding of 33rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, San Diego, US,  2008 Search PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The schematic of fabrication of CIGS solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  Thermal gravimetric analysis of copper(II) acetate monohydrate, indium(III) acetate, gallium(III) acetylacetonate, and the precursor ink.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction patterns (a) and Raman spectra (b) of deposited films selenized at different temperatures. JCPDS files: CuInSe2 (87-2265), Cu2−xSe (06-0680), CuSe (49-1457), and Se (51-1389).	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM cross-section image (a and b), elemental profiles (c and d), and elemental mappings (e and f) of CIS and CIGS films, (a, c and e) for CIS and (b, d and f) for CIGS.	 

 	Fig. 5  X-ray diffraction patterns of CIS and CIGS films. Inset: Raman spectra for the same films.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM cross-section images of CIGS films selenized at low Se pressure (a) and high Se pressure (b).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Current–voltage characteristics of CIGS solar cells selenized at different Se pressures.	 

Low Se	473	26.05	6.10	49	3.7	266	2.9	3.9 × 10−2
High Se	525	25.69	8.01	59	2.3	614	2.24	2.5 × 10−3

 	Fig. 8  (a) External quantum efficiency of CIGS solar cells at 0 V bias. Top inset: EQE ratio at −1 V and 0 V bias, (b) (αhν)2vs. hν characteristics of the CIGS layer.	 

 	Fig. 9  Grazing incidence XRD of a CIGS film at different angles.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
