Synthesis, properties, and optical applications of low-dimensional perovskites  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC06425F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC06425F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13637-13655Synthesis, properties, and optical applications of low-dimensional perovskites

        
          
            Yupeng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingying 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziyu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunzhou 
            Xue
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingdong 
            Ou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lakshminarayana 
            Polavarapu
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Jialu 
            Zheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Qi
          
        
      ae and 

        
          
            Qiaoliang 
            Bao
          
          
        
      *ba
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: qiaoliang.bao@monash.edu
bInstitute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials and Devices, and Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: qlbao@suda.edu.cn
cChair for Photonics and Optoelectronics, Department of Physics and Center for Nanoscience (CeNS), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Amalienstraße 54, 80799 Munich, Germany
dNanosystems Initiative Munich (NIM), Schellingstraße 4, 80799 Munich, Germany
eHunan Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Energy Materials and Devices, Laboratory for Quantum Engineering and Micro-Nano Energy Technology and School of Physics and Optoelectronics, Xiangtan University, Hunan 411105, P. R. China
Received 
      4th August 2016
    , Accepted 3rd October 2016First published on 3rd October 2016AbstractMetal-halide perovskites have been hailed as remarkable materials for photovoltaic devices and, recently, their star has also been on the rise in optoelectronics and photonics. In particular, the optical properties of a metal-halide perovskite can be widely manipulated once its bulk structure has been reduced to a low-dimensional structure, allowing multiple functionalities of light generation, emission, transmission, and detection to be realized in one material. In this paper, we highlight the recent advances in the synthesis of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites and their unique properties as well as their novel optoelectronic and photonic applications. It is anticipated that this review can serve as an overview and evaluation of state-of-the-art synthesis techniques as well as nanoscale optoelectronics and photonics based on low-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals.
Yupeng Zhang
Yupeng Zhang is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University (Australia). He received his BE degree (2005) in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology (China) and his PhD degree (2014) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University (China). His research interests include the synthesis, optical properties and device applications of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites.
Jingying Liu
Jingying Liu is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University. She received her BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University in 2015. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of two-dimensional materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.
Ziyu Wang
Ziyu Wang is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University. He received his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University in 2015. His research focuses on low-dimensional perovskites for electronic and photonic applications.
Yunzhou Xue
Yunzhou Xue is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University (China). He received his BS degree from Tianjin University of Technology (China) in 2006 and his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. His current research interests are focused on synthesis of two-dimensional materials and their applications as photodetectors and optical sensors.
Lakshminarayana Polavarapu
Lakshminarayana Polavarapu obtained his Masters degree from the University of Hyderabad (India) in 2005 and his PhD degree from National University of Singapore in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC biomaGUNE and University of Vigo, Spain (2012–2014), and he is currently an Alexander von Humboldt research fellow at Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (Germany). He is a co-author of over 50 publications and his current research interests include shape-controlled synthesis of metal and semiconductor perovskite nanocrystals for applications such as sensors, LEDs, photovoltaics and photocatalysis.
Qiaoliang Bao
Qiaoliang Bao received his BA (2000) and ME (2003) degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology (China). He obtained his PhD degree (2007) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University (China). He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Nanyang Technological University and National University of Singapore from 2007 to 2012. He has authored or co-authored more than 110 refereed journal articles with more than 10000 total citations. His research interests include synthesis and optical characterization of low-dimensional materials as well as their incorporation into photonic and optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Metal-halide perovskites, with the formula ABX3 (A = organic or inorganic monovalent cation (CH3NH3+ or Cs+), B = bivalent cation (Pb2+, Sn2+ or Bi2+), X = halogen (Cl, Br or I)), have emerged as efficient, low-cost energy materials since Miyasaka et al. first used methylammonium lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3) as a light absorber in solar cells.1 Their strong optical absorption, low non-radiative recombination rates, tunable band gaps, relatively high charge-carrier mobility, long diffusion lengths and solution processability make them uniquely suited for photovoltaic applications.2–5 As a result of intensive research of scientists worldwide, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite solar cells has quickly risen from 3.8% to 22.1% over the past six years.6–12 Moreover, their high photoluminescence quantum yield and outstanding tunable optical properties make these perovskites suitable for use in optoelectronic and photonic devices, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, waveguides, and nanolasers. For example, Friend and colleagues reported the first perovskite-film-based LED, with a record efficiency of 42.0 candela per ampere, which is already comparable to that of state-of-the-art organic LEDs.13,14 Additionally, photodetectors based on simple planar perovskite films exhibit high gain, fast response time and good flexibility, showing great promise as next-generation high-performance photodetectors.15–17 Moreover, their high optical gain (3200 ± 830 cm−1) allows perovskites to function as efficient optical gain media for lasing applications.18 Xing et al. were the first to demonstrate solution-processed perovskite films as an optical gain medium for lasing at a low threshold of ∼12 μJ cm−2, and this has opened a wide range of opportunities in photonic applications.19
To date, several methods have been developed for the preparation of perovskite films, such as spin casting from a solution of perovskite compounds, thermal evaporation, and two-step spin-coating. However, the unavoidable generation of defects and grain boundaries in three-dimensional (3D) perovskite films reduces the quality of the perovskite and further affects the properties of the material. Recently, low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites with high quality have begun to receive increasing attention, primarily for their tunable optical and electronic properties due to quantum-size effects as well as their enhanced photoelectric performance compared with bulk materials. Moreover, perovskites are considered to be a class of layered materials, whose optical properties can be controlled by varying the number of layers, particularly at thicknesses lower than their exciton Bohr radius. Therefore, the shape-, size- and thickness-controlled synthesis of low-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) has recently been a hot topic of research. Tremendous progress has been made in this direction over the past two years, and various low-dimensional morphologies, including zero-dimensional (0D) morphologies such as quantum dots (QD) and nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) morphologies such as nanowires and nanorods, and two-dimensional (2D) morphologies such as nanoplates and nanosheets. These highly luminescent low-dimensional perovskite NCs have already been used in a wide range of applications,20,21 such as LEDs, photodetectors, waveguides, and nanolasers, as shown in Fig. 1. Initial investigation of optoelectronics and photonics based on low-dimensional perovskites has already shown great promise, and there is still plenty of room for further improvement in terms of efficiency and long-term stability.
 Fig. 1  Atomic structure, spectrum range and diverse applications of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites. 
Hence, this review highlights the recent advances in the synthesis of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites and their unique properties as well as their applications in optoelectronic and photonic devices. It is anticipated that this review can serve as an overview and evaluation of state-of-the-art shape-controlled synthetic methods as well as the structure (morphology)–property relationship. Furthermore, we discuss recent studies of the application of these low-dimensional perovskites at the nanoscale. Finally, we provide an overview of future challenges to be addressed to advance the field towards the development of commercial devices.
2. Synthesis of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites
The synthesis and properties of metal-halide perovskites have been widely studied because of their great potential for use in optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications. While most of the initial studies were based on polycrystalline perovskite bulk films, the optical and electronic properties of perovskites can be controlled by reducing their size down to few nanometres, at which level they show quantum-size effects. Achieving the controllable and reproducible production of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskite materials would thus be a very important step in advancing the fundamental understanding of these materials as well as facilitating their technological applications. Inspired by conventional semiconductor NCs, researchers are actively involved in developing methods for the shape- and size-controlled synthesis of perovskite NCs. In this section, we discuss various synthetic methods that have recently been reported for producing perovskite NCs with controlled morphologies, such as quantum dots (QDs), nanowires (NWs), nanoplatelets (NPLs), and nanosheets (NSs).
2.1 Zero-dimensional (0D) perovskites: quantum dots (QDs)
Semiconductor QDs have attracted extensive attention because of their excellent optoelectronic properties, and they have played a key role in the advancement of modern nanoscience and nanotechnology. QDs are very tiny spherical particles that exhibit completely different optical and electronic properties compared with their bulk counterparts. Their size tunability (typically 2–20 nm), large extinction coefficient, high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) and multiple-exciton generation characteristics of QDs make them uniquely suited for use in optoelectronic devices.8,22–24 Perovskite QDs can also exhibit quantum-size effects similar to those of conventional quantum dots. Two different methods have been widely used for the preparation of perovskite QDs: (1) the ligand-assisted re-precipitation technique and (2) the hot-injection technique. Perez-Prieto and colleagues first reported the solution-phase synthesis of colloidal perovskite QDs, in which hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite (CH3NH3PbBr3) QDs with nanoparticles of 6 nm in size were prepared via re-precipitation in the presence of medium-length alkyl chain organic ammonium cations as ligands.25 Although these QD colloids are stable in solution as well as in the solid state for more than three months, their PLQY is rather low (20%) compared with that of conventional metal chalcogenide QDs (80–90%). However, the same research group has found that the PLQY can be further improved to ∼80% by fine-tuning the molar ratio between the precursors and the ligands.26 In addition, an alkyl-amine-assisted re-precipitation strategy has been used to prepare brightly luminescent and colour-tunable colloidal CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I and Cl) QDs, as schematically shown in Fig. 2a, with a quantum yield of up to 70% at room temperature and low excitation fluencies.27 The absorption and PL spectra can be finely tuned from 407 to 734 nm by varying the halide ion composition, and the prepared materials show high colour saturation because of their relatively narrow emission line widths (FWHM = 20–50 nm). Furthermore, light-emitting prototype devices with a wide range of colours were fabricated using green-emissive colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs, offering a possible means of improving the colour performance of display technologies. The unique feature of QDs is their size-controlled optical properties. In addition to exerting control over the halide ion composition, tuning the size of perovskite QDs offers another efficient way to tune their emission colour. In this regard, Huang et al. demonstrated that the size of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite QDs can be controlled by varying the temperature at which re-precipitation occurs and that the resulting QDs exhibit very high absolute quantum yields of 74% to 93%.28
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of the LARP technique (left). Schematic illustration of the starting materials in the precursor solution (top right). Photograph of a typical colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 solution (bottom right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical images of colour-tunable CsPbX3 QDs with PL spectra in the range of 410–700 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) STEM image and (d) the corresponding elemental mapping image of CsPbBr3 QDs with an average size of 8 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) The polarization properties of samples of CsPbBr0.3I2.7 of different volume concentrations in hexane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For all QD nanomaterials, especially in the case of perovskites, stability is one of the major concerns for practical applications. Recent studies have shown that all-inorganic perovskite NCs exhibit much higher stability and superior optoelectronic properties compared with hybrid perovskites.29 The first synthesis of caesium lead halide (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite QDs was reported by Kovalenko and colleagues in 2015 (Fig. 2b). Their synthesis method was based on the hot injection of a Cs precursor into a PbX2 solution in the presence of oleylamine and oleic acid ligands. It was found that CsPbX3 NCs exhibit not only outstanding optical properties but also size-dependent band-gap tunability across the entire visible spectral region of 410–700 nm, with high PLQYs of up to 90%.30 They also found that the size of CsPbX3 QDs can be decreased by lowering the reaction temperature in the hot-injection method. The excellent optical properties and chemical robustness of CsPbX3 perovskite QDs make them appealing for broadband optoelectronic applications such as LEDs and displays.31 In this regard, Zeng and colleagues have reported the first fabrication of LEDs based on all-inorganic CsPbX3 QDs.32 The CsPbX3 QDs that are prepared using the hot-injection method at higher temperatures generally exhibit a monodisperse cubic morphology with a uniform distribution of Cs, Pb and X, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. LEDs prepared using such CsPbX3 QDs exhibit narrow, saturated emission colours. Because of their strong quantum-size effects, the emission wavelengths of CsPbX3 QDs can be tuned by controlling their size, offering additional control over their optical properties. In addition, highly luminescent CsPbX3 QDs can also be prepared at room temperature via a re-precipitation method similar to that used for the synthesis of hybrid perovskites, as discussed above.33 In addition to the development of synthesis methods, significant attention has also been paid to understanding the properties of perovskite QDs. Interestingly, colloidal CsPbX3 QDs in hexane exhibit highly polarized emission, as shown in Fig. 2e, which has been attributed to the movement of ionic species induced by the mobility of the halide ions and the disordered cubic structure.34 This polarized emission can also be observed in other nano-featured perovskites.35
2.2 One-dimensional (1D) perovskites: nanowires (NWs) and nanorods (NRs)
Semiconductor NWs have been demonstrated to be excellent candidates for the realization of miniaturized solar cells, photodetectors, waveguides and nanolasers.36 Similarly, perovskites in the form of 1D NWs and NRs exhibit higher crystalline quality and, consequently, higher quantum efficiencies and longer carrier diffusion lengths. Therefore, they are expected to be important as potential building blocks for future perovskite-based nanoscale optoelectronic and photonic devices.
Generally, because of the instability of perovskites of this type in water and many polar organic solvents, the low-temperature synthesis of perovskite NWs using solution-processing methods is nontrivial. Recently, several novel solution-based methods have been developed for the production of perovskite NWs. For instance, a solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization method has been used to produce perovskite NWs and NW arrays on arbitrary substrates (Fig. 3a); in this method, a supersaturated solution of MAPbI3 was dropped/spin coated onto the substrates, and the perovskite NWs or NW arrays were then prepared by evaporating the solvent.37–40 Yang and colleagues prepared vertical CH3NH3PbBr3 nanorod arrays by spin coating a saturated methanolic solution of lead acetate onto substrates, which were then immersed in a CH3NH3Br solution, as shown in Fig. 3b.41 These studies clearly suggest the possibility of the large-scale production of perovskite NWs or NW arrays for various device applications. An important milestone was achieved in the fabrication of single-crystalline hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite NWs by Zhu and colleagues (Fig. 3c).35,42 They were able to synthesize, at temperatures as low as 80 °C, hybrid perovskite NWs following this catalyst-free route. They deposited a polycrystalline film of lead acetate onto a glass substrate and dipped it into a solution of isopropyl alcohol and CH3NH3X. At this stage, part of the lead acetate layer reacted with the solution and was converted into a thin film of CH3NH3PbX3 with many dislocations. This initial perovskite film acted as a diffusion barrier that prevented further rapid reaction between the solution and the lead acetate remaining underneath the film. The slow dissolution of Pb from the unreacted lead acetate produced an intermediate precursor, PbI42−, which promoted the growth of crystalline NWs driven by the dislocations in the perovskite seed layer. Moreover, this synthesis method was later used for the preparation of formamidinium lead halide perovskite NWs with enhanced thermal stability by the same research group.43 In addition, solution-phase synthesis has also been applied for the synthesis of all-inorganic perovskite NWs, especially CsPbX3 NWs, as shown in Fig. 3d and e; these NWs were synthesized through the reaction of caesium oleate with lead halide in the presence of oleic acid and oleylamine in octadecene at 150–200 °C.44 The diameters of the as-grown all-inorganic perovskite nanowires were in the range of 9 to 12 nm. CsPbX3 NWs of larger diameter were produced directly on the substrate by submerging the prepared PbX2 films in a CsX solution, and they were found to exhibit excellent stability under ambient conditions over several months with a maximum quality factor of up to 1009 ± 5.45
 Fig. 3  (a) Curved nanofluidic channels. The inset shows the dense perovskite particle array in the organic-resin-based nanofluidic channels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Top-view SEM image of a CH3NH3PbBr3 nanorod array. The inset shows a cross-sectional view of the CH3NH3PbBr3 array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3 nanostructures, with square or rectangular crosssections (right insets), and a low-resolution TEM image and the corresponding selected-area electron diffraction pattern (top left inset). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) Colour SEM images of as-prepared (d) CsPbBr3 and € CsPbI3 nanostructures grown from solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f and g) TEM images, the corresponding SAED patterns (insets) and structural simulation images of vapour-phase-grown (f) PbI2 and (g) CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is another effective method of producing semiconductor nanowires. The fabrication of perovskite NWs using the CVD method was first demonstrated by Xiong and colleagues in 2014.46 In their method, NWs were grown through the synthesis of 1D PbX2 nanowires on muscovite mica, followed by conversion into perovskite NWs via a gas–solid heterophase reaction with CH3NH3X molecules. However, the yield of NWs was rather low, with a high percentage of 2D platelets as by-products. These authors further showed that the yield of perovskite NWs could be improved by using silicon oxide substrates.47 As shown in Fig. 3f and g, the confirmation of a lattice fringe transition by the selected-area electron diffraction pattern (SAED) indicates the successful production of high-quality PbI2 and the corresponding CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanowires after a vapour-phase conversion process. Our group has also demonstrated a combined solution process and a vapour-phase conversion method to produce high-quality perovskite NWs.48,49 By controlling the parameters, perovskite NWs with different diameters and lengths can be produced using this method. Meanwhile, through reactions with different MAX compounds, the halogen elemental composition can be substituted, which can induce a variable band structure and, consequently, tunable optical properties.
2.3 Two-dimensional (2D) perovskites: nanoplatelets and nanosheets
The ability to prepare the remarkable ultrathin 2D material graphene50,51 has inspired the exploration of other 2D materials, such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),52 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),53–55 and black phosphorus.56 In particular, 2D semiconductor materials have received considerable attention over the years because of their strong size effects and sizable band gaps, which are critical for various optoelectronic applications. Perovskite materials have recently been included in the class of 2D semiconductor materials, mainly in the form of nanoplatelets. However, unlike other materials of this type, which are covalent semiconductors, these 2D perovskites are ionic materials, which give them special properties of their own. Moreover, 2D perovskites exhibit enhanced fluorescence emission decay rates and higher exciton binding energies compared with their bulk counterparts,57 and the large surface area of nanoplatelets enables their stronger interaction with other two-dimensional materials for efficient energy or electron transfer.
Similar to 1D perovskite NWs, the fabrication of perovskite nanoplatelets through both solution-phase synthesis and vapour-phase deposition techniques has been reported.58–63 Recently, our group demonstrated the synthesis of ultrathin perovskite nanosheets via a two-step synthesis method involving the combination of a solution process for the production of 2D PbI2 nanosheets with the vapour-phase conversion of the PbI2 nanosheets into CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets (Fig. 4a).62 The high-quality nanosheets thus prepared, with triangular and hexagonal shapes, can be as thin as a single unit cell (∼1.3 nm), as shown in Fig. 4b. Because of the induced lattice expansion, the thickness-dependent PL properties (Fig. 4c) of these nanosheets can offer another effective route for tuning the emission colour of perovskites, as has also been confirmed for other hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites.60,64 Moreover, an in-plane heterostructure consisting of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBrxI3−x can be produced by controllably annealing an as-grown CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheet in an excess CH3NH3Br vapour environment, as shown in Fig. 4d–f. Using a similar approach, Duan and colleagues have demonstrated the wafer-scale growth of perovskite 2D microplate arrays through seed-assisted PbI2 growth on patterned SiO2 substrates followed by vapour-phase conversion in a customized tube furnace system, thereby revealing the potential for wafer-scale applications in electronics and optoelectronics.65 More excitingly, the high-quality perovskite (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 nanosheets synthesized by Yang and colleagues have already placed 2D perovskites at the forefront of research.64 They have successfully grown atomically thin 2D sheets of hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites from solution using a ternary co-solvent. These ultrathin sheets are high in quality, large in area, and square in shape (Fig. 4g and h). They also exhibit efficient photoluminescence, colour tunability, and a unique structural relaxation not found in covalent semiconductor sheets.
 Fig. 4  (a) Optical and (b) AFM images of ultrathin 2D CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets with a thickness of 1.3 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Thickness-dependent PL properties of 2D perovskite nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of an as-grown CH3NH3PbI3/CH3NH3PbBrxI3−x heterostructure and (e and f) PL mapping images of the 2D heterostructure integrated over the PL peaks at (e) 660 and (f) 730 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Optical and (h) AFM images of 2D monolayer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite sheets, showing a perovskite monolayer with a thickness of 1.6 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (i) Optical image of a perovskite sheet grown directly from its 3D counterpart via CVD. The corresponding AFM image is shown in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (j) Thicknesses of initial CVD-grown PbI2 platelets (images above data line) and the corresponding CH3NH3PbI3 platelets (images below data line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (k and l) False-colour SEM images of perovskite 2D VDW solids on (k) graphene and (l) MoS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Vapour-phase methods have also been employed for the fabrication of 2D perovskites, such methods generally produce high-quality perovskite nanosheets but offer low yields compared with solution processing. A one-step CVD method has been used to fabricate 2D CH3NH3PbCl3 perovskites on mica surfaces through the direct vapour reaction of dual precursor sources (PbCl2 and MACl2), as shown in Fig. 4i.66 The layered muscovite mica could facilitate the van der Waals (VDW) epitaxial growth of non-layered perovskite to yield an ultrathin (sub-10 nm) 2D morphology, thus showing great promise for the direct growth of 2D perovskite structures from their 3D counterparts. Xiong and colleagues have reported the fabrication of high-quality 2D MAPbI3via two-step CVD growth, in which 2D PbI2 was first deposited on a silicon oxide substrate, followed by the vapour-phase conversion of the PbI2 into MAPbI3 through the intercalation of MAI.46 As shown in Fig. 4j, the thickness of these CVD-MAPbI3 perovskite platelets could be gradually increased by increasing the thickness of the initial PbI2 platelets. By adjusting the conversion process conditions, such as pressure and temperature, mixed halide lead perovskite could also be produced to achieve broad wavelength tunability ranging from visible to near-infrared. Moreover, vapour-phase deposition methods have also been applied for the controlled fabrication of perovskite platelets on other 2D materials (graphene, MOS2 and hBN). Such structures enhance light–matter interactions and act as scaffolds for the tuning of carrier dynamics in their architectures (Fig. 4k and l).67 In addition, few attempts have been made to prepare hybrid perovskite nanosheets with thicknesses of tens of nanometres via mechanical exfoliation,68,69 similar to what has been reported for graphene and other 2D materials. However, each of the synthesis methods discussed above has its own disadvantages. For instance, the nanoplatelets produced via solution-phase colloidal synthesis are rather polydisperse. By contrast, vapour-phase deposition can produce monodisperse nanoplatelets, but the cost of production is relatively high. Despite all the recent advances discussed above, it remains important to develop scalable, high-yield synthesis methods for the production of monodisperse 2D perovskites for their feasible application.
One of the major problems with hybrid perovskite nanosheets is the degradation and instability of perovskites. However, CsPbX3 perovskites are relatively stable for outdoor applications.29 Very recently, progress has been made in the synthesis of 2D CsPbX3 nanoplatelets and nanosheets.59,60,70,71 For instance, Bekenstein et al.58 and Akkerman et al.59 simultaneously reported the synthesis of highly luminescent CsPbBr3 with thicknesses to the monolayer level and demonstrated the thickness-dependent optical properties of CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets that consist of different numbers of unit cells.60 It is clearly observed that the band gap of such nanoplatelets gradually blue-shifts with decreasing thickness because of quantum confinement effects. In addition to the thickness of such nanoplatelets, their lateral size can also be tuned in a range of up to 1 μm by varying the ratio of long- to short-chain ligands, as reported by Manna and colleagues.71 In addition, the growth can be tuned from 3D to 2D by varying the type of ligand used in the synthesis. For example, Sun et al.58 have reported ligand-mediated shape control, in which they showed that a combination of oleic acid and octylamine ligands produces few-unit-cell-thick nanoplatelets. Yang and colleagues have developed a low-temperature solution process for the production of single-crystalline CsPbX3via the reaction of a PbI2 film on a PEDOT:PSS-coated glass with a CsX–methanol solution under mild heating conditions.45 Very recently, Zeng et al.72 have reported that 2D CsPbX3 perovskite nanoplatelets with thicknesses down to 1.7 nm can be produced on a large scale through the reaction of caesium stearate (CsSt) with PbBr2 precursors in 1-octadecene (ODE) at 140 °C under an N2 atmosphere with surfactants. The successful production of these ultrathin perovskite nanoplatelets has introduced a new family of 2D semiconductors for nanoscale and printable optoelectronic devices.
3. Applications
3.1 Solar cells
As an emerging light absorber for efficient solar cells, the hybrid perovskite semiconductor MAPbI3 has received considerable interest in forms with various dimensionalities. Light absorption, exciton dissociation, and carrier transport are three main factors affecting the photovoltaic performance. The exciton recombination rate associated with the exciton diffusion length can thus significantly influence the PCE; this recombination rate has been found to be lower in nanostructured perovskite than its thin-film counterpart, leading to an increased diffusion length.73 Therefore, the dimensionality (or morphology) of the perovskite absorber plays a key role in the photocarrier conversion process. For example, Im et al. reported an MAPbI3 QD-based solar cell with a PCE of 6.54%, which is among the highest values for all reported inorganic QD sensitizers.8 This suggests the immense potential of low-dimensional perovskite absorbers for solar cell applications by virtue of their unique optoelectronic properties.
As one of the key components in perovskite solar cells, electron-injecting nanostructured oxide systems such as TiO2 and ZnO nanostructures have been investigated for the manipulation of the dimensionality of perovskites.74–78 Son and colleagues demonstrated the fabrication of perovskite NR solar cells by growing MAPBI3 NRs on a ZnO NR scaffold (Fig. 5a and b).79 The fabricated devices showed a high photoconversion efficiency that was determined by the diameter and length of the hexagonal NRs, suggesting promising benefits of reducing the dimensionality of MAPbI3. By contrast, Im et al. reported perovskite NW solar cells in which MAPbI3 NWs were used directly as the active layer without nanostructured scaffolds (Fig. 5c).40 The resulting devices delivered a photocurrent density of 19.12 mA cm−2, a voltage of 1.052 V, and a fill factor of 0.721, leading to a high PCE of 14.71%. These 1D perovskite NWs, with a mean diameter of 100 nm, exhibited superior photocarrier extraction and lateral conductivity compared with the 3D cuboid crystal form.
 Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication procedure for a perovskite solar cell based on a ZnO nanorod electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of a CH3NH3PbI3-deposited ZnO nanorod capping layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) 3D-view SEM images of MAPbI3 nanowires formed via two-step spin-coating deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Comparative band energy diagram for (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, 2D layered perovskites have also been investigated as light-absorbing materials for solar cells. To tune the growth of perovskites from 3D to 2D, a much bulkier organic primary ammonium cation can be introduced as a replacement for the smaller MA+ cation to induce steric effects in one dimension, thereby limiting the grain growth to two dimensions. For instance, Smith et al. demonstrated solar cells with a PCE of 4.73% using 2D (C6H5(CH2)2NH3)2(CH3NH3)2[Pb3I10] perovskite light absorbers with enhanced moisture stability.80 The layered structure enabled the deposition of high-quality perovskite films through spin coating and also avoided the necessity of high-temperature annealing during device fabrication. In addition, perovskites in the homologous 2D semiconducting (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 series, in which the band gap decreases with an increasing number of layers, have been successfully implemented as light-absorbing layers in solar cells with a maximum efficiency of 4.02% (Fig. 5d).81 Therefore, layered perovskite structures can offer high tunability at the molecular level for material optimization. Very recently, Koh et al. reported the controlled growth of nanostructured (IC2H4NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites of mixed dimensionality and their application in photovoltaics.82 With the growth of the 2D perovskites preferentially oriented perpendicular to the substrate, the charge transport and extraction performance were drastically improved, resulting in an overall PCE of over 9%.
Despite the various advantages of using low-dimensional perovskites in solar cells, the overall efficiency of such solar cells thus far seems to be lower than that of solar cells using bulk perovskites. However, low-dimensional perovskites are also expected to be excellent candidates for use in light-emitting devices, photodetectors, waveguides, and nanolasers, as we discuss in the following sections.
3.2 Light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
The strong light emission characteristics exhibited by halide perovskites in the visible and near-infrared wavelength range, including high PLQY, broad colour tunability, and high colour purity, make them attractive for LED applications. Although the electronic and optical performances of solid-state perovskites are highly sensitive to the overall film quality, a number of studies on the precise tuning of thin-film processing conditions and insights into their emission and absorption properties gained through pioneering work on perovskite photovoltaics have driven remarkable advances in the development of perovskite LEDs.
In 2014, Friend et al. demonstrated perovskite thin-film LEDs with a device structure of PEDOT:PSS (or TiO2)/perovskite/poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)(F8)/Ca/Ag, in which the perovskite emitting layers, such as MAPbI3, MAPbBr2I, and MAPbBr3, were fabricated via solution processing.14 The resultant green LEDs exhibited high brightness at room temperature with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.1%. This work successfully introduced the promising technology of perovskite LEDs. Inspired by perovskite photovoltaics, several early reports on 3D-perovskite-based LEDs were simply based on solar-cell-type device architectures.83–87 Despite the low carrier-confinement capability of such device structures, the observed strong electroluminescence (EL) and EQE nevertheless suggested that these solar materials exhibit extremely low non-radiative losses. Most recently, the highest EQE to date of 8.5% for green perovskite LEDs has been achieved by optimizing the MABr:PbBr2 precursor ratio and the perovskite grain size (<100 nm) for exciton confinement.13
However, the low exciton binding energy in bulk perovskites inherently hinders further improvement in their electron–photon conversion efficiency.88 For the development of high-efficiency LEDs, ultrathin active regions or reduced-dimensionality perovskite emitters are required to spatially confine the carriers and thus enhance radiative recombination. In this regard, compared with bulk perovskite films, low-dimensional perovskites in the forms of QDs, NCs, NWs, or nanoplatelets have shown competitive PL and EL efficiencies, primarily by virtue of their lower defect densities and higher exciton binding energies.89 For example, Zhang et al. reported the fabrication of brightly luminescent devices using hybrid perovskite QDs prepared using a ligand-assisted precipitation method.27 A comparative study between the small-sized CH3NH3PbBr3 QDs (∼3.3 nm) and the corresponding micrometre-sized bulk particles (2–8 μm) suggested that the remarkable PLQY (>70%) originated from increased exciton binding energy due to reduction in size and appropriate chemical passivation of the Br-rich surface. These authors later fabricated electroluminescent diodes based on hybrid perovskite QDs with a maximum EQE of 1.1%.90Fig. 6a shows the typical device structure of a perovskite QD LED.32 Very recently, all-inorganic perovskites have exhibited higher stability and enormous potential for use in LEDs compared with hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites.29,91 Zeng et al. reported the first demonstration of multicoloured LEDs based on all-inorganic perovskite CsPbX3 QDs synthesized via the hot-injection method, exhibiting an EQE of 0.12% for green LEDs and sharp emissions for all colours, with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of less than 30 nm.32 As an alternative to the conventional spin-coating method of film formation, Jie et al. employed a dip-coating method to effectively fabricate large-area uniform films of perovskite QDs.92 The resulting multicoloured LEDs based on MAPbX3 perovskites showed excellent luminance, notably with a maximum EQE of 1.38% at the blue wavelength. The packaged LEDs also displayed good long-term stability in air (humidity ≈ 50%) for at least 7 days, from which an elongated lifetime of all-inorganic perovskite LEDs can be foreseen.
 Fig. 6  (a) A representative device structure of a multilayer perovskite LED based on CsPbX3 QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy-level diagram for perovskite NC LEDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Perovskite crystals for tunable white-light emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Light-emitting electrochemical cells based on perovskite nanoparticles prepared via spray coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Perovskite-nanorod-array LEDs prepared via solution-phase growth and anion exchange conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Perovskite-nanoplatelet-based LEDs assisted by a bipolar polymer matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
To boost the EL yield, Tan et al. demonstrated highly efficient CsPbX3 NC LEDs by applying a new trimethylaluminium (TMA) vapour-based crosslinking method (Fig. 6b).93 The crosslinked NC films were insoluble, thus permitting the deposition of subsequent charge-injection layers without orthogonal solvents. Therefore, high-quality NC film coverage was achieved with the confinement of the injected charges within the perovskite crystals, which facilitated electron–hole recombination, consequently yielding remarkable EQEs of 5.7% for red emission and 0.19% for green emission. A dual-phase CsPbBr3–CsPb2Br5 NC composite was developed by Zhang et al. and applied as the emitter for green LEDs, which exhibited a maximum EQE of 2.21% with a current efficiency of 8.98 cd A−1.94 Based on an investigation of the existence of secondary-phase CsPb2Br5 nanoparticles on cubic CsPbBr3 NCs, the enhanced light emission was primarily ascribed to the reduced exciton diffusion length, decreased trap density in the band gap, and improved ionic and electronic transport. To overcome the electrical shunts induced by poor film formation, Li et al. fabricated efficient LEDs based on nanocrystalline perovskites in a polyimide precursor dielectric (PIP).95 This modified structure with embedded perovskite crystals reduced non-radiative current losses and improved the EQE to 1.2%. By approaching the problem from the perspective of interface engineering, Zhang et al. achieved high-performance perovskite NC LEDs with enhanced brightness and extremely narrow green emission (FWHM ≈ 18 nm); in these LEDs, a thin film of perfluorinated ionomer (PFI) sandwiched between the HTL and the perovskite emitter facilitated hole injection and prevented the NC emitters from charging.96
Despite the development of these efficient monochromatic perovskite LEDs, the ability to obtain white-light EL from perovskite LEDs is still lacking, although there are promising signs that it can be achieved with complete colour tunability throughout the visible spectrum. To date, perovskite-based white-light emission has only been realized via photoexcitation in layered perovskites with self-trapped emissive states97 and via a blend of multicoloured perovskite NCs embedded in a polymer matrix (Fig. 6c).98 As an alternative to the diode architecture, perovskite-nanoparticle-based light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs) have been demonstrated by Aygüler et al. by means of an easily up-scalable spray-coating technique (Fig. 6d).99 In their work, the photophysical features of the perovskites were tuned through the exchange of the organic cation MA group with formamidinium (FA), resulting in a 13 nm red-shift of the emission spectrum. The MAPbBr3- and FAPbBr3-based devices prepared with the electrolyte matrix showed stable yellowish green luminance at low driving currents and a long lifetime under ambient conditions for over two months.
As discussed in Section 2.2, the 1D nanowire or nanorod morphology demonstrates considerable advantages for optoelectronic applications. Yang et al. demonstrated the first hybrid perovskite-nanorod-array LEDs using high-quality MAPbBr3 nanorod arrays obtained via solution-phase growth and MAPbI3 nanorod arrays obtained via the anion exchange reaction (Fig. 6e).41 The MAPbBr3-nanorod-array-based LEDs exhibited green EL at 533 nm with a small FWHM of 26 nm, whereas the MAPbI3 devices also showed EL at 782 nm, indicating the quality of the MAPbI3 nanorod arrays that were produced through morphology-preserving anion exchange. Similarly, 2D perovskites (see Section 2.3) can also offer superior performance in LEDs as a result of their high crystallinity and light emission quantum yields. Ling et al. were the first to report high-brightness LEDs based on solution-processed hybrid perovskite nanoplatelets (Fig. 6f).100 The high stability and moisture resistance of perovskite nanoplatelets capped with organic ligands enabled glovebox-free device fabrication. The integration of the perovskite nanoplatelets into the bipolar PVK:PBD matrix improved the film morphology and charge transport properties. The polymer-matrix-assisted light emission strategy used here shows great promise for the fabrication of white-light perovskite LEDs through the embedding of perovskite nanostructures with different emission colours in an appropriate polymer material.
Despite the rapid progress that has been made in designing low-dimensional perovskite emitters with high PLQYs, the EL efficiency of the corresponding perovskite LEDs still requires further improvement for use in practical applications such as solid-state lighting and displays. Three main issues facing the development of efficient perovskite LEDs will need to be addressed: (1) to improve the internal quantum efficiency, there is an urgent need for interface engineering towards optimal charge injection and transport for the tuning of the band levels of the charge transport layers and their alignment with the adjacent perovskite active layer or electrodes. (2) To enhance the light out-coupling efficiency, optical engineering will be imperative for the extraction of the trapped waveguide, substrate or surface plasmon modes induced by the high refractive indices of perovskite materials and their properties of internal reflection and optical confinement. (3) Issues related to device stability still remain unclear, although it has been claimed that all-inorganic perovskites can provide a potential long-term solution.
3.3 Photodetectors
The most interesting features of perovskites are their high sensitivity to visible light and their high photovoltage, which are the basic parameters required for efficient solar-to-electric energy conversion. These excellent features of perovskites have been explored gradually in other photovoltaic devices; for example, photodetectors. Most materials that are suitable for solar cells can also be suitable for photodetection. Recently, perovskite photodetectors using a wide range of materials, from thin films to single crystals, have been reported (Table 1). For example, Xie and colleagues demonstrated the first organolead-halide-perovskite-based flexible photodetector, with a photoresponsivity of 3.49 A W−1.101 Simultaneously, Xia et al. reported a perovskite-film-based photodetector with enhanced performance in terms of response time and on/off ratio.102 However, continuous films consisting of tiny perovskite particles (at the sub-microscale or nanoscale) contain a large number of grain boundaries or defects, which act as scattering centres for electrons and photons in photodetectors, thus introducing problems such as low efficiency and responsivity. Attempts to address this issue are of utmost importance for perovskite-based photodetectors. One possible approach is to use low-dimensional single-crystal perovskites as light absorbers in photodetection devices. Horváth et al.37 demonstrated the first MAPbI3-NW-based photodetector (Fig. 7a). Although the responsivity of these devices was lower than that of the best-in-class photoelectric devices made from graphene or monolayer MoS2, their response time was less than 500 μs, which is comparable to that of devices made using other 2D materials.103,104 In most cases, solution-processed NWs tend to be distributed in a macroscopically random manner on substrates, which may lead to poor device performance and low utilization. To solve this problem, Deng et al. successfully applied UV-zone treatment combined with a shadow mask to pattern NWs for incorporation into optoelectronic devices.105 These monolayer nanowire-based photodetectors achieved a response time of less than 0.3 ms, which is superior to that of other perovskite-NW-based devices. Later, Zhang and colleagues fabricated a high-performance visible-light photodetector based on porous CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite NWs that were prepared via the self-template-directed reaction of Pb-containing nanowires with HBr and CH3NH3Br solutions at room temperature.106 In general, practical applications of photodetectors (i.e., imaging applications) require a large number of pixels to obtain the target images. Therefore, several studies have focused on the fabrication of perovskite photodetector arrays for incorporation into photo-imaging devices. To this end, Wang et al. demonstrated independently addressable photodetector arrays and functional field-effect transistors based on perovskite microplates selectively grown on pre-patterned electrode arrays.65 Moreover, such photodetector arrays, with their high uniformity and transparency, have a wide variety of potential applications and can be conveniently integrated into traditional optoelectronic devices. As mentioned above, randomly distributed NW photodetector arrays can achieve high transparency at the expense of uniformity. By contrast, thin-film photodetectors exhibit good uniformity but sacrifice some transparency. Thus, Song and colleagues developed a uniform and flexible photodetector based on perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) networks synthesized on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) to simultaneously achieve transparency and flexibility without compromising the device performance.107 These photodetector arrays could clearly detect the spatial intensity distribution of light, demonstrating a high potential for imaging, and they exhibited superior flexibility over a wide angle and a large number of bending cycles (Fig. 7b). With the help of hydrophobic polymers sheathing the network, the stability of the device was further enhanced by improved interfacial contact, surface passivation, and moisture isolation. In addition, ultrathin perovskite photodetectors have also been reported based on the intrinsic physical properties of low-dimensional perovskites. Very recently, a photodetector based on an ultrathin CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheet of single unit cell thickness was reported, with a photoresponsivity of 22 A W−1 (Fig. 7c).62 In addition to hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites, devices based on all-inorganic perovskite nanocrystals have also been extensively investigated. For instance, Lee and colleagues demonstrated a simple, fast and reproducible halide ion exchange reaction in CsPbX3 NCs at room temperature and used this reaction in the fabrication of photodetectors that exhibited a high on/off photocurrent ratio of 105.108 Shortly thereafter, Zeng et al. demonstrated a flexible photodetector device based on CsPbBr3 nanosheets, which exhibited excellent electronic transport properties, high stability and outstanding flexibility (>10000 cycles).72 Moreover, the large-area, crack-free, high-quality nature of these films and their simple solution processability make them potential candidates for the fabrication of large-area, ultrathin, flexible optoelectronics.
Table 1 Summary of the performance of perovskite-based photodetectors




Device structure
Morphology
Responsivity (A W−1)
Rise/decay time (ms)
On/off ratio
Ref.




ITO/MAPbI3/ITO
Film
3.49
100/100
334

101



FTO/TiO2-MAPbI3/FTO
Film
4.9 × 10−7
20/20
—

102



Pt/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt
Nanowires
5 × 10−3
0.35/0.25
—

37



ITO/PEDOT/MAPbX3/PCBM/HBL/Al
Film
—
6/6 (10−4)
105

114



Ag/MoO3/TPD-Si2/CH3NH3PbI3/ITO
Film
242
—/0.0057
—

115



Au/MAPbX3/Au
Film
7.8
2/7 (10−4)
2 × 103

116



Au/MAPbI3/Au
Nanowires
1.32
0.2/0.3
—

105



ITO/MAPbBr3/ITO
Porous nanowires
—
120/86
62

106



ITO/PEDOT/MAPbX3/PCBM/C60/Al
Film
0.21
1.2/1.2 (10−4)
103

117



FTO/TiO2/MAPbX3/spiro/Au
Film
0.4
1.2/3.2
—

118



Au/MAPbX3/Ga/glass
Single crystal
—
—
—

119



Au/Ti/MAPbCl3/Pt
Single crystal
0.047
24/62
1.1 × 103

120



Au/MAPbX3/Au
Film
320
6.5/5 (10−3)
3 × 104

15



Au/MAPbI3/Au
Islands
—
40/50
>104

17



Au/MAPbI3/Au
Microplates
40
0.5/0.5
106

65



Au/MAPbBr3/Au
Network
0.1
0.3/0.4
340

107



ITO/MAPbBr3/ITO
Single crystal
4 × 103
0.025—0.025
—

121



Au/CsPbI3/Au
Nanocrystals
—
0.024/0.029
105

108



Au/MAPbI3/Au
Nanosheets
21
20/40
—

62



ITO/CsPbBr3/ITO
Nanosheets
0.64
0.019/0.024
>104

72





 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a nanowire-based device fabricated for FET and I–V photocurrent measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of a nanowire-based flexible photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of a 2D-perovskite-based photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a perovskite–graphene hybrid photodetector. (e) Schematic illustration of a graphene–perovskite island phototransistor. (f) Schematic illustration of a 2D VDW heterostructure device based on perovskite. 
In addition to the strategies mentioned above, the hybridization of perovskites with other materials in the form of heterostructures has also been considered as an alternative approach for enhancing the photodetection performance. Lee et al. demonstrated the first perovskite/graphene hybrid photodetector (Fig. 7d)109 and observed a dramatic enhancement in the photoresponse, which was primarily attributed to efficient charge transfer from perovskite to graphene. In the presence of graphene, the recombination of the photoexcited electron–hole pairs in the perovskite layer was suppressed, and consequently, the photoexcited electrons in the perovskite remained in the conduction band without decaying. The main evidence for this was obtained through the observation of dramatic quenching of the PL intensity in the graphene/perovskite system.110,111 Very recently, Bao and colleagues have reported a hybrid photodetector consisting of monolayer graphene covered with a thin layer of dispersive organolead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbBr2I) islands (Fig. 7e).112 This study reached similar conclusions from the real-space evidence for a charge transfer and photogating effect obtained through s-SNOM and photocurrent mapping experiments. The carrier mobility in graphene is higher than that in perovskite by orders of magnitude because of the random surface potentials imposed by the substrate and the coating layer. Therefore, precise control of the perovskite/graphene contacts is required to achieve the true photodetection potential of these heterostructures. To this end, Spina et al. demonstrated a phototransistor consisting of a network of CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires combined with monolayer graphene, thereby achieving a photoresponsivity of as high as 2.6 × 106 A W−1.113 In addition, van der Waals solid–perovskite heterostructures have also been investigated for tunable light–matter interaction, as reported by Niu et al.67 Such VDW solids can be grown in a scalable fashion with arbitrary desired shapes by pre-patterning various inorganic 2D monolayers, which provide excellent scaffolds for exploring and tuning the carrier dynamics at the interfaces (Fig. 7f). All these results offer a new material platform for the fundamental investigation of the electronic and optical properties of perovskite materials and provide a route towards the development of integrated electronic and optoelectronic systems.
3.4 Waveguides
In addition to light emission, one-dimensional metal halide perovskites show intriguing potential for various other photonic applications, such as waveguiding and remote excitation. For example, Wang et al. have demonstrated that polycrystalline perovskite microwires can act as active optical waveguides with a small propagation loss (Fig. 8a and b).48 This study also demonstrated the guiding of light of various colours using high-quality perovskite microwires prepared with different halogen elements, which suggests that perovskite microwires may serve as effective building blocks for micro-/nano-scale photonic circuits. In addition, perovskite waveguides can also be achieved by embedding plasmonic nanostructures in perovskite NCs. For instance, Zhao and colleagues demonstrated the nanoscale output of a dielectric laser via photo–plasmon coupling in rationally designed perovskite/silver hybrid heterostructures (Fig. 8c and d), in which the silver nanowires assisted in achieving the efficient output of the lasing modes in the form of surface plasmons.122 In addition, the photocarrier diffusion process can be directly visualized and quantitatively characterized by monitoring the change in carrier density at various positions with respect to the excitation spot.123 The quantitative determination of such photophysical parameters is helpful for understanding the basic properties of low-dimensional perovskites to provide guidance for improving their efficiency for practical applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of waveguide measurement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A set of optical and dark-field images of a CH3NH3PbI3 microwire. The scale bar represents 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of an embedded dielectric/metal heterostructure for the plasmonic output of a dielectric laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Bright-field image of heterostructures excited by the UV band of a mercury lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) PL image. The green points magnified in the white circles are the results of the scattering of SPPs at the distal ends of the AgNWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Gain medium for nanolasers
Semiconductor materials are generally known as suitable media for colour-tunable and low-threshold lasers because of their size-tunable optical properties and high photoluminescence quantum efficiency. By virtue of their high PLQY and wavelength tunability, both hybrid organic/inorganic and all-inorganic low-dimensional perovskites are also being explored as potential candidates for use as gain media in nano- and micro-lasers (Table 2). After the first demonstration of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from thin films of hybrid perovskites in 2014,19 a large number of studies have explored ASE and lasing from both thin films and low-dimensional materials with improved threshold and gain. A detailed photophysical study of thin films consisting of MAPbI3 perovskites has revealed that long carrier-free biomolecular electron–hole recombination lifetimes together with an exceptionally high luminescence yield are ideal conditions for lasing as well as other optoelectronic applications.130 Moreover, the ASE threshold of a perovskite film can be significantly reduced by sandwiching it in a cavity composed of a thin-film (∼7 μm) cholesteric liquid crystal (CLC) reflector and a metal back-reflector.131 These initial studies on perovskite thin films clearly suggest their potential as gain media for lasing. However, most of these studies focused on bulk perovskite films, which may have resulted in a lack of gain to compensate for the loss induced by insufficient quantum efficiency due to limitations imposed by crystalline defects. Therefore, lasing in low-dimensional perovskites with high crystallinity, particularly in nanowires and nanoplatelets and thin films of quantum dots, has received increasing interest. For example, Xiong's group reported a planar room-temperature near-infrared nanolaser utilizing lead halide perovskite NCs prepared via a CVD method on mica (Fig. 9a).124 The large exciton binding energies, long diffusion length, and naturally formed high-quality planar whispering-gallery mode (WGM) cavities ensured adequate gain and efficient optical feedback for low-threshold optically pumped in-plane lasing. These perovskite NCs could also be transferred onto conductive substrates, such as Si, Au and ITO, for chip integration. Based on the same approach, these authors have also demonstrated an optically pumped room-temperature nanowire laser with a near-infrared wavelength of 777 nm, a low threshold of 11 μJ cm−2, and a quality factor as high as 405 using CH3NH3PbI3 NCs.47 In addition, solution-processed single-crystal MAPbI3 perovskite nanowire lasers have been demonstrated with low lasing thresholds and high quality factors.35 The compositions of these nanowires can be tuned by changing the ratio of the halide salts, thus enabling colour-tunable lasing across the entire visible spectrum (Fig. 9b). In addition to nanowires, single-crystalline square microdisks (MDs) of CH3NH3PbBr3 with four side faces contain built-in WGM micro-resonators with quality factors as high as 430, as reported by Liao et al.126 These authors have achieved single-mode lasing at 557.5 nm in a 2.0 × 2.0 × 0.6 μm3 square MD at a threshold of 3.6 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 9c), which is nearly one order of magnitude lower than those reported for a cavity-free CH3NH3PbBr3 film of 65 nm in thickness18 and for CH3NH3PbI3 NPs.124
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of an optical whispering-gallery-mode nanocavity in perovskite (top). Far-field lasing image and simulated field distributions of the resonant cavity modes (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Lasing spectra of mixed lead halide perovskite nanowires with various alloy compositions, demonstrating widely tunable laser emission at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (c) SEM image and μ-PL image of a square MD above the lasing threshold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Spectral tunability of ASE via compositional modulation in CsPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Evolution of PL to whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator covered by a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Optical images of a CsPbCl3 nanowire and a CsPbBr3 nanoplate showing lasing emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. 
Table 2 Summary of the performance of low-dimensional perovskites as gain media for lasing




Material
Morphology
Operation wavelength (nm)
Lasing threshold (μJ cm−2)
Quality factor (Q)
Cavity type
Ref.




CH3NH3PbI3−xXx
Microplatelets
760
40 (lasing)
900
Planar WGM

124



CH3NH3PbI3
Microcrystal networks
765
200 (lasing)
—
Random lasing

125



CH3NH3PbX3
NWs
787
0.220 (lasing)
3600
Fabry–Pérot cavity

35



CH3NH3PbX3
Microdisks
550
3.6 (lasing)
430
Planar WGM

126



CH3NH3PbX3
NWs
777
11 (lasing)
405
Fabry–Pérot cavity

47



CsPbX3
NCs
440–700
5–22 (ASE) N.A. (lasing)
—

N.A.
Spherical WGM/random lasing


127



CsPbX3
QDs
470–620

22 (ASE)
11 × 103 (lasing)

—

N.A.
Ring WGM


128



CsPbBr3
QDs
520
12 × 103 (ASE)
—
N.A.

129



CsPbX3
NWs/platelets
425–545
10 (lasing)
1009
Fabry–Pérot cavity

45



CH3NH3PbBr3
Microcrystals
∼550
59 (lasing)
855
WGM cavity

122





Although hybrid perovskite NCs act as excellent gain media, they are relatively unstable compared with conventional semiconductors. By contrast, all-inorganic perovskite NCs are relatively stable and exhibit low-threshold ASE and lasing without sacrificing emission tunability or ease of synthesis. Based on recent studies, colloidal NCs of caesium lead halide CsPbX3 perovskite have been found to be superior to traditional metal chalcogenide NCs in terms of their low threshold, high optical gain and wavelength tunability. For example, Kovalenko and colleagues have reported low-threshold ASE and lasing throughout the entire visible spectral range (440–700 nm) using cubically shaped colloidal CsPbX3 perovskite NPs (Fig. 9d and e).127 Furthermore, these authors have also demonstrated whispering-gallery-mode random lasing using silica microspheres as high-finesse resonators. Similarly, Wang et al. have also observed low-threshold, wavelength-tunable, and ultrastable stimulated emission (SE) at room temperature from these all-inorganic perovskite QDs.128 For the reasons mentioned above, surface passivation strategies for perovskite materials have been vigorously pursued to improve the stability of NC films in air. It is important to note that these perovskites exhibit ASE and lasing with both one- and two-photon excitation. For instance, Pan et al. were able to induce ultrastable ASE in solution-processed perovskite QD films using both one- and two-photon excitation processes.129 More importantly, these films showed remarkable photostability under continuous pulsed laser excitation under ambient conditions for at least 34 h, substantially exceeding the stability of other colloidal QD systems. In addition to inorganic perovskite QDs, Yang and colleagues have reported the synthesis of and the observation of ASE from CsPbX3 NWs synthesized via solution processing (Fig. 9f).45 Upon optical excitation, Fabry–Pérot lasing occurs in these CsPbBr3 nanowires at an onset of 5 μJ cm−2, with the nanowire cavity displaying a maximum quality factor of 1009 ± 5. More importantly, these inorganic substrate-mounted perovskite NWs are stable for weeks under ambient conditions and can be handled with little concern for degradation, offering a new stable perovskite platform for future photonic applications.
4. Summary and future prospects
Metal halide perovskites have been attracting considerable attention from the materials science research community in recent years, largely because of their interesting optoelectronic properties and high power conversion efficiencies of perovskite solar cells that have been achieved within a relatively short development time. They exhibit enhanced light emission efficiencies and greater stability when they are in the form of low-dimensional materials such as nanocrystals. This has led to increasing interest in the development of highly luminescent metal halide perovskite NCs for various promising applications, including lasers, LEDs, active waveguides, modulators and photodetectors, which will afford multiple functions of signal emission, transmission, modulation, and detection to be realized in one material. This feature article offers a broad summary of various synthesis methods for the shape and size control of both hybrid organic/inorganic and all-inorganic metal halide perovskite NCs on substrates as well as in the colloidal form. In addition, it provides an overview of recent studies demonstrating the applications of low-dimensional perovskites in LEDs, lasers, photodetectors and solar cells. We hope that the discussion provided in this article will help to guide the design of new synthetic strategies for low-dimensional perovskites with desired morphologies to advance their applications.
Although a significant amount of research on low-dimensional perovskites has been conducted during the last few years, plenty of challenges to be addressed and opportunities to bring laboratory research to real-world devices lie ahead of researchers. Despite recent reports on the synthesis of perovskite nanodots, nanocubes, nanowires and nanoplatelets, we are still far from achieving a level of shape and size control comparable to that available for conventional semiconductors and metal NCs. To this end, the development of robust synthetic methods that offer good morphology control, similar to what has been achieved in the field of nanocrystalline metal chalcogenoids, will certainly be required for the full utilization of these nanoscale perovskite materials in various devices. Recent studies have shown that the optical properties of perovskite NCs strongly depend on their dimensions, primarily their thickness, because of quantum-size effects. Therefore, perfect control over their dimensions and characterization will be crucial for understanding the relevant structure–property–function relationships. Although we have seen tremendous success in the synthesis of low-dimensional perovskites, thickness control for nanoplatelets remains challenging because the reported methods produce mixtures of nanoplatelets with different thicknesses and it is difficult to separate them to investigate their thickness-dependent properties. In this regard, Alvisatos and colleagues have achieved reasonable success in separating nanoplatelets of different thicknesses by varying the precipitating solvent used and the centrifugation speed, which has enabled them to investigate the thickness-dependent excitonic properties of CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets. More research efforts are required in future to obtain high quality monodisperse perovskite nanoplatelets with narrow emission, which will enable the investigation of quantum-confined optical properties and build up their structure–property relationships. Recent developments in synthesis methods have enabled the characterization of morphology-dependent and halide-ion-composition-dependent linear optical properties. However, less attention has been paid to their nonlinear optical properties, such as two-photon and multi-photon absorption. Perovskite NCs are expected to be promising candidates for broadband optical limiting and optoelectronics, which will certainly be active areas of research in the near future. In addition, achieving water stability is a critical challenge that must be overcome to drive perovskite-based devices towards commercialization, and a significant amount of research has been devoted to solving this problem. The degradation of perovskites in polar solvents such as water is due to their inherent ionic nature. Very recently, it has been demonstrated that the stability of perovskite NCs in protic solvents can be markedly improved by using polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes as ligands or by incorporating perovskite NCs into a silica matrix.132 Despite these recent demonstrations, further efforts in this direction will still be needed in the future to achieve complete stability in water. Another difficulty associated with perovskite NCs is related to the spontaneous halide ion exchange between NCs consisting of different halides, which limits their application in the fabrication of multicoloured and white-light LEDs. Considerable research attention must be directed in future towards prevention of this halide ion exchange, either by using specially designed ligands or by encapsulating the particles in shells to prevent ion migration, which is critical for the fabrication of white-light LEDs and multi-layered photovoltaic devices. In addition to the stability issues discussed above, the replacement of toxic Pb with other nontoxic elements will be needed for the large-scale production of perovskite materials and devices to be used in daily life. For centuries, Pb toxicity has been one of the most insidious hazards with the potential of causing irreversible health effects. The maximum accepted levels of Pb in drinking water and air were set to 15 and 0.15 μg L−1, respectively.133 As a result, the presence of Pb in perovskite materials raises substantial concerns regarding their widespread applications because of the easy dissociation in highly polar solvents such as water or even humid air. Taking into account that perovskite-based optoelectronics and photonics will normally be placed in the open field, the release of Pb-containing compounds into the environment is unavoidable. Therefore, several attempts have already been made to replace Pb with Sn to reduce the toxicity of thin films or nanocrystals in photovoltaic devices. However, photovoltaic performances such as PCE and Voc of Sn-based perovskites are relatively low. Moreover, the perovskite nanocrystals made of Sn were found to be very unstable and will lose their fluorescence within few hours after the preparation. Specifically, Sn2+ can be easily oxidized to Sn4+ under ambient conditions, which further leads to structural transformation and thus deteriorates the photovoltaic performance.134 Consequently, the preparation of low-dimensional materials as well as the fabrication of devices should be performed in a nitrogen gas atmosphere to avoid the quick degradation of the Sn-based perovskites. To this regard, it is still one of the future directions to find other perovskites with a less toxic element and excellent stability as well as desired optoelectronic properties for device application. Ge and Bi elements are two potential candidates for this purpose, as high ionic conductivity has been demonstrated in their perovskite structures.135,136 Nevertheless, the relatively large bandgap limits the light absorption in the longer wavelength range. It is expected that the electronic structure of Ge- or Bi-based perovskites can be modified while they are in low-dimensional forms, which may overcome the drawbacks inherited in bulk states. The issues related to disadvantages of perovskites deserve more attention in the future for the development of perovskite based light-emitting or photovoltaic devices for real world applications. We believe that combined efforts from chemists, materials scientists, physicists and device engineers will be needed to advance the field of bulk and low-dimensional perovskites towards the fabrication of commercial products.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from the youth 973 program (2015CB932700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91433107, 51222208 and 51290273), ARC (DE120101569, DP140101501, FT150100450 and CE170100039), the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science & Technology, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions. This work was performed in part at the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication (MCN) in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF). J. L. and Z. W. acknowledge support from the MCATM scholarship of Monash University. L. P. acknowledges the financial support from Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8016–8021 CrossRef .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg. Research Cell Efficiency Records, accessed February 2016.
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. Wu, G. Zhang, Y. Chu, D. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Liang and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21634–21638 CAS .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, P. Kanjanaboos, C. T. O. Wong, J. J. McDowell, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, Z. Ning, A. J. Houtepen and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730–17733 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 548–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kan, T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg and U. Banin, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 155–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. Mínguez Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gonzalez-Carrero, R. E. Galian and J. Perez-Prieto, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9187–9193 CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, A. S. Susha, S. V. Kershaw, T. F. Hung and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500194 CrossRef .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, J. Song, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101–7108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Gu, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 5903–5912 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Wu, D. Dong, W. Chen, J. Hao, J. Qin, B. Xu, K. Wang and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11565–11570 RSC .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horváth, M. Spina, Z. Szekrényes, K. Kamarás, R. Gaal, D. Gachet and L. Forró, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6761–6766 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Spina, E. Bonvin, A. Sienkiewicz, B. Náfrádi, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, H. Wu, J. Sun, D. Yan, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5350–5357 RSC .
J.-H. Im, J. Luo, M. Franckevičius, N. Pellet, P. Gao, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2120–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Wong, M. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. Dou, A. Fu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519–5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, F. Meng, M. B. Rowley, B. J. Thompson, M. J. Shearer, D. Ma, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Eaton, M. Lai, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, L. Dou, J. Ma, L.-W. Wang, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Ha, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, Y. W. Yuan, C. Shen, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4571–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Liu, Z.-Q. Xu, Y. Xue, L. Jiang, J. Song, F. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. L. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6258–6264 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z.-Q. Xu, J. Liu, J. Song, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, J. Zheng, L. Jiang, C. Zheng, F. Huang, B. Sun, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7031–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Q. Xu, Y. Zhang, S. Lin, C. Zheng, Y. L. Zhong, X. Xia, Z. Li, P. J. Sophia, M. S. Fuhrer, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6178–6187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, H. Qiao, Y. Xue, W. Yu, J. Song, Y. Lu, S. Li and Q. Bao, Photonics Res., 2015, 3, 110–114 CrossRef .
C. Chen, H. Qiao, S. Lin, C. Man Luk, Y. Liu, Z. Xu, J. Song, Y. Xue, D. Li, J. Yuan, W. Yu, C. Pan, S. Ping Lau and Q. Bao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11830 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, R. García Cortadella, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521–6527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Xu, A. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3648–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. G. Motti, A. R. Srimath Kandada, E. Mosconi, V. D'Innocenzo, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, B. A. Kamino, L. Miranda, F. De Angelis, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tyagi, S. M. Arveson and W. A. Tisdale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1911–1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z.-Q. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Weber, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hassan, Y. Song, R. D. Pensack, A. I. Abdelrahman, Y. Kobayashi, M. A. Winnik and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 566–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 9 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, G. Xin, J. Lian and J. Shi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 4741–4749 CAS .
L. Niu, X. Liu, C. Cong, C. Wu, D. Wu, T. R. Chang, H. Wang, Q. Zeng, J. Zhou, X. Wang, W. Fu, P. Yu, Q. Fu, S. Najmaei, Z. Zhang, B. I. Yakobson, B. K. Tay, W. Zhou, H. T. Jeng, H. Lin, T. C. Sum, C. Jin, H. He, T. Yu and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7800–7808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gauthron, J. S. Lauret, L. Doyennette, G. Lanty, A. Al Choueiry, S. J. Zhang, A. Brehier, L. Largeau, O. Mauguin, J. Bloch and E. Deleporte, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 5912–5919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, A. Eiden, G. Vijaya Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 171111 CrossRef .
L. Lv, Y. Xu, H. Fang, W. Luo, F. Xu, L. Liu, B. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Yang, W. Hu and A. Dong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13589–13596 RSC .
J. Shamsi, Z. Dang, P. Bianchini, C. Canale, F. D. Stasio, R. Brescia, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7240–7243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W.-S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, Y. Qiu, K. Yan, M. Zhong, C. Mu, H. Yan and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3245–3248 RSC .
S. Dharani, H. K. Mulmudi, N. Yantara, P. T. Thu Trang, N. G. Park, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and P. P. Boix, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1675–1679 RSC .
M. H. Kumar, N. Yantara, S. Dharani, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11089–11091 RSC .
D. Bi, G. Boschloo, S. Schwarzmuller, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson and A. Hagfeldt, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11686–11691 RSC .
D.-Y. Son, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, J. Schlipf, L. Oesinghaus, P. Müller-Buschbaum, N. Ramakrishnan, V. Swamy, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3653–3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Jaramillo-Quintero, R. S. Sanchez, M. Rincon and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1883–1890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gil-Escrig, G. Longo, A. Pertegas, C. Roldan-Carmona, A. Soriano, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 569–571 RSC .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, G. Baek, B. R. Lee, E. D. Jung, S. Lee, J. H. Chu, D.-K. Lee, K. J. Choi, S. Cho and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3492–3500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, A. Kumar, S. P. Gopinathan, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13119–13124 CAS .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yaffe, A. Chernikov, Z. M. Norman, Y. Zhong, A. Velauthapillai, A. van der Zande, J. S. Owen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045414 CrossRef .
H. Huang, F. Zhao, L. Liu, F. Zhang, X.-g. Wu, L. Shi, B. Zou, Q. Pei and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28128–28133 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, X. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, L. Wang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4797–4802 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. L. K. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham and Z.-K. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Zheng, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4595–4600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Z.-K. Tan, D. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H.-W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640–2644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Huang, C. Reckmeier, Y. Zhang, W. C. H. Choy and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1415–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yangui, D. Garrot, J. S. Lauret, A. Lusson, G. Bouchez, E. Deleporte, S. Pillet, E. E. Bendeif, M. Castro, S. Triki, Y. Abid and K. Boukheddaden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23638–23647 CAS .
S. Pathak, N. Sakai, F. Wisnivesky Rocca Rivarola, S. D. Stranks, J. Liu, G. E. Eperon, C. Ducati, K. Wojciechowski, J. T. Griffiths, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Pellaroque, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8066–8075 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Aygüler, M. D. Weber, B. M. D. Puscher, D. D. Medina, P. Docampo and R. D. Costa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12047–12054 Search PubMed .
Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. Ma and H. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
H.-R. Xia, J. Li, W.-T. Sun and L.-M. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13695–13697 RSC .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y.-m. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, D. Dong, K. Qiao, L. Bu, B. Li, D. Yang, H.-E. Wang, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhao, J. Tang and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4163–4170 RSC .
S. Zhuo, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5785–5788 CrossRef .
H. Deng, X. Yang, D. Dong, B. Li, D. Yang, S. Yuan, K. Qiao, Y.-B. Cheng, J. Tang and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7963–7969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, D.-H. Lim, B. Kim, S.-H. Lee, M.-S. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2067–2070 RSC .
Y. Lee, J. Kwon, E. Hwang, C.-H. Ra, W. J. Yoo, J.-H. Ahn, J. H. Park and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T.-W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Xu, H. Mu, C. Chen, H. Qiao, J. Song, S. Li, B. Sun, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1303 CrossRef .
M. Spina, M. Lehmann, B. Nááfrádi, L. Bernard, E. Bonvin, R. Gaál, A. Magrez, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Small, 2015, 11, 4824–4828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1967 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2804–2810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, A. K. Johnston, A. H. Ip, J. Xu, V. Adinolfi, P. Kanjanaboos and E. H. Sargent, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1117–1123 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
G. Maculan, A. D. Sheikh, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, Y. Lv, C.-L. Zou, W. Zhang, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2122–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, C. Zhao, J. Leng, R. Cui and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12458–12461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dhanker, A. N. Brigeman, A. V. Larsen, R. J. Stewart, J. B. Asbury and N. C. Giebink, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 151112 CrossRef .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhao, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 448–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, W. Peng, M. R. Parida, J. Liu, L. Sinatra, N. Alyami, C. Zhao, E. Alarousu, T. K. Ng, B. S. Ooi, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 5027–5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, S. M. Wood, K. Wojciechowski, F. Deschler, M. Saliba, H. Khandelwal, J. B. Patel, S. J. Elston, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, A. P. H. J. Schenning, M. G. Debije, M. K. Riede, S. M. Morris and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4935–4941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, Z. Li, L. Kong, N. Zhu, A. Shan and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5749–5752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
USA Environmental Protection Agency Lead Laws and Regulations. http://www2.epa.gov/lead/lead-laws-and-regulations, retrieved on 12/01/2015.
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Frazer, D. J. Clark, Y. S. Kim, S. H. Rhim, A. J. Freeman, J. B. Ketterson, J. I. Jang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6804–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Yupeng Zhang
	Yupeng Zhang is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University (Australia). He received his BE degree (2005) in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology (China) and his PhD degree (2014) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University (China). His research interests include the synthesis, optical properties and device applications of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites.

Jingying Liu
	Jingying Liu is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University. She received her BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University in 2015. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of two-dimensional materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.

Ziyu Wang
	Ziyu Wang is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University. He received his BS degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University in 2015. His research focuses on low-dimensional perovskites for electronic and photonic applications.

Yunzhou Xue
	Yunzhou Xue is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University (China). He received his BS degree from Tianjin University of Technology (China) in 2006 and his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. His current research interests are focused on synthesis of two-dimensional materials and their applications as photodetectors and optical sensors.

Lakshminarayana Polavarapu
	Lakshminarayana Polavarapu obtained his Masters degree from the University of Hyderabad (India) in 2005 and his PhD degree from National University of Singapore in 2011. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC biomaGUNE and University of Vigo, Spain (2012–2014), and he is currently an Alexander von Humboldt research fellow at Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (Germany). He is a co-author of over 50 publications and his current research interests include shape-controlled synthesis of metal and semiconductor perovskite nanocrystals for applications such as sensors, LEDs, photovoltaics and photocatalysis.

Qiaoliang Bao
	Qiaoliang Bao received his BA (2000) and ME (2003) degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from Wuhan University of Technology (China). He obtained his PhD degree (2007) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Wuhan University (China). He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Nanyang Technological University and National University of Singapore from 2007 to 2012. He has authored or co-authored more than 110 refereed journal articles with more than 10000 total citations. His research interests include synthesis and optical characterization of low-dimensional materials as well as their incorporation into photonic and optoelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Atomic structure, spectrum range and diverse applications of low-dimensional metal-halide perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of the LARP technique (left). Schematic illustration of the starting materials in the precursor solution (top right). Photograph of a typical colloidal CH3NH3PbBr3 solution (bottom right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical images of colour-tunable CsPbX3 QDs with PL spectra in the range of 410–700 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) STEM image and (d) the corresponding elemental mapping image of CsPbBr3 QDs with an average size of 8 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) The polarization properties of samples of CsPbBr0.3I2.7 of different volume concentrations in hexane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Curved nanofluidic channels. The inset shows the dense perovskite particle array in the organic-resin-based nanofluidic channels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Top-view SEM image of a CH3NH3PbBr3 nanorod array. The inset shows a cross-sectional view of the CH3NH3PbBr3 array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3 nanostructures, with square or rectangular crosssections (right insets), and a low-resolution TEM image and the corresponding selected-area electron diffraction pattern (top left inset). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) Colour SEM images of as-prepared (d) CsPbBr3 and € CsPbI3 nanostructures grown from solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f and g) TEM images, the corresponding SAED patterns (insets) and structural simulation images of vapour-phase-grown (f) PbI2 and (g) CH3NH3PbI3 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Optical and (b) AFM images of ultrathin 2D CH3NH3PbI3 nanosheets with a thickness of 1.3 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Thickness-dependent PL properties of 2D perovskite nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical image of an as-grown CH3NH3PbI3/CH3NH3PbBrxI3−x heterostructure and (e and f) PL mapping images of the 2D heterostructure integrated over the PL peaks at (e) 660 and (f) 730 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Optical and (h) AFM images of 2D monolayer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite sheets, showing a perovskite monolayer with a thickness of 1.6 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (i) Optical image of a perovskite sheet grown directly from its 3D counterpart via CVD. The corresponding AFM image is shown in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (j) Thicknesses of initial CVD-grown PbI2 platelets (images above data line) and the corresponding CH3NH3PbI3 platelets (images below data line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (k and l) False-colour SEM images of perovskite 2D VDW solids on (k) graphene and (l) MoS2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Fabrication procedure for a perovskite solar cell based on a ZnO nanorod electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of a CH3NH3PbI3-deposited ZnO nanorod capping layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) 3D-view SEM images of MAPbI3 nanowires formed via two-step spin-coating deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Comparative band energy diagram for (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A representative device structure of a multilayer perovskite LED based on CsPbX3 QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Energy-level diagram for perovskite NC LEDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Perovskite crystals for tunable white-light emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Light-emitting electrochemical cells based on perovskite nanoparticles prepared via spray coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Perovskite-nanorod-array LEDs prepared via solution-phase growth and anion exchange conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Perovskite-nanoplatelet-based LEDs assisted by a bipolar polymer matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

ITO/MAPbI3/ITO	Film	3.49	100/100	334	
101

FTO/TiO2-MAPbI3/FTO	Film	4.9 × 10−7	20/20	—	
102

Pt/CH3NH3PbI3/Pt	Nanowires	5 × 10−3	0.35/0.25	—	
37

ITO/PEDOT/MAPbX3/PCBM/HBL/Al	Film	—	6/6 (10−4)	105	
114

Ag/MoO3/TPD-Si2/CH3NH3PbI3/ITO	Film	242	—/0.0057	—	
115

Au/MAPbX3/Au	Film	7.8	2/7 (10−4)	2 × 103	
116

Au/MAPbI3/Au	Nanowires	1.32	0.2/0.3	—	
105

ITO/MAPbBr3/ITO	Porous nanowires	—	120/86	62	
106

ITO/PEDOT/MAPbX3/PCBM/C60/Al	Film	0.21	1.2/1.2 (10−4)	103	
117

FTO/TiO2/MAPbX3/spiro/Au	Film	0.4	1.2/3.2	—	
118

Au/MAPbX3/Ga/glass	Single crystal	—	—	—	
119

Au/Ti/MAPbCl3/Pt	Single crystal	0.047	24/62	1.1 × 103	
120

Au/MAPbX3/Au	Film	320	6.5/5 (10−3)	3 × 104	
15

Au/MAPbI3/Au	Islands	—	40/50	>104	
17

Au/MAPbI3/Au	Microplates	40	0.5/0.5	106	
65

Au/MAPbBr3/Au	Network	0.1	0.3/0.4	340	
107

ITO/MAPbBr3/ITO	Single crystal	4 × 103	0.025—0.025	—	
121

Au/CsPbI3/Au	Nanocrystals	—	0.024/0.029	105	
108

Au/MAPbI3/Au	Nanosheets	21	20/40	—	
62

ITO/CsPbBr3/ITO	Nanosheets	0.64	0.019/0.024	>104	
72


 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a nanowire-based device fabricated for FET and I–V photocurrent measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of a nanowire-based flexible photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of a 2D-perovskite-based photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a perovskite–graphene hybrid photodetector. (e) Schematic illustration of a graphene–perovskite island phototransistor. (f) Schematic illustration of a 2D VDW heterostructure device based on perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of waveguide measurement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A set of optical and dark-field images of a CH3NH3PbI3 microwire. The scale bar represents 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of an embedded dielectric/metal heterostructure for the plasmonic output of a dielectric laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Bright-field image of heterostructures excited by the UV band of a mercury lamp. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) PL image. The green points magnified in the white circles are the results of the scattering of SPPs at the distal ends of the AgNWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of an optical whispering-gallery-mode nanocavity in perovskite (top). Far-field lasing image and simulated field distributions of the resonant cavity modes (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Lasing spectra of mixed lead halide perovskite nanowires with various alloy compositions, demonstrating widely tunable laser emission at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (c) SEM image and μ-PL image of a square MD above the lasing threshold. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Spectral tunability of ASE via compositional modulation in CsPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Evolution of PL to whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator covered by a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Optical images of a CsPbCl3 nanowire and a CsPbBr3 nanoplate showing lasing emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences.	 

CH3NH3PbI3−xXx	Microplatelets	760	40 (lasing)	900	Planar WGM	
124

CH3NH3PbI3	Microcrystal networks	765	200 (lasing)	—	Random lasing	
125

CH3NH3PbX3	NWs	787	0.220 (lasing)	3600	Fabry–Pérot cavity	
35

CH3NH3PbX3	Microdisks	550	3.6 (lasing)	430	Planar WGM	
126

CH3NH3PbX3	NWs	777	11 (lasing)	405	Fabry–Pérot cavity	
47

CsPbX3	NCs	440–700	5–22 (ASE) N.A. (lasing)	—	
N.A.
Spherical WGM/random lasing
	
127

CsPbX3	QDs	470–620	
22 (ASE)
11 × 103 (lasing)
	—	
N.A.
Ring WGM
	
128

CsPbBr3	QDs	520	12 × 103 (ASE)	—	N.A.	
129

CsPbX3	NWs/platelets	425–545	10 (lasing)	1009	Fabry–Pérot cavity	
45

CH3NH3PbBr3	Microcrystals	∼550	59 (lasing)	855	WGM cavity	
122


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
