Molecular relays in nanometer-scale alumina: effective encapsulation for water-submersed halide perovskite photocathodes   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR06530D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR06530D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 4951-4961Molecular relays in nanometer-scale alumina: effective encapsulation for water-submersed halide perovskite photocathodes†

        
          
            Yuval 
            Harari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chandra Shakher 
            Pathak
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Eran 
            Edri
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er-Sheva 8410501, Israel. E-mail: edrier@bgu.ac.il
bIlse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Be'er-Sheva 8410501, Israel
cBlechner Center for Industrial Catalysis and Process Development, Be'er-Sheva 8410501, Israel
Received 
      22nd November 2022
    , Accepted 21st January 2023First published on 3rd February 2023AbstractHalide perovskite (HaP) solar cells have an excellent voltage efficiency (>70%) and a low electron-affinity conduction band minimum, making them prospective candidates to be used as photocathodes in integrated low-cost solar fuel generators. However, halide perovskites are notoriously unstable in aqueous solutions and immediately dissolve upon exposure to water. Ultrathin layers (<10 nm) of Al2O3 deposited by atomic layer deposition are suitable encapsulants to prevent water ingression but are also electronically insulating. Embedding linear conjugated organic molecules (‘molecular relays’) that transverse the insulating layer enables selective electron transport across the insulating encapsulating layer. The electronic functionality of the embedded molecular relays is verified by conductive probe atomic force microscopy and photoelectrodeposition of metal particles (Pt and Ag) from ethanolic solutions. Lastly, the encapsulated HaP photoelectrodes were submersed in a CO2-saturated aqueous electrolyte and a photocurrent of ∼100 μA cm−2 (at ∼−0.32 V vs. Ag/AgCl) was measured, the highest reported for CsPbBr3 based aqueous photoelectrodes. This work demonstrates a way for stabilizing perovskite semiconductors in polar and protonic electrolytes as photoelectrodes for the generation of solar fuels.
1. Introduction
Directly converting solar energy to energy stored in chemical bonds by photoelectrochemical reactions offers a clean substitute for producing long-distance transport fossil fuels and a possible way to bridge solar energy's spatial and temporal intermittency limitations.1 In parallel to halide perovskite (HaP) photovoltaic research activity, there has been keen interest in utilizing HaPs for driving chemical reactions.2–8 Wang et al. realized a tandem Si/HaP photovoltaic device wired to electrocatalyst-coated electrodes and reported 20% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency with a levelized cost of ∼3$ kg−1 H2.9 Thin film photovoltaic devices connected to immersed (photo)electrodes have shown a record high solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 6.3%.10–12Recently, Andrei et al. showed how a buried junction BiVO4/HaP tandem device floating on water can deliver solar-to-fuel efficiencies reaching 0.58% (solar-to-hydrogen) and 0.053% for CO.13 Furthermore, other photochemical reactions are of interest8,14 and require using different structural materials to attain chemical compatibility. Therefore, continuous efforts to develop and test new materials and device concept design are needed.2,15
To drive a photo-electro synthetic process, the photoexcited electrons and holes must have suitable potential energies and a large enough chemical potential to drive the redox reactions. In a photoelectrode, this is translated to the energy bands straddling the redox potentials and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) larger than the Nernstian cell potential. Reaction kinetics and transport barriers also need to be overcome, which demands additional potential energy produced by the light absorber(s). Operation in a high reactant concentration (e.g., acidic aqueous conditions for proton reduction) lowers these overpotential losses. Finally, the stability of the photoelectrode is critical for any energy conversion application. Lead bromide perovskite (BrP) solar cells have shown a remarkably high Voc for solar cells produced by simple low-cost fabrication routines.16,17 Hodes and coworkers achieved a Voc of 1.57 V using an alumina scaffold for BrP-based solar cells.18 Ryu et al. used PIF8-TAA as a hole transport layer (HTL) and improved the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to >6%,19 and Heo et al. improved the PCE to >10% by controlling the crystallization of the absorber.20 Wu et al. used ICBA as an electron transport layer (ETL) to reach a Voc of 1.61 V,21 which was recently improved to >1.63 V.22,23 A spectroscopic investigation carried out by Brabec and coworkers indicated that tuning the BrP–ETL interface is central for attaining a high Voc,24 and predicted that a Voc of ∼1.95 V can be achieved in BrPs. With the current electrocatalysts, such a Voc could be sufficient for driving photosynthetic reactions such as carbon dioxide reduction and the hydrogen evolution reaction in aqueous media. In addition to the high Voc, photoexcited electrons in BrPs have an excellent reduction ability due to the relatively small electron affinity.25,26 Taken together, these properties make BrPs prominent absorbers in photocathodes.
Recently, Huang et al. reviewed HaP photoelectrodes used directly in solution.25,27 The uses can be aggregated to three main avenues: (1) hydrogen evolution from haloacid solutions, (2) CO2 reduction and organic photocatalysis in low-polarity solvents, and (3) aqueous CO2 reduction and water electrolysis. The latter is most challenging due to the solubility of HaPs in water.28–32 But it can also be highly rewarding due to the higher concentration of reactants (e.g., protons) and the availability of membranes and other cell components (most are stable in water but not in organic solvents), and by using a ‘greener’ solvent. At the same time, HaP photoelectrochemistry is an emerging research field.28,29,33 Therefore, effective encapsulation methods are scientifically and technologically attractive.
For effective encapsulation, the encapsulant needs to be molecularly tight, conductive or semiconductive, and we need to be able to deposit it with minimal degradation of the HaP. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a well-suited method for depositing thin layers with a controlled thickness and high conformality and has been used for effectively coating HaP films with functional layers.34,35 Amorphous titania layers deposited on top of a HTL were recently reported to enhance the stability of HaP solar cells.35 Gahlmann et al. reported that a thin encapsulation layer of SnOx deposited by ALD (using water as a precursor) directly on the HaP served as an efficient encapsulant and as a selective electronic contact for HaP solar cells,36 enabling further deposition of water-dispersed Ag nanowires. Recently, Kim et al. used ∼150 nm of ALD-deposited TiO2 and PC61BM as a protective hybrid layer for a submersed CH3NH3PbI3 photoelectrode and used it for driving hydrogen evolution in acidic media with high current densities (∼10 mA cm−2 at 0.5 sunlight intensity) and prolonged operation.37 With CsPbBr3, which can produce higher voltages and drive more demanding electrocatalytic reactions, a current density of ∼1.2 mA cm−2 was achieved for hydrogen evolution.38 A recent report of CO2 reduction with a water tolerant CsPbBr3 photoelectrode showed that it achieved a current density of ∼2.5 μA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl.39 Others performed CO2 reduction in either organic/water solvent mixtures or CO2/water-saturated vapor.2,40 Minimizing the protective layer thickness can reduce the resistive losses, and the development of different encapsulation strategies, for example, an encapsulant compatible with organic solvents, will broaden the utility of HaP photoelectrodes to other media and other photosynthetic reactions.
Here we combined electronically conductive organic molecular relays in an ultrathin (∼4 nm) insulating alumina (Al2O3) layer to form a continuous and molecularly tight protection layer. This proof-of-concept encapsulant is used for electrodepositing metals from ethanolic solvents and CO2 reduction in an aqueous solution. Both are not possible without a protective layer.
2. Experimental
Chromium and silver (Kurt J. Lesker, 99.99%), anhydrous toluene (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%), anhydrous dimethyl formamide (DMF; Alfa Aesar, 99.8%), sulfuric acid (Bio-Lab, 98%), hydrogen peroxide (Merck, 30% w.w%), methanol (Bio-Lab, AR grade), tetrahydrofuran (THF; Bio-Lab, AR grade), tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium (TDMATi; Acros Organics, 99.99%), trimethylaluminum (TMA; STREM, 99%), DI-water (Thermo Fisher Scientific Barnstead MicroPure, 18.2 MΩ cm), 4-formylbenzoic acid (Fluorochem, 99%), trans-1,4-dicyano-2-butene (Angene, 97%), sodium methoxide (Glentham, 97%), hydrochloric acid (Arcos, 25% w.w%), p-aminophenyltrimethoxysilane (TMSA; Fluorochem, 90%), which was sublimated to obtain higher purity, N,N-diisopropylethylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥99%), (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-O-(1H-benzotriazol-1-yl)uranium hexafluorophosphate (HBTU; Glentham, ≥99%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) D6 (Euriso-top, 99.8%), sodium bicarbonate (Bio-Lab, AR grade), silver epoxy part A and B (EPO-TEK), lacomit varnish (Agar Scientific Ltd). Nitrogen and argon flows were used in ultra-high purity (UHP) grade (99.999%). Lead bromide (PbBr2, 98+%, extra pure) was purchased from Acros Organics; cesium bromide (CsBr, 99.9%, metal basis) was purchased from Alfa Aesar.
Conjugated molecule (CM) synthesis
The synthesis procedure of the CMs, DPDC3–COOH [(1Z,3E,5Z)-2,5-dicyano-1,6-di-(4-(carboxy)phenyl-hexa-1,3,5-triene], was adapted from Meisner et al.41 A 100 mL three-pronged round-bottomed flask was charged with 4-formylbenzoic acid (611 mg, 4 mmol, 2.0 eq.) and trans-1,4-dicyano-2-butene (215 mg, 2 mmol, 1.0 eq.) in 40 mL of methanol under a nitrogen atmosphere and the solution was mixed for 15 min. Sodium methoxide was added (667 mg, 12 mmol, >6.0 eq.), and the reaction was stirred for 24 hours. The solution turned yellow, and after vacuum filtration with methanol wash, a brown precipitate was collected. The precipitate was suspended in methanol for 5 min, and an excess of 1 M HCl (4 mL) was added. The reaction mixture was left to sit for one hour while the solid settled and was again collected by vacuum filtration. Yellow solids emerged as the final product with a yield of 8.9% (66 mg) – (1Z,3E,5Z)-2,5-dicyano-1,6-di-(4-(carboxy)phenyl-hexa-1,3,5-triene (DPDC3–COOH). 1H-NMR was performed on a Bruker DMX 500 spectrometer (∼2 mg of the product was dissolved in 6 mL of DMSO after sonication).
Substrate cleaning
Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates (27.0 × 30.0 mm2; XOP Fisica TEC 15) were sonicated in Alconox soap solution, DI water, acetone, isopropanol, and water for 20 min each. The samples were dried under a nitrogen stream and cleaned for 30 min in an ozone cleaner. Glass substrates (9.0 × 30.0 mm2) were cut from borosilicate microscope slides and cleaned in boiling sulfuric piranha solution before use, rinsed with DI water, and dried before use under a nitrogen stream.
Ag evaporation
Glass substrates were coated with 10 nm of Cr and 70 nm of Ag. HaP photoelectrodes were coated with ∼5 nm of Ag without Cr. Both procedures were performed using a nanoPVD-T15A thermal evaporator. The deposition rate and film thickness were monitored using a quartz crystal microbalance.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
ALD was performed in a Gemstar XTTM benchtop ALD reactor. TiO2 ALD was performed at 120 °C by alternating exposures to a 500 ms pulse of tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium (TDMATi; Acros Organics, 99.99%), followed by a 25 s purge, a 30 ms pulse of H2O (deionized water with <5 ppm TOC and 18.2 Ω cm resistance), and another 30 s purge before the next cycle. Ar (99.999% pure; Maxima Ltd) flowed through the reactor at 20 SCCM, serving as a carrier/purge gas throughout the deposition process. The base pressure in the reactor was ∼190 mTorr. One thousand cycles corresponded to 70 nm of titania being deposited. Al2O3 ALD was performed at 80 °C by alternating exposures of a 21 ms pulse of trimethylaluminum (TMA; STREM, 99%) or a 21 ms pulse of H2O, each followed by closing the chamber expo valve for 5 s, opening the valve, and purging for 60 s (10 SCCM Ar). The base pressure in the reactor was ∼90 mTorr. Forty cycles, corresponding to the deposition of 4 nm of alumina, were performed.
Attachment of CMs to titania
The attachment of the CMs to titania was done in two steps: first, the linker molecules, trimethyl silyl amine (TMSA), were attached, and then, the CMs (DPDC3–COOH) were attached. The two steps were carried out immediately, one after the other. Linker attachment: Two substrates (Ag\titania or HaP\titania) were put horizontally back-to-back in a 25 mL Schlenk flask and evacuated for 1 h at room temperature. In parallel, 2.0 mg of TMSA were dissolved in 15 mL of anhydrous toluene and 1.5 μL of DI water mixture. After complete dissolution of TMSA, the mixture was added to the flask with substrates using a syringe, and the solution was refluxed at 150 °C for 6 h. After cooling, the substrates were washed and cleaned for 10 minutes in 3 different solutions: anhydrous toluene, 1:1 (volume) of anhydrous toluene:methanol and absolute methanol. The samples were then dried with a nitrogen flow, returned to the Schlenk flask, and evacuated for 2 hours (at 50–100 mTorr). CM attachment: In a third vial, 2.0 mg of CMs were dissolved in 15 mL of anhydrous DMF and 0.1 mL of N,N-diisopropylethylamine at 40 °C (∼20 min). 4.7 mg of HBTU was quickly added to the solution, and the solution was stirred for an additional 20 min. Then, the solution was added using a syringe to the flask with substrates and stirred overnight at 40 °C. After stirring overnight, the substrates were taken out, rinsed with DMF and DI water, and dried with a nitrogen stream. For the attachment of CMs to HaPs, the DMF was replaced with THF, but the process was otherwise the same.
The surface binding of TMSA or CMs was verified by reflection–absorption Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Spectra were collected on a Thermo Fisher Nicolet iS50R spectrometer using the photoelastic modulated reflection absorption (PEM-IRRAS) mode and an LN2-cooled MCT/A detector. Spectra were collected with a resolution of 4 cm−1, and an average of five spectra with 1000 scans were usually taken. The spectrometer and IRRAS chamber were purged with nitrogen before and during the measurements.
Nickel oxide (NiOx) deposition
A thin film of (NiO) was deposited by spin-coating/calcination. A precursor solution was prepared by dissolving nickel acetate tetrahydrate [Ni(CH3COO)2·4H2O, 0.0625 g, 0.5 mmol], nickel chloride hexahydrate [NiCl2·6H2O, 0.1782 g, 1.5 mmol], and ethanolamine [H2NCH2CH2OH, 0.1 mL, 2.07 mmol] in 5 mL of 2-methoxy ethanol. The precursor solution was continuously stirred at 70 °C for 2.5 h. The precursor solution was then spin-coated on the substrate at 2000 RPM for 30 s followed by hot plate drying at 350 °C for 1 h.
CsPbBr3 deposition
PbBr2 was dissolved in DMF with a ratio of 0.367 g:1 mL, stirred for 5 h at 75 °C, and then filtered through a 0.22 μm PTFE filter. CsBr in methanol (15 mg:1 mL) was stirred for 6 hours at 50 °C. The sample was heated to 75 °C for 10–15 min before spin coating. 200 μL of PbBr2 precursor solution was then spin-coated on the substrate at 2000 RPM for 30 s, followed by hot plate drying at 75 °c for 1 h. Then, 200 μL of CsBr precursor solution was spin-coated on the substrate at 2000 RPM for 30 s, followed by hot plate drying at 250 °C for 5 min. After cooling for 5 min, the CsBr step was repeated five times, and for a final step, 200 μL dry isopropanol, was spin-coated.
Photodeposition
Pt or Ag was deposited on the photoelectrode by a photo-electrodeposition technique. The photoelectrode was immersed in an ethanolic solution of 1 mM PtCl2 or AgNO3. A Pt wire was used as the counter electrode, and Ag was used as a quasi-reference electrode. A Mightex High-Power LED Collimator Source (glacier white 6500K, 15 W, 22 mm) was used as the light source with a power of 12 W. The samples were illuminated from the glass side at a distance of 15 cm. The bias voltage was supplied by a potentiostat, model SP-200 (Bio-Logic).
Photoelectrolysis
For CO2 photoelectrocatalysis on Ag/CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO/FTO, the photocathode was immersed in an aqueous solution of 0.1 M NaHCO3 that was purged with UHP grade CO2 for 15 min. The pH of the solution was ∼6.8. For testing Pt-coated electrodes, an aqueous solution at a pH value of 4.8–5.0 was used. The pH was adjusted with sulfuric acid, and the solution was purged with nitrogen for 15 min before the measurements. A Pt wire was used as the counter electrode and leakless Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode. A Mightex High-Power LED (glacier white 6500K) was used as the light source with a power of 12 W. The samples were illuminated from the glass side at a distance of 10 cm. Unless stated otherwise, a duty cycle of 5 s dark/5 s light was employed. The bias potential was controlled using a potentiostat (Bio-Logic model SP-200).
Scanning electron microscopy imaging was performed on a Verios XHR 460L equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS; Oxford Xmax 80 mm2 127 eV silicon drift detector), which was used for imaging and elemental analysis with 5 kV and 10 kV accelerating voltages for imaging and elemental analysis, respectively.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected using a PANalytical Empyrean multi-purpose X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα1 (λ = 1.54 Å) radiation (at 40 kV and 30 mA), using a 3° min−1 scan rate.
Transmittance spectra were measured with a parallel beam UV-vis-NIR Cary 5000 spectrophotometer without a sample in the parallel beam position.
Atomic force microscopy measurements were carried out using a Cypher-ED microscope (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments) in a normal laboratory environment in the dark and under the illumination of a white light source. The light was guided through the optical system of the AFM system from the top. Conductive probe AFM measurements were performed using conductive Pt-coated probes (App Nano, probe model: ANSCM-PC-50) with a curvature radius less than 30 nm.

J–V curves of the PSCs were recorded under simulated AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) illumination generated by a ScienceTech AAA solar simulator and measured with an Ossila source-meter unit. The light intensity was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a standard silicon reference cell certified by Newport Corporation.
3. Results and discussion
Originally designed for artificial photosynthetic constructs,42–44 Frei and coworkers reported how encapsulating surface-bound conjugated molecules (CMs) in ultrathin (<4 nm) amorphous layers of silica by ALD can act as a barrier for molecular oxygen or water.45 The encapsulated CMs provided the needed electronic transport channels between the light absorber and electrocatalysis site.46,47 The ultrathin silica layers enabled proton transport through hopping onto dangling –OH groups.48 Here an analogue type of this hybrid construct was adapted to encapsulate HaPs by using a different type of CM and alumina instead of silica. The main aim of this work is to showcase how a composite material made of ultrathin layers of metal oxides and buried CMs can prevent the water ingression of halide perovskite films and transport photoexcited charges. A schematic illustration of the photoelectrode structure and energy band/level diagram is shown in Fig. 1A and B. The HaP-based photoelectrode is made of a continuous CsPbBr3 layer deposited on top of NiOx, and FTO. The CsPbBr3 layer was coated with titania and alumina and the CMs were embedded in the alumina layer in a perpendicular orientation to the surface. A reference solar cell prepared with the same CsPbBr3 layer provided a Voc of ∼1.2 V and a Jsc ∼ 4 mA cm−2 – see ESI-1;† the properties of NiOx are reported in ESI-2.†
 Fig. 1  Protection of HaPs from water ingression. (A) Energy diagram of the photoelectrode components. The values represent disconnected materials relative to the absolute potential scale (in eV). The values next to each bar represent the valence band maxima or the work function (FTO and Ag). The values inside each bar represent the optical bandgap or absorption onset. The black arrows indicate the proposed electron and hole transfer paths. The HOMO and LUMO energy level position of the CMs are based on the first reduction potential of the CMs (−0.89 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and the optical absorption onset (2.92 eV). (B) Illustration of the photoelectrode structure. The illustration depicts the CMs attached to a linker and encapsulated in alumina. The linker is attached to the surface of titania. The components are not to scale. (C) Exposure of various CsPbBr3 photoelectrodes to water. The photoelectrodes were coated with (i) 70 nm of titania, 4 nm of alumina, and CMs; (ii) 70 nm of titania and 4 nm of alumina (without CMs). The CsPbBr3 color is preserved after water covered it. The water evaporated at room temperature over a few hours. (iii) CsPbBr3 coated with only titania (∼70 nm). The electrode bleached instantly upon exposure to water. (D) A SEM plan view image of a CsPbBr3-based photoelectrode with the structure illustrated in (B) after exposure to liquid water for >8 h. 
Various titania and alumina thicknesses were tested (see Table S1†). We found that 10 nm of alumina or a combination of 70 nm of titania coated with an additional ∼4 nm of alumina successfully prevented water ingression when the electrode was dipped in an aqueous electrolyte for several hours or water was dropped on top (Fig. 1C-i and ii, with and without the CMs, respectively). When the metal oxide coating did not prevent water ingression, immediate bleaching of the orange-yellow color of CsPbBr3 was observed (Fig. 1C-iii). A minimal thickness of the alumina layer of ∼4 nm was needed to efficiently block water ingression, while titania layers as thick as 70 nm were alone insufficient. A possible explanation for this result is the granular structure of titania and the semi-amorphous form of alumina grown by ALD.49 The partially amorphous alumina structure prevents water penetration, while water molecules can penetrate the intergranular space of titania particles.
The alumina layer creates an effective chemical barrier between the CsPbBr3 and the solution. But since it is an insulator, it also creates an electrical barrier. To create a controlled electronic path, we attached CMs to the titania surface and encapsulated the CMs in an alumina layer thick enough for encapsulation but preserving electron transfer across the alumina. The molecules were attached in a two-step process: first, a TMSA linker was attached to the titania using the chemistry of TMSA silanol groups, and then the CMs were attached via an amide coupling scheme (see the ESI† for a detailed description). The attachment was verified by PEM-IRRAS (Fig. 2) and comparison with the FT-IR spectra of TMSA or CMs in a KBr pellet (Fig. S7†).
 Fig. 2  PEM-IRRAS spectra along the attachment steps of CMs to titania. Lower panel: spectrum of TMSA attached to titania. Mid panel: spectrum of CMs–TMSA–titania. Upper panel: spectrum of CMs–TMSA–titania encapsulated in 4 nm of alumina. The titania was deposited on top of a Ag coated glass. Bands’ assignment is described in the text. 
After binding the linker molecule to the surface of titania, we observed peaks associated with the molecules’ functional groups, which confirmed their attachment. Specifically, the amine (NH2) bending mode at 1620 cm−1 and the aromatic ring stretching modes at 1601, 1508, and 1416 cm−1. In addition, distinct vibrations of the functional groups associated with CM molecules, namely, the cyano, carbonyl, and carboxylate groups, were observed at 2227, 1693, and 1396 cm−1, respectively. The attachment of the CMs to the linker molecule was confirmed by the decrease of the amine bending mode peak at 1620 cm−1 and the increase of the amide bending mode peak at 1655 cm−1. TMSA linking to titania under similar conditions led to a perpendicular orientation of the linker.46 Furthermore, our attempts to attach the CMs directly to titania without using the linker molecules were unsuccessful. Therefore, we conclude that it is most probable that the CMs bind to the surface in a perpendicular orientation. Further support for the perpendicular orientation of the CMs is the observation of charge transport across the insulating alumina layer, as we describe in the following section. After encapsulation in alumina, the vibrational peaks associated with the linker and the CMs are still visible, which confirms that the CMs are intact after the encapsulation.
The electronic functionality of the encapsulated CMs was confirmed in several ways: (i) cp-AFM of flat surfaces with Ag instead of CsPbBr3, (ii) cp-AFM of the photoelectrodes, (iii) photo-electrodeposition of Pt and Ag on top of the photoelectrodes from an ethanolic electrolyte, and (iv) photo-electrochemistry in an aqueous electrolyte.
Comparing the nanoscale topography scans reveals very similar structural features in electrodes with or without the CMs, which are also reflected in similar RMS values (Fig. 3A and C). However, comparing the current maps (Fig. 3B and D) reveals a notably higher number of high-current spots in electrodes with the CMs. A current map of an Ag/titania/alumina electrode with the embedded CMs (Fig. 3D) shows a large density of high current spots, which is reflected in a total of 86.9 pA passing through the scanned area. A comparison with the topography scan shows that most of the high current spots are not correlated with the topography. A current map generated by cp-AFM scans of an Ag/titania/alumina electrode without the CMs (Fig. 3B) shows that most of the surface is electronically insulating, as expected, and only speckled with spots of higher current. This is reflected in a total of only 42.6 pA passing through the scanned area in electrodes without the CMs. The high correlation between the topography and the speckles of high current spots in the electrode without CMs indicates that these spots stem from the local topography and the AFM contact mode. We ascribe the additional current that passed through the scanned area, reflected in the larger number of high current spots, to the current that passed through the CMs. Current maps collected from the top of CMs–alumina/titania/CsPbBr3/NiO/FTO electrodes under light and in the dark are shown in Fig. 3F and H. A more negative current is collected from the entire scanned area under light. This photocurrent is ascribed to charges generated in the CsPbBr3 and transferred to the surface. In addition, under light, the grain boundaries of the HaP show a higher current density than the grain interior, suggesting that the grain boundaries play an important role in the charge transport in the photoelectrode. We found similar current collection patterns in CsPbBr3/titania/FTO (not shown) and titania/CsPbBr3/NiO/FTO electrodes (ESI-4†), which supports the conclusion that the grain boundaries of CsPbBr3 are more photoactive in generating current than the grain interior.
 Fig. 3  Conductive probe AFM of CM-functionalized electrodes. (A)–(D) alumina/titania/Ag electrodes. (A) Topography and (B) current map without CMs. (C) Topography and (D) current map with CMs. The topography scans show similar RMS values in both electrodes, while the current scans show a higher density of high current spots in electrodes with the CMs, indicating that the CMs facilitate charge transport across alumina. (E)–(H) CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO/FTO electrode (E) topography and (F) current map in the dark. (G) Topography and (H) current map in light. A bias voltage of −10 V was used to collect current maps. 
Next, the functionality of the CMs is demonstrated by pulsed photo-electrodeposition of Ag or Pt on the coated HaPs. Fig. 4 shows SEM images of Pt rods deposited on top of the CMs–alumina/titania/CsPbBr3/NiO/FTO electrode. Energy dispersive spectroscopy confirms that the microrods are made of Pt (Fig. S10†). The rods seem to deposit parallel to the surface and without a visible registration with support features and, as far as we can detect by SEM, at random locations on the surface. A bias potential of −0.9 V (vs. Ag wire) was needed in addition to the bias light to enable the Pt deposition. However, only with irradiation with bias light were rods deposited. A characteristic current–time plot is given in Fig. S11.†
 Fig. 4  Plan view SEM images of metal/CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO. (A) SEM images after pulsed-photo-electrodeposition of Pt rods. The Pt rods are scattered on the surface without a clear registration with the structural features of the underlying substrate. (B) Higher magnification of Pt rods on top of the photoelectrode. Up to 20 μm long Pt rods were deposited while the underlying HaP was unharmed. (C) SEM image after 2 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag. Large and smooth-looking Ag plates partly cover the surface of the photoelectrode. The Ag plates are parallel to the surface, and the HaP grains are visible where Ag was not deposited. (D) SEM image after 15 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag on top of HaP\CMs photoelectrodes. A near complete coating of the photoelectrode surface with large Ag plates is seen. The plates are mostly laid on the surface, with some plates perpendicular. (E) A higher magnification SEM image of HaP\CMs photoelectrodes after 2 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag. The Ag deposit seems to register with the underlying structure of HaP grains. (F) SEM image after exposing the Ag-coated HaP\CMs photoelectrodes seen in (C) to water for 15 minutes. The Ag plates’ shape changed to octahedron-like. In addition, the underlying HaP grains are visible. (G) HaP photoelectrode coated with ∼5 nm of Ag deposited by thermal evaporation (Agth) before electrolysis. (H) The same photoelectrode in (G) after electrolysis. The Ag, which has a brighter contrast than the substrate, has a particulate morphology that covers most of the surface uniformly. 
Similar conditions were needed for Ag deposition, but platelets were the dominant deposit structure (Fig. 4C and D). After two minutes of deposition (Fig. 4C), large Ag plates were deposited with a smooth-looking surface and rough edges. Most of the plates lay parallel to the surface. In comparison, after fifteen minutes of deposition (Fig. 4D), the Ag platelets have smoother edges, and some plates are oriented perpendicular to the surface. Interestingly, it can be seen in the SEM images that after two minutes of deposition, the contour of platelets follows closely, but not precisely, the form of the underlying HaP grains. In specific places, the deposit seems to follow the grain boundary line (see the white arrow in Fig. 4E), suggesting that the Ag deposition is facilitated near or at the grain boundaries of the HaP. This finding is in agreement with the grain boundary photoactivity found in the cp-AFM results.
A comparison of the Ag deposit morphology, orientation, and shape after two and fifteen minutes of deposition time suggests that additional Ag preferentially deposits on the platelets and continues to expand their size, that is instead of forming additional nucleation sites on the CMs–alumina surface. This observation points towards an instantaneous growth mode rather than continuous nucleation, but further investigation is needed. The Ag deposits are shaped and transformed into octahedron-like particles after immersion of the electrodes in an aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 4F). The underlying HaP can still be seen in uncoated regions which indicates that the protective layer and the CsPbBr3 are unharmed by the deposition or immersion in water.
We tested the photoelectrodes coated by photoelectrodeposition in a CO2-saturated aqueous solution (Ag) or a slightly acidic aqueous solution (Pt). However, upon application of a bias voltage (with pulsed light), the photoelectrodes rapidly degraded, which was indicated by the color bleaching. In Fig. S12,† it can be seen that regions that were exposed to the aqueous electrolyte (CO2-saturated 0.1 M NaHCO3 aqueous solution; for ∼1 h) without bias did not lose their color (region 1), while bias light and a potential more negative than −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl caused rapid bleaching. An SEM image from a non-bleached region is shown in Fig. 4F, while a “bleached” region is shown in Fig. S12.† Photocorrosion can be facilitated by a lack of available (or faster) electron transfer routes alternative to the corrosion path,28e.g., limited access to active electrocatalytic sites. Although the photoelectrodeposition method supports the conclusion that electronic activity of the CMs is preserved, it also results in deposition in preferred locations (Ag) or a limited number of particles (Pt), and hence we suspect the photoexcited electrons have limited access to active electrocatalytic sites. To increase the uniformity and surface density of the metal catalyst coating we coated the photoelectrodes with Ag by thermal evaporation (Agth; ∼5 nm of Ag was deposited).
Linear scan voltammograms of photoelectrodes with Agth and with or without the CMs are shown in Fig. 5A. At potentials less cathodic than ∼−0.4 V (Vapp > −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl) the photoelectrode with CMs showed a photocurrent that is nearly twice the photocurrent without the CMs. A maximum photocurrent of ∼100 μA cm−2 was measured at −0.32 V and a similar magnitude of photocurrent was observed over time with pulsed light (Fig. 5B). We ascribe most of the photocurrent observed in electrodes with CMs to faradaic electrocatalytic processes. The occasional bubbles at the electrode surface indicate that gaseous products evolved, such as CO or H2, which supports this assertion. However, the current density was not sufficient for reliable quantitation of the faradaic efficiency.
 Fig. 5  Photo-electrochemistry of Ag/CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO/FTO. (A) Linear scan voltammetry with pulsed light of photoelectrodes with and without CMs. Scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Inset: a magnified range. (B) Current–time with pulsed light of a photoelectrode with CMs. Arrow (1) indicates a change in the pulsed light width. The dark period is too short to allow the dark current to reach a steady state value. Arrow (2) indicates a bubble formation. Inset: a magnified range. A bias voltage of −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied. (C) Linear scan voltammograms with a pulsed light increase of the negative potential scan range. The first scan is shown in (A). With subsequent scans, the magnitude of the photocurrent diminished. In all measurements, a CO2 saturated 0.1 M NaHCO3 aqueous electrolyte (pH ∼ 6.8) was used. 
At potentials (Vapp) more negative/cathodic than −0.8 V (Vapp < −0.8 V), photoelectrodes with and without the CMs degraded, which was observed ocularly by color bleaching. However, electrodes without CMs bleached more rapidly than electrodes with CMs, which could still show a photocurrent in sequential scanning to potentials more negative than −0.8 V (Fig. 5C). At intermediate potentials, i.e., −0.8 V < Vapp < −0.4 V, the current density increased with an onset at ∼−0.4 V, but the I–V slope value in electrodes without CMs was significantly larger than in electrodes with CMs. We note that the current density difference between light and dark periods decreases, which indicates that the electrode is degrading with sequential scans. There could be various reasons for this degradation, such as HaP corrosion or disconnection of the linker and CM amide bond. A comparison of SEM images (Fig. 4G and H) of photoelectrodes with CMs before and after electrolysis reveals that the underlying morphology of the CsPbBr3 was mostly preserved, although the Ag morphology transformed [the surface is coated with Ag particles that resemble the morphology of photoelectrodeposited Ag after immersion in water (Fig. 4F)].
Based on these results we suggest that: (i) the presence of the CMs provided an electron transfer channel that can compete with the corrosion rate and prevent it. Hence, the corrosion rate of electrodes with CMs is slower than electrodes without CMs and the higher current density at Vapp < −0.8 V for electrodes without CMs is due to faster corrosion. At more negative potentials, the corrosion current intensified, overcame the electrocatalytic processes rate, and led to the degradation of the electrodes (with or without CMs). (ii) The thermally evaporated Ag indeed furnished more stable photoelectrodes than photoelectrodes coated with Ag via photo-electrodeposition by enabling better access to electrocatalytic sites. We note that in electrodes without CMs, it is possible that the corrosion current induced a morphological change in the CsPbBr3 that cracked the encapsulation layer and led to its rapid degradation. In electrodes with CMs the photocurrent gradually decreased with sequential scans, and did not immediately disappear, which suggests that the encapsulation is still intact although the CsPbBr3 corroded.
Previously, CsPbBr3 was used as a photoelectrode for CO2 reduction in CO2-saturated water vapor,50 in organic solvents and organic/water mixtures.40 In a water-only environment, Mu et al. reported water-tolerant CsPbBr3 photoelectrodes, which produced a photocurrent of ∼2.5 μA cm−2 for CO2 reduction at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl.39 Using the encapsulated CMs, a photocurrent of ∼100 μA cm−2 at −0.32 V vs. Ag/AgCl was attained, indicating the premise of this approach.
4. Conclusions
We demonstrated that the CMs–alumina composite encapsulant protects the HaP from water ingression (for several hours) and that it prevents degradation under a bias potential of up to −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The activity of the CMs was verified by the photoelectrodeposition of metal particles and cp-AFM. A photocurrent of ∼100 μA cm−2 was measured in a CO2-saturated aqueous electrolyte, which was ascribed to mostly electrocatalytic current. Increasing the availability and accessibility of electrocatalytic sites can delay and possibly prevent corrosion. Further optimization of the kinetics may lead to better and longer-lived HaP photoelectrodes.
5. Experimental details
Experimental details, UV-vis spectra, XRD data, solar cell characterization data, AFM measurements, and additional electrochemical measurements are available in the ESI.†
Note added after first publication
This version of the article is different from the Accepted Manuscript. The Royal Society of Chemistry regrets that the unrevised version of this work was published in error as the Accepted Manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Israeli Ministry of Science and Technology for support through grant no. 3-17411. YH was partly supported by the Israeli Ministry of Energy. We thank Dr Roksana Vidruk for her assistance, and Dr Jitendra Kumar for proof-reading the manuscript.
References
H. Lin, S. Luo, H. Zhang and J. Ye, Toward solar-driven carbon recycling, Joule, 2022, 6(2), 294–314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, H. Liu, S. Wang and X. Li, How to apply metal halide perovskites to photocatalysis: challenges and development, Nanoscale, 2021, 13(23), 10281–10304 RSC .
M. Moniruddin, B. Ilyassov, X. Zhao, E. Smith, T. Serikov, N. Ibrayev, R. Asmatulu and N. Nuraje, Recent progress on perovskite materials in photovoltaic and water splitting applications, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 246–259 CrossRef .
S. Singh, H. Chen, S. Shahrokhi, L. P. Wang, C.-H. Lin, L. Hu, X. Guan, A. Tricoli, Z. J. Xu and T. Wu, Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Materials and Composites for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(5), 1487–1497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guerrero and J. Bisquert, Perovskite semiconductors for photoelectrochemical water splitting applications, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2(1), 144–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Ma, L. Wang and X. Zong, Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites: game-changing candidates for solar fuel production, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104647 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, D. K. Lee, S. M. Kim, W. Park and U. Sim, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting Reaction System Based on Metal-Organic Halide Perovskites, Materials, 2020, 13(1), 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, J. Li, Z. Wen, R. Lu, Q. Zhang, H. Jin, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and S. Wang, Halide Perovskite Materials for Photo(Electro)Chemical Applications: Dimensionality, Heterojunction, and Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12(4), 2004002 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Sharma, T. Duong, H. Arandiyan, T. Zhao, D. Zhang, Z. Su, M. Garbrecht, F. J. Beck, S. Karuturi, C. Zhao and K. Catchpole, Direct Solar Hydrogen Generation at 20% Efficiency Using Low–Cost Materials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(34), 2101053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, New BiVO4 Dual Photoanodes with Enriched Oxygen Vacancies for Efficient Solar-Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(20), e1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, All solution-processed lead halide perovskite-BiVO4 tandem assembly for photolytic solar fuels production, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(2), 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Andrei, R. L. Z. Hoye, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Bajada, S. Ahmad, M. De Volder, R. Friend and E. Reisner, Scalable Triple Cation Mixed Halide Perovskite-BiVO4 Tandems for Bias-Free Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(25), 1801403 CrossRef .
V. Andrei, G. M. Ucoski, C. Pornrungroj, C. Uswachoke, Q. Wang, D. S. Achilleos, H. Kasap, K. P. Sokol, R. A. Jagt, H. Lu, T. Lawson, A. Wagner, S. D. Pike, D. S. Wright, R. L. Z. Hoye, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, H. J. Joyce, R. H. Friend and E. Reisner, Floating perovskite-BiVO4 devices for scalable solar fuel production, Nature, 2022, 608(7923), 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Dong, H. Idriss, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Metal Halide Perovskites for Solar–to–Chemical Fuel Conversion, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(13), 1902433 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, A. Bagger, S. W. Boettcher, J. Bonin, E. Boutin, A. Buckley, R. Buonsanti, E. Cave, X. Chang, S. W. Chee, A. H. M. da Silva, P. De Luna, O. Einsle, B. Endrődi, M. E. Escribano, J. V. Ferreira de Araujo, M. C. Figueiredo, C. Hahn, K. U. Hansen, S. Haussener, S. Hunegnaw, Z. Huo, Y. J. Hwang, C. Janáky, B. S. Jayathilake, F. Jiao, Z. P. Jovanov, P. Karimi, M. T. M. Koper, K. Kuhl, W. H. Lee, Z. Liang, X. Liu, S. Ma, M. Ma, H.-S. Oh, M. Robert, B. R. Cuenya, J. Rossmeisl, C. Roy, M. P. Ryan, E. H. Sargent, P. Sebastián-Pascual, B. Seger, L. Steier, P. Strasser, A. S. Varela, R. E. Vos, X. Wang, B. Xu, H. Yadegari and Y. Zhou, 2022 Roadmap on Low Temperature Electrochemical CO2 Reduction, J. Phys.: Energy, 2022, 4, 042003 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Cai, H. Lv, Y. Qin, Q. Liao, B. Zhou, T. Yan, J. Ren, S. Chen, X. Xiang, S. Dai, S. K. So, X. Wang, S. Yang and B. Xu, High throughput screening of novel tribromide perovskite materials for high-photovoltage solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(45), 25502–25512 RSC .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Enhanced photovoltage for inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 360(6396), 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, M. Kulbak, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Chloride Inclusion and Hole Transport Material Doping to Improve Methyl Ammonium Lead Bromide Perovskite-Based High Open-Circuit Voltage Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(3), 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Voltage output of efficient perovskite solar cells with high open-circuit voltage and fill factor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(8), 2614–2618 RSC .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Planar CH3NH3PbBr3 hybrid solar cells with 10.4% power conversion efficiency, fabricated by controlled crystallization in the spin-coating process, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(48), 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Wu, C. H. Chiang and S. H. Chang, A perovskite cell with a record-high-V(oc) of 1.61 V based on solvent annealed CH3NH3PbBr3/ICBA active layer, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(7), 4077–4085 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. Duan, X. Yang, J. Du, Y. Wang, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Lattice-tailored low-temperature processed electron transporting materials boost the open-circuit voltage of planar CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cells up to 1.654 V, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(23), 11859–11866 RSC .
X. Hu, X.-F. Jiang, X. Xing, L. Nian, X. Liu, R. Huang, K. Wang, H.-L. Yip and G. Zhou, Wide-Bandgap Perovskite Solar Cells With Large Open-Circuit Voltage of 1653 mV Through Interfacial Engineering, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2(8), 1800083 CrossRef .
S. Chen, Y. Hou, H. Chen, M. Richter, F. Guo, S. Kahmann, X. Tang, T. Stubhan, H. Zhang, N. Li, N. Gasparini, C. O. R. Quiroz, L. S. Khanzada, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet and C. J. Brabec, Exploring the Limiting Open-Circuit Voltage and the Voltage Loss Mechanism in Planar CH3NH3PbBr3Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(18), 1600132 CrossRef .
H. Huang, B. Pradhan, J. Hofkens, M. B. J. Roeffaers and J. A. Steele, Solar-Driven Metal Halide Perovskite Photocatalysis: Design, Stability, and Performance, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(4), 1107–1123 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schulz, E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Interface energetics in organo-metal halide perovskite-based photovoltaic cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(4), 1377 RSC .
D. Cardenas-Morcoso, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes, A. B. Ferreira Vitoreti, M. García-Tecedor, S. J. Yoon, M. Solis de la Fuente, I. Mora-Seró and S. Gimenez, Photocatalytic and Photoelectrochemical Degradation of Organic Compounds with All-Inorganic Metal Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10(3), 630–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Samu and C. Janáky, Photocorrosion at Irradiated Perovskite/Electrolyte Interfaces, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(52), 21595–21614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Jeong, T. S. Zsigmond, G. F. Samu and C. Janáky, Sacrificial Agent Gone Rogue: Electron-Acceptor-Induced Degradation of CsPbBr3 Photocathodes, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7(1), 417–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and P. H.-L. Sit, Ab Initio Study of Interaction of Water, Hydroxyl Radicals, and Hydroxide Ions with CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 Surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(39), 22370–22378 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, M. I. Saidaminov, J. A. Christians, O. M. Bakr and P. V. Kamat, Making and Breaking of Lead Halide Perovskites, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(2), 330–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Stability of Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(20), 1500963 CrossRef .
G. F. Samu, R. A. Scheidt, P. V. Kamat and C. Janáky, Electrochemistry and Spectroelectrochemistry of Lead Halide Perovskite Films: Materials Science Aspects and Boundary Conditions, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(3), 561–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Raiford, S. T. Oyakhire and S. F. Bent, Applications of atomic layer deposition and chemical vapor deposition for perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(7), 1997–2023 RSC .
S. Seo, S. Shin, E. Kim, S. Jeong, N.-G. Park and H. Shin, Amorphous TiO2 Coatings Stabilize Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6(9), 3332–3341 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gahlmann, K. O. Brinkmann, T. Becker, C. Tückmantel, C. Kreusel, F. gen Hassend, S. Weber and T. Riedl, Impermeable Charge Transport Layers Enable Aqueous Processing on Top of Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903897 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kim, M. J. Pellin and A. B. F. Martinson, Acid-Compatible Halide Perovskite Photocathodes Utilizing Atomic Layer Deposited TiO2 for Solar-Driven Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(1), 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Gao, W. J. Luo, Y. F. Yao and Z. G. Zou, An all-inorganic lead halide perovskite-based photocathode for stable water reduction, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(81), 11459–11462 RSC .
Y. F. Mu, W. Zhang, X. X. Guo, G. X. Dong, M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Water-Tolerant Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals as Efficient Photocatalysts for Visible-Light-Driven CO2 Reduction in Pure Water, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12(21), 4769–4774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Raza, F. Li, M. Que, L. Zhu and X. Chen, Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by halide perovskites: recent advances and future perspectives, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2(22), 7187–7209 RSC .
J. S. Meisner, D. F. Sedbrook, M. Krikorian, J. Chen, A. Sattler, M. E. Carnes, C. B. Murray, M. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Functionalizing molecular wires: a tunable class of α,ω-diphenyl-μ,ν-dicyano-oligoenes, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3(4), 1007 RSC .
G. Yuan, A. Agiral, N. Pellet, W. Kim and H. Frei, Inorganic core–shell assemblies for closing the artificial photosynthetic cycle, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 233–249 RSC .
W. Kim, E. Edri and H. Frei, Hierarchical Inorganic Assemblies for Artificial Photosynthesis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(9), 1634–1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim, B. A. McClure, E. Edri and H. Frei, Coupling carbon dioxide reduction with water oxidation in nanoscale photocatalytic assemblies, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45(11), 3221–3243 RSC .
E. Edri and H. Frei, Charge Transport through Organic Molecular Wires Embedded in Ultrathin Insulating Inorganic Layer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(51), 28326–28334 CrossRef CAS .
G. Katsoukis, W. J. Jo and H. Frei, Structure and Orientation of Molecular Wires Embedded in Ultrathin Silica Membrane for Artificial Photosynthesis Elucidated by Polarized FT-IRRAS, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(31), 18905–18913 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edri, J. K. Cooper, I. D. Sharp, D. M. Guldi and H. Frei, Ultrafast Charge Transfer between Light Absorber and Co3O4 Water Oxidation Catalyst across Molecular Wires Embedded in Silica Membrane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(15), 5458–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Jo, G. Katsoukis and H. Frei, Ultrathin Amorphous Silica Membrane Enhances Proton Transfer across Solid–to–Solid Interfaces of Stacked Metal Oxide Nanolayers while Blocking Oxygen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(12), 1909262 CrossRef CAS .
V. Miikkulainen, M. Leskelä, M. Ritala and R. L. Puurunen, Crystallinity of inorganic films grown by atomic layer deposition: Overview and general trends, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113(2), 021301 CrossRef .
C. C. Lin, T. R. Liu, S. R. Lin, K. M. Boopathi, C. H. Chiang, W. Y. Tzeng, W. C. Chien, H. S. Hsu, C. W. Luo, H. Y. Tsai, H. A. Chen, P. C. Kuo, J. Shiue, J. W. Chiou, W. F. Pong, C. C. Chen and C. W. Chen, Spin-Polarized Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction of Mn-Doped Perovskite Nanoplates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144(34), 15718–15726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr06530dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Protection of HaPs from water ingression. (A) Energy diagram of the photoelectrode components. The values represent disconnected materials relative to the absolute potential scale (in eV). The values next to each bar represent the valence band maxima or the work function (FTO and Ag). The values inside each bar represent the optical bandgap or absorption onset. The black arrows indicate the proposed electron and hole transfer paths. The HOMO and LUMO energy level position of the CMs are based on the first reduction potential of the CMs (−0.89 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and the optical absorption onset (2.92 eV). (B) Illustration of the photoelectrode structure. The illustration depicts the CMs attached to a linker and encapsulated in alumina. The linker is attached to the surface of titania. The components are not to scale. (C) Exposure of various CsPbBr3 photoelectrodes to water. The photoelectrodes were coated with (i) 70 nm of titania, 4 nm of alumina, and CMs; (ii) 70 nm of titania and 4 nm of alumina (without CMs). The CsPbBr3 color is preserved after water covered it. The water evaporated at room temperature over a few hours. (iii) CsPbBr3 coated with only titania (∼70 nm). The electrode bleached instantly upon exposure to water. (D) A SEM plan view image of a CsPbBr3-based photoelectrode with the structure illustrated in (B) after exposure to liquid water for >8 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  PEM-IRRAS spectra along the attachment steps of CMs to titania. Lower panel: spectrum of TMSA attached to titania. Mid panel: spectrum of CMs–TMSA–titania. Upper panel: spectrum of CMs–TMSA–titania encapsulated in 4 nm of alumina. The titania was deposited on top of a Ag coated glass. Bands’ assignment is described in the text.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conductive probe AFM of CM-functionalized electrodes. (A)–(D) alumina/titania/Ag electrodes. (A) Topography and (B) current map without CMs. (C) Topography and (D) current map with CMs. The topography scans show similar RMS values in both electrodes, while the current scans show a higher density of high current spots in electrodes with the CMs, indicating that the CMs facilitate charge transport across alumina. (E)–(H) CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO/FTO electrode (E) topography and (F) current map in the dark. (G) Topography and (H) current map in light. A bias voltage of −10 V was used to collect current maps.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plan view SEM images of metal/CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO. (A) SEM images after pulsed-photo-electrodeposition of Pt rods. The Pt rods are scattered on the surface without a clear registration with the structural features of the underlying substrate. (B) Higher magnification of Pt rods on top of the photoelectrode. Up to 20 μm long Pt rods were deposited while the underlying HaP was unharmed. (C) SEM image after 2 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag. Large and smooth-looking Ag plates partly cover the surface of the photoelectrode. The Ag plates are parallel to the surface, and the HaP grains are visible where Ag was not deposited. (D) SEM image after 15 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag on top of HaP\CMs photoelectrodes. A near complete coating of the photoelectrode surface with large Ag plates is seen. The plates are mostly laid on the surface, with some plates perpendicular. (E) A higher magnification SEM image of HaP\CMs photoelectrodes after 2 minutes of continuous photo-electrodeposition of Ag. The Ag deposit seems to register with the underlying structure of HaP grains. (F) SEM image after exposing the Ag-coated HaP\CMs photoelectrodes seen in (C) to water for 15 minutes. The Ag plates’ shape changed to octahedron-like. In addition, the underlying HaP grains are visible. (G) HaP photoelectrode coated with ∼5 nm of Ag deposited by thermal evaporation (Agth) before electrolysis. (H) The same photoelectrode in (G) after electrolysis. The Ag, which has a brighter contrast than the substrate, has a particulate morphology that covers most of the surface uniformly.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photo-electrochemistry of Ag/CMs–alumina/titania/HaP/NiO/FTO. (A) Linear scan voltammetry with pulsed light of photoelectrodes with and without CMs. Scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Inset: a magnified range. (B) Current–time with pulsed light of a photoelectrode with CMs. Arrow (1) indicates a change in the pulsed light width. The dark period is too short to allow the dark current to reach a steady state value. Arrow (2) indicates a bubble formation. Inset: a magnified range. A bias voltage of −0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied. (C) Linear scan voltammograms with a pulsed light increase of the negative potential scan range. The first scan is shown in (A). With subsequent scans, the magnitude of the photocurrent diminished. In all measurements, a CO2 saturated 0.1 M NaHCO3 aqueous electrolyte (pH ∼ 6.8) was used.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr06530d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
