Recent advances in understanding Li–CO 2 electrochemistry  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE03417F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE03417F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 887-922Recent advances in understanding Li–CO2 electrochemistry

        
          
            Bao 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yinglun 
            Sun
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lingyang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiangtao 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bingjun 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xingbin 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *abc
aLaboratory of Clean Energy Chemistry and Materials, State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China. E-mail: xbyan@licp.cas.cn; xushan@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-4968055;   Tel: +86-931-4968055
bCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
cDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian 116023, P. R. China
Received 
      21st November 2018
    , Accepted 9th January 2019First published on 10th January 2019AbstractWith ever-increasing demand for balancing CO2 emissions and maximizing electrical energy supplies, Li–CO2 electrochemistry, coupled with dual characteristics of advanced energy storage and effective CO2 fixation, has been attracting considerable attention from researchers. Herein, we offer a real-time, in-depth, and overall review of the latest research progress concerning CO2 reduction/evolution reaction mechanisms in Li–CO2/O2 and Li–CO2 electrochemical systems. Meanwhile, affecting factors on the reaction pathways and the identification of discharge products are summarized and discussed. Then, Li anode/electrolyte interface construction, electrolyte properties and selection of cathode materials/catalysts and design strategy, especially their effect on the performance of Li–CO2/O2 and Li–CO2 batteries, are explored and possible solutions and suggestions are provided. Building on an in-depth understanding of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, novel flexible Li–CO2 batteries and key factors are summarized. Furthermore, based on advanced research progress in the past several years, we identify the main problems, controversies, and challenges currently existing in various battery components that remain to be addressed to design more practicable Li–CO2/O2 and Li–CO2 batteries. Finally, future research directions and opportunities are presented.
Bao Liu
Bao Liu received his Bachelor's degree from Jiangxi University of Science and technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Xinbin Yan at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research focuses on the design and fabrication of new-fashioned energy storage devices coupled with both high-energy density and high power output based on alkali metal–air electrochemistry and the related mechanism study.
Yinglun Sun
Yinglun Sun received his Bachelor's degree in materials science and engineering from Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his doctor's degree in materials science at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Xingbin Yan. His current research interest is in the fabrication of multi-functional supercapacitors.
Lingyang Liu
Lingyang Liu received his Bachelor's degree from Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2013. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Xingbin Yan at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research interests are focused on the design and fabrication of multifunctional energy storage devices, especially supercapacitors, and the related functional mechanism study.
Shan Xu
Shan Xu completed her BS degree in 1999 at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology (China), and then obtained her PhD degree in 2005 at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). After that, she worked at SINOPEC Beijing Research Institute of Chemical Industry (BRICI) until the end of 2006. At the beginning of 2009, she worked at State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation in LICP. Her current research interests mainly focus on designing and fabricating non-noble metal based materials as heterogeneous catalysts and cathodic materials for Li–O2 electrochemical batteries.
Xingbin Yan
Xingbin Yan completed his BS degree in 2000 at the Department of Chemistry, Shandong University (China), and then obtained his PhD degree in 2005 at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). After that, he worked at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) as a research fellow and then at the University of Lyon 1 (France) as a postdoctoral researcher. At the beginning of 2009, he initiated his independent research in LICP as a professor. His current research interests mainly focus on designing and fabricating novel electrode materials and electrolytes for high-performance electrochemical energy storage devices.

Broader context
With the heavy use of fossil fuel and the continuous emission of industrial waste gas, the concentration of CO2 in air is getting higher every year, which has a tremendous negative impact on the surrounding environment and people's lives. So how to decrease or eliminate CO2 emissions has been a troubling issue for a long time. Li–CO2 electrochemistry, coupled with dual characteristics of both effective CO2 fixation and advanced energy storage/conversion, is considered to be a very promising way to balance the continuous CO2 release and the ever-growing energy demand. This review focuses on the recent advances regarding the reaction electrochemistry in Li–CO2 batteries, including the CO2 reduction/evolution mechanism, Li metal anode/electrolyte interfacial chemistry, the effect of electrolyte properties and cathode materials/catalyst design strategy on the performance of Li–CO2 batteries. Additionally, advanced flexible Li–CO2 batteries and the design strategies are proposed. A comprehensive understanding of Li–CO2 electrochemistry will help develop advanced Li–CO2 batteries with excellent electrochemical performance and good application prospects.

1. Introduction
Ever-increasing global warming resulting from greenhouse gases (mainly CO2) has become a thorny problem threatening the survival of mankind.1,2 In recent years, many researchers have devoted their efforts to seeking effective solutions that could significantly reduce CO2 emissions or efficiently utilize CO2 through capturing, burying, and transforming it into valuable chemicals.3–7 Among them, inspired by photosynthesis, making use of renewable energy to convert CO2 into fuels and chemicals (electrochemical CO2 reduction) constitutes a reasonably effective approach because this process achieves conversion of electrical energy into chemical energy, and storage in chemical bonds of the produced chemicals.8,9 However, the obvious shortcomings of electrochemical CO2 reduction are unsatisfactory energy conversion efficiency, owing to the non-reactive properties of CO2 molecules, and multi-electron/proton transfer control on the catalyst surface.10 Instead, direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 accompanied by electron transfer offers a very promising strategy in electrochemical energy storage fields.
Metal–CO2 batteries, including Li–CO2 batteries,11,12 Na–CO2 batteries and Al–CO2 batteries,13–15 utilizing CO2 as a cathodic reactant, possess great promising potential in both reversible CO2 fixation and energy storage fields. Among these batteries, Li–CO2 batteries are considered to be the best candidate due to their relatively high discharge potential (∼2.8 V) and theoretical specific energy density (1876 W h kg−1) based on the reaction of 4Li + 3CO2 ↔ 2Li2CO3 + C.16–18 Thus, they are regarded as desirable energy storage devices in providing sustainable electricity for long-distance transport, especially in CO2-rich environments, such as underwater operations and Mars exploration, where the atmosphere is composed of 96% CO2 gas.15 Moreover, CO2 is an inevitable contaminant in practical Li–air batteries, which has a great effect on O2 electrochemistry, and toward the achievement of feasible Li–air (O2) batteries.19–21 What is needed to be further mentioned is that Li–CO2 electrochemistry only involves a single CO2 reduction reaction on the cathodic surface of Li–CO2 electrochemical batteries, which is greatly different from the Li–air electrochemistry. Compared with Li–CO2 electrochemistry, the corresponding cathodic reaction of Li–air electrochemistry involves a series of complex electrochemical/chemical processes including Li–O2, Li–H2O, Li–CO2, etc. Therefore, it is of great significance to understand Li–CO2 electrochemistry and design corresponding devices.
In 2011, Takechi et al. first reported a primary Li–O2/CO2 battery,22 and discovered that the introduction of CO2 dramatically increased the discharge capacity compared with Li–O2 batteries. In addition, the discharge product was identified as Li2CO3, rather than Li2O2 and LiO2, which was consistent with successive results in Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry.17,21,23,24 After two years, Archer's group reported a primary high-temperature Li–CO2 battery based on an ionic liquid electrolyte and a commercial activated carbon cathode, and a Li–CO2 battery model was proposed. As shown in Fig. 1, a typical Li–CO2 battery is composed of a metal Li anode, a separator infiltrated with an organic electrolyte, and a porous CO2 cathode containing conductive additives, a binder, and a catalyst. During the discharging process, the Li metal anode loses electrons to form Li+, which will dissolve into the electrolyte, and the Li+ ions in the electrolyte move to the CO2 cathode under the driving force of the potential difference. At the cathode/electrolyte interface, dissolved CO2 molecules capture electrons from the cathode and combine with Li+ to produce discharge products of Li2CO3 and carbon species. The specific electrochemical reaction mechanisms involving Li–CO2/O2 electrochemistry and Li–CO2 electrochemistry are discussed in the next section. It is generally recognized that Li2CO3 is a wide-band gap insulator, which exhibits more thermodynamic stability and sluggish decomposition kinetics than Li2O2, a typical discharge product of Li–O2 electrochemistry.11,25 This means that the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 needs higher potential than that of Li2O2, and electro-catalysts are essential to assist the removal of Li2CO3. In 2014, Liu et al. found that Li2CO3 could be decomposed during the charge process of a Li–CO2/O2 battery.17 In 2015, Zhou et al. reported a rechargeable Li–CO2 battery by using porous graphene as a cathodic material.16 Subsequently, various attempts have been made to seek efficient catalysts to achieve the normal operation of Li–CO2/O2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, and many novel catalysts have been proven to possess excellent catalytic capability toward promoting CO2 reduction and evolution during the discharge and charge processes.12,26–30
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a reversible aprotic Li–CO2 battery. 
In addition to the selection of suitable electro-catalysts, the effects of electrolyte parameters, including chemical and electrochemical stability toward reactive O2˙− produced from the initial oxygen reduction in Li–CO2/O2 electrochemistry and the decomposition of Li2CO3,31,32 and dielectric constants of electrolyte solvents21 and lithium salt concentration24 on the CO2 electrochemical reaction mechanism, and the performance of Li–CO2/O2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, have been studied. To overcome the shortcomings of traditional organic liquid electrolytes, namely, high CO2 solubility (approximately 50 times higher than O2) and an issue of leakage,33 novel solid-state polymer electrolytes were developed.18,34,35 In addition, interfacial properties of Li metal/electrolyte have also been investigated recently,36 and wearable and flexible Li–CO2 batteries were successfully designed.18
Currently, despite the achievement of considerable progress in this rapidly emerging field, a comprehensive and systematic understanding of the electrochemical reaction mechanisms of the discharging process (CO2 fixation) and charging reactions involving electrochemical decomposition of solid Li2CO3 and the reversible electrochemical reaction between Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon species is lacking. Moreover, knowledge of the effect of electrolyte properties on the electrochemical reaction processes and the inherent characteristics, as well as the design strategy of electrode materials, remains limited. In 2016, Zhou et al.37 published a review that focused on the effect of reaction mechanisms, electrolytes, and cathode materials/catalysts on Li–CO2 electrochemistry and the performance of Li–CO2 batteries. It is worth noting that the mechanism of Li–CO2 electrochemistry was still unclear at that early stage, and the types of electrolyte and cathode material/catalyst were relatively few. In the past two years, great progress has been made in the study of reaction mechanisms, electrolytes and cathode materials/catalysts. However, only a few review articles exist about metal–air batteries, metal–CO2 batteries, and metal–CO2/O2 batteries that involve the concept of Li–CO2 electrochemistry and the effect of CO2 on Li–O2 electrochemistry.19,38–41 Moreover, investigations of Li metal anode/electrolyte interface properties and flexible Li–CO2 batteries have also been carried out. In the present review, we focus on the latest research progress in every aspect of Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Some current challenges and controversies are also pointed out. Finally, some novel ideas and opportunities for deepening the understanding of Li–CO2 electrochemistry and designing future practical Li–CO2 batteries are presented.
2. Mechanism for Li–CO2 electrochemistry
Although the emergence of Li–CO2 electrochemistry has a relatively short history, some major progress, in terms of understanding the detailed chemical and electrochemical processes of this advanced system, has been made in the past several years. For a comprehensive understanding of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, in this section, we first introduce the CO2 electrochemical reduction mechanism, involving a complicated O2-involved CO2 reduction process and a pure Li–CO2 electrochemistry mechanism, according to recent advanced research reports. Then, three major electrochemical processes releasing CO2 during the charging process, namely, electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 and the reversible electrochemical reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species, are discussed. The identification of discharge/charge products, involving some advanced and in situ characterization techniques, are also discussed. Finally, the critical factors (e.g., working gas components, temperature, current density, discharge depth, etc.) affecting discharge products and electrochemical processes are clarified. On the basis of a more comprehensive understanding of the current progress of Li–CO2 electrochemistry mechanisms, remaining controversies and challenges for future study are proposed in the discussion section.
2.1 CO2 electrochemical reduction mechanism

2.1.1 Mechanism of O2-involved CO2 electrochemical reduction. 
Many researchers have reached a consensus, according to which, to realize veritable Li–air batteries, the role of CO2 in environmental atmosphere should not be overlooked, even though there is very low concentration (∼0.03%) compared to that of O2. In a previous study of Li–O2 electrochemistry, CO2 is considered to be a contamination gas and has a noticeable influence on the electrochemical reaction of Li–O2 batteries. For example, Takechi et al. and Gowda et al. successively discovered that such batteries exhibited enhanced discharge capacity in a CO2/O2 gas mixture compared to that in a one component system.22,23 Apparently, the introduction of CO2 complicates Li–O2 electrochemical reactions. Nevertheless, some researchers invested great effort to explore the reaction chemistries and potential principles in such a complex reaction system, and the relevant electrochemical processes displayed as follows. In an earlier study, Albertus et al. proposed that Li–O2/CO2 batteries should work based on the following reaction.42 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3(1)
With progress in research, first-principles calculations (DFT) and mature investigation results in Li–O2 electrochemistry provided convincing evidence that, in an aprotic electrolyte system, for a gas mixture of O2 and CO2, O2 molecules preferentially trapped electrons from the cathode and reversibly formed O2˙− species (eqn (2)),21,33,43–45 because the direct CO2 reduction toward the formation of a CO2˙− intermediate is an energy-hungry pathway,46 which requires a highly negative potential (−2.0 V vs. Ag in DMSO,33 −2.21 V vs. SCE in DMF47). In other words, in aprotic Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry, the first electrochemical process is an “oxygen reduction reaction” as described in Li–O2 electrochemistry, rather than an electrochemical reduction of CO2. O2 + e− ⇄ O2˙−(2)
It is worth noting that controversy still exists concerning the following fundamental electrochemical/chemical reaction pathways involving CO2 reduction. On the basis of a generally accepted mechanism for CO2 sensors and molten-carbonate fuel cells, in which CO2 could capture O2˙− in non-aqueous solutions,48,49 Takechi et al. proposed a speculated reaction mechanism for Li–O2/CO2 batteries, which is summarized below.22 After the production of O2˙−, the subsequent processes are a series of chemical processes that could be understood as “oxygen-containing free radicals” inducing nucleophilic addition reactions. O2− species is a strong nucleophile and would bond with the carbonyl carbon atoms of CO2 molecules to form CO4− species. It is generally accepted that this reaction is a reversible process (eqn (3)), and the following reactions are a series of nucleophilic addition reactions and reduction reactions (eqn (4)–(6)).48 O2˙− + CO2 ↔ CO4˙−(3) CO4˙− + CO2 → C2O6˙−(4) C2O6˙− + O2˙− → C2O62− + O2(5) C2O6− + 2O2˙− + 4Li+ → 2Li2CO3 + 2O2(6)
Although this supposed mechanism could explain the rapid consumption of O2˙− by CO2 molecules and the slow precipitation of Li2CO3 as a final discharge product, its existence remains unclear. This is because these reaction processes ignore the function of Li+ and the solvation effect of Li+ cations with different solvent molecules. Moreover, this assumption is based on a carbonate electrolyte, and the intermediate products are not observed. Very recently, Qiao et al. investigated the effect of CO2 on the O2 reduction mechanism in an aprotic tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAClO4)–DMSO electrolyte by in situ Raman technology.24 They discovered that the intermediates of C2O62− and CO42− species were detected successively on the Au cathode as the discharge proceeded, and O2− was finally detected. It should be noted that although this report has successfully observed the formation of these metastable intermediates, the detailed reaction pathways remain unknown due to the application of the Li+-free aprotic electrolyte and the failure to consider these intermediates’ lifetime. Moreover, it was found that the type of discharge intermediate depended on the volume ratio of CO2 and O2. Consequently, a major debate exists about the Li–O2/CO2 reaction electrochemistry in aprotic Li+-containing electrolytes.
In order to elucidate the reaction mechanisms of Li–O2/CO2 batteries in different electrolyte systems, Lim et al. performed a theoretical simulation coupled with experiments to show that only Li2CO3 formed in high dielectric electrolytes, such as DMSO.21 In contrast, the Li2O2 species was produced as a primary product in low dielectric electrolytes, such as DME, indicating that the reaction processes of Li–O2/CO2 batteries rely heavily on the dielectric properties of electrolytes. Toward this effort, Yin and co-workers reported a similar result to Lim et al.50 They experimentally verified that the whereabouts of superoxide species depends on the solvation strength of Li+ with electrolyte solvent molecules. However, inconsistent with the report of Lim et al., in both DMSO electrolyte and DME electrolyte, the formation of Li2CO3 as a final discharge product was observed. On the basis of these advances, three possible models were proposed to explain the Li2CO3 formation reaction in aprotic Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry, as summarized in Fig. 2. These three pathways were believed to be determined by the applied electrolyte solvent, and each pathway involved a series of complicated element steps. In high DN (DN refers to the Gutmann donor number) solvents, a typical example of which is DMSO, the dissolved Li+ cations are highly solvated by solvent molecules, and thus Li+ cations are stabilized by neutralizing the positive charge by DMSO.50 In this case, the produced O2˙− species stemming from the initial oxygen reduction (eqn (2)) combine with dissolved CO2 molecules to form CO4˙− species (eqn (7)), which further react with solvated Li+ to generate LiCO4 species (eqn (8)).21,50 O2˙− + CO2 ⇄ CO4˙−(7) CO4˙− + Li+ → LiCO4(8)
 Fig. 2  The possible reaction pathways for the formation of Li2CO3 in non-aqueous Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry. 
However, in low DN solvents, an example of which is DME, Li+ cations have relatively weak interactions with solvent molecules. Therefore, it is concluded that O2˙− species preferentially couple with Li+ cations instead of dissolved CO2 molecules to form LiO2 intermediates (eqn (9)).50 In the next step, the formed LiO2 species would further react with CO2 molecules to produce LiCO4 intermediates (eqn (10)).50 O2˙− + Li+ ⇄ LiO2(9) LiO2 + CO2 → LiCO4(10)
For both cases, LiCO4 intermediates could transform into the final Li2CO3 species through an electrochemical reduction along with the reaction with solvated Li+ and dissolved CO2 molecules (eqn (11)).50 The overall reaction for both pathways is referred to as an indirect two-electron transfer process, as described in eqn (1). LiCO4 + 3Li+ + CO2 + 3e− → 2Li2CO3(11)
Another proposed mechanism claimed that the detected Li2CO3 derived from the chemical reaction between CO2 and the generated Li2O2 during the initial discharge stage, as displayed in eqn (14). This is because Li2CO3 is more thermodynamically stable than Li2O2, and the thermodynamic driving force will compel the transformation of Li2O2 into Li2CO3.37,51,52 This electrochemical process for the formation of Li2CO3 could be understood as an initial oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and a subsequent chemical reaction process. It should be clear that the so-called ORR mechanism is consistent with the extensive research results in non-aqueous Li–O2 electrochemistry. This involves direct one-electron reduction of dissolved oxygen molecules and combination with solvated Li+ to form a LiO2 intermediate (eqn (2) and (9)), and the subsequent disproportionation reaction of LiO2 (eqn (12)) or a second electrochemical reduction of LiO2 (eqn (13)) to form Li2O2 species.53–56 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2(12) LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2(13) 2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2(14)
In this context, to understand the effect of CO2 on the Li2O2 growth mechanism and battery performance, Mekonnen et al. applied density functional theory (DFT) coupled with galvanostatic measurements to determine that CO2 molecules could preferentially bind at the step valley sites of the (100) Li2O2 surface to form Li3CO3-type complexes, which present a low adsorption energy of −0.73 eV.57 The authors further claimed that low concentrations of CO2 could block the surface-active nucleation sites of Li2O2, and thus increase the capacity of Li–O2/CO2 batteries, but at the cost of increased overpotential. Takechi et al. ruled out the possibility of the reaction (eqn (14)) because such a reaction could not explain the improvement of discharge capacity in the mixture gas of CO2 and O2.22 However, Gowda et al. claimed that the augmentation of capacity was attributed to the increased electronic conductivity of Li2CO3 through O2-induced morphology change.23 A theoretical calculation study on the interface properties of Li2O2@Li2CO3 indicated that, compared with pure Li2O2, the favorable formation of electron polaron hopping within the Li2O2 part of the interface increases the electronic conductivity of the discharge product, and therefore explains the improvement of capacity in Li–O2/CO2 batteries.58
In general, although the above-mentioned works offer insight into Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry, substantial controversy exists in understanding the elementary reactions of this complicated system, and related exploration is still in its infancy.


2.1.2 The mechanism of Li–CO2 electrochemistry. 
Compared with O2-involved CO2 electrochemical reduction, the reaction process of Li–CO2 electrochemistry seems relatively simple. Nemeth et al. proposed that the dissolved CO2 molecules can capture electrons from the cathode and are further reduced to C2O42− species by one-electron reduction (eqn (15)).59 By analogy with the disproportionation reaction of LiO2 in Li–O2 electrochemistry, Chen's group speculated that Li–CO2 batteries undergo an analogous disproportionation reaction during CO2 reduction.60 The first step is in line with reaction (15) and, subsequently, unstable C2O42− undergoes two steps of disproportionation reactions to form CO32− and carbon, as shown in eqn (16) and (17). Finally, the formed CO32− couples with Li+ to produce crystalline Li2CO3, according to eqn (18). Therefore, the proposed electrochemical reduction mechanism for aprotic Li–CO2 electrochemistry can be described using eqn (19). 2CO2 + 2e− ⇄ C2O42−(15) C2O42− → CO22− + CO2(16) C2O42− + CO22− → 2CO32− + C(17) CO32− + 2Li+ → Li2CO3(18) 4Li+ + 4e− + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C(19)
In addition to the above-mentioned insights, electro-catalysts played a key role in changing the electrochemical reaction course and determining the final reduction products of CO2 due to the desirable electrocatalytic selectivity. For instance, Wang's group discovered that, in addition to the formation of Li2CO3 species, CO gas, instead of solid carbon species, is produced on the three-dimensional porous fractal Zn cathode. The corresponding electro-reduction mechanism of CO2 in aprotic Li–CO2 batteries is described as eqn (20).61 2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− ↔ Li2CO3 + CO(20)
As discussed above, Li2CO3 is the ultimate discharge product in both Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry and Li–CO2 electrochemistry, regardless of the electrochemical environment and affecting factors. To gain a better understanding of CO2 reduction electrochemistry and the Li2CO3 formation mechanism, Table 1 summarizes the possible electrochemical/chemical reactions, corresponding standard Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic potential (reversible potential) for the formation of Li2CO3. In short, those reports regarding the complicated CO2 reduction mechanisms remain controversial and a tremendous amount of effort is required to reveal the intrinsic reactions.
Table 1 Possible electrochemical/chemical reactions, corresponding standard Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic potential (reversible potential) for formation of Li2CO3




Possible reactions
ΔfG0 (kJ mol−1)

E
0rev (V vs. Li)
Ref.




Note: for the same electrochemical reaction“2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3”, the provided Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic potential are inconsistent due to the different calculation methods; label “a” stands for thermodynamic data extracted from ref. 62, “b” and “c” represent the thermodynamic values obtained through density functional theory calculations and the Nernst equation in DMSO and DME electrolytes, respectively.




2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3a
−737.72a
3.82a

62



2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3b
−351.22b
3.81b

21



2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3c
−352.74c
3.82c

21



2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2
−333.3
—

37



4Li+ + 4e− + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C
−1081.04
2.80

63



2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− ↔ Li2CO3 + CO
−480.49
2.5

61



3CO + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2C + Li2CO3
−720.50
3.73

64






2.2 CO2 electrochemical evolution mechanism
For reversible metal–air batteries, taking mature Li–O2 batteries as an example, the consumption and evolution amounts of O2 in discharge and charge processes, respectively, are theoretically equivalent. For Li–O2 batteries, without considering side reactions, only Li2O2 or LiO2 is formed on the surface of the oxygen cathode as ultimate discharge products, which simplifies the decomposition mechanism of these lithium oxides.45,65,66 In comparison, two crucial discharge products, Li2CO3 and carbon, are produced on the cathodic surface during the discharging process. Consequently, the evolution of CO2 may result from the self-decomposition of Li2CO3 or the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species.

2.2.1 Electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3. 
Li2CO3 is a main discharge product in Li–CO2 batteries, and its wide-bandgap feature resulting in the decomposition of Li2CO3 requires a relatively high charging potential (>4.2 V).67 This means that the incomplete decomposition of Li2CO3 and high charge potential usually cause poor reversibility and low energy efficiency of Li–CO2 batteries, and even eventually Li–air batteries. Over the last several years, great efforts have been made to investigate the electrochemical decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3.40 On the basis of current research results, the electrochemical decomposition processes of Li2CO3 are divided into three possible pathways.31 The possible reactions, corresponding standard Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic potential (reversible potential) for electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Possible reactions, corresponding standard Gibbs free energy and thermodynamic potential (reversible potential) for electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3




Possible reactions
ΔfG° (kJ mol−1)

E
0rev (V vs. Li)
Ref.




Note: “a” represents the oxygen free radical-generated Li2CO3 decomposition process; the corresponding Gibbs free energy value and reversible potential value have not yet been confirmed; “b” represents the singlet oxygen-generated Li2CO3 decomposition process; the Gibbs free energy value and reversible potential value were not provided in the relevant literature and the presented values in this table are reference values compared with the O2-evolved Li2CO3 decomposition process.




2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−
737.72
3.82

62



2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2˙− + 4Li+ + 3e−
Unknown valuea
Unknown valuea

31



2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + 1O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−
737.72b
3.82b

68



2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−
540.52
2.80

32





The first path can be understood as the self-decomposition of Li2CO3, as displayed in eqn (21). In this process, both CO2 and O2 are evolved, and the corresponding electron transfer number is 2e− per CO2 molecule.40,62 However, a previous investigation of a model cathode pre-filled with Li2CO3 in an ether-based electrolyte also found that, during the charge process, no O2 was observed at 120 mA gcarbon−1.62 In addition, research on the charge process of Mn-based MOF-catalyzed Li–CO2 batteries has reported that no O2 was detected when the discharged Li–CO2 battery was recharged in the ether-based electrolyte with a current density of 200 mA g−1.69 Very recently, Wang et al. also found that, during the charging process of a RuP2-catalyzed Li–CO2 battery, no O2 was generated in the ether-based electrolyte at 200 mA g−1.70 2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(21)
The second pathway was defined as the “O2˙−-mediated pathway” by Peng et al.40 The produced O2˙− resulted from the decomposition of Li2CO3 as a strong supernucleophile (eqn (22)), which would further be oxidized to evolve O2 through eqn (23), or directly attack electrolyte solvents, in particular high-donicity solvents, to form a series of uncertain parasitic products.31,71,72 2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2˙− + 4Li+ + 3e−(22) O2˙− − e− → O2(23)
Qiao et al. approached the issue by performing quantitative analysis using differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS).32 It was suggested that whether O2˙− or O2 is produced during the self-decomposition process of Li2CO3 depends greatly on charging current rates. According to the detection of the evolved gas component and charge-to-mass ratio of CO2, it was concluded that the decomposition of Li2CO3 complies with eqn (22) at a low charge current density of 500 mA g−1, and at a relatively high current rate of 2 A g−1, the decomposition of Li2CO3 follows eqn (21) at the initial stage and the subsequent charging process is consistent with eqn (22). As the author claimed, the different decomposition pathways of Li2CO3 largely rely on the kinetic factor. Recently, Freunberger and co-workers applied a selective chemical probe and online mass spectrometry to confirm that the electrochemical oxidation of Li2CO3 in a non-aqueous electrolyte viaeqn (24) would produce highly reactive singlet oxygen (1O2), which would further degrade the battery components or act as a quencher to evolve as 3O2.68 This discovery solves a long existing problem, and offers suggestions to achieve reversible electrochemical batteries based on the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 species. 2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + 1O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(24)
In this part, we only introduced the individual electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3. The third pathway, involving the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species, is discussed individually in the next section, because it is critical to design a truly reversible Li–CO2 battery.


2.2.2 Reversible electrochemical reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species. 
In addition to the individual decomposition of Li2CO3, another feasible decomposition pathway for Li2CO3 in thermodynamics is shown as eqn (25), which is a perfectly reversible process of discharging in Li–CO2 batteries. Thermodynamic calculations from Gibbs free energy suggest that this reaction has a low reversible potential of 2.8 V.31,32 Thus, it is crucial to design a reversible and rechargeable Li–CO2 battery along this pathway. In contrast, if the charging process achieves the sole decomposition of Li2CO3, this electrochemical system can be considered as a primary Li–CO2 battery with CO2 fixation. Toward this effort, several researchers have verified that, with the assistance of some special catalysts, such as metal Ru and Mn-based organic frameworks, the corresponding Li–CO2 batteries have successfully achieved the reversible reaction according to eqn (25).26,32 2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(25)

2.3 Identification of discharge/charge products
Identifying discharge and charge products is of great importance to understand the underlying reaction mechanisms and select optimized electrolytes and cathodic materials/catalysts for high performance Li–CO2 batteries. In both Li–O2/CO2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, Li2CO3 is the main discharge product and forms after the discharging process.17,22,50 For Li–CO2 batteries, amorphous carbon, together with Li2CO3, forms during the discharging process.26,32 Usually, the morphology of the discharge products after the discharging and charging process was directly observed by ex situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).12,26,29,73,74 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out for phase analysis,27,29,74 and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used for analyzing the oxidation states and composition of the discharge products.73 In order to prove the generation of amorphous carbon species, carbon-free cathodes, such as a Ru/Ni cathode, a Au/Ni cathode, Au and Ru cathodes, were utilized as a CO2 cathode. Combined with the very sensitive surface analytical technique of Raman measurement, detection of the formation and decomposition of carbon has been successfully achieved.26,32,70 It is worth noting that the above-mentioned ex situ characteristics are only utilized for postmortem analysis, and it is difficult to observe the unstable/metastable intermediates in the operation of the battery. For instance, the generated superoxide radical (O2˙−)/singlet oxygen (1O2) stems from the decomposition of Li2CO3,31,32,68 which is important to validate the present reported reaction mechanism. In fact, Zhou et al. proposed superoxide formation upon Li2CO3 decomposition, but did not provide direct electrochemical/spectroscopic evidence,31,32 while direct evidence for the generation of singlet oxygen was provided by Mahne et al.68 In order to resolve this discrepancy, further confirmation of whether the oxidation of Li2CO3 produces O2˙− and/or LiO2 is essential, because the formation of LiO2 in the oxidation of Li2O2 is controlled by the electrolyte solvent, and the generated LiO2 is soluble in high-donicity solvents, as reported in a recent work on Li–O2 electrochemistry.72 For the detection of possible soluble intermediates, such as O2˙− and LiO2, a rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) has been proven to be an effective technique,72 which can be applied to explore the electrochemical decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3. In addition, paramagnetic substances containing unpaired electrons, such as superoxide radicals, have been intensively studied by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), which can also be used to detect possibly produced radicals during the decomposition of Li2CO3 and the reduction of CO2.75 To realize real-time and online detection of the CO2 reduction process, the in situ Raman technique was performed and the evolution of intermediates toward the final discharge products was accurately traced.24,32 In addition, in situ differential quantitative mass spectrometry (DEMS) analyses and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) can accurately obtain the mole ratio of the electron transfer number and the consumption/release of CO2 molecules, which is critical to determine the elementary reaction of Li–CO2 electrochemistry.27,69 In addition, considering the high similarities between Li–CO2 and Li–O2 batteries, some other advanced in situ/operando characterization techniques established to perform real-time monitoring of the interface reactions of Li–O2 system can serve as a reference to probe possible intermediates from the reduction of CO2 and the oxidation of Li2CO3.76 We believe that, with the emergence of advanced characterization tools and in situ analysis technology, the underlying mechanisms will be understood in the near future.
2.4 The affecting factors of Li–CO2 electrochemistry
This section mainly clarifies the critical factors (e.g., working gas components, temperatures, current density, discharge depth, etc.) affecting the discharge products and Li–CO2 electrochemical processes. Earlier studies of Li–air batteries and Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry have indicated that the working atmosphere drastically affects the final discharge products and capacity of batteries. Specifically, for Li–O2/CO2 and Li–CO/CO2 systems, O2 and CO can be considered as contaminants of strictly Li–CO2 electrochemistry, and therefore these additional gases constitute major factors affecting Li–CO2 electrochemistry, which were discussed as the influence of working gas composition on Li–CO2 electrochemistry. For Li–O2/CO2 batteries with a low CO2 content, the discharge capacity is much higher than Li–O2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, and the end discharge product is Li2CO3.22,23 When the content of CO2 in the mixture exceeds 50%, the discharge capacity of such battery decreases conversely.57 In addition, Ma et al. recently reported that the introduction of CO changed the reaction pathway of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, as shown in Fig. 3.64 In the presence of CO, the first discharging process occurs based on the following electrochemical reaction (eqn (26)), and the corresponding charging process is a reversible reaction based on pure Li–CO2 electrochemistry, which is in accordance with reaction (25). During the subsequent discharging process, both CO and CO2 are involved in the discharging reaction, as displayed in eqn (27), and the successive charging reaction is a reversible process. The content of CO gradually decreases with reaction progress, and Li–CO2 electrochemistry dominates the overall battery reaction. In contrast, the addition of CO in Li–CO2 batteries results in the formation of more carbon species, which greatly enhances the conductivity of the discharge products. Apart from the increased conductivity, the introduced CO also affects the morphology, distribution, and crystallinity of the discharge products. Benefiting from the uniform distribution, improved conductivity, and poor crystallinity of the film-like discharge products as well as the effective usage of cathode, the Li–CO/CO2 battery exhibits greatly improved capacity, round-trip efficiency, and cycling stability. 3CO + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2C + Li2CO3(26) 3xCO2 + 3CO + 2(2x + 1)Li+ + 2(2x + 1)e− ⇌ (x + 2)C + (2x + 1)Li2CO3(27)
 Fig. 3  (a) Structure and (b) working mechanism of a typical Li–CO/CO2 battery. 
Beyond the reactive atmosphere, temperature is also a crucial factor that affects the discharge capacity of Li–CO2 batteries. Archer et al. found that a primary Li–CO2 battery based on an active carbon cathode exhibited notably increased discharge capacity (approximately 200 times) compared with low-temperature Li–CO2 batteries.11 They proposed that improving the battery operation temperature has a significant effect on the coating thickness and topology, and thus increases the discharge potential and discharge specific capacity.11,77 Current density is another important factor, and the current reported Li–CO2 batteries could normally work at relatively low current density, i.e., a Li–CO2 battery has an undesirable rate capability.12 During discharging of Li–CO2 batteries, with the increase of current densities, the corresponding discharge potentials and discharge capacity of the Li–CO2 batteries are significantly decreased,16,29,30 which could be ascribed to two aspects. On the one hand, cathodic reaction kinetics are usually determined by mass transfer, involving the diffusion of Li+ and CO2 molecules from the bulk of the electrolyte to the cathode surface in organic electrolytes. In such a case, diffusion kinetics constitutes the rate-controlling step compared with cathode reaction kinetics, and thus results in increased discharge overpotential and reduced discharge capacity. On the other hand, discharge rate may also affect the nucleation and growth mechanism, morphology, and crystallinity of discharge products,26 which may have an enormous influence on the discharge potential and capacity, as widely studied in Li–O2 electrochemistry.78,79 Besides the remarkable effect of current rate on the discharge process, more importantly, charging current rate also has a great impact on the decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3, as discussed in the section above. Besides, discharge depth directly determines the reaction pathway and the kinds of discharge products. For example, Qiao et al. discovered that Li2O species appeared with increasing discharge capacity (depth) at a low discharge plateau of ∼1.8 V.32 In addition to the above-mentioned factors, the influence of electrolytes and catalysts on Li–CO2 electrochemistry is summarized in the corresponding part of the review.
3. Stable lithium metal/electrolyte interface construction
The use of metallic lithium as a negative electrode is the most ideal for all Li metal-based batteries due to its extremely high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and lowest electrochemical potential (−3.040 V vs. SHE).80–82 However, the structural and interfacial instability of metal anode/aprotic electrolyte always presents a challenge, and greatly affects the safety and overall performance of such batteries, especially coulombic efficiency and cycling life.83,84 For gas-involved Li anode electrochemical systems, taking the Li–O2 battery as an example, the reaction of the Li metal anode and dissolved O2 is inevitable.85 In general, to realize the optimal design of practical Li/electrolyte construction, the following two aspects should be carefully considered. First, due to heterogeneous deposition and stripping of lithium during the cycling process, the formed lithium dendrites on the Li metal surface would result in severe security problems, namely, thermal runaway and short-circuiting. Second, the produced passivation film (SEI, solid electrolyte interface layer) resulting from the reactions between metal Li and electrolyte/dissolved gas not only increases potential polarization, but also restricts the cycling life of the corresponding battery. In recent years, numerous efforts have been devoted to building a stable Li metal protective layer with excellent Li+ conductivity, and homogeneous morphology and components through pre-treating Li metal to create artificial coatings on the Li metal surface,83,86–88 or adjusting the concentration or components of the electrolyte with additives,81,89,90 and satisfactory results have been achieved. In this section, we primarily focus on the three-phase boundary reaction concerning metal Li–electrolyte–CO2 gas and the effects of the properties of the formed Li2CO3 passivation layer on battery performance. In earlier research, Billups and Margrave reported that CO2 could spontaneously react with metallic lithium in an argon matrix to form lithium oxalate, and this reaction could easily occur at room temperature.91 Archer et al. considered that the formed Li2C2O4 would decompose to Li2CO3 and CO gas at high temperature (Li2C2O4 → Li2CO3 + CO↑).11 In addition, Aurbach et al. found that the presence of CO2 in a carbonate-based electrolyte led to the formation of LiCO3 species on the surface of a metal Li anode, which thus increased the Li cycling efficiency of the Li electrode.92 Further an in situ FTIR spectroelectrochemical study once again demonstrated that, at low potential, a LiCO3 film formed on the Li metal surface in various organic lithium salt solutions, which suppressed organic solvate-related surface reactions.93 These previous studies indicated that the available and stable Li2CO3 passivation layer on the Li metal surface provided electrochemical feasibility to achieve Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Quite recently, Asadi et al. reported a rechargeable Li–O2 battery, which showed an ultra-long cycle life in a simulative air atmosphere by utilizing a Li2CO3/C coating layer protected Li metal anode.36 In the preparation of the protected Li anode, the protective layer was formed by cycling of Li–CO2 batteries and the composition and formation mechanism were systematically studied. As shown in Fig. 4(a), after 10 continuous discharge and charge cycles of the Li–CO2 battery composed of the Li anode, EMIM-BF4/DMSO electrolyte and MoS2 cathode, there was a layer of species with a rod-shaped network structure evenly covered on the surface of the Li anode. Further results from Raman, XPS, and EELS spectroscopy revealed that the coating layer was composed of Li2CO3 and carbon species (Fig. 4(b)–(d)). The authors proposed the formation mechanism of the Li2CO3/C protective layer on the Li anode, which was that, during the charging process of Li–CO2 batteries, Li+ resulting from the decomposition of Li2CO3 on the cathode surface would travel back to the Li anode side and react with dissolved CO2 molecules to form a Li2CO3/C covering layer on the Li anode surface according to the reaction 4Li + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C. Owing to the absence of catalysts (here referred to MoS2), the reaction was quite irreversible and further caused continuous accumulation of Li2CO3 and carbon on the anode. Interestingly, the protected Li anode had a high average lithium retention of 99.97%, which was provided by an exhaustive stripping test after running a cell with a protected anode for 51 cycles in an air environment, as shown in Fig. 4(e), and the detailed test method was displayed in ref. 36. It is worth noting that the charge transfer resistance of the passivated anode continued to increase with the increase of cycle number (Fig. 4(f)). This means that, during the operation of Li–CO2 batteries, the polarization of the anode accounts for an increasing proportion of the overall battery polarization. Very recently, Ma et al. observed that, after a long-term cycling of Li–CO2 batteries, the Li anode was severely corroded and the surface was covered with a loose corroded layer consisting of Li2CO3 and LiOH species.94 They proposed that Li anode corrosion would lead to the continuous consumption of electrolyte and CO2, which finally blocked the mass transportation at the anode side and degraded the battery performance. Mao et al. also investigated the Li anode of a dead Li–CO2 battery and found that metallic Li has been fully transformed into LiOH, which was responsible for the failure of the Li–CO2 batteries.95 In this context, pre-treatment of Li metal to form a specific protective layer with both good Li+ ion conductivity and high lithium retention may offer an optimal approach to avoid potential safety hazards and realize a Li–CO2 battery with excellent cyclability. Although these advanced works made great strides toward understanding interface chemistry involving metallic lithium, CO2 and organic electrolytes, it is still in its infancy. Consequently, we believe that exploring Li–metal/electrolyte interfacial properties will constitute an active topic for researchers in the future.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image, (b) Raman spectrum, (c) XPS spectra and (d) EELS spectra of the Li metal anode after ten continuous discharge and charge cycles. (e) Exhaustive stripping test of the protected Li anode at 0.5 mA cm−2, and the inset is the cycling test of the protected Li anode in air at 0.05 mA cm−2. (f) The comparison of electrochemical impedance spectra for the passivated Li anode at various cycles of Li–CO2 batteries and fresh anode. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2018, Macmillan publishers Limited. 
4. Suitable electrolytes for stable Li–O2/CO2 and Li–CO2 electrochemistry
Perhaps the most serious scientific challenge facing both Li–O2/CO2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries is the instability of the current electrolyte systems, which, to a large extent, determine the working mechanisms of the cathode, and the morphology, distribution, and crystallinity of the discharge products. Thus, electrolytes greatly affect the overall performance of such batteries, especially the cyclability. As discussed in the mechanism section, Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry involves the formation of superoxide species during the initial discharging process. Moreover, the charging process is an irreversible reaction based on the individual decomposition of Li2CO3, which is likely to produce reactive superoxide species or singlet oxygen. In contrast, the formation of superoxide species or singlet oxygen is only possible for primary Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Given the different mechanisms of the two systems, in this section, we respectively overview the progress of current applied electrolyte systems for Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry and Li–CO2 electrochemistry by categorization according to the kinds of electrolyte solvents. On the basis of recent advanced reports, the potential advantages/disadvantages of such electrolyte solvents have been identified. Moreover, the effect of some crucial electrolyte parameters, including electrochemical stability against possible discharge products and intermediates, chemical stability (wide voltage window), dielectric constants, Gutmann donor number (DN) of different electrolyte solvents, and lithium salt concentration on the CO2 reduction/evolution mechanisms, as well as the performance of Li–O2/CO2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, have been discussed, respectively. In the last part, the deficiencies and challenges of current research works, and the corresponding remedial measure for traditional liquid electrolyte systems, namely, the development of new-generation solid-state electrolytes (including polymer electrolyte and gel electrolyte), have also been discussed.
4.1 Aprotic liquid electrolytes for Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry
According to the O2-involved CO2 reaction mechanisms, Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry has a similarity with Li–O2 electrochemistry, that is, the two electrochemical reactions involve the formation of O2˙− species during the discharge process. This means that the choice of a suitable electrolyte for the Li–O2/CO2 battery should be carefully considered. As established elsewhere, the discharge product of O2˙− was considered as a strong Lewis base and an efficient electron-transfer agent that would lead to the decomposition of polar electrolyte solvents, such as propylene carbonate and DMSO by nucleation attack (proton substitution or abstraction).72,96 In an early study of this new field, a carbonate-based electrolyte (1 M LiTFSI/(EC/DMC with a volume ratio of 3:7)) was used for a primary Li–O2/CO2 battery, which obtained a much improved discharge capacity.22 As widely discussed in the O2˙-generated electrochemical processes, the formed superoxide radicals could function as a nucleophile, which would attack O-alkyl carbons (methylene groups) of organic carbonate molecules and further result in a ring-opening reaction of this kind of electrolyte solvent to produce a series of irreversible by-products, such as Li2CO3, CO2,H2O and Li-carboxylates.71,97–99 It is easy to recognize that the generation of superoxide radicals is essential for Li–O2/CO2 batteries, and even the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 during the charging process of Li–O2/CO2 batteries. This implies that carbonate-based electrolytes may not be suitable for rechargeable Li–O2/CO2 electrochemical batteries.
Dimethyl sulfoxide(DMSO) is a popular electrolyte solvent in the field of metal–air batteries due to its advantages of high conductivity, high CO2 solubility, and low viscosity.100,101 Some earlier studies on Li–O2 batteries have indicated that a DMSO-based electrolyte matching with a carbon-free Au cathode and a TiC cathode presented significantly enhanced recyclability.100,102 However, several in-depth studies determined that DMSO was unstable in the presence of aggressive superoxide species (O2˙− and LiO2), which could be oxidized to form dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2).103,104 Another possible reason for DMSO2 generation could be the direct electrochemical oxidation of DMSO on the Au cathode at a high charging voltage of 4.2 V in the presence of trace H2O, which is an inevitable component in all rigidly dry organic electrolyte systems, as supported by Mozhzhukhina et al.103 The issue of DMSO2 in DMSO-based electrolytes remains a controversial topic.
Combined with quantum mechanical simulations and experimental verification, Lim et al. discovered that dielectric constants of different electrolyte solvents had a great impact on the reaction mechanisms of Li–O2/CO2 (50%) electrochemistry. In high dielectric DMSO, CO2 molecules are easily activated via nucleophilic attack by electrochemically generated superoxide radicals towards the formation of Li2CO3 in Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry. Instead, in the low dielectric DME electrolyte, O2 molecules are electrochemically reduced to O2− and further vigorously combine with charged Li+ to form Li2O2 species, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Moreover, they provided direct experimental evidence that the Li–O2/CO2 battery based on a porous carbon cathode and DMSO electrolyte showed better rechargeability than the DME-based battery. The authors attributed the reversible formation of Li2CO3 to the effective electrochemical activation of CO2 by high dielectric DMSO. Subsequently, this finding was further investigated experimentally by Yin and co-workers, and a similar result was obtained.50 They found that solvents could alter the reaction pathway of the superoxide intermediate due to the different salvation between Li+ and solvent molecules, and Li2CO3 was the only discharge product in both high DN solvent (DMSO) electrolyte and low DN solvent (DME) electrolyte. The proposed influencing mechanism based on different solvents is discussed specifically in the mechanism section.
 Fig. 5  (a) The effect of dielectric constants of electrolyte solvents on the reaction pathways of CO2 reduction under the existence of O2. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) In situ Raman spectra recorded during the charging process of a Li–CO2 battery with an Au cathode in LiClO4/DMSO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017,32 Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic illustrations of the formation mechanism of the final discharge product (Li2CO3) in dilute LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte. (d) Raman spectra of LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte with the increase of LiTFSI and DMSO mole ratio. (e) Schematic illustrations of the formation mechanism of the final discharge product (C2O62−) in super-concentrated LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from dielectric constants and DN of solvent molecules, the lithium salt concentration of the DMSO-based electrolyte also has a significant effect on the electrochemical mechanism of Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry. In dilute DMSO-based electrolytes, Li+ ion is solvated by DMSO molecules to form a [Li(DMSO)4]+ monodentate ligand,105,106 for which the Li+ cations in [Li(DMSO)4]+ solvation spheres have a relatively weak interaction with lithium salt anions (TFSI−). Consequently, the unstable C2O62− anions produced during the initial discharge process would have the tendency to combine with Li+ to form Li2C2O6 species, which would be further reduced/dissociated into Li2CO3 (Fig. 5(c)). Accordingly, it is desirable to find a new strategy that enables neutralization of the charged Li+ and further prevention of the combination of Li+ ion and C2O62−. Recently, Zhou's group developed a super-concentrated DMSO-based electrolyte composed of a DMSO-solvated contact ion pair ([Li(DMSO)3]+–[TFSI−]) by adjusting the mole ratio of the lithium salt (LiTFSI) and DMSO solvent.24 It was proposed that, in this super-concentrated LiTFSI/DMSO electrolyte (1:3 mole ratio), TFSI− anions have a strong interaction with Li+ in [Li(DMSO)4]+ solvation spheres and replace one DMSO ligand to form a [Li(DMSO)3]+–[TFSI−] contact ion pair. This effectively prevents the combination of Li+ and C2O62−, and thus stabilizes C2O62− (Fig. 5(d) and (e)). Interestingly, when this highly concentrated LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte was introduced into the Li–O2/CO2 battery, the charging potential was significantly decreased when the mole ratio of LiTFSI and DMSO was 1:3, which exhibited a peroxodicarbonate-related decomposition potential plateau of ∼3.5 V, indicating the achievement of a peroxodicarbonate-based Li–O2/CO2 battery. Moreover, Li–O2/CO2 batteries based on super-concentrated LiTFSI/DMSO (1:3 mole ratio) electrolytes showed much improved rate capability (below 3.6 V at 600 mA g−1) and excellent cycle performance (20 cycles) under completely discharged and charged conditions at a high current density of 400 mA g−1. In light of the above-mentioned advancements, both the intrinsic properties of DMSO solvent and the overall structure of DMSO-based electrolytes greatly affect CO2 reduction mechanisms in Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry.
Some other electrolytes that are widely used in Li–O2 electrochemistry may also be suitable for Li–O2/CO2 reaction systems. Compared with polar solvents, the acknowledged nonpolar ether-based electrolyte (LiTFSI/LiCF3SO3–TEGDME) was thought to be relatively stable and was directly employed as an electrolyte for Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry investigations.17,21,27 This is because, compared with polar aprotic solvents, ether-based electrolytes are considered to be electrochemically and chemically inert solvents against reactive superoxide anion radicals.43,96,107 Moreover, ether-based solvents possess several other major advantages, including high oxidation potential (over 4.5 V vs. Li/Li+), low volatility, and excellent compatibility with the Li metal anode.108 However, it has been demonstrated that ether-based electrolytes were not optimal for the electrochemical system with the generation of superoxide species.31 Bruce et al. proposed that, except for the nucleophilic reaction caused by superoxide anions, the presence of highly electrophilic Li+ in aprotic electrolytes could strongly bond to electronegative oxygen atoms of ether molecules, which would result in the decomposition of polyether molecules through facilitating the transformation of alkoxy groups into better leaving groups.96 Therefore, the best current ether-based electrolytes applied extensively in Li–O2 batteries may not be the optimal choice for feasible Li–O2/CO2 batteries.
4.2 Aprotic liquid electrolytes for Li–CO2 electrochemistry
In light of the present research results and combined with the discharge reaction mechanism, Li–CO2 electrochemistry does not involve the formation of reactive superoxide species during the discharge process. Therefore, without regard to the subsequent charging reaction, numerous electrochemically stable electrolyte systems that were widely used in other aprotic metal–air batteries may also be suitable for Li–CO2 electrochemistry. One very popular electrolyte, comprising an inorganic/organic lithium salt dissolved in tetraglyme (TEGDME), was widely used to investigate Li–CO2 electrochemistry and examine the catalytic activity of cathodic catalysts,12,16,26,28–30,60,69,70,74,95,109–112 but the stability toward the possible intermediates from direct CO2 reduction has not been explored to date. It should be noted that, for primary Li–CO2 battery, the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 may generate reactive O2˙− intermediates or singlet oxygen as discussed in the mechanism section, which would enable the decomposition of ether solvents. For example, in a study of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, Yang et al. discovered that the most common tetraglyme solvent was not stable during the decomposition of pre-filled Li2CO3 in the simulated Li–CO2 battery.31 They performed in situ gas chromatography-mass spectrometry measurements, isotopic tracing method and Fourier transition infrared spectroscopy to explore the component of the tetraglyme-based electrolyte. The results suggested that tetraglyme solvent is vulnerable to the attack of O2˙− and O2 that result from the decomposition of Li2CO3. Therefore, ether-based electrolytes may not be suitable for a primary Li–CO2 battery based on individual Li2CO3 decomposition but for a completely reversible Li–CO2 battery.
In addition, several researchers also employed DMSO as an electrolyte solvent for Li–CO2 batteries, and they found that Li–CO2 batteries based on DMSO electrolytes showed excellent rechargeability.32,109,113 However, Qiao et al. applied in situ Raman to prove that DMSO was unstable in the Li–CO2 electrochemical system, and DMSO2 species formed in LiClO4/DMSO electrolyte during the charging process of Li–CO2 batteries coupled with a gold cathode, as shown in Fig. 4(b).32 The authors believed that the emerging DMSO2 species was attributed to the nucleophilic attack of DMSO by O2− species resulting from the decomposition of Li2CO3. In light of the above results, it is speculated that DMSO-based electrolytes are only desirable to reversible Li–CO2 electrochemistry.
Electrolytes based on ionic liquid solvents were regarded as very promising alternatives due to their high electric conductivity, low volatility, and excellent chemical/electrochemical stability toward O2˙− species.114,115 In 2013, a high-temperature primary Li–CO2 battery based on an ionic liquid electrolyte composed of 1 M LiTFSI dissolved in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide ([bmim][Tf2N]) was first developed by Archer's group, and exhibited a much increased discharge potential of ∼2.6 V and a greatly improved discharge capacity at 100 °C compared with the battery operated at low temperatures.11 The relatively low viscosity of pure ionic liquid-based electrolytes compared to traditional organic electrolyte solvents significantly limits the lithium ions’ mobility, and thus produces kinetic limitations. Taking this into account, developing mixed electrolytes based on ionic liquids is promising to overcome the drawback of pure ionic liquid-based electrolytes. Very recently, a mixture electrolyte composed of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMTM-BF4) and DMSO with a volume ratio of 1:3 was developed and applied to Li–CO2 batteries, and enabled the battery to operate with a stable discharge and charge potential at a high current density of 500 mA g−1.36 Although ionic liquid-based electrolytes have found successful application in Li–CO2 batteries, specific investigations of their chemical/electrochemical stability and the effects on the mechanism of Li–CO2 electrochemistry remain scarce.
4.3 Solid-state electrolytes for Li–CO2 electrochemistry
As discussed above, although aprotic liquid electrolytes (LEs) have been widely studied in conventional Li–O2/CO2 batteries and Li–CO2 batteries, it is worth noting that these aforementioned electrolytes are still suffering from several critical defects for practical battery systems. For example, the crucial reactant of CO2 gas molecules has relatively high solubility in aprotic liquid electrolytes,19,33,37 which usually leads to the formation of non-porous, thick, and polymer-shaped Li2CO3 on the surface of the cathode.12,16,17,34 It is well-known that the decomposition of such discharge products usually requires high charge potential, which probably aggravates the performance of such batteries based on organic liquid electrolytes. In other words, LEs are not conducive to the generation of a dominant morphology of discharge products. In addition, organic LEs also face several other challenges, such as volatility, leakage and flammability issues,26,57,116 which place great limitations on the practical operation of Li–CO2 batteries with open battery systems and the development of flexible Li–CO2 batteries. In an attempt to overcome these drawbacks of LEs, some researchers focused on solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs), and proposed that SPEs may be promising candidates for substitution of LEs due to their characteristics of solid-state electrochemistry. In 2017, Chen et al. reported a liquid-free, solid-state Li–CO2 battery based on a SiO2-added composite polymer electrolyte (CPE) composed of poly(methacrylate)/poly(ethylene glycol)–LiClO4–3%SiO2.18 This CPE integrates the advantage of ideal mechanical properties and acceptable ionic conductivity (7.14 × 10−2 mS cm−1 at 55 °C). In addition, the use of CPE not only protected the Li anode from corrosion by CO2, but also provided possibilities for the preparation of integrated cathodes. When it was introduced into the Li–CO2 battery, good flexibility and enhanced electrochemical performance, including a long cycle life and excellent rate capability, were achieved at the same time. In order to further obtain polymer electrolytes with high ionic conductivity at room temperature, inspired by Chen's work, Xia et al. developed a gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) composed of a polymer host, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulphonyl)imide salt (LiTFSI) and teraglyme (TEGDME), in which the polymer matrix was filled with conventional LiTFSI/TEGDME liquid electrolyte.34 From the morphological observation, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) and thermogravimetric (TG) studies on the obtained GPE, it can be found that the GPE exhibited compact structural characteristics (Fig. 6(a)–(c)), high ionic conductivity (0.5 mS cm−1), excellent electrochemical stability (∼4.5 V) and thermal stability (below 100 °C), as shown in Fig. 5(d)–(f). As a consequence, the Li–CO2 battery based on GPE and CNT cathode exhibited greatly enhanced rate performance, extended recyclability and reduced potential polarization, as shown in Fig. 6(g)–(k). The improvement of battery performance is ascribed to the formation of particle-shaped Li2CO3 with poor crystallinity on the GPE/CNT interface. Yu's group recently reported a silyl-terminated polyether-based PE prepared by a simple in situ polymerization reaction for a rechargeable solid-state Li–CO2 battery.35 Compared with the works of Chen's group and Xia's group, this novel polyether-based PE showed an augmented ionic conductivity of 7.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 and broadened potential window of ∼5.0 V. After compositing PE with CNT, benefiting from the high ionic and electronic conductivity of the composite cathode, large contact area and abundant pore structure, the Li–CO2 battery based on the PE/CNT cathode delivered a record cycling life of 100 cycles, outstanding reversible capacity, and rate performance. In addition, it was found that film-like discharge products covered the PE/CNT cathode after discharging. It is worth noting that, despite solid-state electrolytes being the optimal solution for traditional LEs, the influence of PE on the morphology and structure of discharge products remains undetermined. Overall, developing and designing a novel solid-state electrolyte with high ionic conductivity and dominant structure is urgent.
 Fig. 6  (a) Optical photograph and (b and c) SEM images of the as-prepared GPE. (d) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the symmetric Li/GPE/Li cell at room temperature. (e) LSV and (f) TG analysis for GPE; LSV was performed at a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (g) Rate performance of the GPE-based Li–CO2 battery at various current densities with a cut-off voltage of 2.0 V. (h) The discharge/charge curves of the GPE-based Li–CO2 battery with a restricted capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at various current densities. (i) The cycle performance of the Li–CO2 battery based on GPE with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5. Tailoring of cathode materials/catalysts for enhancing CO2 reduction/evolution kinetics
For Li–CO2 electrochemistry, cathode materials/catalysts play a key role in promoting electrochemical reaction kinetics, especially reducing the discharge and charge overpotential, and thus affecting the overall performance of viable Li–CO2 batteries accompanied by high-efficiency energy storage and CO2 capture. Yet, over the past several years, only a few kinds of cathode materials/catalysts have been found to exist, including carbonaceous materials (commercialized activated carbon such as XC-72 carbon black, Super P and Ketjen black (KB), nanometer carbon materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes, and heteroatom-doping carbon materials, etc.), transition metal nanoparticles/carbon composites, precious metals and their composites, Mo-based carbides and sulfides, metal–organic complexes and soluble catalysts, which have been developed to achieve discharge response and superior recharge ability. In this section, we systematically elucidate the progress of all types of electrocatalysts by categorization according to the cathode materials type, and analyze the effects of design strategy, chemical composition, and microscopic physical parameters of the above-mentioned materials on CO2 reduction and evolution activity, as well as the overall performance of Li–CO2 batteries. Current main problems and challenges will then be identified, including future research directions and opportunities in the design of high-efficiency electrocatalysts.
5.1 Carbon materials and heteroatom-doped carbon materials
Carbon materials, owing to their high electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, controllable pore structure, and adjustable surface electronic states caused by defect engineering and heteroatom doping, have been intensively applied in various electrochemical energy storage devices, especially emerging Li–O2 electrochemical batteries.117 Similar to Li–O2 electrochemistry, commercial activated carbon, including XC-72 carbon black, Super P and Ketjen black (KB), were firstly introduced in Li–CO2 electrochemistry to investigate the electrochemical behavior.11,20 Gowda et al. discovered that a Li–CO2 battery based on a XC72 cathode displayed no discharge capacity in pure CO2 working gas.20 It is worth noting that Super P has hardly any discharge capacity in an ionic liquid electrolyte when utilized as a cathode material, as reported by Archer et al.11 Due to the Super P cathode cooperating with the ether-based electrolyte, the Li–CO2 battery exhibited a much enhanced discharge capacity of 6062 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1.26 Therefore, for cathodes with exactly the same electrode material, electrolytes may play a critical role in determining the battery performance. In contrast to the Super P cathode, batteries based on the commercial KB carbon cathode achieved an impressive discharge capacity of over 1000 mA h g−1 in an ether-based electrolyte.16,17 These results demonstrated the feasibility that, without considering the electrolyte, Li–CO2 batteries can normally function once suitable carbon materials are screened and applied as the cathode. However, these commercial carbon materials are not ideal electro-catalysts for CO2 reduction and evolution due to the poor catalytic activity and the limited structure architecture.
Apart from the above-mentioned commercial activated carbon materials, carbon nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, were considered to be superior electrocatalytic materials for the CO2 reduction reaction due to their outstanding physical and chemical properties deriving from their unique quantum size effect and surface chemical state.12,16 As a pioneering work, Zhou's group first introduced carbon nanotubes into a Li–CO2 battery and achieved significantly improved battery performance, in particular initial discharge capacity and cycle stability.12 Electrochemical performance evaluation results revealed that the CNT cathode delivered a large discharge capacity of 8379 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1. Moreover, the as-prepared Li–CO2 battery could normally operate for more than 20 cycles at both 50 mA g−1 and 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. The authors claimed that the improved battery performance was mainly due to the excellent electrical conductivity of the one-dimensional structure of CNTs, and the interconnected three-dimensional networks for the massive deposition of discharge products and the improved mass transfer process. Almost at the same time, this group firstly reported the direct application of pure graphene (Fig. 7(a)) as a cathode of Li–CO2 batteries.16 Even more remarkably, by using porous graphene as cathodes, such Li–CO2 batteries exhibited a ultra-high discharge specific capacity of 14722 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (Fig. 7(b)), as well as enhanced cycle capability over 20 cycles at the same current density with a curtailing capacity of 1000 mA h g−1, as shown in Fig. 7(c). Additionally, due to the sufficient catalytic activity of graphene and the abundant pore structure between crosslinked graphene nanosheets, even at a high current density of100 mA g−1, the batteries could display a high discharge capacity of 6600 mA h g−1 and normally operate for 10 cycles with a capacity-limited strategy (Fig. 7(d)). From the XRD and FTIR characterization of discharge products, as shown in Fig. 7(e) and (f), the main discharge product of Li2CO3 can reversibly form and decompose during the discharging and charging processes, respectively. Concerning the achieved electrochemical performance, it may depend on the surface chemical composition and structure of carbonaceous materials. In this regard, the adsorption and interaction between CO2 molecules and surface active sites are connected to the induction of the following CO2 electrochemical reduction process: the chemically inert surface of carbon materials has a weak interaction with symmetric and nonpolar CO2 molecules, based on the assumption that only forming a moderate interaction could be favorable to CO2 activation at the initial stage of discharge, thus resulting in enhanced electrochemical performance. It should be noted that determining whether or not it is reasonable necessitates convincing experimental evidence supported by advanced characterization techniques and results stemming from theoretical calculations.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of porous graphene as the cathode of Li–CO2 batteries. (b) The first discharge/charge curves of Li–CO2 batteries based on the graphene cathode in CO2 (at 50 mA g−1 and 100 mA g−1) and Ar atmosphere (at 50 mA g−1), respectively. The recyclability of the Li–CO2 batteries with the graphene cathode at (c) 50 mA g−1 and (d) 100 mA g−1 with a cutoff capacity of 1000 mA h g−1, respectively. (e) XRD and (f) FTIR analysis of the graphene cathode after the first discharge and charge, respectively. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In light of the above-mentioned discussion, although involvement of novel carbon nanomaterials, such as graphene and carbon nanotubes, greatly improved the electrochemical performance of Li–CO2 batteries in terms of discharge capacity and recyclability, however, due to their dissatisfactory catalytic activity, the batteries still exhibit very low coulomb efficiency (reversibility), poor rate capability, and poor cycling stability. It is generally accepted that heteroatom doping could regulate the electronic structure and change the position of the Fermi level of nanostructured carbon materials (e.g., graphene),118,119 which have a great impact on the adsorptive manner and adsorption energy between gas molecules (e.g., O2 molecules) and the surface of carbon materials, thus remarkably enhancing gas reduction kinetics and simultaneously facilitating the decomposition kinetics of solid discharge products on the cathode surface of metal–O2 batteries. In this context, more recently, Dai and co-workers devised two kinds of bi-functional graphene-based materials with ample defect structures for Li–CO2 batteries, namely, holey graphene (hG) and B,N-codoped holey graphene (BN–hG), as shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b).74 In order to obtain BN–hG, hG was first prepared through simple direct oxidation of graphene in an air atmosphere. The mixture of the prepared hG and H3BO4 was then subjected to high temperature annealing under Ar protection for B-doping. Subsequently, B,N-codoped graphene was obtained by further high temperature treatment of the as-prepared B-doped graphene in an NH3 atmosphere. In this design, the evidence provided by XPS (Fig. 8(c)) indicated that B and N atoms successfully entered the lattice of graphene. The catalytic activity of the as-obtained BN–hG was further evaluated in a Li–CO2 battery, as shown in Fig. 8(d). The resulting battery displayed an exceptionally high reversible capacity and observably reduced discharge/charge potential polarization compared with the battery using the hG cathode. It is generally believed that the electrochemical performance of metal–gas batteries is closely associated with the physical and chemical properties of discharge products produced during the discharge process, such as electrical conductivity, morphology, crystallization, and chemical composition.53 Similarly, the authors identified the reason for the reduced charge potential polarization of the BN–hG cathode on the basis of direct observation of the morphology of discharge products before and after recharge, as displayed in Fig. 8(e) and (f). Specifically, the discharge product of Li2CO3 crystals exhibited fine particle-like morphology within a size distribution of 50 to 200 nm. Such small particles could be completely removed, owing to the shortened electron transfer pathways from the cathode surface to the outside surface of insulated discharge products. Thus, the Li–CO2 battery with the BN–hG cathode showed good reversibility, as can be seen from the electrochemical impedance analysis in Fig. 8(g). Further evaluation results indicated that the Li–CO2 battery containing the BN–hG cathode exhibited considerably enhanced rate performance (Fig. 8(h) and (i)) and ultra-long cycling life over 200 times (Fig. 8(j)). The above success proved that the introduction of both intrinsic defect (pore structure) and extrinsic defect (foreign atom doping) could dramatically improve the catalytic ability of carbon nanomaterials toward Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Nevertheless, the identification of active sites and the investigation of related CO2 reduction mechanisms on heterogeneous atom doped carbonaceous materials are urgent, because an optimal design of carbon-based materials that produces the expected results is very advantageous. In addition, achieving controllable preparation, including qualitative and quantitative doping, constitutes a challenge.
 Fig. 8  (a) Proposed mechanism of CO2 reduction and evolution on the BN–hG cathode of a Li–CO2 battery. (b) SEM image of BN–hG. (c) XPS full spectra of hG and BN–hG, and the enlarged spectra of N1s and B1s in (c). (d) Discharge/charge curve comparison of hG and BN–hG cathodes at 0.3 A g−1 within a voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. TEM images of the BN–hG cathode after (e) full discharge and (f) full recharge. (g) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the pristine, discharged and recharged Li–CO2 battery with the BN–hG cathode. (h) The contrast of polarization potentials of hG and BN–hG cathodes at different current rates. (i) Rate capability and (j) cycling stability measurements of the Li–CO2 battery with the BN–hG cathode. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Although the utilization of heterogeneous atom doping has dramatically improved the catalytic activity of graphene and further remarkably extended the cycle life of Li–CO2 batteries when directly used as a cathodic material, of note is that Li–CO2 batteries based on these cathodes still suffer from a large overpotential (1.8 V at 1 A g−1), thus leading to a low energy efficiency and undesirable cyclability, especially at high density rates.74 In view of the outstanding electrocatalytic activity of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) arising from the abundant edge defects but the poor electrical conductivity, this group developed a graphene-based composite catalyst composed of uniform CQD modified holey graphene sheets, through a facile ultrasonication and subsequent lyophilization treatment, showing enhanced cathode reaction kinetics and facilitated electron/ion conductivity in Li–CO2 batteries.109 As a consequence, the assembled battery based on the CQDs/hG-0.3 (0.3 represents the weight ratio of CQDs and hG) composite catalyst exhibited a decreased overpotential of 1.02 V at 0.1 A g−1. More importantly, even at a high current rate of 1 A g−1, the operated battery revealed a relatively low overpotential of only 1.45 V, superior to all the reported carbonaceous materials at present. Furthermore, the resultant Li–CO2 battery delivered an ultra-high discharge capacity of 12300 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and a much increased cyclability of 235 cycles at a high current rate of 1 A g−1 with a controlled capacity of 500 mA h g−1. The outstanding electrochemical performance was attributed to the synergistic effect of the excellent catalytic activity of QCDs and the enhanced electron/CO2 transportation capability of holey graphene sheets. In terms of the advanced research studies above, designing a novel structure for favorable reactant diffusion and developing defect engineering are very efficient strategies to enhance the catalytic activity of nanocarbon materials toward CO2 reduction and Li2CO3 decomposition.
5.2 Mo-Based catalysts
Molybdenum carbides (MoxC) having a similar d electronic structure to the noble metals, especially metallic palladium, are recognized as “analogous precious metal catalysts”. In earlier research, Mo2C has been proven to be a remarkably efficient electrocatalyst for Li–O2 batteries to increase the electrical efficiency and cycle life due to the formation of surface molybdenum oxide species.73 Recently, Chen's group reported that Mo2C played a major role in improving the round-trip efficiency and cyclability of Li–CO2 batteries.60 In this work, a Mo2C/CNT composite with a good dispersion of Mo2C nanoparticles in a 3D conductive CNT network (Fig. 9(a)) was prepared by a simple carbothermal reduction method. Electrochemical testing coupled with ex situ characterization studies revealed the catalytic mechanism of Mo2C in the whole discharging/charging process of Li–CO2 electrochemistry. As shown in Fig. 9(f), it was proposed that the embedded Mo2C in the cathode changed the formation pathway of discharge products. Specifically, the amorphous Li2C2O4 intermediate with film-like morphology (Fig. 9(b)) as a final discharge product could be stabilized on the surface of Mo2C nanoparticles to form Li2C2O4–Mo2C species (Fig. 9(c)), instead of Li2CO3 species. The Mo2C-catalyzed Li2C2O4 formation mechanism can be interpreted as the initial CO2 reduction electrochemistry (eqn (15)) and the subsequent chemical pathway that involves the reaction of Li+ and C2O42− on the surface of the Mo2C catalyst, as displayed in eqn (28). C2O42− + 2Li+ + Mo2C → Li2C2O4−Mo2C(28)During the chemical reaction processes, Mo2C could stabilize and prevent further disproportionation of the metastable Li2C2O4 intermediate toward the formation of thermodynamically stable Li2CO3. Generally, amorphous discharge products possess the characteristic of much higher ionic and electrical conductivity than the homologous crystal structure, and thus only a relatively low external voltage is required to completely remove amorphous products.120–122 In this case, Mo2C enabled the amorphous Li2C2O4 constituents to easily decompose at a very low potential of below 3.5 V (Fig. 9(d)). As a consequence, the battery presented a superb cycle performance over 40 cycles along with low cathodic polarization (Fig. 9(e)). It is worth noting that although prominent battery performance is achieved as anticipated, the overall performance of Li–CO2 is quite inferior to those of the current Li ion batteries, as well as Li–air batteries, and the formation mechanism of amorphous Li2C2O4 on the surface of Mo2C remains unclear. In this regard, some advanced characterization tools assisted by theoretical simulation calculation are powerful to elucidate the reaction mechanism of Mo2C intervening in Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Indeed, we believe that it is essential to develop late-model Mo-based catalysts/materials for effective CO2 reduction and evolution. In addition, studying the effect of the crystal structure of MoxC on Li–CO2 electrochemistry is a worthy endeavor.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of (a) as-prepared Mo2C/CNT composites and (b) discharged Mo2C/CNT cathode. (c) Raman spectra of discharged Mo2C/CNT cathode. (d) Discharge/charge profiles and (e) cycling performance of Li–CO2 batteries based on Mo2C/CNT and CNT cathodes at 20 μA with a controlled capacity of 100 μA h. (f) The schematic illustration of the formation/decomposition mechanism of amorphous Li2C2O4 intermediate on Mo2C nanoparticles during the discharging/charging process. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Compared with Li–O2 batteries, the charging process of Li–CO2 batteries usually requires a higher external voltage to decompose the primary discharge product of Li2CO3 and achieve good rechargeability because the insulator characteristic of Li2CO3 greatly restricts the electron transfer from the cathode surface to Li2CO3 bulk or to the surface adjacent to the solid discharge products/electrolyte interface. In this case, such a high voltage (often far exceeding the decomposition voltage of the electrolyte) generally produces the degeneration of battery components, such as the electrolyte, carbon material additive, and binders. This greatly impacts the deposition of discharge products and the passivation of active surface sites, therefore degrading the overall performance of Li–CO2 batteries. This implies that developing carbon-free, binder-free, and free-standing cathodes is crucial to improve the cycling performance of Li–CO2 batteries. In order to avoid binder degradation and design a self-supporting CO2 cathode, Wang et al. developed a novel CO2 cathode composed of an Ni framework supporting, and MoFeNi and MoC nanoparticles modified N-doped worm-shaped carbon composite (MFCN).27 Such a cathode displayed particularly good catalytic activity for CO2 reduction and evolution reactions in Li–CO2 electrochemistry, as shown in cyclic voltammetry measurements in Fig. 10(a). The results of electrochemical performance testing indicated that the battery achieved a superior coulombic efficiency of 73.4% and a high discharge capacity of 8827 mA h g−1 for the first discharge–charge process (Fig. 10(b)). More importantly, the overpotential was limited to 1.04 V (the discharge potential is 2.75 V, and the charge potential is 3.79 V) with a capacity-limited strategy. Moreover, an excellent rate capability (1461 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1) and cycle performance (over 90 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a restricted capacity of 1000 mA h g−1) were achieved in their work (Fig. 10(c)). The authors attributed this remarkable electrochemical behavior to the following reasons: (1) the robust cathode configuration resulting from the pre-treatment of the Ni skeleton with acidic MoCl5–ethenol solution ensured the stability of the cathode during battery cycling; (2) the effective CO2 electrochemical reduction/evolution activity of MoFeNi and MoC nanoparticles was favorable to reducing the discharge/charge overpotential, thus improving the energy efficiency and cycle stability; (3) the N-doped worm-like carbon enhanced the adsorption capability between CO2 molecules and nitrogen functional groups, owing to the strong Lewis acid–base interactions, which is beneficial for good rate capability; and (4) the formed thin-layered discharge products homogeneously deposited on the cathode surface during the discharge process (Fig. 10(d)), enabling dramatic improvement of the decomposition kinetics of the discharge products.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammetry profile of the Li–CO2 battery with the MFCN cathode at 0.2 mV s−1. (b) Discharge/charge curves of the Li–CO2 battery based on the MFCN cathode at 100 mA g−1, 200 mA g−1 and 400 mA g−1 respectively. (c) Cycle performance of the Li–CO2 battery with the MFCN cathode at 100 mA g−1 with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (d) Both low resolution and high resolution (the inset image) SEM images of the MFCN cathode after the 10th discharge. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2015, published by Elsevier B.V. 
Apart from molybdenum carbides, Asadi et al. demonstrated that MoS2 was an efficient electrocatalyst for promoting CO2 reduction and catalyzing Li2CO3 decomposition.36 A Li–CO2 battery based on a MoS2 cathode combined with an ionic liquid/DMSO electrolyte displayed markedly decreased potential polarization at a current density of 500 mA g−1. Remarkably, even after a stable operation for 10 continuous cycles, each discharge profile was almost overlapped, and the charge curves presented a slight increase. Therefore, a good combination of a highly active cathode and a matched electrolyte favors the enhanced stability of Li–CO2 batteries.
5.3 Transition metal and oxides/carbon composites
Previous research has shown that among various 3d metal series, chemically inert metal Cu, particularly certain facets, has spontaneous chemisorption and favorable activation of CO2 molecules in aqueous electrolytes.123,124 This means that metal Cu nanoparticles could promote CO2-related reactions in initial reactions. Given this advantageous reciprocity, numerous researchers have corroborated the superiority of middle–late transition metals in aprotic Li–CO2 electrochemistry.29,30 Most remarkably, Zhou et al. reported a rechargeable CO2 cathode composed of Ni nanoparticle modified nitrogen-doped graphene.29 In their design, the composite of highly-dispersed Ni nanoparticles on nitrogen-doped 3D porous graphene was prepared by a hydrothermal method and a subsequent annealing process. Electrochemical tests indicated that the composite cathode exhibited outstanding electrochemical performance: the discharge capacity of the battery could reach 17625 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, and cycling times exceed 100 cycles with a capacity-restricting strategy of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. In addition, on the basis of the density functional theory (DFT) studies, they found that high-exposed (111) and (200) crystal faces of the Ni nanocrystal have a strong interaction with reactants of Li+ and CO2 molecules, and confirmed that metal Ni nanoparticles served as catalytic active centers for facilitating the reaction between Li ions and CO2 molecules to form Li2CO3 products. Combining the aforementioned experiment and theoretical computation results, the authors proposed that this remarkable performance was primarily attributed to the unique structure construction of the cathode material which ensured the advantageous permeation of reactants and sufficient room for depositing the discharge products. Moreover, the prominent catalytic ability of Ni particles is capable of catalyzing the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon in the process of discharge/charge cycling. Very recently, Qiao et al. fabricated 3D nanostructured Ni nanoparticles/reduced graphene oxide frameworks (with a thickness of 0.4 mm) via viable 3D printing technology followed by a thermal shock treatment.110 With this nanocomposite as a cathodic catalyst, Li–CO2 batteries exhibited significantly improved cyclability (over 100 cycles with a restricted capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1) and much enhanced rate capability (the overpotential is only 2.01 V at a high current rate of 1000 mA g−1). The superior electrochemical performance was ascribed to the uniform distribution and prominent catalytic activity of ultrafine Ni nanoparticles, as well as the designed 3D porous structure, which provided the favorable reactant diffusion channels and the enhanced electrical conductivity. Although 3D printing technology has been proved to be an efficient strategy to construct novel Ni-based electro-catalysts (the same for other kinds of materials), it is difficult to achieve commercial application due to the high cost and long fabrication period.
Immediately following this advanced work, they also reported that metallic Cu, which is close to metallic Ni in the periodic table, also exhibited an unexpected catalytic property to boost the charging process.30 To prove their findings experimentally, a composite material consisting of homogeneous Cu nanoparticles with good dispersity on N-doped graphene nanosheets was prepared by a simple solvothermal method and the subsequent high-temperature hydrogen reduction treatment process. As a consequence, the as-prepared cathode could restrict the overpotential to 0.77 V; even though the battery operated for 50 cycles, the overpotential is merely 1.26 V. Such significantly reduced cathode polarization surpassed that of almost all transition metal-based catalysts. A detailed examination of the cathode after the first or several discharge/charge processes through a series of ex situ characterization analysis (the specific introduction is presented in the verification of the discharge product part) indicated that Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon as ultimate discharge products uniformly spread over the Cu nanoparticle-studded N-doped graphene. Moreover, the key role of the Cu nanocrystal is favorable to facilitate the reaction of Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon during the charging process to release Li+ and CO2. More importantly, an accurate analysis based on TEM images provided direct evidence that the surface of Cu nanoparticles was covered by a thin layer of CuO film when the battery operated for a certain number of times. The authors believed that the surface oxidation of metal Cu resulted from the attack of superoxide radicals which were produced from the self-decomposition of LiCO3 species during the charging process. Based on this, the authors proposed an objective reaction mechanism of Cu nanoparticle-involved Li–CO2 electrochemistry, i.e., the dispersed metal Cu nanoparticles were further oxidized by the produced superoxide radicals, derived from the decomposition of LiCO3, to form a stable protective layer, and thus cathode stability was enhanced in subsequent cycling. In our view, the key claim here is the identification of active sites. It is clear that metal Cu nanoparticles with preferential exposed crystal surfaces, such as the thermodynamically most stable (111) crystal face and some high-index facets, may reduce the activation energy of the reaction between CO2 molecules and Li ions due to the facet-coordinated effect. Consequently, the original reduction barrier of CO2 is significantly decreased. However, during the subsequent operation of the battery, the surface of metal Cu nanoparticles was oxidized and further formed a thin layer of CuO. In this case, the catalytic action is probably associated with the CuO film, or the electron exchange mechanism between the two species of Cu cores and CuO shells, instead of the facet-induced catalytic reaction. This is because the corresponding electrochemical reactions are entirely dominated by surface chemistry. Hence, the underlying synergistic effect mechanism of oxide-derived Li–CO2 electrochemistry remains unspecified. In follow-up studies, tremendous efforts, other than improving the overall electrochemical performance of Li–CO2 batteries, should be dedicated to investigating the basic electrochemical mechanisms and confirmation of active sites, which may provide deeper insights into devising more advanced catalysts/cathodes for high performance Li–CO2 batteries.
In addition to the above-mentioned metallic Ni and Cu, previous research has demonstrated that their oxides, especially NiO, are exceedingly effective in facilitating the decomposition kinetics of Li2CO3.125 Similarly, the catalytic effect of NiO was also verified in Li–O2 batteries, and the introduction of NiO in an oxygen cathode enabled the disintegration of by-products, such as carbonate and carboxylate species, and thus the lifetime of the battery was greatly prolonged.126,127 In the past few years, whether the transition metal oxides could function when used as catalysts in aprotic Li–CO2 electrochemistry has been undetermined. Recently, Zhou et al. have first confirmed the satisfactory electrocatalytic ability of NiO to achieve noticeable enhanced battery performance, including remarkable discharge capacity and improved cycling life,28 as displayed in Table 3. They attributed the superior battery performance to the intrinsically high catalytic activity of sheet-like NiO and its good durability in a Li–CO2 electrochemical environment. Although the attractive catalytic effect of NiO was demonstrated in this promising electrochemical system, the precise role played in promoting the formation and decomposition of Li2CO3 remains unclear. In other words, the catalytic mechanism related to NiO in Li–CO2 batteries is still unknown. In Li–O2 electrochemistry, the nucleation and growth mechanism of Li2O2 on hexagonal NiO nanocrystals was supposed to be the lattice reduced equiaxial growth of Li2O2 on NiO facets due to the highly similar a- and b-lattice parameters.128,129 In contrast to the formation mechanism of Li2O2 on NiO in Li–O2 batteries, we conclude the existence of another entirely different mechanism of the nucleation and growth pattern for the Li2CO3 inside of the NiO nanocrystal catalyzed CO2 cathode. This is because there is no approximate lattice, and an inner lattice spacing match is found between the two species. In the next step of this research, greater efforts should be dedicated to explore the underlying reaction mechanism regarding the function of the NiO nanocrystal catalyst in Li–CO2 batteries, which will have a profound significance in devising the distinctive NiO-based electro-catalyst for high performance Li–CO2 batteries.
Table 3 Summary of recent progress in different cathodic materials/catalysts–electrolyte systems and the corresponding electrochemical performance under various operating conditions for Li–CO2 (Li–CO2/O2) batteries




Cathode materials catalysts electrolyte
Electrochemical window (V vs. Li/Li+)
Coulombic efficiency
Discharge specific capacity or capacity
Rate capacity
Cycle performance
Operating atmosphere
Ref.




Note: the rate capability of Li–CO2 (Li–CO2/O2) batteries is expressed as the discharge specific capacity or discharge/charge potential at a certain current density; “*” represents the discharge capacity is calculated based on the total mass of Li–CO2 pouch batteries.




Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) (poly(methacrylate)/poly(ethylene glycol)–LiClO4–3 wt%SiO2) composite polymer electrolyte (CPE)
—
—
993.2 mA h/2.5 mA*
—
100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

18



CNTs (CPE electrolyte)
2.2–4.5 V
—
8536 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
2581 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1
60 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

34



50 cycles at 250 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


CNTs (PE electrolyte)
2–4.6 V
∼92%
12000 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
Discharge potential ∼2.5 V and charge potential ∼4.46 V at 0.5 A g−1
60 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

35



Super P high surface area carbon (1 M LiTFSI/([bmim][Tf2N]))
—
—
∼0 mA h g−1/0.05 mA cm−2
—
—
Pure CO2

11



∼750 mA h g−1/0.05 mA cm−2
—
—


Super P (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)
2–4.5 V
10.9%
6062 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
—
20 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

26



Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/EC:DEC with a volume ratio of 3:7)
1.5–∼
—
66 mA h g−1/0.2 mA cm−2
—
—
Pure CO2

22



5860 mA h g−1/0.2 mA cm−2
CO2:O2 = 1:1 (volume ratio)


Ketjen black (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)
2.2–4.3 V
—
1808 mA h g−1/30 mA g−1
—
10 cycles at 30 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CO2:O2 = 2:1 (volume ratio)

17



Ketjen black (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)
2.2–4.4 V
—
1032 mA h g−1/30 mA g−1
—
7 cycles at 30 mA g−1 without capacity limitation
Pure CO2

17



Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.2–4.3 V
—
1620 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
<500 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
9 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

16



CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.2–4.3 V
—
8379 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
5786 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
29 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

12



22 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
—
—
∼5000 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
∼0 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1
20 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

35



CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
—
—
8396 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
15 cycles at 50/100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

69



25 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


CNTs (1 M LiCF3SO3/TEGDME)
2.2–4.4 V
—
9535 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
—
70 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 500 mA h g−1
CO and CO2

64



Graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.2–4.3 V
—
14722 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
6600 mA hg−1 at 100 mA g−1
20 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

16



Ketjen black (1 M LiPF6/DMSO) (0.1 M LiPF6/DME)
2–4.5 V
—
∼2200 mA h g−1/0.4 mA cm−2
—
20 cycles at 0.4 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CO2:O2 = 9:1 (volume ratio)

21



—
—
∼3800 mA h g−1/0.4 mA cm−2
—
—


B,N-Codoped holey graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2–4.5 V
93.5%
14996 mA h g−1/0.3 A g−1
—
200 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 with a controlled capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

74



Carbon quantum dot/holey graphene composite (1 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiNO3/DMSO)
2–4.5 V
96%
12300 mA h g−1/0.5 A g−1
Discharge potential 2.67 V at 2 A g−1
235 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 with a controlled capacity of 500 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

109



Mo2C/carbon nanotube composites
2.0–3.8 V
100%
1150 μA h/20 μA
—
40 cycles at 20 μA with a controlled capacity of 100 μA h
Pure CO2

60



CNT (1 M LiCF3SO3/TEGDME)
∼2850 μA h/20 μA


MoC/MoFeNi@ N-doped worm-like carbon (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
(2.35–4.1 V)
73.4%
8827 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
1461 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1
90 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CO2 with trace O2

27



Ni nanoparticles/N-graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.2–4.5 V
—
17625 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
<5000 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1
100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

29



Ultrafine Ni nanoparticles/3D printed oxide graphene framework (the as-prepared cathode with a thickness of 0.4 mm) (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.0–4.5 V
—
14.6 mA h cm−2 (8991.0 mA h g−1)/0.1 mA cm−2
Overpotential 2.01 V at 1000 mA h g−1
100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

110



Cu nanoparticles/N-doped graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.2–4.5 V
92%
14864 mA h g−1/200 mA g−1
11966 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1
50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

30



Sheet-like NiO/carbon nanotubes (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.0–4.3 V
97.8%
9000 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
42 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

28



25 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


Anatase TiO2 nanoparticle/CNT–CNF composite (1 M LiTFSI/DMSO)
2.5–4.5 V
—
1950 μA h cm−2
—
20 cycles at 0.05 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 250 μA h cm−2
Pure CO2

113



Porous Mn2O3 (0.5 M LiClO4/TEGDME)
2.5–4.5 V
—
9434 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
45 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

94



Ru@Super P (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)
2–4.4 V
86.2%
8229 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
—
70 cycles at 100/200/300 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

26



Ru@GNSs (0.1 M LiClO4/DMSO)
2.0–4.2 V
89.2%
4742 mA h g−1/0.08 mA cm−2
3865 mA h g−1 at 0.16 mA cm−2
67 cycles at 0.16 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 500 mA h g−1
CO2 with 2% O2

51



Ru@CNT/flexible wood cathode (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.0–4.5 V
—
11 mA h cm−2/— (2 mm thick cathode)
Overpotential 1.85 V at 1000 mA g−1
200 cycles at 200 mA gC−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h gC−1
Pure CO2

111



RuO2/LDO (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.25–4.3 V
—
5455 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
—
60 cycles at 166 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

136



RuP2/N,P dual-doped carbon film (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.0–4.3 V
98.1%
11951 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
4680 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1
200 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

70



Ir/carbon nanofibers (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
2.0–4.5 V
93.1%
21528 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
18813 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
45 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

112



27 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


IrO2/δ-MnO2–carbon cloth (1 M LiClO4/TEGDME)
2.0–4.5 V


6604 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1
1223 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1
378 cycles at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

95



200 cycles at 800 mA g−1 without capacity limitation


Nanoporous Au super-concentrated electrolyte (LiTFSI/DMSO with a mole ratio of 1:3)
2.6–3.65 V
—
753 mA h g−1/400 mA g−1
<3.6 V at 600 mA g−1
20 cycles at 400 mA g−1 without capacity limitation
CO2:O2 = 1:1 (volume ratio)

24



100 cycles at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 200 mA h g−1


Mn2(dobdc) (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
—
—
18022 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
30 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

69



50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


Mn(HCOO)2 (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
—
—
15510 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

69



MnCO3 (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)
—
—
11110 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
—
15 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

69



25 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1


Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME + LiBr)
2–4.3 V
81%
11500 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1
Charge potential below 4.0 V at 200 mA g−1
38 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Pure CO2

156



16 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1




Apart from the exploration of copper-based and nickel-based oxides, manganese-based oxides, owing to their unique advantages of low cost, diverse valence states and tunable structure (function), have been intensively investigated in Li–O2 electrochemical batteries.53 Based on the distinct functionality of Mn-based oxides, some researchers set out to study their potential application when used as cathodic catalysts in Li–CO2 systems, and the availability has recently been proven.71,94 Early in 2011, Freunberger et al. first investigated the electrochemical oxidation of pre-filled Li2CO3 in an α-MnO2-catalyzed carbon cathode in a carbonate-based electrolyte and discovered that the decomposition potential was decreased to about 4.0 V in an O2 atmosphere.71 Recently, Liu's group prepared porous Mn2O3 through a simple polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) assisted sol–gel method and a subsequent annealing treatment process.94 Thanks to the highly porous structure and excellent catalytic activity, the Li–CO2 battery containing the porous Mn2O3 catalyst exhibited a much decreased overpotential of 1.4 V (for the first cycle) and a durable cyclability for more than 2000 h (about 50 cycles) at 50 mA g−1. Simultaneously, the authors examined the reversibility of porous Mn2O3-catalyzed Li–CO2 electrochemistry, and found that the charging process was a fully reversible reaction, rather than the sole decomposition of electrochemically generated Li2CO3. Crucially, the detailed Raman and XPS analysis provided the evidence that the formed carbon product presented a highly graphitized feature on the Mn2O3-catalyzed cathode, which is different from the other literature results. More recently, Xie's group also found that a Li–CO2 battery based on the cathode comprising δ-MnO2 nanosheets supported by carbon cloth delivered a high discharge specific capacity of 3819 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, implying the excellent catalytic performance of MnO2 for CO2 reduction.95 In addition, Lei et al. have reported that porous MnO has excellent catalytic capability toward the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3,52 but its practical function in Li–CO2 batteries has not been detected. Clearly, these advanced research studies have indicated that Mn-based oxides are very promising cathodic catalysts for CO2 reduction and evolution reactions in aprotic Li–CO2 batteries. Note that the study on the application of Mn-based oxides as electrocatalysts for Li–CO2 electrochemistry has just started recently, and considerable research efforts should be devoted to focusing on the effect of crystal structure, chemical composition and microscopic physical parameters on the catalytic activity of Mn-based oxides. Apart from these, developing self-supporting Mn-based CO2 cathodes with both abundant porous structure and remarkable catalytic activity is a very efficient strategy to design high-performance Li–CO2 batteries.
In addition to Mn-based oxides, it has been demonstrated that anatase TiO2 has the bi-functional feature for both efficient CO2 capture/adsorption130,131 and excellent catalytic ability to CO2 reduction.132 In light of these above merits, Manthiram and co-workers turned their attention to anatase TiO2 recently, and proved its superior catalytic capability to achieve a reversible aprotic Li–CO2 battery with improved electrochemical performance.113 In order to obtain an optimized CO2 cathode, they prepared a freestanding TiO2@CNT/CNF composite membrane cathode via a simple hydrolysis method followed by vacuum filtration. Benefiting from the superior electrocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles and the novel structure of the freestanding cathode, the as-made Li–CO2 battery exhibited a significantly improved capacity, and could stably work over 20 cycles. Although the feasibility of TiO2 has been validated, the catalytic mechanism toward CO2 reduction and Li2CO3 decomposition remains to be seen.
5.4 Precious metals and their composites
It is a common knowledge that precious metals and their composites are omnipotent electrocatalysts in almost all electrocatalytic fields, owing to their distinct electronic configuration and good chemical/electrochemical stability.133–135 In the extant literature on precious metal catalysis in Li–CO2 batteries, very few works have been reported at present. On the basis of the superior electrocatalytic activity of metal Ru nanoparticles in Li–O2 electrochemistry, Zhou et al. demonstrated, for the first time, the prominent ability to facilitate the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species rather than the simple decomposition of Li2CO3 during the charging process in Li–CO2 batteries.26 In order to obtain an optimized catalyst, they prepared Ru@Super P composites, in which fine Ru nanoparticles with particle sizes of 5–10 nm were uniformly dispersed on a Super P matrix (Fig. 11(a)) by the solvothermal method. As shown in Fig. 11(b), when introduced into the CO2 cathode, the composites achieved a high discharge/charge capacity of 8229 mA h g−1 and 7093 mA h g−1, respectively. More significantly, the charging potential of the corresponding Li–CO2 battery was reduced to below 4.4 V during 70 cycles of continuous operation (Fig. 11(c)). Such remarkable battery performance mainly depended on the superior catalytic activity of Ru nanoparticles. To explore the role of Ru nanoparticles in the discharge/charge process, in situ surface-enhanced Raman was performed to investigate the transformation of discharge products on the carbon-free Au electrode and Au–Ru electrode. The results indicated that, only on the surface of the Au–Ru electrode would the formed carbon species during the CO2 reduction process gradually disappear in the subsequent charging process, as shown in Fig. 11(d). This implied that metal Ru could effectively promote the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon rather than the simple electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 (Fig. 10(e)). Recently, Qiao et al. systematically studied the electrochemical behavior of Li+ and CO2 on a sputtered Au cathode and a Ru-based cathode in Li–CO2 batteries.32 As shown in Fig. 12(a), it is obvious that the Li–CO2 battery using the Ru cathode exhibited a lower charge potential than the battery using the Au cathode. To investigate the detailed electrochemical reaction mechanism on the two cathodes, sensitive surface analytical techniques of in situ Raman and ex situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) were carried out to analyze the evolution of discharge products in the discharge and charge process. The results indicated that, on the Ru-based cathode surface, the generated discharge products, Li2CO3 and carbon species, could reversibly react to form the initial reactants, Li+ and CO2 molecules (Fig. 12(b) and (c)) during the charging process by the reaction described in eqn (25). By contrast, the formed carbon species remained on the surface of the Au cathode, and only Li2CO3 electrochemically decomposed into Li+, O2˙− and CO2 molecules by the reaction pathway given in eqn (22) (Fig. 12(d)). On the basis of an entirely different decomposition mechanism of Ru-involved and without Ru-involved electrochemical reactions, as displayed in Fig. 12(e), a new concept of CO2 fixation and renewable energy storage was proposed through rechargeable/irreversible and rechargeable/reversible Li–CO2 electrochemical reactions, respectively. This study in both theory and experiment demonstrated a feasible design strategy for both CO2 fixation and energy storage in one electrochemical system based on Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Moreover, they quantitatively analyzed the decomposition process of Li2CO3 by detecting gas evolution rates at various current rates by differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS), and the results revealed that the decomposition of Li2CO3 proceeded along different pathways and involved different number of electron transfer processes at different current rates. The detailed relationship between the electrochemical process and test conditions was clarified in the mechanism discussion section. Afterwards, Chen and co-workers reported that the composite catalyst composed of monodispersed Ru nanoparticle (∼2 nm) modified graphene nanosheets (Ru/GNSs) presented remarkable catalytic activity for the decomposition of electrochemically generated Li2CO3.51 Compared with the GNS counterpart, using such Ru/GNSs as a cathode catalyst in an O2-assisted Li–CO2 battery could effectively reduce the charging potential by ∼0.45 V, and thus the Coulombic efficiency, discharge capacity, and cyclic stability were significantly improved. It should be noted that the introduction of a small amount of oxygen was capable of effectively triggering the CO2 reduction reaction. However, Ru nanoparticles play a vital role in promoting the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3. This was because the final discharge products displayed floccules-like morphology composed of sheet-like aggregations on the surface of the Ru/GNS cathode, which was distinguished from the film-like discharge products and could be easily disintegrated at a low applied voltage.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image and electron diffraction pattern of the prepared Ru@SP composite. (b) Comparison of discharge/charge curves of SP and Ru@SP cathodes at 100 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performance of the Li–CO2 battery using the Ru@SP cathode with a capacity limit of 1000 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1. (d) In situ Raman spectra of Au and Au–Ru cathodes during the discharge/charge process. (e) The proposed mechanism of Ru-catalyzed Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 12  (a) Discharge/charge curves of the Li–CO2 battery with the Ru cathode, and the charge curve of the Li–CO2 battery with the Au cathode. (b) In situ Raman spectra on the Ru cathode during the charging process of the Li–CO2 battery. (c and d) The charging curves of current and Raman peak intensity at 1085 cm−1 (Li2CO3) and 1587 cm−1 (G band of carbon) with the increase of linear scan potential from 3.0 to 4.5 V at 10 mV s−1 at both the Ru (c) and Au (d) cathodes after a galvanostatic discharge. (e) Schematic for the energy storage system (rechargeable/reversible process) and electrochemical CO2 fixation (rechargeable/irreversible process) with Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017,32 Elsevier Inc. 
In addition to the superior catalytic activity of metallic Ru, the remarkable catalytic ability of RuO2 for the reversible Li–CO2 electrochemical reaction was also recently demonstrated by Xu et al.136 In order to maximize the catalytic efficiency, atomically monodispersed RuO2 catalysts were confined to the interlayer of a Co–Ti double metal oxide support, which exhibited significantly enhanced energy efficiency and cycle life over 60 cycles when introduced into the cathode of the Li–CO2 battery. More importantly, with a capacity-restricted strategy, the battery containing RuO2/LDO catalysts showed a distinct reduced overpotential of merely 0.6 V at 166 mA g−1, which was much lower than that with LDO and Super P cathode, respectively. It has been generally accepted that the electrochemical performance of a metal–air battery is mainly dependent on the physical and chemical properties of the discharge products formed during the discharge process. Characterization results of discharged and re-charged cathodes with RuO2/LDO catalysts indicated discharge products with a flaky flocculus shape composed of Li2CO3 and carbon species, in which crystalline and amorphous Li2CO3 quantum dots were uniformly dispersed in a carbon matrix. Moreover, the RuO2/LDO catalyzed battery reaction is a highly reversible electrochemical process, which complied with the reaction in eqn (25), as demonstrated by DEMS analysis.
Although great progress regarding optimizing battery performance has been achieved by incorporating Ru and RuO2 nanoparticles into the cathode, the detailed electrochemical reaction procedures, i.e., catalytic mechanism, especially in the reversible charging process, remain undefined. Similar to Li–O2 electrochemistry, the morphology of the discharge products considerably depends on the current density in Ru-catalyzed Li–CO2 batteries as well, which was not observed in other Li–CO2 cathode systems. These may be strongly related to the formation process of discharge products and the following charging process. Moreover, according to a new report by Lu and co-workers, Ru catalysts were experimentally proven to improve the oxidation kinetics of Li2O2 and Li2CO3. They also proposed that the enhanced Li2O2 decomposition kinetics were attributed to the direct interaction between solid Ru catalysts and solid Li2O2, and Ru played a vital role in stabilizing the solid reaction intermediate via forming Ru–Li2−xO2 complexes.137 Given the analogous structure characterizations of Li2O2 and Li2CO3, Ru-catalyzed electrochemical decomposition of individual Li2CO3 can be interpreted as a similar catalytic mechanism to Ru-catalyzed Li2O2 decomposition. However, in fact, the supporting experimental evidence suggested that Ru-catalyzed Li2CO3 oxidation is a reversible electrochemical reaction between Li2CO3 and carbon species.26,32 These discrepancies imply that Ru-catalyzed Li–CO2 electrochemistry still remains poorly understood, and will constitute an attractive direction for future research in this novel field. Therefore, in order to achieve long-term operation of Li–CO2 batteries, a formidable challenge remains to elucidate the reversibility of Ru-catalyzed electrochemical/chemical reaction pathways between Li2CO3 and carbon. We believe that a thorough understanding of rechargeable and reversible Li–CO2 batteries in practical applications can only be achieved by identifying the underlying reaction mechanism of the Ru-involved charging process.
Very recently, the Wang group demonstrated that RuP2 also has outstanding catalytic capability as a cathodic catalyst of Li–CO2 batteries.70 In their study, the novel composite catalyst comprised of highly dispersed RuP2 nanoparticles decorated N,P dual-doped carbon film (RuP2/NPCF) was obtained through a simple pyrolysis of the mixed precursor containing phytic acid, RuCl3·xH2O and melamine. The RuP2 nanoparticles endowed the composite with high catalytic activity, which promoted the formation of disk-shaped discharge products and reversible removal during the charging process. The porous N,P dual-doped carbon film skeleton not only improved the conductivity and stabilized the RuP2 nanoparticles, but also provided ample channels for electrolyte infiltration and adequate space for deposition of discharge products. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of RuP2 nanoparticles and N,P dual-doped carbon film networks, Li–CO2 batteries with RuP2/NPCF composite catalysts displayed a desirable reversible capacity of 11951 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Meanwhile, the corresponding battery achieved superior cycling stability (more than 200 cycles at a limited capacity of 1000 mA g−1).
Except for Ru-based catalysts, metal Ir and its oxides have been proven to be highly efficient in facilitating both oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the field of Li–O2 electrochemistry.75,138 In a recent report, Zhang's group demonstrated that, owing to the synergistic effect of a Ir catalyst and a B4C carrier, the nanocomposite of Ir/B4C was able to promote the complete decomposition of the preloaded Li2CO3 below 4.37 V with an efficiency of nearly 100%.139 Building on the excellent catalytic activities of Ir, Zhou's group designed a novel Ir-based composite catalyst composed of fine Ir nanoparticle (∼3 nm) decorated carbon nanofibers through a simple electrospinning technique and a subsequent heat treatment process.112 The design benefitted from the superior catalytic activity of Ir nanoparticles, unique structural advantages of Ir/CNF networks for effective diffusion of Li+ and CO2 gas, rapid electron transfer, and abundant storage of discharge products. As this composite catalyst was introduced to the cathode, the significantly increased Li–CO2 battery performances, including a high reversible specific capacity, excellent rate performance, and remarkably enhanced cycling stability, were ascribed to the formation of Ir-induced particle-shaped discharge products, except for the intrinsic catalytic activity of Ir nanoparticles and structural superiority of the composite. Notably, the Li–CO2 battery based on the free-standing Ir/CNF cathode delivered a very high area specific capacity of 11.54 mA h cm−2 and a stable discharge potential of 2.8 V at 40 μA. When the capacity was controlled at 0.1 mA h cm−2, an ultralong cycling life of 120 cycles (normal operation over 1500 h) was achieved. It is clear that the incorporation of metal Ir significantly benefits CO2 reduction and Li2CO3 decomposition. However, whether carbon is involved in the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 still requires further experimental verification. Moreover, the nucleation and growth mechanism of small sized discharge products on the surface of the metal Ir catalyst is undetermined.
More recently, based on the superior catalytic activity of IrO2, Mao et al.95 developed a high-efficiency CO2 cathode that was composed of ultrafine IrO2 nanoparticle decorated layered δ-MnO2 (IrO2/δ-MnO2) growing directly on a carbon cloth substrate. As a result, the prepared IrO2/δ-MnO2@carbon cloth cathode showed a greatly improved reversible capacity of 6604 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and an exceptional rate capability (the reversible capacity maintained at 1223 mA h g−1 at a high current rate of 800 mA g−1). Furthermore, the corresponding Li–CO2 battery exhibited an impressive cycling performance up to 378 cycles at 400 mA g−1 with a controlled capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. More importantly, when the current density increased to 800 mA g−1, even without limiting the capacity, Li–CO2 batteries with this novel cathode could stably operate for 200 cycles. The significantly enhanced battery performance was attributed to the co-catalytic effect of the IrO2/δ-MnO2 composite and the freestanding electrode structure. The authors proposed that IrO2 nanoparticles have higher catalytic activity than δ-MnO2 nanosheets, thus serving as active sites for nucleation and growth of discharge products at the beginning of the discharge process. In the subsequent discharge reaction, 2D δ-MnO2 played a co-catalytic role and provided numerous active centers for further formation of discharge products. As a result, the co-catalytic effect of IrO2 and 2D δ-MnO2 in the IrO2/δ-MnO2 composite resulted in the conformal growth of thin-layered amorphous Li2CO3, which led to the excellent reversibility of Li–CO2 batteries. Despite this, the IrO2/δ-MnO2-catalyzed nucleation and growth mechanism of amorphous discharge products remains unclear.
5.5 Metal–organic complexes
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), formed by the self-assembly of inorganic metal centers (usually metal ions or metal clusters) and bridged organic ligands, are a type of crystalline porous organic–inorganic hybrid material with a periodic network structure.140 In particular, the rigidity of inorganic materials and the flexible characteristic of organic materials are integrated into one component, and thus the MOF family offers attractive development prospects in modern materials research field.141,142 Due to supernormal structural features, such as abundant and regular pore structure, excellent structural stability and regulated physicochemical properties, these innovative materials have been widely utilized in CO2 enrichment and electrocatalytic reduction in previous studies.143–147 Recently, Wang and co-workers achieved successful application of MOFs in a Li–CO2 battery system and verified the catalytic activity for Li–CO2 electrochemistry. The results demonstrated that MOFs have remarkable potential in improving the performance of Li–CO2 batteries in terms of expanding the discharge capacity and reducing the polarization potential of the charging process.69 In order to identify the activity of the transition metal center, the authors compared the properties of six MOFs with different transition metal centers (Fig. 13(a)). The results indicated that, among these selective MOF materials, manganese-based MOFs exhibited lower charge potential (∼3.96 V for Mn2(dobdc) and 4.19 V for Mn(bdc)), as shown in Fig. 13(a) and (b). The authors concluded that bivalent manganese centers served as active sites to catalyze Li2CO3 decomposition. A comparative research found that the porosity and capture capability (affinity) for CO2 molecules of MOFs have a great effect on the catalytic activity of bivalent Mn centers and corresponding battery performance, especially discharge capacity and discharge potential (Fig. 13(c)). Based on morphological observation of the discharged MOF electrodes, the electrochemically generated Li2CO3 presented a thin layer that was made of tiny nanoparticles on the surface of the Mn(HCOO)2 and Mn2(dobdc) cathode, which was obviously different from the CNT cathode and the MnCO3 cathode. The authors suggested that this novel morphology of Li2CO3 was attributed to a uniform pore structure and active centers of Mn-based MOFs, which were beneficial for promoting the decomposition kinetics of Li2CO3 during the charging process (Fig. 13(d)). This research facilitates finding and designing highly active MOF-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries with excellent electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 13  (a) Crystal structures of the screened MOF materials and the corresponding galvanostatic discharge/charge voltage curves of Li–CO2 batteries at 50 mA g−1 with controlled capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (b) The comparison of average discharge (red bars) and charge (blue bars) voltages for Li–CO2 batteries based on different MOF cathodes at 50 mA g−1 with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (c) Crystal structures and the full discharge voltage curves of MnCO3, Mn(HCOO)2, Mn2(dobdc) and CNT electrodes at 50 mA g−1, respectively. (d) Schematic illustration of the superiority of a Li–CO2 battery based on a MOF cathode. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry. 
5.6 Soluble catalysts
As discussed above, although these potential solid catalysts have demonstrated distinguished function in promoting CO2 reduction in the discharging process through lowering the activation energy, electrochemical removal of solid Li2CO3, and the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon species, their intrinsic drawbacks still restrict the electrochemical reactions between Li+ and CO2, especially the electrochemical degradation of solid discharge products. This is mainly because the solid catalysts are always embedded in a highly conductive carbon matrix to form composites and then are coated on a porous current collector, or directly grown on the current collector. It is worth noting that the catalytic effectiveness of such solid-state catalysts is unsatisfactory due to the insufficient physical contact between the active surfaces of catalysts and solid-state discharge products. Moreover, the active sites on solid catalyst surfaces are easy to be passivated by other by-products. These disadvantages are very similar to Li–O2 electrochemistry,148 and greatly limit the improvement of round-trip efficiency and cyclability of Li–CO2 batteries. Most importantly, from the perspective of dynamics, the reactions that occurred on the solid–liquid interface are easier than those on the solid–solid interface. To mitigate this shortcoming, mobile catalysts (including redox mediators and chemical catalysts), with enhanced catalytic efficiency, are deemed to be a good solution, and have been extensively studied in Li–O2 electrochemistry to improve the energy efficiency, by lowering the discharge/charge overvoltage, and increase the cycle life.148–151 It is usually recognized that the choice of an ideal redox mediator is critical to oxidize the electronically isolated solid-state discharge products. Generally, a suitable redox mediator that can effectively decompose solid-state discharge products should meet the following conditions: (1) the selected redox mediators, apart from good solubility, are chemically inert to the adopted electrolyte components; (2) the redox mediator can withstand the attack of reactive intermediate species, such as superoxide radicals, and itself has a high decomposition voltage in the operating voltage range; (3) the oxidation potential of RMs is far below the decomposition potential of the discharge products (in the absence of catalysts) and higher than the initial decomposition potential, and the oxidation/reduction reaction of RMs+/RMs redox couple is fully electrochemically reversible; and (4) the RMs+ can chemically oxidize the discharge products (mainly referring to Li2CO3) to decompose into CO2 and Li+, or energetically facilitate the reversible electrochemical reaction of Li2CO3 and carbon. Similar to the catalytic decomposition mechanism of Li2O2 by RMs in Li–O2 electrochemistry,149,152 the decomposition processes of Li2CO3 can be described as follows: RM → RMo+ + oe−.(29) RMo+ + nLi2CO3 → RM + mLi+ + pCO2(30)At the beginning of charging, when the charging voltage reaches the oxidation potential of the dissolved RM molecules, the soluble RM first transfers electrons to the cathode and electrochemically oxidizes to the desired oxidation state (eqn (29)). Subsequently, RMo+ chemically oxidizes the insulative Li2CO3 to Li+ and CO2 molecules, and the oxidized RMo+ is simultaneously reduced to its initial state (eqn (30)). Therefore, the apparent voltage in the charging process reflects the oxidation potential of the added RM rather than the decomposition potential of Li2CO3. Consequently, the charge potential of the Li–CO2 batteries can be significantly reduced. The corresponding RM cycles in the overall cell operation process and the specific catalytic mechanism are presented in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  The electrochemical decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3 catalyzed by RMs. 
To date, there have been a few reports that focus on the application of RMs in promoting the decomposition of Li2CO3 or promoting the reversible reaction between Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon in pure Li–CO2 electrochemical battery systems. For example, Liu et al. first discovered that binuclear cobalt phthalocyanine was an effective RM that could facilitate the decomposition of Li2CO3.153 Through a comparative research on the electrochemical decomposition of isotope-labeled Li2CO3, mononuclear cobalt phthalocyanine and binuclear cobalt phthalocyanine were respectively introduced into Li–O2/CO2 battery systems. Although the two RMs have a suitable redox couple in the voltage range of 2–4.5 V due to the reversible redox of phthalocyanine rings and central cobalt ions, direct evidence provided by DEMS showed that only binuclear cobalt phthalocyanine could effectively improve the decomposition rate of Li2CO3 (2.88 times). Furthermore, the mononuclear and binuclear cobalt phthalocyanines were oxidized to the specified potentials, and XRD and FTIR analyses were performed to investigate the effect of oxidation state on the decomposition of Li2CO3. The results showed that, concerning the bi-CoPc-catalyzed reaction system, the preloaded Li2CO3 could be entirely removed at the polarized potential of 3.95 V. In contrast, for the reaction system that contained mono-CoPc, the removal of Li2CO3 required a high charging potential of 4.40 V. In addition, the results provided by evaluating a practical Li–CO2/O2 (2:1) electrochemical battery revealed that the introduction of bi-CoPc significantly prolonged the cycle life to 171 cycles. In view of the improved decomposition efficiency of Li2CO3 and enhanced battery behavior, bi-CoPc may constitute a promising candidate for practical Li–air or Li–CO2 batteries. Based on the different decomposition capability of the two mobile catalysts, the authors suggested that the reason for the excellent catalytic performance of bi-CoPc is the second redox couple of 3.82 V vs. Li/Li+. In other words, the decomposition of Li2CO3 promoted by bi-CoPc is a direct two-electron transfer process. Taking this one step further, RMs that could stimulate the effective decomposition of Li2CO3 require two electrons provided by the same RM molecule within an appropriate redox potential range, rather than tandem electron transfer coming from different RM molecules. The discovery of the catalytic effect of bi-CoPc on the electrochemical decomposition of Li2CO3 opened a new avenue toward seeking more novel RMs with good catalytic ability for decomposing Li2CO3. Nevertheless, an understanding of the specific decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3 driven by two-electron reduction and the detailed electron transfer process from RM molecules to Li2CO3, namely, in which the effective electrons are provided by central metal ions or phthalocyanine rings, or both, remains elusive. We believe that this understanding will be achieved with the assistance of an advanced characterization technique combined with theoretical simulation. In addition, a major challenge will be to identify all-powerful RMs that can induce the invertible electrochemical reaction between Li2CO3 and amorphous carbon produced during the discharging process to re-form the original CO2 molecules and lithium ions. In previous studies of Li–O2 batteries, lithium bromide (LiBr) was proven to be an efficient RM that could reduce the charge potential to approximately 3.5 V, and therefore, the efficiency and cyclability of LiBr-assisted Li–O2 batteries were significantly improved.154,155 The catalytic mechanism was understood as the initial oxidation of Br− (Br3−) to yield Br3 and the subsequent chemical oxidation of Li2O2 by the generated Br3 species.155 Aside from the chemical oxidation of Li2O2 mediated by LiBr, Liang et al. discovered that LiBr could promote the oxidation of Li2CO3 in ether-based electrolytes according to the following electrochemical and chemical steps (eqn (31) and (32)) since the reversible potential of reaction (31) in diglyme electrolyte (E = 4.02) is higher than the decomposition potential of Li2CO3,155 as shown in Table 2. This study also provided experimental proof that the decomposition potential of Li2CO3 could be lowered to 3.9 V (with LiBr) from 4.35 V (without LiBr). 2Br3− → 3Br2 + 2e−(31) 2Li2CO3 + 6Br2 → 2CO2 + 4Br3− + 4Li+ + O2(32)As a pioneering work, Zhou and co-workers, for the first time, demonstrated that LiBr was a highly efficient RM for rechargeable Li–CO2 batteries, and successfully achieved a RM-catalyzed Li–CO2 battery with excellent electrochemical performance.156 The possible catalytic mechanism of LiBr could be understood as two electrochemical steps and one subsequent chemical step. Specifically, during charging, the dissolved Br− was first oxidized to Br3− at a low potential of approximately 3.6 V, which was further oxidized to Br2 species at 4.0 V. Next, the generated Br2 reacted chemically with Li2CO3 to evolve CO2 molecules and Li+ ions and, meanwhile, the Br2 was reduced back to Br− ions. As a consequence, the charge potential of the Li–CO2 battery with LiBr additive could be reduced by 0.3 V compared to that without LiBr, and thus the reversible capacity, rate capability, and cyclic life were significantly enhanced. Further study suggested that the improved performance is attributed to the dominant discharge products with pinecone morphology in the presence of LiBr. It should be noted that whether the carbon species participates in the decomposition reaction of Li2CO3 remains unknown, and the proposed mechanism of 2Li2CO3 + C + 2Br2 → 3CO2 + 4LiBr is only based on computations.157 Therefore, our understanding of the intrinsic charging mechanism is currently poor, and we still seek satisfactory RMs for highly reversible Li–CO2 electrochemistry.
In the above section, we discussed the electrochemical oxidation of Li2CO3 mediated by RMs. In fact, an efficient homogeneous catalyst (including RMs and chemical catalysts) is required for facilitating indirect electrochemical reduction of CO2 molecules in aprotic electrolytes, and as discussed previously, the stable molecular structure of CO2 leads to direct CO2 reduction toward the formation of the CO2˙− intermediate, which is the rate-limiting step in the overall discharge reaction. Inspired by the strong binding affinity between CO2 molecules and quinone anions, such as quinone anion radicals (Q˙−) and dianions (Q2−), as established elsewhere,158–160 Yin and co-workers comparatively investigated the influence of three quinone derivatives, including 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ), 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (PAQ), and 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DBBQ), on the reduction of CO2 in Li+-containing aprotic electrolytes by means of the cyclic voltammetry method.161 The results indicated that AQ and DBBQ could combine with both Li+ cations and CO2 molecules to form a new adduct in the DMF-based electrolyte. However, only in Li+-based MeCN electrolytes are DBBQ and AQ able to facilitate the reaction of CO2 with Li+ to form a solid precipitate on the electrode surface as expected during discharging in a Li–CO2 battery. These findings revealed that the catalytic ability of quinones toward CO2 reduction is highly dependent on the chemical structure of quniones, electrolyte solvent, and the electrolyte cations. Further electrochemical performance evaluation showed that a Li–CO2 battery with the addition of DBBQ displayed a notably decreased discharge overpotential compared with that without the addition of DBBQ, and the ultimate discharge product was Li2CO3. The mechanism for quinone-assisted CO2 reduction was proposed as the favorable reaction between CO2 molecules and Q2, resulting from the initial reduction of qunione molecules on the cathode surface in kinetics to produce the quinone–CO2 adduct, thus reducing the activation energy for the reaction of CO2 reduction to form the CO2˙− intermediate. Unfortunately, the instability of quinones restricted discharge-specific capacity and recyclability. Consequently, identifying stable chemical catalysts in such a harsh electrochemical environment is urgent, and is promising to promote CO2 reduction. In another new study, Gallant and co-workers reported that the introduction of alkyl amine into aprotic solvents could facilitate the reduction of CO2 in a Li–CO2 battery.162 Specifically, the CO2 capture reagent, 2-ethoxyethylamine (EEA), was introduced into 0.3 M LiClO4/DMSO electrolyte to form an electroactive electrolyte; the presence of EEA could pre-capture CO2 to form soluble EEA–CO2 adducts, which could be stabilized by DMSO solvent. The formation of EEA–CO2 (C–N bond) adducts led to the reconfiguration of highly stable CO2 molecules and thus activated inert CO2 molecules. During the discharging, the dissolved EEA–CO2 adducts would be reduced at the carbon cathode surface via the selective cleavage of C–N bonds in these adducts to generate the discharge products (Li2CO3 and C) and recyclable EEA molecules, as shown in Fig. 15(a) and (b). Using this design, a Li–CO2 battery containing EEA showed a very high discharge potential of ∼2.9 V, which far exceeded the thermodynamic potential of 2.80 V, suggesting that the EEA mediated CO2 reduction was a very favorable electrochemical process in kinetics, and the proposed mechanism was shown in eqn (33). In light of these research achievements, soluble chemical catalysts play an important role in facilitating CO2 reduction indeed, but there is a long way to go due to the complicated electrochemical environment and the limited electrochemical/chemical stability. RNHCOO− + RNH3+ + 2CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2RNH3 + C + 2Li2CO3(33)
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the battery structure (a) and the proposed reaction mechanism (b) of the Li–CO2 battery containing the EEA chemical catalyst. 
In addition to the successful application of the above-mentioned catalysts in Li–CO2 batteries, the catalytic effect of several other types of catalysts on electrochemically oxidizing Li2CO3 species has already been demonstrated. For instance, Meini et al. found that in the model electrode composed of a Pd/C catalyst, Li2CO3 and active carbon, pre-filled Li2CO3 could be electro-oxidized to CO2 and Li+ at approximately 4.2 V.62 In addition, Fan et al. demonstrated that porous Au nanoparticles (AuNPs) enabled the parasitic discharge product of Li2CO3 to effectively decompose in the operation of Li–O2 batteries. Furthermore, by incorporating a AuNP catalyst and additional Li2CO3 into a carbon cathode, the added Li2CO3 was decomposed at approximately 4.2 V.163 In 2016, Chen and co-workers reported that the introduction of spinel LiCoO2 nanoparticles could dramatically facilitate electrochemical oxidation of pre-filled Li2CO3 in carbonate-based electrolytes, and the decomposition potential could be reduced to ∼4.25 V vs. Li/Li+.164 Zhang et al. then reported that porous perovskite oxide of La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8Mn0.2O3 nanofibers (LSCM NFs) exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activities toward electrochemical decomposition of both pre-filled Li2CO3 and the in situ generated Li2CO3 resulting from the side reactions of Li–O2 batteries.165 In addition, Liu et al. very recently confirmed that bi-CoPC introduced as a mobile catalyst could effectively remove Li2CO3, the detailed working mechanism of which is discussed in Section 5.6.153 It is also important to note that, although these advanced works have confirmed that these catalysts have the ability to oxidize preloaded or electrochemically produced lithium carbonate species at a relatively low charge potential, the function in Li–CO2 batteries has not yet been verified.
As can be seen from the above-mentioned achievements, catalysts play a critical role in determining the morphology, distribution, and crystallinity of discharge products, and the reaction pathways of discharge and charge processes, thus strongly affecting the electrochemical performance of Li–CO2 batteries. However, thus far, few materials have been found that exhibit predominant catalytic activity for CO2 reduction and evolution during the operation of aprotic Li–CO2 batteries. Seeking new catalysts and devising superior structures for providing sufficient space to deposit discharge products and facilitate reactant diffusion are crucial to obtain excellent battery performance. Moreover, the catalyst-induced CO2 reduction/evolution mechanism in aprotic Li–CO2 electrochemistry is not understood. Achieving insight into the catalytic mechanism will be very helpful to discover and design highly efficient electrocatalysts.
6. Flexible Li–CO2 batteries
The dramatic increase in portable electronics has stimulated the rapid development of flexible and wearable power sources with reliable security in recent years.166 Current energy storage devices, such as lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors and solar cells, have achieved a design toward excellent flexibility and lightweight characteristics.167–169 To catch up with the pace of flexible devices, designing flexible and folded metal–air batteries, especially flexible Li–O2 batteries, is receiving ever-increasing attention due to their exceptionally high specific energy density and wide applicability.170 Since the advent of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, designing flexible and bendable Li–CO2 batteries offers great potential for providing sustainable energy supplies in certain environments. However, little attention has been given to this objective so far. In comparison with common flexible devices, several strict requirements must be fulfilled to build flexible and bendable Li–CO2 batteries. Specifically, (1) flexible Li–CO2 batteries should avoid possible leakage issues due to the open battery system, and thus the familiar liquid electrolytes composed of lithium salts and organic solvents may not be suitable for both flexible and open battery systems; (2) constructing robust anode/cathode configurations with excellent mechanical properties, super structural stability, and compact interface contact is essential to achieve flexibility; (3) developing a novel CO2 cathode with high catalytic activity and decreased interface resistance is crucial to obtain flexible Li–CO2 batteries with outstanding electrochemical performance; and (4) an applied electrolyte with a high Li-ion conductivity is essential. Admittedly, designing and preparing flexible Li–CO2 batteries is an enormous challenge, owing to the open electrochemical system and the fairly complicated electrochemical/chemical reactions. However, solid electrolytes, in particular polymer electrolytes, due to their unique advantages of comparable ion conductivity, superior dimensional stability and facile preparation, and wide application in metal–air batteries,18,116,171 may be ideal candidates for realizing flexible Li–CO2 batteries. For the first time, Chen and co-workers successfully developed a liquid-free, rechargeable Li–CO2 battery consisting of a Li metal anode and an integrated poly(methacrylate)/poly(ethylene glycol)–LiClO4–3%SiO2@CNT cathode, and the battery construction and battery reactions are shown in Fig. 16(a).18 In this novel design, they took advantage of CPE, which not only avoided the use of an insulating and electrochemically inactive binder, but also achieved an integrated cathode with both good flexibility and excellent electrochemical performance. Specifically, the enhanced overall performance could be attributed to the following reasons: (1) the introduction of CPE made the Li–CO2 battery exhibit a decreased interface resistance due to the intimate contact of electrode/electrolyte, and avoided usage of a binder; (2) except for high ionic conductivity (7.14 × 10−2 mS cm−1 at 55 °C), the nonporous feature of CPE prevented the diffusion of CO2 to the side of the Li metal anode, and thus further protected the Li metal anode from corrosion by dissolved CO2; (3) compared with traditional preparation technology, the integrated cathode structure provided an increased cathodic reactive area, fast transportation dynamics, and enhanced electrochemical stability; and (4) the electrochemical reaction that occurred at the CPE/CNT interface was a reversible electrochemical process. As a result, the Li–CO2 battery reinforced with the integrated CPE@CNT cathode showed stable cycling performance for 100 cycles with a low overpotential of 0.7 V at 55 °C. Moreover, the assembled flexible pouch-type Li–CO2 battery could normally operate for 220 h under various bending and twisting conditions, as shown in Fig. 16(b)–(d). It should be noted that the adopted CPE electrolyte exhibited low Li-ion conductivity at room temperature (∼10−3 mS cm−1 at 25 °C), and the corresponding Li–CO2 battery showed obviously increased polarization. Accordingly, improving the ionic conductivity of CPE and developing a new solid electrolyte are major challenges to achieve flexible Li–CO2 batteries with satisfactory electrochemical performance. Constructing robust electrodes accompanied by reasonable/compatible electrolytes is also important, because Li metal and a conventional gas diffusion layer, such as Ni foam, have poor mechanical stability.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of a flexible all-solid-state Li–CO2 battery (left is structural diagram, right is SEM image and EDX mapping of Li/CPE@CNTs). (b)–(d) are the open circuit voltage of the integrated Li–CO2 battery under various bended and twisted conditions and the corresponding cycling performance at 2.5 mA. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Toward the effort to construct a mechanically flexible CO2 cathode, very recently, Hu and colleagues developed a natural wood-based CO2 cathode consisting of Ru nanoparticle catalyst decorated and CNT-covered flexible wood.111 This novel architecture integrated the unique advantages of natural wood, in which the ample microchannels and nanochannels provided fast CO2 and electrolyte transportation, and the excellent adsorption capacity of cellulose nanofibers toward the electrolyte facilitated the formation of nanoionic channels. Except for the improvement of transportation kinetics, the additional CNT not only provided enough surface area to deposit discharge products but enhanced the electronic conductivity. More importantly, the decorated Ru catalyst facilitated the CO2 reduction and evolution kinetics. Benefiting from these integrated advantages, Li–CO2 batteries based on this flexible cathode (2 mm thick) exhibited an ultrahigh reversible capacity of 11 mA h cm−2. Moreover, the as-prepared battery could normally operate with a low overpotential of 1.5 V for 200 cycles at 200 mA gC−1 with a restricted capacity of 1000 mA h gC−1. With utilization of this flexible wood-based cathode, the assembled flexible Li–CO2 pouch battery presented an open circuit potential (OCV) of 2.92 V in an Ar atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 17(a). After folding and rolling, the as-prepared flexible Li–CO2 battery still sustained a constant OCV of 2.99 V and 2.97 V respectively (Fig. 17(b) and (c)). Significantly, even after folding 50 times, the pouch battery could still recover the initial state and maintain almost the same OCV of 2.91 V (Fig. 17(d)), demonstrating that the flexible wood-based Li–CO2 battery is fairly stable under various bending conditions. As shown in Fig. 17(e), the pouch Li–CO2 battery in a CO2 atmosphere could still light up a LED device under the rolling state, suggesting its potential application as a wearable battery system for Mars exploration (Fig. 17(f)).
 Fig. 17  Optical images of the as-prepared flexible wood-based Li–CO2 pouch battery. (a) The pristine pouch battery and the corresponding OCV in an Ar atmosphere. The OCV measurements of the pouch battery in the folding state (b) and rolling state (c). (d) The OCV of the pouch battery after 50 folding cycles. (e) Lighting a LED device by the rolled wood-based Li–CO2 pouch battery in a CO2 atmosphere. (f) Potential application as a wearable battery system for Mars exploration. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018 Royal of Society of Chemistry. 
On the basis of these advances, the substitution of Li metal with a Li composite foil anode,170 selection of a textile serving as both current collector and gas diffusion layer, and the development of a self-supporting cathode with high catalytic activity will play a vital role in the electrochemical performance improvement of flexible Li–CO2 batteries in the future.
7. Conclusion and outlook
The present review systematically presents recent advances in various aspects of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, including CO2 reduction and evolution electrochemical mechanisms, interface stability study of Li metal anodes/organic electrolytes, electrolyte properties, the effect of cathode material/catalyst selection/design on CO2 reduction/evolution kinetics, etc. With the application of in situ characterization methods, some unstable reaction intermediates are successfully detected and related electrochemical reactions are established. However, full elucidation of the underlying mechanisms remains unachieved because the open battery system involves a complex electrochemical environment, and many factors (e.g., working atmosphere) and testing conditions (e.g., current density, cut-off voltage, discharge/charge depth, etc.) significantly affect the fundamental CO2 electrochemistry. Moreover, the adopted electrolyte and cathodic materials also have a significant influence on the formation and decomposition process of Li2CO3. So far, however, only a few cathode–electrolyte systems have been investigated and proven to be effective in improving the overall performance of practical Li–CO2 batteries. Therefore, much research must be performed to completely understand this novel electrochemical reaction system. Building on basic CO2 electrochemistry and the screening of optimized electrolyte/cathode systems, flexible Li–CO2 batteries based on polymer electrolytes have been successfully designed and prepared; however, this only constitutes a beginning. Although research on Li–CO2 electrochemistry in terms of the energy storage and conversion, and CO2 fixation has progressed significantly, the development of this novel Li–CO2 electrochemistry remains in its infancy. Based on the analysis and discussion of recent advanced works, some crucial drawbacks and challenges facing Li–CO2 electrochemistry are pointed out as follows:
(1) For mechanistic research of Li–CO2 electrochemistry, especially in a mixture atmosphere of O2 and CO2, the fundamental reaction chemistry is a complicated process that involves multistep electrochemical and chemical reactions. With regard to the current research results, a number of controversies exist in terms of indentifying unstable intermediates and confirming elementary reactions during the discharge/charge process. Additional efforts are still required to quantitatively detect and qualitatively distinguish unstable intermediates resulting from CO2 reduction and evolution. We believe that the utilization of some advanced in situ characterization tools, including sensitive surface analytical techniques, such as IR and in situ Raman spectra, will help achieve real-time detection of unstable/metastable intermediates. In addition, in situ DEMS (quantitative analysis technology) can accurately monitor the mole ratio of electron transfer number and CO2 molecules, which is helpful in confirming specific electrochemical reactions during the discharging and charging processes. Coupled with other ex situ characterization analyses, an in-depth understanding of electrochemical/chemical processes is anticipated to be gradually achieved by researchers in the near future.
(2) Regarding electrolyte selection, no most-suitable electrolyte has thus been discovered for Li–CO2 batteries, and the influence mechanism of common electrolytes on the specific CO2 electrochemical reduction and evolution processes remains undetermined. Numerous efforts should be devoted to investigating dielectric constants, Gutmann donor number (DN) of different solvents, and the ionic dissociation strength of inorganic/organic lithium salts and solubility of CO2 molecules in various electrolyte solvents for the electrochemical pathways of CO2 reduction and Li2CO3 decomposition. Moreover, to obtain practical Li–CO2 batteries, seeking new electrolyte systems with low volatility, excellent electrochemical/chemical stability, favorable compatibility with both Li anode and CO2 cathode, and high ionic conductivity is crucial.
(3) For cathode materials/catalysts, until now, no real understanding of high-efficiency electro-catalysts has been achieved. Clarifying the relationships between the intrinsic structure (crystal structure and defect effect) of catalysts and electrochemical mechanism/performance of Li–CO2 batteries is important to seek and design novel catalysts. In terms of understanding the formation/decomposition mechanism of discharge products in the catalyst-induced CO2 electrochemistry process, combining theoretical calculation, simulation study, and experiments is necessary. In efforts to design and synthesize advanced cathode materials/catalysts, except for inherent activity, designing a proper pore structure for effective CO2/Li+ diffusion and a large amount of deposition of discharge products, and decreasing the size of catalysts are essential to obtain high energy density and enhanced catalytic ability. In this regard, it is very crucial to achieve controllable preparation of nano-sized catalysts with specific morphology and uniformity, especially for some crystal metals and oxides. Except for the improvement of catalytic efficiency resulting from the increased specifc surface area, it is of significance to investigate the specific facet-induced CO2 reduction/evolution mechansim and the morphology evolution mechanism of discharge products. Beyound that, considering the insufficient electric conductivity of the commonly used cathodic materials/catalysts, such as transition metal oxides and carbon quantum dots, constructing composite structures with highly conductive carbon nanomaterials (e.g. carbon nanotubes and graphene) and designing novel electronic structures by virtue of heteroatom doping are very promising in terms of improving the overall performance of Li–CO2 batteries. Building on the high catalytic activity of the employed catalysts, designing and developing a free-standing CO2 cathode with excellent electron conductivity constitutes an efficient strategy to avoid the side reaction caused by binders and conductive additives, which is promising to increase the recyclability of Li–CO2 batteries. In addition, to further boost the electrochemistry performance of Li–CO2 batteries, designing dual-functional electro-catalysts through integrating multiple components into a composite for more efficient CO2 reduction and evolution is an effective means to achieve long-term operation of Li–CO2 batteries.
(4) Constructing structure- and interface-stable Li metal anodes is also critical to obtain extended cycling life for Li–CO2 batteries; for this purpose, optimizing the composition and thickness of interfacial layers with good Li+ conductivity should be considered in further studies. We propose that this can be achieved through pre-treating the Li anode to build an artificial protection layer, or modifying the components of the electrolyte.
(5) To keep pace with emerging flexible devices, we propose the following two research tasks to acquire flexible and wearable Li–CO2 batteries, namely, developing a robust alloy anode and a solid-state polymer electrolyte with low interface impedance and high ion mobility, and designing highly active and robust CO2 cathodes.
(6) Similar to Li–O2 batteries, in order to make the transformation of Li–CO2 batteries from the laboratory scale to practical integrated devices, macroscopic modeling studies involving heat and mass transfer, building of governing equations, and performance evaluation standards should be acheived.172
In summary, although many scientific and technical challenges remain, we strongly believe that Li–CO2 electrochemistry will become the mainstream in next-generation electrochemical energy storage in the near future. This promising electrochemical technology will become a reality through the continual efforts of increasing number of researchers.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundations of China (Grant No. 21573265 and 21673263) and the DNL Cooperation Fund, CAS (DNL 180307).
References
A. M. Appel, J. E. Bercaw, A. B. Bocarsly, H. Dobbek, D. L. DuBois, M. Dupuis, J. G. Ferry, E. Fujita, R. Hille, P. J. A. Kenis, C. A. Kerfeld, R. H. Morris, C. H. F. Peden, A. R. Portis, S. W. Ragsdale, T. B. Rauchfuss, J. N. H. Reek, L. C. Seefeldt, R. K. Thauer and G. L. Waldrop, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6621–6658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Vitousek, Science, 1997, 278, 21 CAS .
T. Y. Ma and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3847–3855 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Nielsen, H. Herrmann and C. Weller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6684–6704 RSC .
Y.-G. Huang, S.-Q. Wu, W.-H. Deng, G. Xu, F.-L. Hu, J. P. Hill, W. Wei, S.-Q. Su, L. K. Shrestha, O. Sato, M.-Y. Wu, M.-C. Hong and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703301 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15174 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, A. M. Al-Enizi and G. Zheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701809 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Ager and A. A. Lapkin, Science, 2018, 360, 707–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, S. K. Das and L. A. Archer, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6656 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Xie, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14636–14639 RSC .
X. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Sun, Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602396 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, J. Sun, Z. Li, Q. Zhao, C. Chen and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6482–6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Li, C. Yang, Y. Li, K. Guo, J. Cheng, D. Yuan, C. Song, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804439 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Bao, X. Zhou, Z. Xie, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6550–6553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Wang, Y. Lyu, H. Li and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 677–681 RSC .
X. Hu, Z. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5785–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, N. Ding, T. S. A. Hor, S. W. Chien, Z. Liu, D. Wuu, X. Sun and Y. Zong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502164 CrossRef .
S. R. Gowda, A. Brunet, G. M. Wallraff and B. D. McCloskey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 276–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-K. Lim, H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Seo, H. Gwon, J. Hong, W. A. Goddard, III, H. Kim and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9733–9742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takechi, T. Shiga and T. Asaoka, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3463–3465 RSC .
S. R. Gowda, A. Brunet, G. M. Wallraff and B. D. McCloskey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 276–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, J. Yi, S. Guo, Y. Sun, S. Wu, X. Liu, S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1211–1217 RSC .
J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, R1–R30 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Qiao, P. He, Y. Liu, Z. Cheng, J.-J. Zhu and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 972–978 RSC .
Q.-C. Zhu, S.-M. Xu, Z.-P. Cai, M. M. Harris, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 209–215 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Li, X.-G. Wang, Y.-N. Chen, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2792–2796 RSC .
Z. Zhang, X. G. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. N. Chen, L. Ma, Z. Peng and Z. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700567 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Xie, K. Cao and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3218–3223 RSC .
S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1650–1654 RSC .
Y. Qiao, J. Yi, S. Wu, Y. Liu, S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Joule, 2017, 1, 359–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wadhawan, P. J. Welford, E. Maisonhaute, V. Climent, N. S. Lawrence, R. G. Compton, H. B. McPeak and C. E. W. Hahn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10659–10668 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Guo, B. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9126–9130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mushtaq, X.-W. Guo, J.-P. Bi, Z.-X. Wang and H.-J. Yu, Rare Met., 2018, 37, 520–526 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, B. Sayahpour, P. Abbasi, A. T. Ngo, K. Karis, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Liu, B. Narayanan, M. Gerard, P. Yasaei, X. Hu, A. Mukherjee, K. C. Lau, R. S. Assary, F. Khalili-Araghi, R. F. Klie, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nature, 2018, 555, 502–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Yang, N. Feng, P. He and H. Zhou, Chin. J. Catal., 2016, 37, 1016–1024 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X.-G. Wang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Green Energy Environ., 2016, 1, 4–17 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605891 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, J. Huang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3874–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, S. Lau and L. A. Archer, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 1070–1079 RSC .
K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 830–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassoun, F. Croce, M. Armand and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2999–3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Floate and C. E. W. Hahn, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 110, 137–147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lyu, Y. Zhou, W. Dai, X. Cui, M. Lai, L. Wang, F. Huo, W. Huang, Z. Hu and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6046–6072 RSC .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
E. Lamy, L. Nadjo and J.-M. Savéant, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 78, 403–407 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Roberts, T. S. Calderwood and D. T. Sawyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 4667–4670 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wadhawan, P. J. Welford, H. B. McPeak, C. E. W. Hahn and R. G. Compton, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 88, 40–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin, A. Grimaud, F. Lepoivre, C. Yang and J. M. Tarascon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 214–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Dai, L. Ma, L. Gong, Z. Lyu, Y. Zhou, J. Liu, M. Lin, M. Lai, Z. Peng and W. Chen, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 9280–9286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lei, S. Lu, W. Ma, Z. Cao, R. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Ding, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 280, 308–314 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Liu, S. Xu and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704973 CrossRef .
L. Ma, T. Yu, E. Tzoganakis, K. Amine, T. Wu, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800348 CrossRef .
S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 29–48 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2921–3004 RSC .
Y. S. Mekonnen, K. B. Knudsen, J. S. Myrdal, R. Younesi, J. Hojberg, J. Hjelm, P. Norby and T. Vegge, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 121101 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Mekonnen, J. M. Garcia-Lastra, J. S. Hummelshøj, C. Jin and T. Vegge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18066–18073 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nemeth and G. Srajer, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1879–1885 RSC .
Y. Hou, J. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Chou, D. Shi, H. Liu, Y. Wu, W. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700564 CrossRef .
J. Xie, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, M. Wu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13952–13958 RSC .
S. Meini, N. Tsiouvaras, K. U. Schwenke, M. Piana, H. Beyer, L. Lange and H. A. Gasteiger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11478–11493 RSC .
N. Feng, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502303 CrossRef .
S. Ma, H. Yao, D. Lei, X. Guo, Y. Lu, Q. Liu and Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 8072–8075 RSC .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-W. Chang, Y. Wang, D.-P. Liu, Y. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9620–9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, X. Liang, P. Yin, J. Wang, Y. L. Lee, Z. Hu and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 535–542 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, R. Zhang, K. Takechi and F. Mizuno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26591–26598 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahne, S. E. Renfrew, B. D. McCloskey and S. A. Freunberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5529–5533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Dong, J. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Han, P. Qi and B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1318–1325 RSC .
Z. Guo, J. Li, H. Qi, X. Sun, H. Li, A. G. Tamirat, J. Liu, Y. Wang and L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803246 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, N.-C. Lai, Y.-R. Lu, Y. Zhou, C.-L. Dong and Y.-C. Lu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1–17 CrossRef .
W.-J. Kwak, K. C. Lau, C.-D. Shin, K. Amine, L. A. Curtiss and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4129–4137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qie, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, J. Xu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6970–6974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Jung Lee, X. Luo, K. Chun Lau, M. Asadi, H.-H. Wang, S. Brombosz, J. Wen, D. Zhai, Z. Chen, D. J. Miller, Y. Sub Jeong, J.-B. Park, Z. Zak Fang, B. Kumar, A. Salehi-Khojin, Y.-K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nature, 2016, 529, 377–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, Q. Zou, Y. Wang and Y.-C. Lu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700150 CrossRef .
S. K. Das, S. Xu, A.-H. Emwas, Y. Y. Lu, S. Srivastava and L. A. Archer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8927–8931 RSC .
H. D. Lim, B. Lee, Y. Bae, H. Park, Y. Ko, H. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2873–2888 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Guo and Z. Peng, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 186–203 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, Z. Liang, J. Zhao, K. Yan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, W. A. Henderson, W. Xu, P. Bhattacharya, M. Engelhard, O. Borodin and J. G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Trinh, D. Lepage, D. Ayme-Perrot, A. Badia, M. Dolle and D. Rochefort, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5072–5075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Zhou, T. Zhang, L. Li, J. Wang and Y. Nuli, J. Power Sources, 2017, 366, 265–269 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miao, J. Yang, Z. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Nuli and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-C. Liu, J.-J. Xu, S. Yuan, Z.-W. Chang, D. Xu, Y.-B. Yin, L. Li, H.-X. Zhong, Y.-S. Jiang, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cha, M. D. Patel, J. Park, J. Hwang, V. Prasad, K. Cho and W. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 337–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Kozen, C.-F. Lin, A. J. Pearse, M. A. Schroeder, X. Han, L. Hu, S.-B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5884–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X.-G. Wang, C. Wang, Y.-N. Chen, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12814–12818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Patel, E. Cha, C. Kang, B. Gwalani and W. Choi, Carbon, 2017, 118, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, J. Ren, W. Zhang, M. Xie, Y. Li, D. Sun, Y. Shen and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803270 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Kafafi, R. H. Hauge, W. E. Billups and J. L. Margrave, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 3886–3893 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Gofer, M. Benzion and P. Aped, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 339, 451–471 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach and O. Chusid, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, L155–L157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, S. Lu, X. Lei, X. Liu and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20829–20835 RSC .
Y. Mao, C. Tang, Z. Tang, J. Xie, Z. Chen, J. Tu, G. Cao and X. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.ensm.2018.08.011 .
D. Aurbach, B. D. McCloskey, L. F. Nazar and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16128 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev and M. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 379–383 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, A. Kushima, Z. Yin, L. Qi, K. Amine, J. Lu and J. Li, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao and S. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15830–15845 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ottakam Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mozhzhukhina, L. P. Mendez De Leo and E. Julio Calvo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18375–18380 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, M. Afri, M. Noked, A. Garsuch, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tatara, D. G. Kwabi, T. P. Batcho, M. Tulodziecki, K. Watanabe, H.-M. Kwon, M. L. Thomas, K. Ueno, C. V. Thompson, K. Dokko, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Watanabete, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9162–9172 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Kwabi, V. S. Bryantsev, T. P. Batcho, D. M. Itkis, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3129–3134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J.-H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609–8613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, C. Hu, Q. Dai, Y. Xiao, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, F. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804630 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, Y. Liu, C. Chen, H. Xie, Y. Yao, S. He, W. Ping, B. Liu and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805899 CrossRef .
S. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Gan, B. Liu, E. M. Hitz, J. W. Connell, Y. Lin and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3231–3237 RSC .
C. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, X.-G. Wang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, 1800641 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Pipes, A. Bhargav and A. Manthiram, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37119–37124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, G. Zhu, Z. Qiu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shen, X. Zhang, R. Guo, J. Lang, J. Chen and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8180–8189 RSC .
J. Yi, S. Guo, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 860–884 RSC .
Z. Chang, J. Xu and X. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700875 CrossRef .
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. F. Wang, K. Storr, L. Balicas, F. Liu and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 430–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski and A. V. Krasheninnikov, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 26–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Cui, X. Zhang, W. C. McKee, Y. Xu, S. Ling, H. Li, G. Zhong, Y. Yang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10717–10721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tian, M. D. Radin and D. J. Siegel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2952–2959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, R. A. Wong, W. Park, K. Yamanaka, T. Ohta, Y. Jung and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 680 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ma, K. Djanashvili and W. A. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6680–6684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825–4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Yu, J. Bai, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and X. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, H. C. Choi and H. R. Byon, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2234–2241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, M. Zheng, Y. Lu, Z. Lin, J. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Shi, P. He and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16177–16182 RSC .
S. Ganapathy, Z. Li, M. S. Anastasaki, S. Basak, X.-F. Miao, K. Goubitz, H. W. Zandbergen, F. M. Mulder and M. Wagemaker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18421–18427 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Ganapathy, Y. Xu, Q. Zhu, W. Chen, I. Kochetkov, C. George, L. F. Nazar and M. Wagemaker, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703513 CrossRef .
L. Mino, G. Spoto and A. M. Ferrari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25016–25026 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. T. A. Fischer, M. Hankel and D. J. Searles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 29044–29051 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Ramesha, J. F. Brennecke and P. V. Kamat, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3249–3254 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Z. Liu, G. Kim, J. T. Frith, N. Garcia-Araez and C. P. Grey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 16273–16278 CrossRef .
R. Gao, X. Liang, P. Yin, J. Wang, Y. L. Lee, Z. Hu and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 535–542 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Y. J. Lee, X. Luo, K. C. Lau, M. Asadi, H.-H. Wang, S. Brombosz, J. Wen, D. Zhai, Z. Chen, D. J. Miller, Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, Z. Z. Fang, B. Kumar, A. Salehi-Khojin, Y.-K. Sun, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nature, 2016, 529, 377–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Xu, Z.-C. Ren, X. Liu, X. Liang, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 291–298 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Liang, Q. Zou, G. Cong and Y.-C. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6459–6466 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. Cheng, X. Yang, B. Wu, H. Nie, H. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14556–14561 RSC .
S. Song, W. Xu, J. Zheng, L. Luo, M. H. Engelhard, M. E. Bowden, B. Liu, C.-M. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1417–1424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Z. Guo, X. Yin, Q. Pang, B. Tu, L. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3258–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q.-L. Zhu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem, 2017, 2, 52–80 CAS .
A. R. Millward and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17998–17999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Suh, S. Lee and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24444–24451 CrossRef CAS .
F. Moreau, I. da Silva, N. H. Al Smail, T. L. Easun, M. Savage, H. G. W. Godfrey, S. F. Parker, P. Manuel, S. Yang and M. Schroeder, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Kumar, S. S. Kumar and M. A. Kulandainathan, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 70–73 CrossRef .
J. Chen, K. Shen and Y. Li, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3165–3187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-B. Park, S. H. Lee, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704162 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. R. Johnson, Z. P. Jovanov and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17118 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, Y. Shen, W. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Yi, W. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, D. Wang and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8941–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, B. Sun, X. Xie, Y. Zhao and G. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500285 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Feng, P. He and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 600–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Jia, H. Wan, Z. Peng, Y. Bi, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, Q. Wang, H. Li, D. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Kwak, D. Hirshberg, D. Sharon, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2334–2345 RSC .
Z. Liang and Y. C. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7574–7583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Wu and Z. Zhou, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2145–2149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, O. Shyue Ping, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
B. Gurkan, F. Simeon and T. A. Hatton, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1394–1405 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Rheinhardt, P. Singh, P. Tarakeshwar and D. A. Buttry, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 454–461 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagaoka, N. Nishii, K. Fujii and K. Ogura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 322, 383–389 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yin, A. Grimaud, I. Azcarate, C. Yang and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6546–6554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khurram, M. He and B. M. Gallant, Joule, 2018, 2, 1–18 CrossRef .
W. Fan, X. Guo, D. Xiao and L. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7344–7350 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, D. Tang, D. Wang, Z. Wang and L. Chen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3903–3913 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Gong, S. Li and C. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7737–7747 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, Q. Meng, A. Ahmad and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700535 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 201701827 Search PubMed .
M. Gockeln, J. Glenneberg, M. Busse, S. Pokhrel, L. Mädler and R. Kun, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 564–573 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dong, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, J. Zhang, R. S. Borges, K. Kalaga, A. L. M. Reddy, G. G. Silva, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 181–186 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Yang, J.-J. Xu, D. Bao, Z.-W. Chang, D.-P. Liu, Y. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 201700378 Search PubMed .
X. L. Cheng, J. Pan, Y. Zhao, M. Liao and H. S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702184 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Huang and A. Faghri, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 420–446 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Bao Liu
	Bao Liu received his Bachelor's degree from Jiangxi University of Science and technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Xinbin Yan at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research focuses on the design and fabrication of new-fashioned energy storage devices coupled with both high-energy density and high power output based on alkali metal–air electrochemistry and the related mechanism study.

Yinglun Sun
	Yinglun Sun received his Bachelor's degree in materials science and engineering from Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his doctor's degree in materials science at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Xingbin Yan. His current research interest is in the fabrication of multi-functional supercapacitors.

Lingyang Liu
	Lingyang Liu received his Bachelor's degree from Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2013. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Xingbin Yan at Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research interests are focused on the design and fabrication of multifunctional energy storage devices, especially supercapacitors, and the related functional mechanism study.

Shan Xu
	Shan Xu completed her BS degree in 1999 at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology (China), and then obtained her PhD degree in 2005 at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). After that, she worked at SINOPEC Beijing Research Institute of Chemical Industry (BRICI) until the end of 2006. At the beginning of 2009, she worked at State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation in LICP. Her current research interests mainly focus on designing and fabricating non-noble metal based materials as heterogeneous catalysts and cathodic materials for Li–O2 electrochemical batteries.

Xingbin Yan
	Xingbin Yan completed his BS degree in 2000 at the Department of Chemistry, Shandong University (China), and then obtained his PhD degree in 2005 at the Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). After that, he worked at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) as a research fellow and then at the University of Lyon 1 (France) as a postdoctoral researcher. At the beginning of 2009, he initiated his independent research in LICP as a professor. His current research interests mainly focus on designing and fabricating novel electrode materials and electrolytes for high-performance electrochemical energy storage devices.

Broader context
With the heavy use of fossil fuel and the continuous emission of industrial waste gas, the concentration of CO2 in air is getting higher every year, which has a tremendous negative impact on the surrounding environment and people's lives. So how to decrease or eliminate CO2 emissions has been a troubling issue for a long time. Li–CO2 electrochemistry, coupled with dual characteristics of both effective CO2 fixation and advanced energy storage/conversion, is considered to be a very promising way to balance the continuous CO2 release and the ever-growing energy demand. This review focuses on the recent advances regarding the reaction electrochemistry in Li–CO2 batteries, including the CO2 reduction/evolution mechanism, Li metal anode/electrolyte interfacial chemistry, the effect of electrolyte properties and cathode materials/catalyst design strategy on the performance of Li–CO2 batteries. Additionally, advanced flexible Li–CO2 batteries and the design strategies are proposed. A comprehensive understanding of Li–CO2 electrochemistry will help develop advanced Li–CO2 batteries with excellent electrochemical performance and good application prospects.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a reversible aprotic Li–CO2 battery.	 
2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3	(1)
O2 + e− ⇄ O2˙−	(2)
O2˙− + CO2 ↔ CO4˙−	(3)
CO4˙− + CO2 → C2O6˙−	(4)
C2O6˙− + O2˙− → C2O62− + O2	(5)
C2O6− + 2O2˙− + 4Li+ → 2Li2CO3 + 2O2	(6)
O2˙− + CO2 ⇄ CO4˙−	(7)
CO4˙− + Li+ → LiCO4	(8)

 	Fig. 2  The possible reaction pathways for the formation of Li2CO3 in non-aqueous Li–O2/CO2 electrochemistry.	 
O2˙− + Li+ ⇄ LiO2	(9)
LiO2 + CO2 → LiCO4	(10)
LiCO4 + 3Li+ + CO2 + 3e− → 2Li2CO3	(11)
2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2	(12)
LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2	(13)
2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2	(14)
2CO2 + 2e− ⇄ C2O42−	(15)
C2O42− → CO22− + CO2	(16)
C2O42− + CO22− → 2CO32− + C	(17)
CO32− + 2Li+ → Li2CO3	(18)
4Li+ + 4e− + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C	(19)
2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− ↔ Li2CO3 + CO	(20)


2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3a	−737.72a	3.82a	
62

2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3b	−351.22b	3.81b	
21

2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2CO3c	−352.74c	3.82c	
21

2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2	−333.3	—	
37

4Li+ + 4e− + 3CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + C	−1081.04	2.80	
63

2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− ↔ Li2CO3 + CO	−480.49	2.5	
61

3CO + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2C + Li2CO3	−720.50	3.73	
64



2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	737.72	3.82	
62

2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2˙− + 4Li+ + 3e−	Unknown valuea	Unknown valuea	
31

2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + 1O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	737.72b	3.82b	
68

2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	540.52	2.80	
32

2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(21)
2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + O2˙− + 4Li+ + 3e−	(22)
O2˙− − e− → O2	(23)
2Li2CO3 → 2CO2 + 1O2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(24)
2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(25)
3CO + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2C + Li2CO3	(26)
3xCO2 + 3CO + 2(2x + 1)Li+ + 2(2x + 1)e− ⇌ (x + 2)C + (2x + 1)Li2CO3	(27)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structure and (b) working mechanism of a typical Li–CO/CO2 battery.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image, (b) Raman spectrum, (c) XPS spectra and (d) EELS spectra of the Li metal anode after ten continuous discharge and charge cycles. (e) Exhaustive stripping test of the protected Li anode at 0.5 mA cm−2, and the inset is the cycling test of the protected Li anode in air at 0.05 mA cm−2. (f) The comparison of electrochemical impedance spectra for the passivated Li anode at various cycles of Li–CO2 batteries and fresh anode. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2018, Macmillan publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The effect of dielectric constants of electrolyte solvents on the reaction pathways of CO2 reduction under the existence of O2. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) In situ Raman spectra recorded during the charging process of a Li–CO2 battery with an Au cathode in LiClO4/DMSO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017,32 Elsevier Inc. (c) Schematic illustrations of the formation mechanism of the final discharge product (Li2CO3) in dilute LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte. (d) Raman spectra of LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte with the increase of LiTFSI and DMSO mole ratio. (e) Schematic illustrations of the formation mechanism of the final discharge product (C2O62−) in super-concentrated LiTFSI–DMSO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Optical photograph and (b and c) SEM images of the as-prepared GPE. (d) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the symmetric Li/GPE/Li cell at room temperature. (e) LSV and (f) TG analysis for GPE; LSV was performed at a sweep rate of 1 mV s−1. (g) Rate performance of the GPE-based Li–CO2 battery at various current densities with a cut-off voltage of 2.0 V. (h) The discharge/charge curves of the GPE-based Li–CO2 battery with a restricted capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at various current densities. (i) The cycle performance of the Li–CO2 battery based on GPE with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of porous graphene as the cathode of Li–CO2 batteries. (b) The first discharge/charge curves of Li–CO2 batteries based on the graphene cathode in CO2 (at 50 mA g−1 and 100 mA g−1) and Ar atmosphere (at 50 mA g−1), respectively. The recyclability of the Li–CO2 batteries with the graphene cathode at (c) 50 mA g−1 and (d) 100 mA g−1 with a cutoff capacity of 1000 mA h g−1, respectively. (e) XRD and (f) FTIR analysis of the graphene cathode after the first discharge and charge, respectively. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Proposed mechanism of CO2 reduction and evolution on the BN–hG cathode of a Li–CO2 battery. (b) SEM image of BN–hG. (c) XPS full spectra of hG and BN–hG, and the enlarged spectra of N1s and B1s in (c). (d) Discharge/charge curve comparison of hG and BN–hG cathodes at 0.3 A g−1 within a voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. TEM images of the BN–hG cathode after (e) full discharge and (f) full recharge. (g) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the pristine, discharged and recharged Li–CO2 battery with the BN–hG cathode. (h) The contrast of polarization potentials of hG and BN–hG cathodes at different current rates. (i) Rate capability and (j) cycling stability measurements of the Li–CO2 battery with the BN–hG cathode. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
C2O42− + 2Li+ + Mo2C → Li2C2O4−Mo2C	(28)

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of (a) as-prepared Mo2C/CNT composites and (b) discharged Mo2C/CNT cathode. (c) Raman spectra of discharged Mo2C/CNT cathode. (d) Discharge/charge profiles and (e) cycling performance of Li–CO2 batteries based on Mo2C/CNT and CNT cathodes at 20 μA with a controlled capacity of 100 μA h. (f) The schematic illustration of the formation/decomposition mechanism of amorphous Li2C2O4 intermediate on Mo2C nanoparticles during the discharging/charging process. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cyclic voltammetry profile of the Li–CO2 battery with the MFCN cathode at 0.2 mV s−1. (b) Discharge/charge curves of the Li–CO2 battery based on the MFCN cathode at 100 mA g−1, 200 mA g−1 and 400 mA g−1 respectively. (c) Cycle performance of the Li–CO2 battery with the MFCN cathode at 100 mA g−1 with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (d) Both low resolution and high resolution (the inset image) SEM images of the MFCN cathode after the 10th discharge. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2015, published by Elsevier B.V.	 


Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) (poly(methacrylate)/poly(ethylene glycol)–LiClO4–3 wt%SiO2) composite polymer electrolyte (CPE)	—	—	993.2 mA h/2.5 mA*	—	100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
18

CNTs (CPE electrolyte)	2.2–4.5 V	—	8536 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	2581 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1	60 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
34

50 cycles at 250 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CNTs (PE electrolyte)	2–4.6 V	∼92%	12000 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	Discharge potential ∼2.5 V and charge potential ∼4.46 V at 0.5 A g−1	60 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
35

Super P high surface area carbon (1 M LiTFSI/([bmim][Tf2N]))	—	—	∼0 mA h g−1/0.05 mA cm−2	—	—	Pure CO2	
11

∼750 mA h g−1/0.05 mA cm−2	—	—
Super P (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)	2–4.5 V	10.9%	6062 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	—	20 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
26

Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/EC:DEC with a volume ratio of 3:7)	1.5–∼	—	66 mA h g−1/0.2 mA cm−2	—	—	Pure CO2	
22

5860 mA h g−1/0.2 mA cm−2	CO2:O2 = 1:1 (volume ratio)
Ketjen black (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)	2.2–4.3 V	—	1808 mA h g−1/30 mA g−1	—	10 cycles at 30 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	CO2:O2 = 2:1 (volume ratio)	
17

Ketjen black (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)	2.2–4.4 V	—	1032 mA h g−1/30 mA g−1	—	7 cycles at 30 mA g−1 without capacity limitation	Pure CO2	
17

Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.2–4.3 V	—	1620 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	<500 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	9 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
16

CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.2–4.3 V	—	8379 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	5786 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	29 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
12

22 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	—	—	∼5000 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	∼0 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1	20 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
35

CNTs (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	—	—	8396 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	15 cycles at 50/100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
69

25 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
CNTs (1 M LiCF3SO3/TEGDME)	2.2–4.4 V	—	9535 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	—	70 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 500 mA h g−1	CO and CO2	
64

Graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.2–4.3 V	—	14722 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	6600 mA hg−1 at 100 mA g−1	20 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
16

Ketjen black (1 M LiPF6/DMSO) (0.1 M LiPF6/DME)	2–4.5 V	—	∼2200 mA h g−1/0.4 mA cm−2	—	20 cycles at 0.4 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	CO2:O2 = 9:1 (volume ratio)	
21

—	—	∼3800 mA h g−1/0.4 mA cm−2	—	—
B,N-Codoped holey graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2–4.5 V	93.5%	14996 mA h g−1/0.3 A g−1	—	200 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 with a controlled capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
74

Carbon quantum dot/holey graphene composite (1 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiNO3/DMSO)	2–4.5 V	96%	12300 mA h g−1/0.5 A g−1	Discharge potential 2.67 V at 2 A g−1	235 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 with a controlled capacity of 500 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
109

Mo2C/carbon nanotube composites	2.0–3.8 V	100%	1150 μA h/20 μA	—	40 cycles at 20 μA with a controlled capacity of 100 μA h	Pure CO2	
60

CNT (1 M LiCF3SO3/TEGDME)	∼2850 μA h/20 μA
MoC/MoFeNi@ N-doped worm-like carbon (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	(2.35–4.1 V)	73.4%	8827 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	1461 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1	90 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	CO2 with trace O2	
27

Ni nanoparticles/N-graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.2–4.5 V	—	17625 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	<5000 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1	100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
29

Ultrafine Ni nanoparticles/3D printed oxide graphene framework (the as-prepared cathode with a thickness of 0.4 mm) (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.0–4.5 V	—	14.6 mA h cm−2 (8991.0 mA h g−1)/0.1 mA cm−2	Overpotential 2.01 V at 1000 mA h g−1	100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
110

Cu nanoparticles/N-doped graphene (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.2–4.5 V	92%	14864 mA h g−1/200 mA g−1	11966 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1	50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
30

Sheet-like NiO/carbon nanotubes (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.0–4.3 V	97.8%	9000 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	42 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
28

25 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Anatase TiO2 nanoparticle/CNT–CNF composite (1 M LiTFSI/DMSO)	2.5–4.5 V	—	1950 μA h cm−2	—	20 cycles at 0.05 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 250 μA h cm−2	Pure CO2	
113

Porous Mn2O3 (0.5 M LiClO4/TEGDME)	2.5–4.5 V	—	9434 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	45 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
94

Ru@Super P (LiCF3SO3/TEGDME with a molar ratio of 1:4)	2–4.4 V	86.2%	8229 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	—	70 cycles at 100/200/300 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
26

Ru@GNSs (0.1 M LiClO4/DMSO)	2.0–4.2 V	89.2%	4742 mA h g−1/0.08 mA cm−2	3865 mA h g−1 at 0.16 mA cm−2	67 cycles at 0.16 mA cm−2 with a limited capacity of 500 mA h g−1	CO2 with 2% O2	
51

Ru@CNT/flexible wood cathode (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.0–4.5 V	—	11 mA h cm−2/— (2 mm thick cathode)	Overpotential 1.85 V at 1000 mA g−1	200 cycles at 200 mA gC−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h gC−1	Pure CO2	
111

RuO2/LDO (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.25–4.3 V	—	5455 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	—	60 cycles at 166 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
136

RuP2/N,P dual-doped carbon film (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.0–4.3 V	98.1%	11951 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	4680 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1	200 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
70

Ir/carbon nanofibers (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	2.0–4.5 V	93.1%	21528 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	18813 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	45 cycles at 50 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
112

27 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
IrO2/δ-MnO2–carbon cloth (1 M LiClO4/TEGDME)	2.0–4.5 V	
	6604 mA h g−1/100 mA g−1	1223 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1	378 cycles at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
95

200 cycles at 800 mA g−1 without capacity limitation
Nanoporous Au super-concentrated electrolyte (LiTFSI/DMSO with a mole ratio of 1:3)	2.6–3.65 V	—	753 mA h g−1/400 mA g−1	<3.6 V at 600 mA g−1	20 cycles at 400 mA g−1 without capacity limitation	CO2:O2 = 1:1 (volume ratio)	
24

100 cycles at 400 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 200 mA h g−1
Mn2(dobdc) (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	—	—	18022 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	30 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
69

50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Mn(HCOO)2 (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	—	—	15510 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	50 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
69

MnCO3 (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME)	—	—	11110 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	—	15 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
69

25 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1
Ketjen black (1 M LiTFSI/TEGDME + LiBr)	2–4.3 V	81%	11500 mA h g−1/50 mA g−1	Charge potential below 4.0 V at 200 mA g−1	38 cycles at 100 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1	Pure CO2	
156

16 cycles at 200 mA g−1 with a limited capacity of 1000 mA h g−1

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image and electron diffraction pattern of the prepared Ru@SP composite. (b) Comparison of discharge/charge curves of SP and Ru@SP cathodes at 100 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performance of the Li–CO2 battery using the Ru@SP cathode with a capacity limit of 1000 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1. (d) In situ Raman spectra of Au and Au–Ru cathodes during the discharge/charge process. (e) The proposed mechanism of Ru-catalyzed Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Discharge/charge curves of the Li–CO2 battery with the Ru cathode, and the charge curve of the Li–CO2 battery with the Au cathode. (b) In situ Raman spectra on the Ru cathode during the charging process of the Li–CO2 battery. (c and d) The charging curves of current and Raman peak intensity at 1085 cm−1 (Li2CO3) and 1587 cm−1 (G band of carbon) with the increase of linear scan potential from 3.0 to 4.5 V at 10 mV s−1 at both the Ru (c) and Au (d) cathodes after a galvanostatic discharge. (e) Schematic for the energy storage system (rechargeable/reversible process) and electrochemical CO2 fixation (rechargeable/irreversible process) with Li–CO2 electrochemistry. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017,32 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Crystal structures of the screened MOF materials and the corresponding galvanostatic discharge/charge voltage curves of Li–CO2 batteries at 50 mA g−1 with controlled capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (b) The comparison of average discharge (red bars) and charge (blue bars) voltages for Li–CO2 batteries based on different MOF cathodes at 50 mA g−1 with a fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. (c) Crystal structures and the full discharge voltage curves of MnCO3, Mn(HCOO)2, Mn2(dobdc) and CNT electrodes at 50 mA g−1, respectively. (d) Schematic illustration of the superiority of a Li–CO2 battery based on a MOF cathode. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017 Royal of Society of Chemistry.	 
RM → RMo+ + oe−.	(29)
RMo+ + nLi2CO3 → RM + mLi+ + pCO2	(30)

 	Fig. 14  The electrochemical decomposition mechanism of Li2CO3 catalyzed by RMs.	 
2Br3− → 3Br2 + 2e−	(31)
2Li2CO3 + 6Br2 → 2CO2 + 4Br3− + 4Li+ + O2	(32)
RNHCOO− + RNH3+ + 2CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2RNH3 + C + 2Li2CO3	(33)

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the battery structure (a) and the proposed reaction mechanism (b) of the Li–CO2 battery containing the EEA chemical catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of a flexible all-solid-state Li–CO2 battery (left is structural diagram, right is SEM image and EDX mapping of Li/CPE@CNTs). (b)–(d) are the open circuit voltage of the integrated Li–CO2 battery under various bended and twisted conditions and the corresponding cycling performance at 2.5 mA. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Optical images of the as-prepared flexible wood-based Li–CO2 pouch battery. (a) The pristine pouch battery and the corresponding OCV in an Ar atmosphere. The OCV measurements of the pouch battery in the folding state (b) and rolling state (c). (d) The OCV of the pouch battery after 50 folding cycles. (e) Lighting a LED device by the rolled wood-based Li–CO2 pouch battery in a CO2 atmosphere. (f) Potential application as a wearable battery system for Mars exploration. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018 Royal of Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
