Transition metal dichalcogenides for alkali metal ion batteries: engineering strategies at the atomic level  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE03549D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE03549D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1096-1131Transition metal dichalcogenides for alkali metal ion batteries: engineering strategies at the atomic level

        
          
            Biao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dongliang 
            Chao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Enzuo 
            Liu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mietek 
            Jaroniec
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Naiqin 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *bde and 

        
          
            Shi-Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@adelaide.edu.au
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Composite and Functional Materials, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300350, P. R. China. E-mail: nqzhao@tju.edu.cn
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA
dCollaborative Innovation Centre of Chemical Science and Engineering, Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China
eKey Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology, Ministry of Education, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      2nd November 2019
    , Accepted 22nd January 2020First published on 23rd January 2020AbstractIn the past few decades, great effort has been made toward the preparation and development of advanced transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) materials for anodes of alkali metal ion batteries (AMIBs). However, their electrochemical performance is still severely impaired by structural aggregation and fracture during the conversion reaction. To address these issues, various methodologies for the fabrication of hierarchical and hybrid nanostructures, with optimization of materials and electrodes, have been fully investigated and reviewed. As regards tuning the TMD-based materials, extensive efforts have been undertaken toward optimization of their intrinsic structure at the atomic level, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping. However, the design strategies and methods to manipulate the intrinsic structures and electrochemical mechanisms in AMIBs have not been fully summarized. This review provides a well-timed and critical appraisal of recent advances in the engineering of TMDs at the atomic level for AMIBs, by combining computational and experimental approaches. The correlation between these strategies and electrochemical performance is highlighted. The challenges and opportunities in this research field are also outlined. We expect that this review would be beneficial for improving the overall knowledge on the charge storage mechanisms in TMDs and for pointing out the importance of intrinsic structure engineering for enhancing the performance of TMDs in energy storage.
Biao Chen
Biao Chen is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Naiqin Zhao at Tianjin University and Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao at the University of Adelaide. He received his BS degree from Tianjin University in 2013. His current research is focused on nanostructure design, fabrication and properties for energy and environment applications, including lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, photocatalysis, and solar cells.
Dongliang Chao
Dongliang Chao obtained his PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) on January 2017. He joined the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA, USA) in 2016 as a joint-researcher. Dr Chao continued serving as a Research Fellow at NTU from January 2017. He is currently a Research Fellow at the University of Adelaide (UoA, Australia), working on materials for next-generation safe and low-cost energy storage.
Enzuo Liu
Enzuo Liu is an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Tianjin University (China). Prior to joining Tianjin University in 2009, he completed his PhD in physics at Tsinghua University (China), in 2007, and worked in Prof. Jianzhong Jiang's group at Zhejiang University (China) as a postdoc. His research aims at improving the properties of nanocomposite through interface engineering.
Mietek Jaroniec
Mietek Jaroniec received his PhD degree from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. Since 1991, he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State, he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University. His research interests revolve around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State, he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.
Naiqin Zhao
Naiqin Zhao is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. She obtained her BSc and PhD from Tianjin University. She was a visiting scholar at Illinois Institute of Technology and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; and a visiting professor at Tohoku University and Vanderbilt University. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and characteristics of carbon nanophases and their applications in structural composites and energy storage fields.
Shi-Zhang Qiao
Shi-Zhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor and Australian Laureate Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials of the University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 398 papers in refereed journals with over 45900 citations (h-index 112). Dr Qiao is a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society).

Broader context
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been widely studied as promising anode materials for alkali metal ion batteries (AMIBs) in recent years, since they exhibit high Li+, Na+, and K+ diffusion speed ascribed to their layered structure and they have high theoretical capacity based on the four-electron transfer reaction under a low cutoff voltage. Even though numerous efforts have been devoted to the development of various architectures and composites of TMDs for enhancing the performance of AMIBs, the charge storage mechanisms have not been systematically discussed and highlighted. In addition, the intrinsic structure of TMDs, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping, also shows an important effect on the charge storage mechanisms and electrochemical performance of AMIBs. This review summarizes the progress in the development of strategies for intrinsic structure engineering and highlights the corresponding charge storage mechanisms by combining computational and experimental approaches. The “intrinsic structure–electrochemical properties–storage mechanisms” relationships have been elucidated to provide a critical analysis and reliable mechanistic understanding.

1. Introduction
With increasing concern regarding pollution and availability of traditional energy of fossil fuels, the development of renewable energy sources, such as sun and wind, has attracted great interest. Their intermittent nature has stimulated rapid research of clean and inexpensive electrical energy storage devices. In this regard, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been successfully explored and commercially used in everyday life including electric vehicles owing to their high energy/power density and long lifespan.1–5 However, the small abundance of Li in the Earth's crust and its growing cost hinder its long-term suitability for the commercial production of energy storage devices. Na and K elements, which exhibit similar chemical properties to Li, show higher abundance and lower cost. Therefore, in recent years, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs) have been considered as ideal alternatives to LIBs.6–10 These alkali metal (Li, Na, K) ion batteries show a similar rocking-chair operation mechanism according to which alkali metal ions exchange reversibly between the two electrodes. Among them, the anode plays a key role in the electrochemical performance of these batteries. Hence, a cheap, eco-friendly, abundant, and stable anode material is highly desired for their low-cost, large-scale and long-life applications.
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), normally with a formula of MX2 (M = Ti, V, Nb, Mo, W, Re; X = S, Se, Te), have attracted significant scientific interest in the fields of energy conversion and storage, and electrical and optoelectrical devices due to their unique physical, chemical, and electronic properties.11–14 Particularly, their layered structure with a weak interlayer van der Waals (vdW) force is beneficial for the intercalation of Li+, Na+, and K+.11–16 For example, in the seminal work of Whittingham, he demonstrated that Li+ can be reversibly inserted/extracted into the interlayer of TiS2 with high diffusion speed at a high cutoff voltage of 1.5 V.15,16 2D MoS2 has even been demonstrated to be an efficient host for Mg2+ insertion.17 In addition, the TMDs have high theoretical capacity based on the conversion reaction between one atom of MX2 and four atoms of alkali metal. Thus, TMDs have been widely studied as promising anode materials for alkali metal ion batteries (AMIBs).18–22 However, the performance of TMD anodes of AIMBs is still severely restricted by spontaneous aggregation and unstable electrochemistry during the conversion reaction. In this regard, the TMDs display poor cycling stability and rate capability when evaluated as anodes of AMIBs.
To address these issues, numerous efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of various architectures of TMDs, with an emphasis on the material and electrode levels for enhancing the performance of AMIBs.11–29 For example, Wu et al. summarized the relation between the designed structures of materials and electrodes and the electrochemical performance of transition metal disulfide-based nanocomposites for LIBs and SIBs.21 The development of hierarchical nanostructures is an effective strategy, because these structures facilitate ion transport and enhance structural integrity during cycling.21–25 Another promising strategy involves coupling TMD nanostructures with carbon, especially graphene to construct graphene/TMD nanostructures, which feature an enhanced electrical conductivity and structural stability.21–27 The above strategies can be used to effectively improve the electrochemical performance of TMDs and have been sufficiently reviewed.21–30 However, the electrochemical storage mechanisms have not been systematically discussed and highlighted.
In addition to the structure optimization of materials and electrodes, the intrinsic structure of TMDs needs to be engineered at the atomic level, because it is also a key factor determining the electrochemical properties of TMDs including their electrical conductivity, ionic diffusion kinetics, and structural stability.31–42 Recently, more and more efforts have been undertaken toward engineering the intrinsic structure of TMDs, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping, for obtaining high-performance AMIBs.35–42 These emerging strategies for intrinsic structure engineering show important issues in the charge storage mechanisms and electrochemical performance of AMIBs. For instance, computational calculations are important for tuning the charge storage in TMD-based electrodes, which is essential for predicting their structure and understanding the operational mechanism in AMIBs. The importance of refined calculations has been recognized quickly, because they provide comprehensive guidance towards effective modifications of the existing TMD-based electrodes. In recent reviews, considerable attention has also been paid to the “synthesis–intrinsic structure–physical properties of TMDs” relationships with an emphasis on various surface-controlled applications, such as electrical and optoelectrical devices, supercapacitors, electrocatalysts, and photocatalysts.31–42 However, less attention has been paid to the “intrinsic structure–electrochemical properties–storage mechanisms” relationships of TMDs for application in AMIBs. Therefore, to better understand and design TMD-based anodes, there is an urgent need to summarize the progress in the development of strategies for intrinsic structure engineering and highlight the corresponding electrochemical mechanisms by combining computational and experimental approaches.
In this review, the “intrinsic structure–electrochemical properties–storage mechanisms” relationship is elucidated for each engineering strategy at the atomic level and the specific charge storage mechanism is discussed. Section 2 introduces the fundamental properties of TMDs. Section 3 discusses and highlights the Li/Na/K storage mechanisms of TMDs. Section 4 highlights the recent advances in intrinsic structure engineering of TMDs, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping (Fig. 1). Charge storage mechanisms associated with various electrochemical behaviours are also extensively analyzed in this section. Finally, the concluding section presents the challenges and perspectives of this fast-growing application of TMDs in AMIBs. We believe that this review summarizes emerging concepts and opportunities for the rational design of TMDs and other 2D materials.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the emerging strategies for tuning the intrinsic structure of TMDs. 
2. Fundamental properties of TMDs
2.1 Crystal structures of TMDs
MX2 (M = Ti, V, Nb, Mo, W, Re; X = S, Se, Te) is composed of two layers of X atoms between which reside one layer of M atoms. The stacked layers of TMD materials are connected by vdW interactions. The natural phases of TMDs are summarized in Table 1. Their polytype structures are determined by metal atom coordination and stacking orders. There are three kinds of coordination of metal atoms in TMDs, namely, trigonal prismatic, octahedral, and distorted octahedral coordination.43 For the monolayer, as shown in Fig. 2a–c, the trigonal prismatic coordination can expand into hexagonal symmetry with Bernal stacking (AbA) in the monolayer, forming a 1H phase. The octahedral coordination is able to form tetragonal symmetry with rhombohedral (AbC) stacking in the monolayer, obtaining a 1T structure. A distorted 1T (1T′) structure is just like the 1T structure with small distortions.44 For multilayer structures, the 1H layers can be stacked in two different ways to form 2H and 3R phases, which consist of hexagonal symmetry with a stacking order of AbA BaB (Fig. 2d) and rhombohedral symmetry with a stacking order of AbA BcB CaC (Fig. 2e), respectively.45,46 The number and letter in the phase name, respectively, denote the number of layers and symmetry name initial. Among the aforementioned five phases, 1T, 1T′, and 2H have been widely studied in AMIBs.
Table 1 Summary of phases and electrical properties of TMDs




Group
Metal
–S2
–Se2
–Te2


Phases/electrical properties
Ref.
Phases/electrical properties
Ref.
Phases/electrical properties
Ref.




4
Ti
1T/semiconducting

11 and 12

1T/semiconducting

11 and 12

1T/semiconducting

11 and 12



5
V
1T/metal

11 and 12

1T/metal

11 and 12

—
—


5
Nb
2H/metal

12 and 45

2H/metal

12 and 41

1T/metal

12 and 45



6
Mo
2H/semiconducting

12 and 45

2H/semiconducting

12 and 41

2H/semiconducting

12 and 45



6
W
2H/semiconducting

12 and 45

2H/semiconducting

12 and 41

1T′/semiconducting

45 and 47



7
Re
1T′/semiconducting

48 and 49

1T′/semiconducting

45 and 46

—
—




 Fig. 2  Atomistic structures of monolayer TMDs. (a) 1H-MX2 having hexagonal symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. (b) 1T-MX2 having tetragonal symmetry with octahedral coordination. (c) 1T′-MX2 having distorted tetragonal symmetry with distorted octahedral coordination. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 43. Copyright 2014, Science. Schematic illustration of multilayer TMDs. (d) 2H-MX2 having hexagonal symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. (e) 3R-MX2 having rhombohedral symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. Reproduced with permission from: (d and e) ref. 45. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
2.2 Electrical properties and alkali metal ion diffusion kinetics of TMDs
The electrical conductivity of TMDs is an important factor for the electrochemical performance of AMIBs. The 2H phase with trigonal prismatic coordination and 1T phase with octahedral coordination, respectively, show three and two degenerate states in d orbitals of metals.34 For the electrical properties of TMDs, the filling state of the d orbitals plays a key role. Partial filling leads to metallic conductivity, whereas complete filling results in semiconducting behaviour.11 As shown in Table 1, Group 4, 6 and 7 TMDs with d0, d2 and d3 metal centers, respectively, always display semiconducting conductivity, whereas Group 5 TMDs featuring a d1 metal center always show metallic conductivity.11,12,45,47–50 Notably, the electrical conductivity of semiconducting TMDs can be tuned by adjusting their intrinsic structures, for example, by phase control engineering. The 2H phase MoS2 shows semiconducting conductivity, while the 1T phase MoS2 exhibits metallic conductivity.51 Up to now, some reviews have summarized the phase control engineering of TMDs.34–37 Other emerging strategies for engineering intrinsic structures can also be used to improve electrical conductivity. For example, hydrogen doping in TiS2 nanosheets can greatly improve their electrical conductivity.52 However, the strategies for improving the electrical conductivity of TMDs paid less attention to alkali metal ion storage.
Interlayer alkali metal ion diffusion kinetics plays a crucial role in the electrochemical performance of TMDs. The interlayer vdW interactions have an important influence on the diffusion kinetics.53–55 Small vdW interactions in TMDs could induce small ionic diffusion resistance. The vdW interactions are determined by the composition and intrinsic structure of TMDs. For example, according to density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the 1T′-ReS2 shows a weak vdW interaction of 18 meV per unit cell, which is far less than that (460 meV) in 2H-MoS2.56,57 As a result, the Li+ diffusion kinetics of ReS2 is significantly larger than that of MoS2.58 The vdW interactions of TMDs can be easily adjusted by engineering their intrinsic structures. Recently, the interlayer spacing expansion strategy has been widely used to reduce the vdW interactions and ionic diffusion resistance in MoS2 and other TMDs.38,39 Other emerging strategies for engineering the intrinsic structures, such as surface defects and alloying, can also be used to improve alkali metal ion diffusion kinetics in TMDs. However, they have not been summarized yet.
3. Li/Na/K storage mechanisms in TMDs
The Li/Na/K storage mechanisms in MX2 have been widely studied by both experimental methods and theoretical calculations. Generally, alkali metals show similar charge storage behaviours due to their analogous physical properties.6,10,59 However, the increased ionic radius from Li+ to K+ would aggravate the diffusion resistance and volume change in MX2.60–62 As shown in Fig. 3, the storage mechanisms are affected by the cutoff voltage and the properties of MX2. Under a high cutoff voltage (∼1 V), all MX2 materials present reversible intercalation and extraction reactions (Fig. 3a and b).17 Under a low cutoff voltage (∼0.1 V), some M′′X2 (M′′ = Ti, Nb) materials can still display reversible intercalation and extraction mechanisms due to their strong M′′–X bonding interactions (Fig. 3b), while many M′X2 (M′ = V, Mo, W, Re) materials suffer from conversion reactions (Fig. 3c). For the conversion storage mechanism, M′ and A2X (A = Li, Na, K) are formed after the first discharge process. The oxidation products are affected by the dynamic properties of M′X2 (Fig. 3c).63 Poor dynamic properties lead to the irreversible formation of M′ and X after the initial charge process. Then the remaining active material changes to X instead of M′X2 in the subsequent cycles. Excellent dynamic properties cause fully reversible oxidation. M′X2 is formed again after the first charge process and acts as an active material in the subsequent cycles. In the following section, we will highlight the above electrochemical mechanisms to provide a better understanding.
 Fig. 3  Summary of electrochemical storage mechanisms for MX2 in AIMBs. 
3.1 Intercalation mechanism
The intercalation mechanism of Li/Na/K storage in MX2 has been demonstrated to be reversible. The intercalation mechanism of MX2 is like that of a graphite anode. By various characterization methods and theoretical calculations, this section will summarize the reversible intercalation/extraction processes in MX2 and their dependence on the atomic structure, migration dynamics, and intercalation depth.
Li intercalation into one of the most popular MX2, MoS2, has been widely studied by many groups up to now. In 2012, Fang et al. used in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) to explore the crystal structure change of commercial MoS2.64 They confirmed that MoS2 shows reversible reactions when the cutoff voltage is 0.8 V. In addition, Zhang et al. also observed the structural and compositional changes of MoS2 in a voltage window of 3.0–0.8 V by using XRD and in situ operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS).65 They found that a phase transition from 2H to distorted 1T occurs during the intercalation process. In 2014, Wang et al. further analyzed the structural evolution at the atomic level via in situ high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM).66 They confirmed that MoS2 can maintain its layered structure during the reversible intercalation and extraction reactions. Superstructures and 1T symmetry appear after Li intercalation into the interlayer S–S tetrahedron sites, suggesting the phase transition from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-LixMoS2. In addition, in 2018, in situ HRTEM was used to further investigate the atomic structure and migration dynamics.67 It was shown that a phase transition occurs at the MoS2/LixMoS2 interface upon Li+ intercalation. In 2015, Xiong et al. examined the dynamics of Li intercalation into MoS2 nanosheets by in situ optical observations together with Raman spectroscopy measurements.68 They demonstrated that Li+ intercalates into MoS2 nanosheets from the edges and gradually diffuse toward the center. In addition, they also found that the phase transition from 2H to 1T occurs at ∼1.1 eV vs. Li/Li+.
MoS2 displays the desired structural stability and long-life span cycling performance in a narrow voltage window of 3.0–1.0 V.17 However, it has a low theoretical capacity of 167 mA h g−1. It still needs to expand the Li depth in MoS2 to enhance the storage sites in the premise of maintaining its parent layered structure during the discharge–charge process. Recently, the lowest discharge voltage has been explored by decreasing the cutoff voltage and studying the corresponding structural change in MoS2.69 As shown in Fig. 4a, the layered structure of MoS2 can be retained even during discharging up to 0.6 V, whereas structural degradation occurs when the discharge is continued to 0.5 V. TEM images (Fig. 4b–e) were also taken for the fully charged MoS2 samples at different cutoff voltages. It was noticed that the expanded interlayer increases with decreasing cutoff voltage from 1.0 V to 0.6 V, suggesting deeper Li intercalation. For comparison, the MoS2 nanosheets become disordered in a large voltage window of 3.0–0.5 V. This result is ascribed to the conversion reaction at 0.6–0.5 V. Therefore, the authors found that the largest voltage window is 3.0–0.6 V, in which MoS2 can preserve its layered structure (Fig. 4f). As a result, the deeper lithiation with the reversible structure endows MoS2 with higher capacity and long-life span cycling performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Enlarged XRD patterns of the fully charged MoS2 electrodes after cycling under different voltages for one cycle. The peaks marked with “♦” in (a) correspond to the Para film. (b–e) Corresponding TEM images with contrast profiles along the arrow-direction indicating the average interlayer distance. (f) Scheme for the structural changes and lithium storage performance of MoS2 cycled in different voltage windows. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Na+ intercalation into MoS2 has also attracted great interest. A previous study has demonstrated that the diffusivity of Li+ in MoS2 is significantly larger than that of Na+.63 In 2013, Park et al. first used XRD and TEM to investigate the electrochemical behaviours of Na/MoS2 cells with two different cutoff voltages of 0.85 and 0.4 V.70 The layered structure of MoS2 and charge–discharge plateau can be well maintained during repeated cycles at the high cutoff voltage, while a distorted structure occurs at the low cutoff voltage. The structural transition of MoS2 upon Na+ intercalation at the atomic level was further performed. By aberration-corrected scanning TEM, Wang and co-workers found that 2H-Na0.5MoS2 is formed when the voltage is greater than 0.85 V.71 Next, the formed 2H-Na0.5MoS2 transforms into 1T-Na0.5MoS2 and 1T-NaMoS2 after further Na+ intercalation. The intercalation kinetics of Na+ in MoS2 was probed by in situ HRTEM.72 The phase transition from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-NaMoS2 gives rise to the ordered lattice distortion. The phase boundary between 2H-MoS2 and 1T-NaMoS2 shows a width of ∼2 nm. The reaction rate of phase boundary for Na intercalation is ∼3–7 nm s−1, which is one order smaller than that for Li+ intercalation into MoS2. This result further confirms the sluggish kinetics for Na+ intercalation into MX2. DFT calculations were used to study the dynamics of structural evolution.73,74 Li and co-workers combined in situ electron diffraction with DFT calculations to investigate the phase transition mechanism and reaction pathway during Na+ intercalation into 2H-MoS2.74 As shown in Fig. 5, in the early stage of Na+ intercalation, the intermediate phase of NaxMoS2 with a low Na content (0.125 < x < 0.5) is metastable. The Na ion diffusion kinetics is faster than those of Mo and S ions in this stage because the process when the metastable phase relaxes to its stable counterpart can be omitted.75 Subsequently, several thermodynamically stable 1T-NaxMoS2, such as Na0.625MoS2, Na0.75MoS2, Na1.0MoS2, and Na1.75MoS2 can be observed with a high Na content (0.625 < x < 1.75). In addition, more and more planar defects are generated with increasing Na+ insertion content. Finally, the layered structure collapses and a conversion reaction occurs when the content is larger than 1.75 per MoS2 unit.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical sodiation process in MoS2 starting from the original 2H-MoS2 structure (a, x = 0); the sodiation proceeds through a phase transition from the 2H to 1T structure (b, x = 0.625) by S ion shifting and reordering. Further sodiation occurs via two intermediate phases (c, x = 0.75), (d, x = 1.0) by Na ion ordering with intact Mo and S backbones. The Mo–S layers start to collapse when more than 1.5 Na ions are inserted (e, x = 1.75). Na ion intercalation stops and the sodiation reaction switches to the conversion style with the final phase (f, x = 3.0) featuring Na2S and isolated Mo atoms. (g) Simulated voltage profile of MoS2 through the intermediate phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The study of K+ intercalation into MoS2 is at an early stage. Compared with Li+ and Na+, lower content of K+ can be intercalated per MoS2 unit in the premise of reversible process due to its larger radius. In 2017, Ren et al. first studied K+ intercalation into 2H-MoS2 in a voltage window of 0.5–2.0 V.76 They found that a 2H-K0.4MoS2 phase with a low K content of 0.4 per MoS2 unit and a largely expanded interlayer of 8.28 Å is formed during K+ intercalation. The K+ intercalation reaction is reversible between MoS2 and K0.4MoS2, and the layered structure is stable. However, the structural evolution of MoS2 upon K+ intercalation at the atomic level has not been reported. There is an urgent need to study the detailed K+ intercalation mechanism by advanced characterization techniques and theoretical calculations.
Moreover, except for the typical MoS2, the structural evolution of Li/Na/K intercalation into other MX2 (M = Mo, W, V, Re, Ti, Nb) such as MoSe2, WS2, VS2, NbSe2 and TiS2 with high cutoff voltage has also been widely investigated by various characterization methods and theoretical calculations.77–88 All these materials exhibit a fully reversible intercalation–extraction mechanism under a high cutoff voltage (Fig. 3a and b). For example, the reversible intercalation/extraction process of Na+ into metallic 1T-VS2 was studied by in situ XRD, HRTEM, Raman, and DFT calculations.79–82 It was shown that the layered NaVS2 phase is formed at a cutoff voltage of 0.4 V. During the extraction, the layered structure and composition are reversible.
Notably, as shown in Fig. 3b, some M′′X2 (M′′ = Ti, Nb) nanosheets can exhibit the reversible Li+ intercalation mechanism even under a low cutoff voltage. According to theoretical calculations (Fig. 6a), the TiS2 and NbS2 nanosheets have a strong M′′–X bonding interaction, which can protect them from structural dissociation even under the deep lithiation process.89 The reversible intercalation mechanism has also been confirmed for TiS2 and NbS2 by ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations.89 Moreover, experiments also demonstrated that NbS2 and NbSe2 show reversible Na+ intercalation behaviour under a low cutoff voltage of 0.01 V.90,91 As shown in Fig. 6b and c, the discharge–charge cycles and corresponding in situ XRD were performed between 3.0 and 0.01 V. After discharging to 0.01 V, NbS2 transforms into NaxNbS2. In the following charging process, NaxNbS2 almost disappears and NbS2 is formed. Therefore, NbS2 shows the reversible intercalation mechanism even under a low cutoff voltage of 0.01 V. As a result, it achieves a large reversible capacity of 205 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 as an anode material in SIBs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Formation entropies and Li binding energies as the descriptors for evaluating the Li intercalation mechanism for MX2 electrode materials in LIBs. The spheres and squares denote the data for MX2 bulk and bilayers, respectively. The shadow and unfilled regions represent the lithiation of MX2 structures followed by the reversible intercalation reaction mechanism and irreversible conversion reaction mechanism, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. First two-cycle charge–discharge curves (b) and the corresponding in situ XRD patterns collected at the selected charged/discharged states between 0.01 and 3.0 V at 0.1 A g−1 (c) of the exfoliated Nb2S nanosheet based anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
In summary, the intercalation mechanism depends on the competition between the M–X bonding interaction and Li/Na/K–MX2 interaction.89 Generally, under a high cutoff voltage, the Li/Na/K–MX2 interaction is small with low Li/Na/K content per MX2 unit. Thus, all MX2 nanosheets can exhibit the reversible intercalation mechanism. With increasing Li/Na/K intercalation at a low discharging voltage, the Li/Na/K–MX2 interaction increases. For many kinds of M′X2 nanosheets (M′ = Mo, W, V, Re), the enhanced Li/Na/K–M′X2 interaction is larger than the M′–X bonding interaction at a low cutoff voltage, leading to the structural dissociation and conversion reaction. On the other hand, for a few kinds of M′′X2 nanosheets (M′′ = Ti, Nb), the M′′–X bonding interaction is still larger than the Li/Na/K–M′′X2 interaction even at a low cutoff voltage of 0.01 V. Thus, they do not undergo structural dissociation, whilst they achieve a reversible intercalation/extraction reaction even under a low cutoff voltage.
3.2 Conversion mechanism
Although the intercalation storage mechanism of MX2 presents long-life span cycling performance, their potential application is severely restricted by the low theoretical storage capacity (MoS2 for LIBs, 167 mA h g−1 in 3.0–1.0 V), which is even significantly lower than that of graphite (372 mA h g−1). Therefore, the reduction of cutoff voltage (∼0.01 V) to obtain higher capacity has a significant application value. Notably, for many M′X2 (M = Mo, W, V, Re) nanosheets, the conversion reaction (reaction (2) in Fig. 3c) occurs in the low discharging voltage zone. The intermediate AyM′X2 phase undergoes dissociation and changes into M′ and A2X after full discharging.89 The conversion process results in a large theoretical capacity. For example, under the conversion mechanism, MoS2 shows a theoretical capacity of 669 mA h g−1 in LIBs. In the subsequent charge process, the oxidation products are determined by the dynamic properties of M′X2, which are closely related to the comprehensive properties of electrical conductivity, structural stability, and ion diffusion kinetics.63 Poor dynamic properties lead to the irreversible formation of M′ and S after the oxidation reaction (reaction (3) in Fig. 3c). As a result, after the first cycle, the redox couple changes into A2X/X through reduction and oxidation reactions (reactions (4) and (3), respectively, in Fig. 3c).64,65,71 On the other hand, excellent dynamic properties cause fully reversible oxidation. M′X2 is reversibly formed after the oxidation reaction (reaction (5) in Fig. 3c). Therefore, M′X2 remains an active material in the subsequent cycles, and reversible reduction and oxidation reactions (reactions (6) and (5), respectively, in Fig. 3c) occur. We will discuss and highlight the progress of the two electrochemical mechanisms in the following sections.

3.2.1 Irreversible conversion mechanism. 
The pure semiconducting M′X2, including Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides always display irreversible conversion due to their low dynamic properties. For 2H-MoS2, the irreversibility of MoS2 can be studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) plots together with ex situ XRD patterns and Raman spectroscopy.65Fig. 7a and b present typical CV curves for MoS2 with cutoff voltages of 0.05 V and 0.8 V, respectively. Fig. 7c–e shows the ex situ XRD patterns and Raman spectra of MoS2 at different states. In the first discharging scan, the peak at ∼1.0 V appears in both curves. This is attributed to the Li+ intercalation into MoS2 to form LiyMoS2. An additional peak is at ∼0.5 V in Fig. 7a. This peak is assigned to the conversion reaction from LiyMoS2 to Mo/Li2S. In the following charging scan (Fig. 7a), a peak observed at ∼2.3 V is ascribed to the oxidation reaction from Li2S to S.65,92 Thus, under a low cutoff voltage of 0.05 V, the original MoS2 is irreversibly converted into Mo and S (Fig. 7c–e) after the first cycle. In subsequent cycles (Fig. 7a), the reduction peaks associated with Li+ intercalation and conversion disappear, whilst two new reduction peaks are observed at ∼2.2 and ∼1.9 V that involve the reduction of S to intermediate lithium polysulfides and the subsequent conversion to Li2S, respectively. The oxidation peak at ∼2.3 V remains. This behaviour is in accordance with the storage mechanism of Li–S batteries.65,92 The above results reveal that S and Li2S become the redox couple in the following cycles. Moreover, the irreversible conversion mechanism was also confirmed by SEM and TEM.65,92 The layered structure of the original MoS2 nanosheets is dissociated and transformed into Mo and Li2S nanoclusters after deep discharging.65,92 After charging back to 3.0 V, Mo and Li2S irreversibly convert to disordered Mo and S instead of initial MoS2.65,92 The structural dissociation and aggregation after deep discharging hinder the reversible conversion in the charging process. In addition, both the ex situ and in situ XAS results also demonstrate the irreversible conversion in the first cycle.65 In summary, as shown in Fig. 7f, compared with the reversible intercalation mechanism at a high cutoff voltage, the conversion reaction of semiconducting MoS2 is irreversible. The discharged product of Li2S is irreversibly oxidized to S after the first charge process. Consequently, the redox couple turns into S and Li2S after the first cycle. This behaviour is in agreement with the Li–S storage mechanism.
 Fig. 7  CV plots of the MoS2 electrode with a cutoff voltage of (a) 0.05 V and (b) 0.8 V. Ex situ XRD patterns (c) and Raman spectra (d) of MoS2 electrodes at different states as labeled. (e) Atomic vibration direction of different Raman modes for MoS2. (f) The proposed electrochemical reaction mechanism for the MoS2 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The irreversible conversion mechanism of the MoS2 anode has also been confirmed in SIBs. Wang et al. used in situ and ex situ techniques, including TEM, XRD and Raman, to study Na+ storage behaviour in commercial MoS2 between 0.01 and 3.00 V at 20 mA g−1.71 They found that the conversion reaction from Na1.5MoS2 to Na2S and Mo occurs at low discharging voltages (0.75–0.06 V). The Na–MoS2 interaction is enhanced with increasing content of Na+ intercalation. When the Na+ intercalation content is larger than 1.5 per MoS2 unit at a low discharging voltage, the emerging Na–MoS2 interaction is greater than the S–Mo bonding interaction. This results in the breakdown of S–Mo bonds and the formation of Na2S and Mo during the conversion process.89 After charging back to high voltage, the ex situ XRD result shows that MoS2 disappears and Mo and Na2S are formed.71 These results confirm the irreversible conversion of semiconducting MoS2.71,93
For K+ storage in MoS2 at a low cutoff voltage, Li et al. confirmed a conversion reaction at a low discharge voltage (0.5 V),94 where Mo and K2S were evidenced by Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques. In the subsequent charge process, MoS2 cannot be recovered after charging back to 2.0 V. These results support the irreversible conversion of MoS2 in PIBs. However, studies on the structural evolution of MoS2 at the atomic level are sill needed to reveal the irreversible conversion in PIBs.
In summary, the semiconducting M′X2, including Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenide nanosheets, display the irreversible conversion mechanism at a low cutoff voltage in AMIBs. After the first discharge process, the layered MoS2 is converted into M′ and A2X nanoclusters. Because of the poor dynamic properties, M′ and X are formed after the first charge. Therefore, the X and A2X become the redox couple in the subsequent cycles. However, this new storage mechanism derived from the irreversible conversion suffers seriously from poor structural stability and the shuttle effect of polysulfide, which leads to rapid decay of electrochemical capacity.65,93 As a result, the irreversible conversion mechanism of semiconducting M′X2 nanosheets always results in poor electrochemical performance.


3.2.2 Reversible conversion mechanism. 
In addition to the irreversible conversion mechanism for semiconducting M′X2, the metallic M′X2, including V-based dichalcogenides, such as VS2 and VSe2, have been shown to exhibit a partially reversible conversion mechanism in AMIBs.95–97 For example, Zhang et al. studied the structural and chemical transitions of a VS2 anode in LIBs by employing in situ and ex situ XAS.95 As shown in Fig. 8a, the VS2 anode undergoes intercalation and conversion reactions in the discharge process. V and Li2S were detected after the first discharge process. In the following charge process, these reactions are partially reversible. VS2 and (V and S) were detected after the first cycle. Such a partially reversible conversion can also occur in the VS2 anode in SIBs (Fig. 8b).96 Moreover, as shown in Fig. 8c, metallic VSe2 nanosheets also exhibit a partially reversible conversion mechanism in PIBs.97 The ex situ XRD and TEM were performed to support the proposed mechanism.97 The XRD pattern of the original VSe2 shows a typical (002) peak located at 29.2° (Fig. 8d), which corresponds to a lattice spacing of 0.307 nm in the HRTEM image (Fig. 8e). Upon discharging to 0.5 V, the (002) peak shifts to lower angles in the XRD pattern. This indicates an expanded lattice spacing, which is in good agreement with the HRTEM image in Fig. 8f. After full discharging to 0.01 V, the diffraction peaks of VSe2 disappear, whilst new peaks assigned to KSe2 and V are detected. This change is also confirmed by the HRTEM image (Fig. 8g). These results suggest that a complete conversion reaction occurs after the first discharge process. In the following charge process, as shown in the XRD patterns (Fig. 8d) and HRTEM image (Fig. 8h), VSe2 reappears and KSe2 and V disappear after charging to 2.6 V. Moreover, in the XRD patterns (Fig. 8d), the signal intensities of the peaks of VSe2 after charging to 2.6 V are slightly smaller than those of the original VSe2 before cycling. The above results demonstrate the partially reversible conversion mechanism for VSe2 in PIBs. Therefore, the metallic M′X2 nanosheets achieve partial reversibility due to their excellent electrical conductivity and relatively good dynamic properties. Moreover, through phase control engineering, the normal semiconducting M′X2, including Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides, can be adjusted to achieve metallic conductivity. They can also exhibit a partially reversible conversion mechanism due to the enhanced electrical conductivity and dynamic properties. The related information is introduced in the phase control engineering section.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of reversible Li+ storage in VS2 nanosheets (a), Na+ storage in VS2 nanosheet assemblies (b), and K+ storage in VSe2 nanosheets (c). (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of the VSe2 nanosheet electrodes at the different states (D: state of discharge, C: state of charge). HRTEM images of the VSe2 nanosheet electrodes at the (e) original, (f) discharged (0.5 V), (g) fully discharged (0.01 V), and (h) fully charged (2.6 V) states. Reproduced with permission from: (a) ref. 95. Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing; (b) ref. 96. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (c–h) ref. 97. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
To improve the electrochemical performance of semiconducting M′X2 anode materials, the irreversible conversion reaction needs to be suppressed. In order to address this problem, incorporation of highly conductive carbon into the semiconducting M′X2 has been proved to be an effective method to improve its electrochemical performance. From the theoretical calculation viewpoint,98 as shown in Fig. 9a, the semiconducting 2H-MoS2 nanosheets show serious dissociation during the Li+ insertion process. The graphene/2H-MoS2 composites exhibit significantly enhanced structural stability on the surface of MoS2 covered with graphene (Fig. 9b). The above theoretical results indicate that the graphene coating layer can effectively suppress the dissociation of MoS2 in the discharge process. In this regard, the sandwich-like graphene/2H-MoS2/graphene heterostructure is believed to be a promising anode material that has good dynamic properties (Fig. 9c). This theoretical result is in agreement with experimental data. For example, MoS2 nanosheets, nitrogen doped graphene (NDG)/MoS2, and NDG/MoS2/NDG composites were prepared and studied as anode materials in LIBs. As shown in the CV curves (Fig. 9d–f), compared with those for MoS2 nanosheets, both NDG/MoS2 and NDG/MoS2/NDG composites exhibit an additional charged peak at 1.3–1.8 V, corresponding to a new oxidation reaction in addition to the irreversible reaction at 2.3 V. XRD and HRTEM were performed to reveal the reaction mechanism.99 MoS2 in the NDG/MoS2/NDG composite is converted into Mo and Li2S after the first discharge process. Notably, except Mo and S, some MoS2 reappear after the first cycle.99 This result confirms that this new oxidation peak is ascribed to the partially reversible reaction from Mo to MoS2. Therefore, this novel NDG/MoS2/NDG structure with high structural stability and electrical conductivity exhibits a partially reversible conversion mechanism. As a result, the NDG/MoS2/NDG anode features a high initial coulombic efficiency (CE) of 84.3% and excellent cycling performance of 552 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 600 cycles. This partially reversible conversion mechanism in LIBs was also confirmed in other carbon/MoS2 composites, such as graphene-supported peony-like MoS2 nanosheets100 and yolk–shell MoS2 confined in carbon spheres.101 Notably, they all exhibited an additional oxidation peak at 1.3–1.8 V as compared with data for the MoS2 anode and showed a significantly enhanced cycling performance, due to the existence of the partially reversible conversion mechanism.
 Fig. 9  Snapshots of trajectories for lithiated (a) 2H-MoS2, (b) graphene/2H-MoS2 and (c) graphene/2H-MoS2/graphene composites following 6 ps AIMD simulations at 300 K. The formed LixSy species are labeled by circles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. CV curves measured for (d) 2H-MoS2, (e) NDG/2H-MoS2 and (f) NDG/2H-MoS2/NDG at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The partially reversible conversion reaction of MoS2 was also confirmed for various carbon/MoS2 composites in SIBs.102–106 It was shown that the partially discharged products (Mo and Na2S) can be reversibly converted to MoS2 in the charge process. For example, Hao and co-workers prepared MoS2/C composites with various MoS2 weight contents to investigate the influence of carbon on the electrochemical storage mechanism.63Fig. 10a shows the initial CV profiles of pure carbon and MoS2/C composites with various MoS2 weight contents.63 As shown in the HTREM image of the MoS2/C-66 anode after discharging to 0.01 V (Fig. 10b), MoS2 is completely converted to Mo and Na2S.63 In the charge process, three oxidation peaks are observed at around 0.44, 1.00 and 1.82 V (Fig. 10a).63 It is widely acknowledged that the peak at 1.82 V is attributed to the oxidation reaction from Na2S and S that belongs to the irreversible conversion. The other two new oxidation peaks indicate a new conversion mechanism. HRTEM images of MoS2/C-66 were taken to recognize the oxidation paths and reveal the conversion reactions at new peaks. When MoS2/C-66 is recharged to 0.5 V, a small amount of NaxMoS2 grains ascribed to the lattice spacing of 0.74 nm arise (Fig. 10c). This observation suggests that NaxMoS2 is formed at 0.44 V due to its low formation energy. During the charge process from 0.5 to 1.5 V, more NaxMoS2 grains form and simultaneously more Mo domains disappear (Fig. 10d and e). Na2S or Mo domains can still be observed in these samples. These observations suggest that more and more Na2S or Mo domains are converted to NaxMoS2 at 1.00 V. This conversion process (2Na2S + Mo → 1T-NaxMoS2 + (4 − x)Na+ + (4 − x)e− (x ∼ 1)) continues in a wide voltage range (≥0.44 V).63 When MoS2/C-66 was charged to 3.0 V, the lattice spacing of NaxMoS2 decreased to 0.61–0.68 nm, suggesting the formation of MoS2 (Fig. 10f). Meanwhile, the Mo domains are still present and the Na2S domains are absent. These data confirm that NaxMoS2 is reversibly converted to MoS2 (1T-NaxMoS2 → 1T-MoS2 + xNa+ + xe−), whilst Na2S is irreversibly partially transformed into S (Mo + 2Na2S → Mo + S + 4Na+ + 4e−) at a high charge voltage (≥1.5 V). Moreover, the XPS results also support the above phenomenon.63 In conclusion, the discharged products (Mo and Na2S) can be converted to 1T-NaxMoS2 and then 1T-MoS2 in MoS2/C-66 anodes. The partially reversible conversion mechanism for MoS2 was also demonstrated in the case of the MoS2/C microtube (MT) anode.107 The in situ XRD patterns (Fig. 10g) confirm that the partially discharged products (Na2S and Mo) can be reversibly converted to 1T-NaxMoS2 and then to 1T-MoS2 during the charge process. In summary, the highly conductive carbon materials can effectively improve electrical conductivity and suppress structural dissociation of MoS2, leading to a desirable reversible conversion mechanism. Fig. 10h illustrates the reversible reaction mechanism for 2H-MoS2 in carbon/MoS2 anodes. In the discharge process, the intercalation and conversion reactions: 2H-MoS2 → 2H-NaxMoS2 → 1T-NaxMoS2 → (Na2S and Mo) are observed. In the charge process, the partially discharged products (Na2S and Mo) can be reversibly converted to 1T-MoS2. This is obviously different from the case of pure MoS2, in which only S and Mo are formed after the charge process. In addition, to achieve a partially reversible conversion mechanism in carbon/MoS2 composites, the rational design of the carbon/MoS2 composites with high electrical conductivity and structural stability needs to be considered.
 Fig. 10  (a) The CV profiles of MoS2/C composites at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 (the inset is for an overview of the composites and pure carbon). The HRTEM images of MoS2/C-66 discharged to 0.01 V (b), recharged to 0.50 V (c), 0.75 V (d), 1.50 V (e), and 3.00 V (f) after initially discharged to 0.01 V. The insets in (e) and (f) are for the corresponding line profile of contrast along the blue line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) In situ XRD patterns of the MoS2/C MTs anode operated at different states of charge against the voltage during the initial cycle. (h) Proposed schematic atomistic models of the illustrated reaction mechanism for the MoS2 anode during the sodiation and desodiation processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
For the partially reversible conversion reaction of the MoS2 anode in PIBs, Xie et al. also found the partially reversible conversion reactions in MoS2@reduced graphene oxide (MoS2@rGO) anodes.108 They used in situ Raman and ex situ XRD to investigate the oxidation reaction in the first charge process. MoS2 was converted to Mo and K2S after the first discharge process as usual. Notably, the partially discharged products can be reversibly converted to MoS2 after the charge process. This result demonstrates that the partially reversible conversion of MoS2 in MoS2/C composites also appears in PIBs. However, the detailed oxidation reaction path still needs to be studied.
In addition to semiconducting MoS2, the incorporation of highly conductive carbon materials is also beneficial to suppress the structural dissociation and improve the electrical conductivity of other semiconducting M′X2, leading to enhanced dynamic properties and a partially reversible conversion mechanism. For example, the semiconducting ReS2 confined in 2D honeycombed carbon nanosheet composites were reported as anode materials in SIBs.109 The authors demonstrated that ReS2 can be partially maintained even after repeated cycles, suggesting that the reversible conversion mechanism exists in ReS2 combined with highly conductive carbon.
In summary, metallic V-based dichalcogenides and rationally designed semiconducting Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides/carbon composites have been shown to be effective for improving the dynamic properties of TMDs. Their dynamical properties are usually somewhere between “poor” and “excellent”. As a result, the partially discharged products can be converted to original nanosheets after the following charge process. Therefore, the partially reversible conversion reactions can be achieved and lead to greatly enhanced cycling and rate performance. The reversible conversion mechanism plays a key role in promoting the potential application of M′X2 in AMIBs. The fully reversible conversion is highly desirable and remains a major challenge.

4. Engineering strategies at the atomic level for charge storage in TMDs
4.1 Surface defect engineering in TMDs

4.1.1 Introduction to surface defects in TMDs. 
According to previous research,53,68,94 the alkali metal ions insert into the MX2 nanosheets via the edge sides and diffuse along the interlayers. This solid-state diffusion kinetics seriously suffers from insufficient channels, long diffusion pathways, and a high diffusion energy barrier between the layers. Therefore, the alkali metal ions are difficult to insert into MX2 nanosheets at high rates, resulting in poor kinetics. In order to address this issue, nanostructure engineering has been used as one effective strategy to increase transport channels and decrease the diffusion pathway by reducing the size of MX2 nanosheets in two axes.110–114 However, this improvement is not very significant.
Recently, some researchers found that the surface defects on the basal planes of MX2 nanosheets show an important effect on the kinetics of intercalation of alkali metal ions based on theoretical and experimental data.115–117 The surface defects on basal planes of MX2 provide additional channels for alkali metal ion insertion. Thus, the alkali metal ions can be inserted into MX2 nanosheets not only through the edge side, but also through the surface defects. Moreover, the ionic diffusion pathway along the interlayers is significantly reduced. Therefore, surface defect engineering is a promising strategy to increase transport channels and decrease the diffusion pathway, resulting in enhanced ionic diffusion kinetics.
The surface defects in MX2 nanosheets can be divided into two categories, point defects and line defects.32,118 For point defects, chalcogen and transition metal vacancies are common defects in MX2. For 2H-MoS2 monolayers,116 as shown in Fig. 11a, seven kinds of vacancy defects are visible, including Mo single vacancy (VMo), S single vacancy (VS) and double vacancies (VS2), vacancy complex of Mo and nearby three S (VMoS3), vacancy complex of Mo and three nearby S2 pairs (VMoS6), and antisite defects where Mo substitutes S (MoS) or S substitutes Mo (SMo). Fig. 11b shows the Li+ adsorption energies on different sites around the vacancy defect position. The theoretical results show that these vacancy defects bring favourable Li+ adsorption energies for 2H-MoS2.116 This result was also confirmed in vacancy defective monolayer 1T′-ReS2.117 Therefore, it can be inferred that the defect position in MX2 adsorbs alkali metal ions more strongly than perfect MX2. The alkali metal ion diffusion on the surface of 2H-MoS2 monolayers and 1T′-ReS2 monolayers with vacancy defects was also studied.116,117 The diffusion energy barriers were slightly higher. Notably, the diffusion process of alkali metal ion insertion into the MX2 layer through vacancy defects is very important to demonstrate that these defects can provide additional insertion channels. As shown in Fig. 11c, Yao et al. investigated this diffusion process by employing DFT.119 They constructed three models of (I) perfect MoS2 monolayers, (II) defective MoS2 with one vacancy, and (III) defective MoS2 with two vacancies. The Na+ diffusion energy barriers across the MoS2 plane of the three models are 14.31, 1.47 and 0.291 eV, respectively. This result confirmed that Na+ diffusion across the MoS2 layer with vacancies is much easier. The diffusion energy barrier of Na+ diffusion across MoS2 should become smaller with increasing vacancy holes.
 Fig. 11  (a) Optimized atomistic configurations of vacancy defects in 2H-MoS2 monolayers. (b) The adsorption energies of Li adsorbed on different sites around the point defect and the most stable adsorption configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) The pathways of the lowest Na+ diffusion barrier across (I) the perfect MoS2 monolayer, (II) defective MoS2 with one vacancy, and (III) two vacancies and their corresponding potential energy curves. The purple, yellow, and green balls represent Mo, S, and Na, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
For line defects, grain boundary defects are an important type that can strongly influence the properties of MX2. Theoretical results also confirmed that the grain boundary defects can also increase adsorption efficiency and slightly enhance the diffusion energy barriers on the surface.116,117 However, the diffusion across layers through grain boundary defects has not been reported so far, thereby there is an urgent need to explore the diffusion energy barriers.


4.1.2 Preparation and application of TMDs with surface defects. 
Surface defect engineering is beneficial for creating additional insertion channels and reducing the diffusion pathway as well as absorbing alkali metal ions. Therefore, surface defect engineering has been carried out to improve the electrochemical performance of MX2 in AMIBs. Generally, surface defects are prepared by two strategies. (i) Using post-treatment, such as oxygen plasma exposure and hydrogen treatment of pristine MX2 nanosheets to create surface defects.120 (ii) Modulating the hydro-/solvo-thermal process, such as the reaction temperature and time, and adsorption factors during preparation to control the surface defects.121–123
For the first strategy, for example, a quenching method was applied to pristine MoS2 to prepare bundled defect-rich MoS2 (BD-MoS2).119 At high temperatures under an air atmosphere, some MoS2 can be oxidized, leading to a large amount of grain boundaries and vacancy defects as shown in Fig. 12a and b. When the as-prepared MoS2 and BD-MoS2 were used as anode materials in SIBs, they exhibited similar charge/discharge profiles (Fig. 12c), suggesting the same Na+ storage mechanism. Importantly, BD-MoS2 showed lower voltage deviation between the reductive and oxidative platforms than MoS2. This indicates that BD-MoS2 with rich grain boundaries and vacancy defects shows better Na+ diffusion kinetics.124 The rate performance in Fig. 12d confirms that BD-MoS2 exhibits higher capacity than pristine MoS2 at all tested current densities. Notably, the capacity of BD-MoS2 decayed more slightly than that of pristine MoS2 with increasing current density, suggesting faster Na+ diffusion kinetics for BD-MoS2 especially at a high current density. Moreover, the cycling performance in Fig. 12e further reveals that BD-MoS2 shows higher capacity even after many cycles. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was conducted to investigate the Na+ diffusion kinetics for MoS2 and BD-MoS2 anodes after five cycles. As shown in Fig. 12f, the Warburg coefficient (σw) relating ω−1/2 and Z′ can be used to estimate the Na+ diffusion coefficient.119 The lower σw indicates better Na+ diffusion kinetics. The BD-MoS2 anode exhibited larger Na+ diffusion kinetics as expected. In addition, Liang et al. used hydrogen treatment to prepare MoS2 nanosheets with S-vacancies (MoS2-VS).125 The pseudocapacitive contribution of MoS2-VS is 74.4% at 1 mV s−1, which is significantly larger than that for pristine MoS2 (36.3%). This result indicates favourable Na+ adsorption in MoS2-VS. As a result, MoS2-VS exhibited better cycling and rate performance than pristine MoS2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 12  (a and b) HRTEM images of BD-MoS2. Comparison of (c) charge/discharge profile, (e) rate capacity, and (d) cycle performance for the BD-MoS2 and pristine MoS2 electrodes. (f) Z′ as a function of ω−1/2 in the semi-infinite region for the calculation of the Warburg coefficient (σw). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic representation of the synthesis of UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2. HRTEM images of (h) UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 and (i) UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2. Nyquist plots of (j) UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2 and (k) UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 electrodes in the second discharge process at 0.1 A g−1 over the frequency range from 100 kHz to 100 mHz. (c) Linear fits of the relationship between Z′ and ω−1/2 in the low-frequency region at 1.71 V. The inset in (l) is the corresponding equivalent circuit model of the system studied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
For the second strategy, the hydro-/solvo-thermal reaction was the most commonly used method to prepare MX2 nanosheets. The adsorption factors and reaction temperature and time have an important effect on the formation of surface defects. Thiourea has been widely used as an adsorption controlling agent.126–130 For example, as shown in Fig. 12g, during the hydrothermal process, the primary MoS2 seeds can adsorb excess thiourea molecules due to their high surface energy. This hinders the MoS2 crystal growth and leads to the formation of surface defects.127Fig. 12h shows the HRTEM image of the obtained carbon-coated ultrathin TiO2@defect-rich MoS2 (UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2) composite. For comparison, carbon-coated ultrathin TiO2@defect-poor MoS2 (UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2) nanosheets were also prepared. The defect-poor structure of MoS2 can be confirmed by the HRTEM image of Fig. 12i. As expected, UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 displayed better cycling and rate performance than UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2. UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 and UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2 have the same composition and structure. Therefore, the different degrees of surface defects in the two samples should be the key factor determining the LIB performance. In the first discharge process, MoS2 with rich surface defects provides significantly more Li+ insertion channels than MoS2 with poor surface defects. Therefore, it is easy to understand that Li+ diffuses into UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 faster and deeper, resulting in a larger capacity. However, the original MoS2 nanosheets would convert into small nanoparticles after the first cycle.53 Mo and S were formed instead of MoS2 due to the poor dynamic properties. Although the structure is destroyed, the pristine structure affects the following structure. The MoS2 in UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 should turn into smaller nanoparticles after the first cycle because of the deeper conversion degree than that for UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2. The transformed active materials in UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 exhibit a large exposed surface for facilitating Li+ diffusion kinetics. EIS measurements of UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2 and UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 during the second discharge process were examined at different working voltages. As shown in Fig. 12j and k, the profiles at different voltages show little change in both electrodes. The electrical and Li+ diffusion kinetics can be obtained by data fitting on the equivalent circuit model in Fig. 12j. Rf and Rct represent the contact resistance of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) film and the charge transfer resistance, respectively. The fitting data at 1.71 V show that both the values of Rf and Rct of the UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 electrode are smaller than those for UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2, indicating the better electrical transfer due to deeper conversion.98 Moreover, the diffusion coefficient can be calculated based on the relationship between Z′ and ω−1/2 in the low-frequency region. As shown in Fig. 12l, the UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 exhibits lower σw than that of UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2, indicating better Li+ diffusion kinetics.127 The above results confirm that MoS2 with rich surface defects is favourable for Li+ diffusion. In addition, other researchers also found that 1,6-hexanediamine131 and carbon disulfide103,132 can be used as adsorption controlling factors to prepare defect-rich MoS2.
In summary, surface defect engineering of the MX2 basal plane is an effective strategy to enhance insertion channels and decrease the diffusion pathway based on theoretical and experimental results. However, it should be noted that surface defect engineering can also affect the electrical conductivity in reverse.123 Therefore, more attention should be paid on this issue. In addition, controllable formation of surface defects is important to achieve the balanced ionic diffusion kinetics and electrical conductivity, which remains a major challenge.

4.2 Interlayer spacing expansion engineering in TMDs

4.2.1 Introduction to interlayer spacing expansion in TMDs. 
The alkali metal ion diffusion kinetics in MX2 nanosheets depends on channels, diffusion pathway, and diffusion energy barrier between the layers. The surface defect engineering strategy has been shown to be effective for increasing channels and shortening diffusion pathway.119 Another strategy is aimed to reduce the diffusion energy barrier. It is worth pointing out that the Li+ diffusion energy barrier between ReS2 nanosheets is significantly lower than that for MoS2, although they have similar interlayer spacings (6.14 Å for ReS2 and 6.15 Å for MoS2).58 A careful analysis reveals that the main factor is the difference in vdW interactions.58 ReS2 features significantly smaller vdW interactions than MoS2.56 The small vdW interactions between MX2 layers are beneficial for ionic diffusion along the direction of the layer. Reduction of vdW interactions between MX2 layers is a promising strategy to decrease the diffusion energy barrier. The vdW interactions can be reduced by expanding the interlayer spacing in MX2.56 Moreover, more sites can be afforded for alkali metal ion storage in the expanded interspace. Therefore, as mentioned above, expanding interlayer spacing between MX2 nanosheets could be an effective strategy to reduce the diffusion energy barrier, resulting in enhanced ionic diffusion kinetics.
Strong vdW interactions induce a close packing between electronegative X layer and inserted alkali metal ions. This leads to a large diffusion barrier and impedes the alkali metal ion shuttling in the diffusion pathway. When the interlayer spacing in MX2 is increased, the vdW interactions between MX2 layers are weakened and the space of diffusion channel is expanded. This weakens the interaction between the electronegative X layer and alkali metal ions, which results in a smaller diffusion barrier and facilitates the diffusion kinetics. This conclusion has also been confirmed by theoretical calculations of Li+/Na+/K+ intercalation into 2H-MoS2.133–135 For example, Shuai et al. found two available adsorption sites: the most stable octahedral (Oh) site above the center of a hexagon (Fig. 13a); and the metastable tetrahedral (Th) site above a Mo atom (Fig. 13b).133 Then, they calculated the diffusion energy values for the pathway of Oh → Th → Oh with different interlayer spacings (Fig. 13c). The obtained results are presented in Fig. 13d and e. The diffusion energy barrier spans between the highest and lowest energy values along the diffusion pathway. For Na+ diffusion, the barrier decreases from 1.14 to 0.20 eV with increasing two-interlayer spacing (c) from 13 to 18 Å (Fig. 13e). This result is in good agreement with that reported for Na+ diffusion in MoS2.135 For Li+ diffusion, the energy barrier also decreases from 0.54 eV with increasing c from 13 to 15 Å (Fig. 13d). However, when c is larger than 15 Å, the diffusion from Oh to Th is endothermic. Therefore, the Li+ diffusion barrier increases slightly when c increases from 15 to 18 Å. When c increases to an infinitely large value, the Li+ diffusion energy barrier between MoS2 layers is equal to the diffusion barrier on MoS2 monolayers. This value is 0.21 eV,136 which is still significantly smaller than that (0.54 eV) for 13 Å. Zheng et al. investigated K+ diffusion, as shown in Fig. 13f, using the 2H-MoS2 bilayer model with two different interlayer spacings of 6.2 and 9.2 Å. Fig. 13g shows that the difference between the highest and lowest energy values (3.94 eV) for 9.2 Å is smaller than that for 6.2 Å. Moreover, this value is significantly larger than that for Li+ and Na+ diffusion.
 Fig. 13  Top and front views of M (M = Na, Li) intercalation geometries in 2H-MoS2 at (a) the octahedral Oh site above the center of a hexagon, and (b) the tetrahedral Th site above a Mo atom. (c) Main diffusion path between Oh sites via a Th site in 2H-MoS2 layers. The teal, olive, and violet spheres denote Mo, S and M atoms, respectively. The spacing between any two layers is equivalent to half of the lattice constant c as indicated. (d and e) Relative energy along the diffusion coordinate from Oh to Th with respect to the species M intercalated at the most stable Oh position in 2H-MoS2 with the indicated lattice constant c. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, IOP. (f) Top and side views of the optimized MoS2/MoS2 interface (the blue dotted line indicates the K+ diffusion path). (g) Energy profiles along the diffusion path in the selected interlayer spacings of 2H-MoS2/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In summary, the alkali metal ion diffusion energy barrier across the MX2 interlayer is affected by the interlayer spacings. Thus, the interlayer spacing expansion strategy is effective in reducing the diffusion energy barrier. In addition, the diffusion of Li+ in MX2 nanosheets is more facile as compared with that of Na+ and K+ due to its small ionic radius.


4.2.2 Preparation of interlayer-expanded TMDs. 
Interlayer-expanded MX2 has been prepared by intercalating or trapping foreign species, such as carbon, organics, molecules, and ions for applications in AMIBs.137–186 The synthetic strategies for the preparation of interlayer-expanded MoS2 were summarized in 2017.38 Two strategies including top-down and bottom-up have been proposed. In this review, we will summarize the methods for preparing interlayer-expanded MX2 nanosheets for AMIBs, focusing on the formation mechanisms and synthesis parameters. A detailed mechanism and driving forces for intercalating or trapping species, and the effects of interlayer spacing and reaction conditions are summarized in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 14, there are four methods, including hydro-/solvo-thermal, chemical vapor transport (CVT), exfoliation–restacking, and template intercalation for preparing interlayer-expanded MX2.
Table 2 Summary of intercalating or trapping foreign species to expand the interlayer spacing in MX2




Intercalation or entrapment of species
MX2: reaction conditions (+calcination)
Driving force or resources
Interlayer spacing (Å)
Ref. (year)




PDDA is poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride); ATTM is ammonium tetrathiomolybdate; PMo12 is phosphomolybdic acid; PANI is polyaniline.




4.2.2.1 Hydro-/solvo-thermal method


NH4+
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
Excess thiourea
6.7

137 (2014)


NH4+
MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h
Excess urea
9.68–11.0

138 (2015)


NH4+
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
Excess thioacetamide
9.8

139 (2017)


NH4+
MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h (+700 °C for 1 h in 5% H2/Ar)
Excess L-cysteine
7.1

140 (2017)


NH4+
MoS2: 220 °C for 3 days
Excess thiourea
9.8

141 (2017)


NH4+
MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+700 °C for 2 h in Ar)
Excess thiocarbamide
6.56

142 (2017)


NH4+
MoS2: 220 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in 8% H2/Ar)
Excess L-cysteine
6.6

143 (2018)


NH4+
MoS2: 160 °C for 24 h
Excess thiourea
10

145 (2018)


NH4+
MoS2: microwave at 250 °C
Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate
9.4

147 (2018)


NH4+
MoS2: 210 °C for 24 h
Excess thiourea
9.1

126 (2019)


NH4+
WS2: 200 °C for 12 h
Ammonium paratungstate
10.3

148 (2015)


NH4+
MoSe2: 220 °C for 2 days
Excess selenourea
10.0

149 (2017)


NH4+
MoSe2: 190 °C for 6 h
Excess octylamine (OA)
10.0

150 (2017)


NH4+
MoSe2: 250 °C for 1 h (+550 °C for 2 h in Ar)
Excess OA
8.5

151 (2015)


Carbon
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h (+450 °C for 2 h in 5% H2/N2)
Glucose
10.0

152 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h
Glycerol
9.8

153 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h
Glycerin
9.3

106 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+700 °C for 2 h in N2)
Ethylenediamine
9.2

134 (2019)


Carbon
MoSe2: 200 °C (+500 °C for 5 h in N2)
Ethylenediamine
10.2

155 (2018)


Carbon
MoSe2: 200 °C for 12 h
Ethylenediamine
11.5

156 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: 190 °C for 8 h (+700 °C for 1 h in 5% H2/Ar)
OA
9.8

157 (2016)


Carbon
MoS2: 240 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 2 h in N2)
Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
10.4

158 (2013)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in N2)
Pyrrole
10.3

159 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: 220 °C for 18 h
Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)
7.07

161 (2015)


Carbon
MoS2: 190 °C for 18 h (+500 °C for 3 h in N2)
PVP
13.4

162 (2017)


Carbon
MoSe2: 180 °C for 12 h (+500 °C in Ar)
PVP
8.7

164 (2018)


Carbon
ReS2: 240 °C for 18 h
PVP
7.4

165 (2019)


Carbon
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 2 h in Ar)
Polyvinyl alcohol
8.6

166 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h (+700 °C for 3 h in Ar)
Polydopamine (PDA)
10.2

167 (2014)


Carbon
MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h (+500 °C for 4 h in Ar)
PDDA
9.9

168 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: 210 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in 5% H2/Ar)
Poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
6.9

169 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: 240 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 3 h in 5% H2/N2)
Polyquaternium-10
6.42

170 (2016)


O
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
Precursor molar ratio of S:Mo = 2:1
6.8

171 (2015)


O
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
Precursor molar ratio of S:Mo = 2:1
9.7

172 (2019)






4.2.2.2 CVT method


Carbon
MoS2: MoOx/aniline and sulfur at 650 °C for 5 h
Aniline
10.2

173 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: MoOx/PMA and sulfur at 600 °C for 5 h
Phosphomolybdic acid (PMA)
6.6

174 (2012)


Carbon
MoS2: ATTM/PDA at 400 °C for 2 h + 700 °C for 2 h
PDA
7.2

175 (2016)


Carbon
MoS2: GO/MoOx/PDA and sulfur at 500 °C for 3 h
PDA
7.5

135 (2018)


Carbon
MoSe2: PPy-PMo12@TiO2 and selenium at 700 °C for 2 h
Polypyrrole-phosphomolybdic (PPy)
12.6

176 (2019)






4.2.2.3 Exfoliation–restacking method


Li+
MoS2: LixMoS2 hydrothermal at 160 °C for 48 h
Residual Li
6.35

177 (2010)


PEO
MoS2: LixMoS2 and PEO mixed and centrifuged
Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)
14.5

178 (2015)






4.2.2.4 Template-intercalation method


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/OA and dopamine stirred (+850 °C for 2 h in Ar)
PDA-OA
9.8

179 (2015)


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/OA and dopamine stirred (+800 °C for 2 h in Ar)
PDA-OA
9.9

180 (2017)


Carbon
MoSe2: MoSe2/OA and dopamine stirred (+800 °C for in N2)
PDA-OA
7.0

181 (2016)


PANI-OA
MoS2: MoS2/OA and aniline stirred
PANI-OA
10.8

182 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ immersed in glucose (+800 °C in N2)
Glucose
9.8

183 (2016)


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and methanol at 180 °C for 24 h
Methanol
8.0

184 (2017)


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and dopamine stirred (+800 °C in N2)
PDA
9.2

185 (2018)


Carbon
MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and PEI stirred (+800 °C for 4 h in Ar)
Polyethyleneimine (PEI)
9.8

186 (2019)




 Fig. 14  Illustrations of methods for synthesis of the interlayer-expanded MX2. 
Among them, the hydro-/solvo-thermal method is the most widely used. During the hydro-/solvo-thermal process, the MX2 crystal shows a high surface energy. When the precursor molar ratio of X:M is significantly larger than 2:1, MX2 would trap the excess NH4+ and organic precursors to decrease the total surface energy. On the other hand, when the precursor molar ratio of X:M is around 2:1, the O species are also formed in the interlayer of MX2 due to the incomplete reaction. As shown in Table 2 and Fig. 14a, during the hydro-/solvo-thermal process, three kinds of foreign species including NH4+, carbon, and O were found to be trapped in MX2.137–172 When the X source is sufficient in the precursor, NH4+ is always formed from the excess of thiourea, urea, thioacetamide, L-cysteine, selenourea, and octylamine,137–151 which can release NH4+ during the hydro-/solvo-thermal process. Typical carbon species are originated from organic precursors, such as glucose, glycerol, glycerin, ethylenediamine, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), pyrrole, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), polyvinyl alcohol, polydopamine (PDA), and poly(allylamine hydrochloride).152–170 The O foreign species are introduced by using an insufficient amount of the X-source precursor.171,172 In this case, the precursor molar ratio of X:M is around 2:1, and the M oxide cannot be completely transformed into MX2 during the hydro-/solvo-thermal process. Therefore, the O residue exists in the formed MX2.171,172
Controllable adjustment of the interlayer spacing is important for various applications. For the NH4+ species, the amount of added source and the calcination temperature are important factors controlling the interlayer spacing. As shown in Fig. 15a and b, the interlayer spacing of the obtained MoS2 nanosheets increases from 0.63 to 0.91 nm with increasing amount of added thiourea from 14 to 60 mmol.126 During the subsequent calcination process, the interlayer spacing decreases with increasing calcination temperature (Fig. 15c–h).146 For the carbon species, the interlayer spacing in MX2 decreases with decreasing amount of the added organic precursor (Fig. 15i and j)158 and increasing calcination temperature (Fig. 15k and l).159 For the O species, the hydrothermal temperature and subsequent calcination temperature are important factors. As shown in Fig. 15m and n, the interlayer spacing in MoS2 prepared at a hydrothermal temperature of 160 °C (7.0 Å) is significantly larger than that for the process at 220 °C (6.3 Å).171 The expanded interlayer spacing can be decreased after the calcination process as shown in Fig. 15o and p.168 Based on the above results, the interlayer spacing in MX2 can be adjusted and controlled during the hydro-/solvo-thermal process and the subsequent calcination process. In summary, the interlayer spacing in MX2 can be adjusted by increasing the amount of NH4+ and organic precursors or decreasing the reaction temperature. After the hydro-/solvo-thermal process, the interlayer-expanded MX2 is metastable and shows a small degree of crystallinity. The trapped species can be volatilized during the calcination process. Thus, the interlayer spacing in MX2 can also be gradually reduced by adjusting the calcination process.
 Fig. 15  HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared with (a) 14 mmol and (b) 60 mmol thiourea during the hydrothermal process. (c–h) HRTEM images of MoS2 at different calcination temperatures. HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared at hydrothermal temperatures of (i) 160 °C and (j) 220 °C. HRTEM images of MoS2 (k) before annealing and (l) after annealing at 500 °C. HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared with (m) 0.01 mol L−1 and (n) 0.05 mol L−1 PVP during the hydrothermal process. HRTEM images of MoS2 (o) before annealing and (p) after annealing at 800 °C. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 126. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–h) ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i and j) ref. 158. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH; (k and l) ref. 159. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (m and n) ref. 171. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (o and p) ref. 172. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Except for the hydro-/solvo-thermal method, the bottom-up approach also includes the CVT method.135,173–176 As shown in Fig. 14b, the M source and organic precursor complex were prepared in advance by stirring; then the complex was put in a tube furnace and reacted with X powder via the CVT method. The carbon species were intercalated in the formed MX2 nanosheets during the CVT process. The interlayer spacing can be controlled by adjusting the organic precursor and temperature during CVT.
The top-down approach includes exfoliation–restacking and template intercalation. The exfoliation–restacking method, as shown in Fig. 14c, includes the exfoliation of bulk MX2 and the restacking of exfoliated MX2 single layers together with an organic polymer.177,178 Generally, the exfoliated MX2 single layers are prepared by n-butyllithium intercalation and oxidation reactions with water.177 The exfoliated MX2 single layers are prone to aggregation due to the high surface energy. After adding the organic polymer into the exfoliated MX2 solution, the polymer can be adsorbed on the surface of MX2 layers. Therefore, the organic polymer is intercalated into the restacked MX2 multiple layers, leading to the expanded interlayer spacing, which increases with increasing amount of the added organic polymer as confirmed elsewhere.178 Another method of template-intercalation is illustrated in Fig. 14d. The interlayer-expanded MX2 nanosheets trapped with octylamine (OA) or NH4+ species are prepared as the template in advance. The trapped OA species can further adsorb dopamine and aniline to form new OA-PDA and OA-polyaniline (PANI) species, respectively, just under stirring.179–182 The organic polymers are converted into carbon during carbonization. The NH4+ species can interchange with various organic materials, such as glucose,183 methanol,184 dopamine,185 and polyethyleneimine (PEI).186 The template-intercalation method is effective for the rational design of organic intercalation species, which can be converted into carbon during the subsequent carbonization process. The formed carbon species not only induce the interlayer-expanded structure but also improve its electrical conductivity.179


4.2.3 Application of interlayer-expanded TMDs. 
Interlayer spacing expansion has been widely implemented to improve the ionic diffusion kinetics in MX2 nanosheets and their electrochemical performance. The use of MX2 nanosheets as anode materials in AMIBs needs to study the effect of interlayer spacing on the electrical conductivity and structural stability. As mentioned above, the interlayer-expanded MX2 nanosheets can be obtained by trapping or intercalating inorganic or organic foreign species, such as NH4+, O, and carbon.137–186 The fundamental properties and electrochemical performance of these nanosheets with different kinds of foreign species will be discussed in the following section.
Introduction of inorganic species into MX2 nanosheets was achieved by the hydro-/solvo-thermal method.137–172 For example, Gong et al. prepared non-expanded MoS2 and interlayer-expanded MoS2 with incorporated oxygen (O-MoS2) as anode materials in LIBs.172 The Li+ diffusion energy barriers in non-expanded MoS2 (6.2 Å) and interlayer-expanded O-MoS2 (9.8 Å) were calculated by DFT.172Fig. 16a and b shows the typical top and side atomic structures with 0.67 Li intercalation. The obtained formation energies in Fig. 16c show that the Li+ diffusion energy barrier for interlayer expanded O-MoS2 is more negative than that for MoS2. In addition, the expanded interlayer can also provide more Li+ storage sites as confirmed in open-circuit voltage (OCV) profiles (Fig. 16d). The above results demonstrate that the expanded interlayer attributed to O intercalation not only increases the diffusion kinetics, but also enhances the storage sites. However, it should be noted that it is not necessary that the larger interlayer spacing gives better electrochemical performance of AMIBs. For example, Zhang and co-workers reported MoS2 sheet arrays anchored on nitrogenous reduced graphene oxide (MoS2-SA/N-RGO) composites.146 The interlayer spacing in this material from 6.2 to 10.0 Å was adjusted by calcination-controlled volatilization of NH4+ species. The Na+ diffusion energy barriers at different interlayer spacings were calculated by DFT as exhibited in Fig. 16e. The diffusion energy barrier for Na+ was significantly reduced from 0.41 to 0.05 eV when the interlayer spacing increased from 6.15 Å to 7.3 Å. However, the diffusion energy barrier shows a slight change when the interlayer spacing is larger than 7.3 Å. In addition, the relationship between interlayer spacing expansion and charge transfer was also studied by EIS. As shown in Fig. 16f, the EIS spectra present two semicircles, the left semicircle at high-frequency and the right semicircle at middle-frequency are, respectively, attributed to the resistances for the SEI film (Rf) and for charge transfer (Rct). Both Rf and Rct increase with increasing interlayer spacing. Especially, when the interlayer spacing is larger than 7.3 Å, the Rct rapidly gets high, which might be ascribed to the formation of excessive SEI film inside the interlayer. This result suggests that the expanded interlayer spacing, especially larger than 7.3 Å, can significantly decrease the intrinsic electrical conductivity. Therefore, an appropriate interlayer spacing is important to achieve a well-balanced alkali metal ion diffusion kinetics and electrical conductivity. In this work, the 7.3 Å MoS2 presented both large Na+ diffusion kinetics and electrical conductivity. As a result, it achieved the best electrochemical performance as confirmed in the cycling performance in Fig. 16g. In addition, this conclusion has also been confirmed in other reported interlayer-expanded MoSe2, WS2, and ReS2 nanosheets.171,187 In summary, expanding the interlayer spacing in MX2via inorganic species can significantly increase the diffusion kinetics and storage sites. On the other hand, it also causes a decrease in the electrical conductivity. The electrochemical performance is determined by four factors including storage sites, diffusion kinetics, electrical conductivity, and structural stability.128 Therefore, exploring a properly expanded interlayer for balancing the aforementioned factors is necessary to achieve an excellent electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 16  The typical atomic structures of 0.67 Li atoms intercalated into (a) non-expanded MoS2 and (b) interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. (c) The formation energies of x Li atoms in non-expanded MoS2 and interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. (d) The OCV profiles with respect to the Li content (x) for non-expanded MoS2 and interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The energy barrier for Na+ diffusion in bulk bilayer MoS2, monolayer MoS2, and MoS2 with a d-spacing of 7.3 or 10 Å. Insets show the layer distance established (left) and Na+ diffusion path (right). (f) Nyquist plots of MoS2-SA/N-RGO electrodes obtained at the 50th discharge state. (g) Cycling performance of the MoS2-SA/N-RGO and bulk MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For the carbon species, the presence of carbon can not only increase the diffusion kinetics and storage sites but also improve the electrical conductivity and structural stability. Jiang and co-workers constructed three atomic models of two MoS2 layers (denoted as MoS2/MoS2) and two MoS2 layer clamped graphene sheets with and without vacancy (denoted as MoS2/r-G/MoS2 and MoS2/G/MoS2, respectively).179 As shown in Fig. 17a, the Li+ adsorption energy in the MoS2/MoS2 interlayer is significantly lower than those for expanded MoS2/G/MoS2 and MoS2/r-G/MoS2 interlayers. This result suggests that the MoS2/carbon interface exhibits a larger binding energy and more storage sites than the MoS2/MoS2 interface. In addition, the carbon species can also increase the diffusion kinetics in the interlayer. For example, Wang et al. used mean square displacement (MSD) and root mean square deviation (RMSD) tools to investigate the Li+/Na+ diffusion kinetics on standard MoS2 nanosheets and MoS2/PANI nanosheets with PANI intercalation.182 As shown in Fig. 17b–e, the result confirms that the PANI intercalation can effectively improve the Li+/Na+ diffusion kinetics in the MoS2 interlayers. Moreover, the EIS spectra were used to study the electrical conductivity.182Fig. 17f reveals that the PANI coated MoS2 (MoS2@PANI) structure exhibits better electrical conductivity than MoS2 due to the high conductivity of the PANI coating layer. Notably, Rct for MoS2/PANI (143 Ω) is smaller than that for MoS2@PANI (230 Ω). This suggests that a new electrical transfer mechanism exists in MoS2/PANI due to the carbon intercalation. This hypothesis has been confirmed by Feng and co-workers.186 As shown in Fig. 17g, for pure MoS2, the electrons can be transferred along the MoS2 plane and cannot move across the interlayer, leading to poor electrical conductivity. For MoS2/nitrogen doped carbon (MoS2/NC) (Fig. 17h), electrons can transfer across the MoS2 interlayer to NC through the Mo–N bonds. Therefore, the NC intercalation layer between MoS2 nanosheets can also serve as a highway for electron transfer, which is different from the electron transfer mechanisms for MoS2 and MoS2@C nanosheets. According to the above studies, the carbon intercalation species in the MX2 interlayer are beneficial for improving the storage sites, diffusion kinetics, and electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 17  (a) Li+ adsorption in MoS2/MoS2, MoS2/G/MoS2, and MoS2/r-G/MoS2 interlayers, respectively. (b and d) The mean square displacement and (c and e) the root-mean-square displacement of Li+/Na+ ions as a function of time of Li+/Na+ diffusion on the pristine MoS2 nanosheets and the MoS2/PANI hybrid nanosheets. (f) Nyquist plots of the MoS2/PANI hybrids, the MoS2@PANI hybrids and the annealed MoS2 nanosheets in LIBs. Electron transport pathways within MoS2 monolayers in pure MoS2 powder (g) and across MoS2 monolayers in the MoS2/NC heteroaerogel (h). Reproduced with permission from: (a) ref. 179. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH; (b–f) ref. 182. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g and h) ref. 186. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
The amount of intercalated carbon is also an important factor to control the electrochemical properties. For example, Zhang et al. prepared MoS2, MoS2/C-0.5, MoS2/C-1.5, MoS2/C-2.5, and MoS2/C-3 via the hydrothermal method by adding 0, 0.5, 1.5, 2.5, and 3 g of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), respectively.166 The obtained interlayer spacing increases from 0.63 to 0.88 nm with increasing amount of the added PVA. The cycling performance confirmed that all MoS2/C composite samples are better than pure MoS2. For instance, MoS2/C-2.5 showed the best cycling performance with 400 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles. Therefore, it is still necessary to explore the appropriate amount of intercalated carbon species to achieve the best electrochemical performance.
In addition, the carbon intercalation species can also improve the dynamic properties and achieve the reversible conversion mechanism. For example, Xie and co-workers prepared an interlayer-expanded MoS2 with intercalated carbon anchored on a rGO composite.106 The resulting composite, when used as an anode material in PIBs, exhibited good dynamic properties. The ex situ XRD patterns show that MoS2 is transformed into K2S after a full discharge and is then partially recovered as MoS2 after a full charge. This result demonstrates the good reversibility of the conversion reaction of the interlayer-expanded MoS2 with intercalated carbon in PIBs.
In summary, expanding the interlayer spacing in MX2via adding an appropriate amount of carbon can significantly increase the storage sites, diffusion kinetics, electrical conductivity, and structural stability, leading to the enhanced dynamic properties. Thus, the interlayer-expanded MX2 with an intercalated carbon layer may feature a partially reversible conversion mechanism and significantly better electrothermal performance, especially long-life span cycling performance at high rates.

4.3 Phase control engineering in TMDs

4.3.1 Introduction to phase control in TMDs. 
In addition to the ionic diffusion kinetics, the intrinsic electrical conductivity of M′X2 also plays an important role in the electrochemical performance of AMIBs. As shown in Table 1, the Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides show the 2H phase with semiconducting conductivity, which exhibits irreversible conversion and unsatisfactory electrochemical performance.64,65,71 On the other hand, the V-based dichalcogenides show the 1T phase with metallic conductivity, which exhibits the partially reversible conversion mechanism and good electrochemical performance.95–97 Recently, some researchers have confirmed that turning the 2H-phase of the Mo and W-based dichalcogenides into the 1T phase is an effective method to obtain metallic conductivity.34–36,40 As shown in Fig. 18a, the Mo 4d electron state of the 2H phase of MoS2 is divided into dx2–dy2/dxy, dyz/dzx, and dz2 orbitals. Two d electrons of Mo4+ occupy the lowest dz2 orbital, leading to semiconducting conductivity.188 For the 1T phase of MoS2, as shown in Fig. 18b, the Mo 4d electron state splits into dxy/dyz/dxz and dz2/dx2–dy2 orbitals. The two electrons should parallelly occupy two of the three degenerate orbitals following the minimum coulomb energy principle, resulting in metallic conductivity.188 In addition, the partial density of states (PDOS) data for Mo 4d in 2H-MoS2 and 1T-MoS2 can also confirm the above conclusion (Fig. 18b).188 Therefore, phase control engineering is extremely beneficial for preparing metallic Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides.
 Fig. 18  (a) The occupation of electrons in Mo 4d orbitals under the crystal fields of 1T phase and 2H phase. (b) Calculated PDOS of 4d states of Mo for the 1T phase and 2H phase. Snapshots of trajectories for lithiated (c) 2H-MoS2 bilayer and (d) 1T-MoS2 bilayer nanosheets following 6 ps AIMD simulations at 300 K. The formed LixSy species are labeled by circles. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 188. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing; (c and d) ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the enhanced electrical conductivity, the phase engineering of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides can also help improve the structural stability. Fig. 18c and d show the lithiation process in 2H and 1T phases of MoS2.95 The LixSy species were formed and continuously released from the 2H-MoS2 bilayer, whereas no obvious LixSy species were observed in the 1T-MoS2 bilayer. This result may be attributed to the fact that the Mo–S bonding energy for 1T-MoS2 is larger than that for 2H-MoS2.89 For diffusion kinetics, although the diffusion barrier of Li on the monolayer of 1T-MoS2 is larger than that on 1H-MoS2,189 the diffusion barrier of Li in the interlayer of 1T-MoS2 is low due to the increased interlayer in 1T-MoS2.141


4.3.2 Preparation of metallic TMDs. 
In 2018, Lei et al. have summarized the methods for preparing 1T-MoS2 for various energy conversion storage applications.36 They proposed two strategies, top-down and bottom-up. Herein, we will summarize the existing methods for the preparation of metallic (1T) Mo and W-based dichalcogenides for AMIBs, focusing on the formation mechanisms and the synthesis parameters. As shown in Table 3 and Fig. 19, there are four methods including hydro-/solvo-thermal, CVT, 2H phase template, and exfoliation–restacking, depending on the reaction conditions and driving force.190–208
Table 3 Summary of methods for preparation of the 1T phase of the Mo and W-based dichalcogenides




Precursors
MX2: reaction conditions
Driving force
Interlayer spacing (Å)
1T ratio (%)
Ref. (year)




CN2H4S is thiourea; C2H5NS is thioacetamide; DMF is N,N-dimethylformamide; G is graphene; GO is graphene oxide; rGO is reduced graphene oxide; GF is graphene foam; AS is ammonia solution; AAO is anodic aluminum oxide; HC is hollow carbon microspheres; CFC is carbon fiber cloth; CNF is carbon nanotube film; CC is carbon cloth; PEG is polyethylene glycol; P123 is HO(CH2CH2O)20(CH2CH(CH3)O)70(CH2CH2O)20H, THF is anhydrous tetrahydrofuran; N2H4·H2O is hydrazine monohydrate.




4.3.2.1 Hydro-/solvo-thermal method


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, P123, and G in AS
MoS2: 230 °C for 24 h
G substrate
—
—

190 (2016)


H3PMo12O40, CN2H4S, and G in H2O
MoS2: 180 °C for 20 h
G substrate
6.3
89

191 (2018)


Na2MoO4·2H2O, L-cysteine, and HC in H2O
MoS2: 220 °C for 24 h (+calcination)
NH4+ trapping
6.6
12

192 (2016)


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, and GO in DMF/H2O
MoS2: 220 °C for 3 days
NH4+ trapping
9.8
73.0

141 (2017)


Na2MoO4·2H2O, L-cysteine, and CFC in DMF:H2O = 3:2
MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h
NH4+ trapping
8.2–9.1
—

193 (2017)


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, KSCN, CO(NH2)2, and CFC in H2O
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
NH4+ trapping
8.2–9.1
58.3

194 (2019)


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, and GO in H2O
MoS2: 220 °C for 24 h
NH4+ trapping
10.6
70

195 (2019)


MoCl5, selenourea, and CNF in DMF
MoSe2: 220 °C for 2 days
NH4+ trapping
10.0
78.6

149 (2017)


Na2MoO4·2H2O, CN2H4S, and PEG in H2O
MoS2: 190 °C for 24 h
C trapping
9.7
69

196 (2018)


MoO3, C2H5NS, and GF in ethanol
MoS2: 200 °C for 18 h
NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor
6.4
100

197 (2017)


MoO3, C2H5NS, urea, and CC in ethanol
MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h
NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor
7.7
100

198 (2018)


MoO3, C2H5NS, urea, and AAO in ethanol
MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h
NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor
7.1
100

199 (2018)


MoO3, C2H5NS, and ZIF-67 in ethanol
MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h
NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor
8.2
100

200 (2018)


(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and CN2H4S in H2O
MoS2: 210 °C for 18 h under magnetic
9 T magnetic field
9.4
100

201 (2019)


WCl6 and C2H5NS in water
WS2: 210 °C for 24 h under magnetic
8 T magnetic field
—
100

201 (2019)






4.3.2.2 CVT method


Mo, Co and C based precursor and S power
MoS2: 600 °C for 3 h
Co doping
6.9
-

202 (2018)






4.3.2.3 2H phase template method


2H-MoS2 and Li in naphthalene-THF
MoS2: stirred and centrifuged
1 Li intercalaiton
—
70

203 (2016)


2H-MoS2 and Na in naphthalene-THF
MoS2: stirred and centrifuged
1 Na intercalation
—
—

203 (2016)


2H-MoS2/NH4+ in methanol
MoS2: solvothermal at 180 °C for 24 h
C intercalation
8.0
—

184 (2017)


2H-MoS2@CC
MoS2: 800 °C for 3 h in NH3
N-Doping
—
—

204 (2018)


2H-WS2@CFC
WS2: 800 °C for 2 h in NH3
N-Doping
—
—

205 (2018)


2H-MoSe2 and KMnO4
MoSe2: calcination at 300 and 500 °C, respectively
O-Doping
—
—

206 (2018)






4.3.2.4 Exfoliation–restacking method


1T-LixMoS2 and PEO in H2O
MoS2: mixed and centrifuged
PEO intercalation
14.5
—

178 (2015)


1T-MoS2 and GO in H2O
MoS2: sonicated and vacuum filtering
rGO intercalation
—
—

207 (2016)


1T-MoS2, PDDA-G, and N2H4·H2O in H2O
MoS2: heated and centrifuged
PDDA-G intercalation
20.5
—

208 (2018)




 Fig. 19  Illustrations of methods for the synthesis of 1T phase MX2. 

Fig. 19a shows an illustration of the hydro-/solvo-thermal method, during which the formation process includes nucleation and growth. Generally, as shown in Fig. 20a, the ground-state energy of the 2H phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides is lower than that of the 1T phase. Therefore, the formation of the 2H phase is energetically favourable.161,191 Notably, the phase transition from the metastable 1T phase to the stable 2H phase is hindered by a large energy barrier (Fig. 20a).161,191 In order to obtain the thermodynamically metastable 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides via the hydro-/solvo-thermal process, one strategy is to hinder the 1T → 2H phase transition kinetics,34,40 and the other strategy is to decrease the ground-state energy of the 1T phase to be smaller than that of the 2H phase.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the phase transformation energy barrier between the metastable 1T phase and stable 2H phase. High-resolution XPS spectra of Mo 3d of (b) 1T-MoS2/G and (c) MoS2. (d) HRTEM image of the as-prepared 1T-MoS2 nanotube. (e) Raman patterns of the 1T-MoS2 nanotube of a fresh sample, sample after 30 d in air, sample after 120 d in air, and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. (f) X-ray diffraction spectra of the 1T-MoS2 nanotube and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. (g) Phase percentage of 1T-MoS2 under different magnetic fields in magneto-hydrothermal processing. (h) Magnified top-view HAADF-STEM image of MoS2-8T, from which a high fraction of 1T phase is observed and the intensity profiles from the selected areas confirm the 2H and 1T phases. The green area indicates the 1T phase, and the red area indicates the 2H phase. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 191. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (d–f) ref. 199. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (g and h) ref. 201. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In the case of the first strategy, the graphene substrate,190,191 entrapment of NH4+ or C species,192–197 solid M′ precursor,197–200 and reaction temperature200 have been shown to be the major factors hindering the 1T → 2H phase transition kinetics. For example, Zhou et al. found that the graphene substrate can serve as a sealing layer to hinder the crystal growth of MoS2.190 Therefore, the metastable 1T phase of MoS2 can be partially preserved after the hydrothermal process. Zheng and co-workers also prepared a 1T-MoS2/graphene composite with a graphene substrate.191 The 1T phase content can be quantitatively analyzed by high-resolution XPS spectra. As shown in Fig. 20b and 22c, the 1T phase amount in 1T-MoS2/graphene is 89%, which is larger than that for pure MoS2 without the graphene substrate.191 The trapped foreign species on the surface of Mo and W-based nanocrystals can significantly hinder the crystal growth.121 Therefore, intercalating foreign species is also a promising strategy to prepare metastable 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides.141,149,192–200 On the other hand, it should be pointed out that the state of the precursor also plays an important role in the formation of the 1T phase. As shown in Table 3, the 1T phase content ranges from 58.3 to 78.6% when an ionic Mo precursor, such as MoO42−, Mo7O246−, and Mo5+, is used;141,149,193–196 this content is significantly smaller than that (∼100%) when a solid Mo precursor (MoO3) is employed.197–200 This result is attributed to the slower reaction kinetics for the solid–liquid reaction between solid MoO3 and X sources, when compared with the liquid–liquid reaction between ionic Mo sources and X sources. For example, Jiao et al. used solid MoO3 and thiourea to prepare the 1T phase of MoS2 nanosheets, which exhibited low crystallinity degree and small size (Fig. 20d–f).199 Notably, the obtained 1T phase of MoS2 exhibited high stability in air. As shown in Raman spectra (Fig. 20e), all typical peaks for the 1T phase of MoS2 are present and only a small peak at 400 cm−1 for the 2H phase of MoS2 appears even after exposure to air for 120 days. Moreover, the hydrothermal temperature is also an important factor controlling the formation of the 1T phase. As shown in Fig. 20f, the obtained MoS2 changes from 1T to 2H phase with increasing solvothermal temperature from 200 to 240 °C.200 The increased hydrothermal temperature can significantly improve the reaction kinetics for the phase transition, leading to the formation of a stable 2H phase.
In the case of the second strategy, the aim is to decrease the ground-state energy of the 1T phase to be smaller than that of the 2H phase. Recently, Ding et al. found that the magnetic field plays a key role in the formation of the 1T phase of MoS2 and WS2,201 because 2H-MoS2 and 1T-MoS2, respectively, show diamagnetism and paramagnetism.188 As a result, the ground-state energy of 1T-MoS2 is significantly reduced and even smaller than that of 2H-MoS2 under a strong magnetic field.201 As shown in Fig. 20g, the phase content of 1T-MoS2 increases from 24.7% to 100% with increasing magnetic field from 0 to 9 T in a magneto-hydrothermal reaction. For MoS2-8T prepared under an 8 T magnetic field, the XPS spectra reveal that the 1T-MoS2 phase percentage is as high as 76.4% (Fig. 20h). The high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image displays the atomic arrangements of MoS2-8T (Fig. 20h). Both 1T and 2H phases exist in MoS2-8T with a zigzag interface. This result demonstrates that the magnetic field can reduce the ground-state energy of metastable 1T-MoS2.
In addition, the bottom-up approach also includes the CVT method, which has been proposed to prepare 1T-MoS2 together with doping.202 Although 1T-MoS2 would transform into stable 2H-MoS2 during high-temperature treatment, Co doping can induce the formation of 1T-MoS2 due to the Co–S covalent bond.202 However, the 1T phase content achieved via the CVT method is low due to the limited doping amount.
In addition to the bottom-up approach, top-down approaches including the 2H phase template (Fig. 19b)203–206 and exfoliation–restacking (Fig. 19c)178,207,208 methods were proposed to prepare the 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides. For the 2H phase template method, according to theoretical calculations, 2H-MoS2 with a perfect basal plane is hardly transformable into the 1T phase due to the huge energy barrier,209 whereas the introduction of S vacancies can greatly facilitate the 2H → 1T phase transition.209,210 Therefore, introducing foreign species and defects into the 2H phase of the Mo and W-based dichalcogenides is beneficial for facilitating the phase transition to form the 1T phase. Li, Na, and C intercalation, and N and O doping have been used to facilitate the phase transition from 2H → 1T in Mo and W-based dichalcogenides.203–206 Among them, the 2H → 1T phase transition has been widely observed during the Li and Na intercalation process.64–68 Doping with non-metals such as N and O can form covalent bonds with transition metals at high temperatures, which causes the 2H → 1T phase transition.204–206 The exfoliation–restacking method involves the restacking process to stabilize the obtained 1T-MoS2 nanosheets.178,207,208 As shown in Fig. 19c, 2H-MoS2 bulk can be exfoliated after extensive Li or Na intercalation, giving unstable 1T-MoS2 nanosheets. Restacking 1T-MoS2 nanosheets with carbon materials can achieve stabilized 1T-MoS2/carbon layer-by-layer nanosheets. The as-prepared composites also display an expanded interlayer spacing.178,207,208


4.3.3 Application of phase control engineering. 
Based on theoretical calculations, the 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides shows significantly higher electrical conductivity than the 2H phase.51 In addition, the 1T (metallic) phase of V-based dichalcogenides has been demonstrated to exhibit a partial reversibility in AMIBs due to their excellent electrical conductivity.95–97 Therefore, the phase engineering of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides is expected to change the storage mechanism and enhance electrochemical performance in the case of AMIBs. As mentioned above, the 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides was prepared by intercalating organic or inorganic foreign species, such as carbon, Li, Na, and NH4+ or introducing extrinsic defects, such as N, O, and Co doping.190–208
Among intercalation of foreign species, an organic polymer precursor was always used to stabilize the 1T phase.178,196,208 For example, Xiong et al. used the exfoliation–restacking method to prepare 1T-MoS2/graphene-PDDA composites.208 After calcination at high temperature, as shown in Fig. 21a, the crystallinity degree of carbon and MoS2 was improved and the interlayer spacing was decreased, whilst the 1T phase of MoS2 was transformed into the stable 2H phase. The as-prepared 1T phase composite displayed better electrochemical performance than the calcined composite with the 2H phase of MoS2 at all tested current densities (Fig. 21b).208 Therefore, the phase engineering shows an important effect on the electrochemical performance. Moreover, Liu and co-workers prepared 1T-MoS2 intercalated polyethylene glycol (PEG) composite (MoS2-PEG) and its annealed product (MoS2-PEG-A) to investigate their electrochemical behaviours.196 As shown in Fig. 21c and d, the CV curves of MoS2-PEG and MoS2-PEG-A composites display obvious differences during both discharge and charge processes. In the first cycle, the MoS2-PEG composite with the 1T phase exhibits a weak reduction peak at 1.5 V and a sharp reduction peak at 0.4 V, which are attributed to the Li+ intercalation into MoS2 and the conversion of LixMoS2 to Mo and Li2S, respectively. The MoS2-PEG-A composite with the 2H phase shows two sharp reduction peaks at ∼1.1 and 0.6 V. The peak for Li+ intercalation shifts left, which indicates a higher diffusion energy barrier in the case of MoS2-PEG-A.89 In the following charge scan, both MoS2-PEG and MoS2-PEG-A show an oxidation peak at 2.3 V, which is assigned to the conversion from Li2S to S and Li. Importantly, the curve for MoS2-PEG shows a series of peaks ranged from 1 to 2 V associated with the partially reversible conversion toward formation of MoS2.96–98 This result suggests that the 1T phase of MoS2-PEG has good dynamic properties due to carbon incorporation. The higher electrical conductivity of MoS2-PEG is demonstrated by Nyquist plots (Fig. 21e). As a result, MoS2-PEG exhibits better rate performance than MoS2-PEG-A at all tested current densities (Fig. 21f). Intercalation of NH4+ species has also been adopted to prepare the 1T phase of the Mo and W-based dichalcogenides.192–195,197,203 The 1T → 2H phase transition also occurs after calcination at high temperature (∼700 °C).193,198 The calcined samples exhibited smaller electrical conductivity and poorer electrochemical performance than the as-prepared products with a high content of the 1T phase.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the 2H phase and decreased interlayer spacing in MoS2 during the annealing process. (b) Rate capability of the 1T-MoS2/graphene superlattice, control superlattice, and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. CV of (c) MoS2-PEG and (d) MoS2-PEG-A at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (e) Nyquist plots and (f) rate capability of MoS2-PEG and MoS2-PEG-A. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 208. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c–f) ref. 196. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
For the creation of extrinsic defects, N, O, and Co were used as doping elements to enhance the electrochemical performance of the 2H phase in Mo and W-based dichalcogenides.202,204–206 For example, Wang et al. prepared N doped WS2 by calcination of 2H-WS2 in ammonia flow.205 The induced N–W covalent bonds facilitated the formation of the 1T phase structure. The 1T phase content achieved via this strategy is small (<10%) due to the poor doping content. Although the formed 1T@2H-WS2 nanosheets show enhanced electrical conductivity and electrochemical performance as compared with 2H-WS2 the obtained electrochemical performance is still unsatisfactory.205
The 1T phase structure is beneficial to enhance electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion. However, it is still hard to obtain the pure 1T phase.190–196,202–208 The interface between the two phases generates a high Schottky barrier for transfer of electrons.211,212 Therefore, the pure 1T phase structure is highly desirable for application in AMIBs. Recently, the solid Mo precursor together with NH4+ intercalation has been adopted to prepare stable pure 1T-MoS2.197–199 For example, Jiao et al. used this strategy to prepare pure 1T-MoS2 nanotubes at a relatively low temperature (200 °C).199 For comparison, 2H-MoS2 was also prepared with fast reaction kinetics at a higher solvothermal reaction temperature (240 °C). The pure 1T-MoS2 and 2H-MoS2 phases exhibit different Li+ storage mechanisms as confirmed by the analysis of the CV curves. The prominent oxidation peak ranging from 1 to 2 V for pure 1T-MoS2 demonstrates that this phase shows remarkable reversible conversion.196 As a result, the pure 1T-MoS2 nanotubes exhibit an excellent rate performance of 1080, 1020, 875, and 589 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, 5, and 20 A g−1, respectively. This is the greatest rate performance reported so far for the 1T phase MoS2 with different phase contents used in LIBs (Table 4). This result suggests that the pure 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenides shows great advantages for application in AMIBs due to its good dynamic properties.
Table 4 Summary of rate performance for the 1T phase of Mo and W-based dichalcogenide electrodes in LIBs within a voltage window of 0.01–3 V




Materials
1T phase ratio (%)
Rate performance
Ref. (year)




1T-MoS2/graphene
89
1163, 820, 700 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, and 2 A g−1, respectively

191 (2018)


Annealed HC@1T-MoS2
12
943, 735, and 561 mA h g−1 at 0.25, 1, and 4 A g−1, respectively

192 (2016)


1T-MoS2-PEG
69
866, 733, 537, and 364 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, 5, and 10 A g−1, respectively

196 (2018)


1T-MoS2/CC
100
680, 386, 276 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, and 2 A g−1, respectively

198 (2018)


1T-MoS2 nanotube
100
1080, 1020, 875, and 589 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, 5, and 20 A g−1, respectively

199 (2018)





4.4 Alloy engineering in TMDs

4.4.1 Introduction to alloying in TMDs. 
Alloy engineering of TMDs is achieved by partial substitution of one kind of element in MX2 with another congeneric element. Two types of isoelectric alloys, including MX2(1−x)X′2x and M1−xM′xX2, have been synthesized for AMIBs so far. The degree of substitution can be adjusted and controlled at an arbitrary percentage due to their similar elemental properties.40 The physical and chemical properties of MX2 nanosheets can be tuned by alloy engineering,213 which has received significant attention in their applications as electrodes in AMIBs.
Among MX2(1−x)X′2x alloys, the MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy was widely used as an anode material in AMIBs. Ersan and co-workers first used DFT calculations to investigate the Li+ adsorption and diffusion on MoS2(1−x)Se2x with different compositions of x (x = 0.00, 0.33, 0.50, 0.66, and 1.00).214 The density of states (DOS) was calculated to study the electrical conductivity of MoSxSe2(1−x). The results indicate that the primary MoS2(1−x)Se2x monolayers show semiconducting conductivity. When one Li+ is adsorbed on MoS2(1−x)Se2x, the stable adsorption position site is located at the top site of Mo and deviates slightly along with the Mo–S bond, respectively, for MoSe2/MoS2 and other MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys. The Li s orbitals and S or Se p orbitals hybridize giving s–p orbitals. As a result, the MoSxSe2(1−x) systems feature metallic conductivity. In addition to the electrical conductivity, the ionic diffusion kinetics is also important. As shown in Fig. 22a, the diffusion path between two nearest neighbouring Mo atoms is considered the lowest energy path. Fig. 22b displays the calculated energy profiles along the paths. The energy barriers of MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys are 0.194, 0.319, 0.541, 0.391, and 0.237 eV for x = 0.00, 0.237, 0.33, 0.50, and 1.00, respectively.
 Fig. 22  (a) Lowest energy diffusion paths of a single lithium atom and (b) calculated energy profiles along the paths for one Li atom-adsorbed on the MoSxSe2(1−x) monolayer. Schematic representation of the Li diffusion path on Mo1−xWxS2 alloy of x = 0.33 from one top position to another through a hollow site. (c) Bare surface, (d) lithiated surface. The blue, green, yellow, and maroon balls denote Mo, W, S, and Li atoms, respectively. (e) Energy profiles for lithium diffusion on the monolayer Mo1−xWxS2. The blue line indicates a bare surface, and the red line indicates a lithiated surface. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 214. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (c–e) ref. 215. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Among M1−xM′xX2, Mo1−xWxS2 is a star material. Barik and co-workers studied the electrical, adsorption, and diffusion properties of Mo1−xWxS2 (x = 0.00, 0.33, 0.66, and 1.00) by DFT calculations.215 The PDOS results indicate that all Mo1−xWxS2 alloys show semiconducting conductivity, whereas the lithiated alloys display a metallic structure. The stable adsorption site of Li is located at the top sites. The adsorption energy decreases from 1.74 to 1.44 eV with increasing x from 0.00 to 1.00. As shown in Fig. 22c and d, the lowest diffusion energy barriers are along the reaction coordinate between two nearest M atoms. The diffusion energy barriers decrease from 0.202 to 0.183 eV corresponding to MoS2 and WS2, whilst the diffusion energy barriers for Li2MoS2 to Li2WS2 decrease from 0.315 to 0.172 eV (Fig. 22e). Therefore, MoS2 exhibits better adsorption energy than WS2, while MoS2 displays larger diffusion energy barrier than WS2. The Mo1−xWxS2 alloy with an appropriate x value is believed to have well-balanced properties in both aspects.


4.4.2 Preparation of alloyed TMDs. 
The formation of alloyed TMDs should simultaneously meet two principles: (1) the lattice constants and the metal–chalcogen bond distances between two TMD materials show a good match; and (2) at least one of the TMD compounds has semiconducting properties.40,215 Among MX2(1−x)X′2x type alloys, MoS2(1−x)Se2x and TiS2(1−x)Se2x were successfully synthesized for application in AMIBs.216–223 MX2(1−x)X′2x was prepared via one-pot solvothermal, one-pot CVT, and post CVT methods. For example, Cai et al. used MoO3, thiourea, and SeO2 as Mo, S, and Se sources, respectively.217 After the solvothermal reaction at 180 °C for 24 h, MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys with different Se–S ratios were prepared by adjusting the ratio of thiourea and SeO2. Wang et al. used the one-pot CVT method to synthesize MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys by calcination of Mo, S, and Se sources at high temperature.218 Notably, the post CVT method was also proposed to prepare MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys.219–221 For example, Jia and co-workers prepared a MoS2/graphene composite through a hydrothermal reaction in advance, then the MoS2/graphene and Se powder were calcinated at 700 °C for 2 h.220 The S atoms were partially substituted by Se atoms. Thus, the MoS2(1−x)Se2x/graphene alloys were obtained. The TiS2(1−x)Se2x alloys were also prepared by one-pot solvothermal222 and one-pot CVT223 methods.
For another M1−xM′xX2 type alloy, Mo1−xWxS2, MoVS2, and Mo1−xRexS2 have been used in AMIBs.224–227 Their preparation was accomplished by using one-pot hydro-/solvo-thermal and one-pot CVT methods. For example, Woo et al. used RexMo1−xO3 (x < 0.01) nanoparticles as precursors to prepare RexMo1−xS2 (x < 0.01).222 RexMo1−xO3 was vulcanized by using H2S at high temperature. The Mo–Re ratios in the obtained RexMo1−xS2 were controlled by adjusting the oxide precursor.


4.4.3 Application of alloy engineering. 
Alloy engineering of TMDs is expected to balance the adsorption and diffusion properties.213–215 For MX2(1−x)X′2x type materials, the theoretical capacities of MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys are between those for MoSe2 and MoS2. MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys with an optimized x value exhibited better cycling performance than MoSe2 or MoS2.216,218–220 For example, Cai and co-workers confirmed that a MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy with x = 0.25 shows the best cycling performance among MoS2, MoSe2, and other MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys prepared by the one-pot solvothermal method.217 Jia et al. prepared MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloys through the post-CVT method, in which MoS2 was calcined at high temperature with Se powder.220 Although MoS2 showed a slightly larger theoretical capacity than the MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy, the authors reported that the MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy displayed better cycling and rate performance than MoS2. The reasons for enhancing electrochemical performance have been studied by EIS and CV curves at different scan rates. The MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy showed larger electrical conductivity and better Na+ diffusion kinetics than MoS2. In addition, the authors used in situ Raman spectra and ex situ XRD patterns to reveal the corresponding electrochemical reaction mechanisms. The MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy exhibited a good reversible intercalation mechanism with a high cutoff voltage of 0.5 V.
For M1−xM′xX2 type materials, when semiconducting MX2 and M′X2 form alloys, the x value shows an important effect on the properties of the resulting alloys. Li et al. and Xu et al. prepared Mo1−xWxS2 alloys as anode materials for LIBs.224,226 Their studies are somewhat divergent. Li et al. found that MoS2 has better cycling performance than the Mo0.7W0.3S2, Mo0.6W0.4S2, and Mo0.5W0.5S2 alloys with a high x value (x > 0.3);224 whereas Xu et al. confirmed that the Mo0.91W0.09S2 alloy with a small x value (0.09) exhibits better cycling performance than MoS2.226 These studies indicate that the x value is an important factor determining the electrochemical performance of AMIBs. MoS2 has significantly larger theoretical capacity than WS2. The Mo1−xWxS2 alloy with a high x value could show lower capacity than MoS2, although the alloy could exhibit better electrical conductivity or diffusion kinetics. On the other hand, when metallic MX2 and semiconducting M′X2 form alloys, the resulting hybrid could have interesting properties. For example, Zhang et al. confirmed that the Mo1−xVxS2 alloy shows semimetallic conductivity, which is better than that of 2H-MoS2.225 When MoS2 and the Mo1−xVxS2 alloy are used as anode materials in LIBs, Mo1−xVxS2 exhibited a significantly larger electrical conductivity and smaller diffusion energy barrier than MoS2. Notably, the Mo1−xVxS2 alloy showed a partially reversible conversion storage mechanism. As a result, the Mo1−xVxS2 alloy displayed significantly better cycling and rate performance than MoS2.
In summary, the rational design of MX2(1−x)X′2x and M1−xM′xX2 alloys is essential to achieve high electrochemical performance. The design principle should include two aspects: the first refers to the value of x – the composition of the alloy should be close to MX2 with high theoretical capacity; the second refers to the conductivity – the metallic compound is ideal because it can greatly improve the electrical conductivity of the alloy. However, the electrochemical properties and storage mechanisms associated with alloy engineering are still not sufficiently studied by computational and experimental methods, and further research in this direction is highly desirable.

4.5 Heteroatom doping engineering in TMDs

4.5.1 Introduction to heteroatom doping in TMDs. 
In addition to isoelectric alloying, heteroatom doping has also drawn wide attention due to its enormous possibilities.228 The doped heteroatoms can be divided into two categories, nonmetal heteroatoms, such as N and O, and metal heteroatoms, such as Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cr, and Sr. Heteroatom doping engineering has been reported to enhance the electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion kinetics of the Mo and W-based dichalcogenides. The type of doped atoms shows an important effect on their electrochemical properties.229 Therefore, we will focus on the electrochemical properties of heteroatom-doped TMDs and their relevant applications in AMIBs.
For metal heteroatom doping, Sun et al. used various metal atoms (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) to substitute Mo atom in the monolayer of 2H-MoS2.229 They found that Li+ is located on top of the Mo atom in MoS2, with an adsorption energy of −1.24 V. For metal heteroatom-doped MoS2 monolayer, the adsorption energy is significantly reduced. Notably, if the adsorption site is closer to the metal heteroatom location, the adsorption energy is lower. These results suggest that the metal heteroatom doping can significantly decrease the Li+ adsorption energy and Li+ tends to be adsorbed near the metal heteroatom. The diffusion energy barriers were studied in a typical path: the top site above Mo (T) → hollow site (H) → T. The diffusion path is shown in Fig. 23a. The data in Fig. 23b indicate that the metal heteroatom doping has a pronounced effect on the diffusion energy barriers for the diffusion path near the doping site. Moreover, the influence of metal heteroatom doping on the electrical conductivity has also been studied. The DOS data in Fig. 23c and d indicate that 2H-MoS2 exhibits semiconducting properties, while the Co-doped MoS2 exhibits semi-metallic conductivity. A similar finding was also reported by others,202 indicating that the Co doping causes the formation of metallic MoS2. For nonmetal heteroatom doping, Sun et al. performed DFT calculations for a model obtained by substitution of one S atom with one of other nonmetal atoms (N, P, As, F, Cl, and I) in the monolayer of 2H-MoS2.229 The obtained results shown in Fig. 23e–h indicate that the nonmetal atoms also decrease the adsorption energy and diffusion energy barrier near the nonmetal atom site as well as increase the electrical conductivity of 2H-MoS2.
 Fig. 23  (a) Diffusion path and corresponding (b) diffusion energy profiles for Li on metallic heteroatom-doped monolayer MoS2. The projected DOS for (c) pristine and the case for substitution of Mo with (d) Co in monolayer MoS2. (e) Diffusion path and corresponding (f) diffusion energy profiles for Li on non-metallic heteroatom-doped monolayer MoS2. The projected DOS for monolayer MoS2 with substitution of S (g) N and (h) I. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In summary, heteroatom doping is an effective strategy to adjust the diffusion kinetics and electrical conductivity of 2H-MoS2, making the doped MoS2 a more suitable anode material for application in AIMBs.


4.5.2 Preparation of heteroatom-doped TMDs. 
There are enormous opportunities for selection of heteroatom species, including elements such as N, O, Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cr, and Sr. However, heteroatom doping can cause a significant structural change. To preserve the layered structure of the heteroatom-doped MX2, the doping content should be limited. The following section will summarize the major methods for preparation of heteroatom-doped MX2.
For nonmetal heteroatom-doped TMDs, N doping can be accomplished by one-pot CVT and post-CVT methods.142,204,205,230–233 For example, Qin et al. reported the performance of LIBs for N-doped MoS2 materials, which were prepared by calcination of the powders containing MoCl5 and (NH2)2CS.230 This method represents a simple way for the preparation of N-doped MoS2. However, it is hard to control the doping sites and their content. In order to accurately control the content of N sites, the post-CVT method was proposed.142,204,205,232,233 Generally, MX2 was prepared in advance, then N doping was accomplished by NH3 treatment at high temperature. The content of N doped sites is always small and it can be controlled by adjusting the CVT time and temperature. O doping was obtained by hydro-/solvo-thermal and post oxidation methods.172,206,234–238 The hydro-/solvo-thermal method is attributed to the incomplete sulfuration or selenization,172,234–236 which has already been introduced in Section 4.2.2 of this review. For the post oxidation method, the obtained MX2 is treated by oxygen-containing oxidizing agents, such as air, KMnO4, and acid, to introduce O doping.206,237,238 The oxidation degree was small to avoid the formation of a large amount of M-based oxides.
For metal heteroatom-doped TMDs, the hydro-/solvo-thermal reaction is the most widely used. A wide spectrum of elements such as Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cr, and Sr has been successfully used to dope MoS2 or MoSe2.239–244 For example, Zhang et al. used (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CoNO3, and CH4N2S as Mo, V, and S sources, respectively.225 After hydrothermal treatment at 220 °C for 24 h, Co-doped MoS2 was prepared. Cr-doped MoS2 was also prepared by replacing CoNO3 with CrCl. In addition, other research groups used the one-pot CVT method to prepare metal heteroatom-doped TMDs.202


4.5.3 Application of heteroatom doping engineering. 
Because of the significant physical and chemical differences between the heteroatoms and elements in MX2, heteroatom doping can synchronously introduce changes in many aspects, such as surface defects, interlayer spacing, phase, electrical conductivity, or ionic diffusion kinetics. Therefore, heteroatom doping engineering represents an important direction for expanding the range of TMD applications in AMIBs.
For nonmetal heteroatom doping, N and O doping has been shown to enlarge the interlayer spacing, induce phase transitions, or introduce surface defects.119,142,172,204–206 These different effects were caused by different doping contents and methods. Fundamentally, these effects are intended to improve basic electrochemical properties including electrical conductivity, ionic diffusion kinetics, and overall dynamic properties. For example, Zhang et al. used a post oxidation method to prepare the O doped MoS2/carbon fibers (MSCF).238 The O doping content was adjusted by controlling the oxidation temperature at 300, 400, and 500 °C, corresponding to OMSCF-300, OMSCF-400, and OMSCF-500, respectively. As shown in Fig. 24a, the oxidation degree increased with increasing temperature. MoS2 was even partially oxidized into MoO2 and MoO3 at 500 °C. The OMSCF-400 exhibited an expanded interlayer spacing due to O doping. The XPS spectrum of O 1s recorded for the OMSCF-400 electrode confirmed the O doping with an appropriate content. In addition, OMSCF-400 shows the best electrical conductivity among the above samples (Fig. 24b). Therefore, OMSCF-400 should have significantly better electrical conductivity and Na+ diffusion kinetics, resulting in enhanced dynamic properties. The XRD pattern of the OMSCF-400 electrode shows that the MoS2 signal can be detected after 60 cycles charged to 3 V (Fig. 24c). The exciting partially reversible conversion reaction leads to good cycling and rate performance. As a result, the OMSCF-400 electrode exhibits the best rate performance (Fig. 24d). Moreover, Liu et al. and Peng et al. also confirmed by computational and experimental studies that N doping can effectively improve the electrical conductivity.232,233 N and O doping is another strategy to enhance dynamic properties and achieve an almost ideal reversible conversion mechanism.
 Fig. 24  (a) XRD patterns, (b) Nyquist plots of MSCF, OMSCF-300, OMSCF-400, and OMSCF-500. (c) XRD pattern of the OMSCF-400 electrode after 60 cycles at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 charged to 3 V. (d) Rate performance of MSCF, OMSCF-300, OMSCF-400, and OMSCF-500. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Metal heteroatom doping was achieved by substitution of M atoms with other metal atoms. Metal heteroatom doping also has a significant effect on the electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion kinetics. For example, Chu and co-workers prepared Fe doped MoSe2@N-doped carbon (FMSC) composites by a solvothermal method.241 The XPS spectra of Fe 2p and Se 3d recorded for FMSC confirm the existence of Fe–Se bonding, which confirms the Fe doping. The four-point probe method shows that the FMSC-based films have a good electrical conductivity. The ex situ XRD patterns and XPS spectra were used to investigate the electrochemical mechanism. Fe-doped MoSe2 changed into K2Se, Fe, and Mo after deep discharging to 0.01 V. After charging to 2.5 V, the signal associated with Fe doped MoSe2 reappeared. Therefore, the partially reversible conversion reaction of MoSe2 was achieved by Fe doping.241 The FMSC composite used as an anode material in PIBs showed a good cycling performance.
In summary, heteroatom doping engineering is a promising strategy to adjust the electrochemical properties of TMDs. It is used to improve the electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion kinetics in charge storage. As expected, it can even change the electrochemical storage mechanism from irreversible to partially reversible due to the enhanced dynamic properties. However, the most challenging problem of this nanoengineering is the poor controllability of the doped sites and content. The reported computational approaches do not match well with the experimental results. Therefore, there is still a need to explore the effects of doping sites and content on the electrochemical properties by combining computational and experimental studies.

5. Summary and perspectives
In summary, this review presents a systematic discussion, and highlights the emerging strategies for intrinsic structure engineering of TMDs at the atomic level and the methods for tuning alkali metal ion storage mechanisms in AMIBs. In brief, the competition between the M–X bonding interaction and Li/Na/K–MX2 interaction determines the charge storage mechanism of intercalation or conversion. Under a high cutoff voltage (∼1.0 V), the Li/Na/K–MX2 interaction is weaker than the M–X bonding interaction due to the low Li/Na/K intercalation content per MX2 unit. Therefore, all MX2 nanosheets present a reversible intercalation mechanism. Under a low cutoff voltage (∼0.01 V), the intercalation content of Li/Na/K per MX2 unit is much higher. In most of the M′X2 materials (M′ = Mo, W, V, Re), the Li/Na/K–M′X2 interaction is larger than the M′–X bonding interaction, leading to the structural dissociation and conversion reaction. In some other M′′X2 materials (M′′ = Ti, Nb), their intrinsic M′′–X bonding interaction is invariably larger than the Li/Na/K–M′′X2 interaction. Therefore, these M′′X2 materials exhibit an intercalation mechanism under a low cutoff voltage without structural collapse. Moreover, the conversion reaction can be divided into irreversible and reversible mechanisms, which depends on the dynamic properties. Semiconducting Mo, W, and Re-based dichalcogenides show poor dynamic properties due to low electrical conductivity and serious structural dissociation. In this case, irreversible conversion occurs. Metallic V-based dichalcogenides and rationally designed carbon/M′X2 composites show good dynamic properties due to their excellent electrical conductivity. Therefore, a partially reversible conversion mechanism takes place, which leads to enhanced cycling and rate performance as compared to the irreversible conversion reactions. As a result, the reversible conversion mechanism plays a key role in promoting the potential application of MX2 in AMIBs.
In addition, we have also summarized the emerging strategies for nanoengineering the intrinsic structure of MX2, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping. The synthetic strategies and the “intrinsic structure–electrochemical properties–storage mechanisms” relationships have been elucidated to provide a reliable mechanistic understanding. In brief, by combining computational and experimental studies, (1) surface defect engineering of the MX2 basal plane is aimed to enhance the insertion channels and decrease the diffusion pathway; (2) interlayer spacing engineering has been adopted to improve the diffusion energy barrier in MX2 nanosheets; (3) phase engineering is beneficial to enhance the intrinsic electrical conductivity of semiconducting MX2 nanosheets; (4) alloy engineering is expected to achieve comprehensive electrochemical properties; and (5) heteroatom doping engineering can synchronously be effective at adjusting the electrical conductivity and ionic diffusion kinetics.
Although some advances have been achieved in the development of TMD based anode materials for AMIBs, extensive efforts are still needed to design new TMD anode materials for next-generation practical energy storage, by tuning electrochemical mechanisms and intrinsic structure engineering at the atomic level. Some challenges and suggestions are listed below:
(1) Fundamental studies on the dynamic properties and reaction path of reversible conversion reactions. The reversible intercalation reaction process has been well studied via advanced in situ or ex situ characterization techniques. The related intercalation mechanism and reaction path were well established and accepted. However, the conversion process causes a serious structural dissociation and compositional change. It is still hard to investigate the composition and chemical state changes at the atomic level. The occurrence of irreversible or reversible conversion reaction depends on the dynamic properties of MX2. The poor dynamic properties lead to irreversible conversion, while excellent dynamic properties result in reversible conversion. The dynamic properties for conversion reaction have not been quantitatively analyzed. In addition, the reversible conversion reaction, especially the oxidation reaction path is still unclear. Recently, the emerging cryo-STEM technique has been successfully used to investigate the atomic-level change that occurs in the conversion reaction. In addition, metallic V-based dichalcogenides have been shown to exhibit a significant reversible conversion degree as anode materials in AMIBs. In the future, V-based dichalcogenides will be considered promising carriers to investigate the dynamic properties and reaction path of reversible conversion reactions, by combining computational simulation and emerging characterization techniques.
(2) Precise control and characterization of the intrinsic structure of MX2 at the atomic level. The adjustment and controlling of the intrinsic structure of MX2 have been presented in Section 4. The interlayer spacing and phase control engineering of MX2 can be tuned by adjusting the foreign species or forces. However, challenges still exist in the precise control of foreign species or forces. On the other hand, the currently available possibilities for controlling the surface defects, alloying, and heteroatom doping engineering of the MX2 intrinsic structure are still limited. For example, the doping sites and content in heteroatom doping engineering are hard to control. The same heteroatom doping at different sites can induce different effects on the intrinsic structure of TMDs. Therefore, numerous optimization experiments have been undertaken to explore the best electrochemical properties. In the future, more efforts should be devoted to reveal the precise MX2 structure in each engineering stage through advanced characterization. In addition, the detailed relationship between precise MX2 structure and electrochemical properties in each engineering stage should be established.
(3) Development of promising MX2 based materials for AMIBs with a long-life span, high rate performance, high security, low cost, and wide operating temperature range. These properties, which are mainly determined by the charge storage mechanism, are essential for practical application of TMDs. The charge storage mechanism of TMDs is affected by the electrical conductivity, ionic diffusion kinetics, and structural stability. Further efforts are needed to optimize the rational synthesis of TMDs. Only partially reversible conversion has been achieved until now. Therefore, it is highly desirable to simultaneously optimize all factors for achieving the fully reversible conversion reactions, which are essential for practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21576202, 51771136, and 51972225). S. Z. Qiao gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the Discovery Project and Linkage Project programs (FL170100154, DP160104866 and LP160100927). B. Chen thanks the China Scholarship Council for support. B. Chen also thanks the support of schematic image production from Huanxiong Liu at Tianjin University.
References
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, F. Shen, C. Bommier, H. Zhu, X. Ji and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Pramudita, D. Sehrawat, D. Goonetilleke and N. Sharma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602911 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Zhang, W. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700571 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1978, 12, 41–99 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, D. Chen, R. S. Ruoff and G. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600025 CrossRef .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 RSC .
T. Wang, S. Chen, H. Pang, H. Xue and Y. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2016, 4, 1600289 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Meng, J. Sha, C. Zhong, W. Hu and N. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 34–68 RSC .
S. Wu, Y. Du and S. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 189–207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, W. Lei, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 408–423 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Yu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Small Methods, 2016, 1, 1600020 CrossRef .
Q. Yun, Q. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 626–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Meng, F. Xie, F. He, C. He, K. Davey, N. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804116 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chen, W. Chen, L. Ma, G. Ji, K. Chang and J. Y. Lee, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8816–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1190–1209 RSC .
N. Choudhary, M. A. Islam, J. H. Kim, T.-J. Ko, A. Schropp, L. Hurtado, D. Weitzman, L. Zhai and Y. Jung, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 16–40 CrossRef CAS .
U. Gupta and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 49–65 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O’Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965–1974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, D. Voiry, J. Yang, H. S. Shin and P. K. Loh, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 585–591 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, J. Zhan, L. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703482 CrossRef .
Y. Jiao, A. M. Hafez, D. Cao, A. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Ma and H. Zhu, Small, 2018, 14, e1800640 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. Rasamani, F. Alimohammadi and Y. Sun, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Cao, Q. Yang and L. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602684 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3301–3338 RSC .
C. Zhu, D. Gao, J. Ding, D. Chao and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4332–4356 RSC .
H. Li, X. Jia, Q. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1510–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu and J. Li, Science, 2014, 346, 1344–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, G.-H. Nam, Q. He, X.-J. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, F.-R. Ran, X. Wang, H. Li, X. Huang, B. Li, Q. Xiong, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Gu, Y. Du, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Song, C. Park and H. C. Choi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7495–7514 RSC .
E. Torun, H. Sahin, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and F. M. Peeters, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 074307 CrossRef .
M. Rahman, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606129 CrossRef .
H.-X. Zhong, S. Gao, J.-J. Shi and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 115438 CrossRef .
B. Jariwala, D. Voiry, A. Jindal, B. A. Chalke, R. Bapat, A. Thamizhavel, M. Chhowalla, M. Deshmukh and A. Bhattacharya, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3352–3359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, X. Zhu, J. Feng, C. Wu, S. Hu, J. Peng, Y. Guo, L. Peng, J. Zhao, J. Huang, J. Yang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5144–5151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, K. Bustillo, K. Niu, C. Gammer, J. Xu and H. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5214–5220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang and A. T. S. Wee, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 022001 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tongay, H. Sahin, C. Ko, A. Luce, W. Fan, K. Liu, J. Zhou, Y.-S. Huang, C.-H. Ho, J. Yan, D. F. Ogletree, S. Aloni, J. Ji, S. Li, J. Li, F. M. Peeters and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3252 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang and L. Fu, Chem, 2018, 5, 505–525 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. Tan, R. G. Mendes, Z. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Kong, Y. Xue, M. H. Rümmeli, X. Wu, S. Chen and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2616–2623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802938 CrossRef .
Q. Li, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, J. Kang, X. Liu, C. Wolverton, M. C. Hersam, J. Wu and V. P. Dravid, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7875–7882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, A. Yang, X. Wu, J. van de Groep, P. Tang, S. Li, B. Liu, F. Shi, J. Wan, Q. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Lu, X. Zheng, G. Zhou, C.-L. Wu, S.-C. Zhang, M. L. Brongersma, J. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mao, C. Cui, M. Wu, M. Zhang, T. Gao, X. Fan, J. Chen, T. Wang, J. Ma and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, X. Shen, M. Tian, R. Yu, Z. Wang and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, C. Hua, X. Guo, Y. Hu, Z. Wang, X. Gao, F. Wu, J. Wang and L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 81, 155–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Sun, J. Kang, J. Feng, H. A. Bechtel, L.-W. Wang, E. J. Cairns and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1466–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Xu, W. Wang and X. Bai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6693–6697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Wang, R. Shao, J. Zou, R. Cai, J. Lin, C. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Xu, J. Cao, J. Feng, J. Qi and P. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 560–568 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiong, H. Wang, X. Liu, J. Sun, M. Brongersma, E. Pop and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6777–6784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Y. Tang, W. R. Leow, H. Xia, Z. Lv, J. Wei, X. Ge, S. Cao, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Xi, Y. Du and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J.-S. Kim, J.-W. Park, T.-H. Nam, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, G. Wang and H.-J. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Shen, Z. Wang, R. Yu and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11394–11400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and K. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11296–11301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mortazavi, C. Wang, J. Deng, V. B. Shenoy and N. V. Medhekar, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Yao, J. Wu, S. Mitra, S. Hao, T. S. Sahu, Y. Li, C. Wolverton and V. P. Dravid, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 342–349 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Yu, C. Ling, J. Bhattacharya, J. C. Thomas, K. Thornton and A. Van der Ven, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1760–1768 RSC .
X. Ren, Q. Zhao, W. D. McCulloch and Y. Wu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1313–1321 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fan, X. Zou, H. Du, L. Gan, C. Xu, W. Lv, Y.-B. He, Q.-H. Yang, F. Kang and J. Li, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13599–13605 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Meng, Y. Wei, Y. Zhao, Q. Pang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21370–21377 RSC .
D. B. Putungan, S.-H. Lin and J.-L. Kuo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18754–18762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sun, Q. Wei, J. Sheng, C. Shi, Q. An, S. Liu and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Q. Pang, Y. Gao, Y. Wei, C. Wang, G. Chen and F. Du, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Zhao, R. Lian, D. Yang, D. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Liu, Y. Wei and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15985–15992 RSC .
C. Ding, T. Huang, Y. Tao, D. Tan, Y. Zhang, F. Wang, F. Yu and Q. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21010–21017 RSC .
E. Hitz, J. Wan, A. Patel, Y. Xu, L. Meshi, J. Dai, Y. Chen, A. Lu, A. V. Davydov and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11390–11395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, L. Cheng, N. Han, F. Zhao, P. Li, C. Jin and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, J. Han, Q. Ma, R. Zhan, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu and M. Xu, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 9807–9811 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, W. Tang, K. Leng, Z. Chen, S. J. R. Tan, C. Peng, G.-H. Ning, W. Fu, C. Su, G. W. Zheng and K. P. Loh, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1835–1840 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Zou, S. Chen, G. Zhou, J. Bai, P. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Yu, J. Li, Y.-S. Hu and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 216–222 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, H. Shu, Z. Shen, H. Hu, J. Wang and X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2139–2146 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ou, X. Xiong, F. Zheng, C. Yang, Z. Lin, R. Hu, C. Jin, Y. Chen and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 410–416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Subramanian, G. K. Veerasubramani, M.-S. Park and D.-W. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A598–A604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, X. Guo, Y. Mao, C. Hua, L. Shen, Y. Hu, Z. Wang, F. Wu and L. Chen, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 1013–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-X. Wang, S.-L. Chou, D. Wexler, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9607–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, J. Zou, L. Cao, Z. Li, S. Gu, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Liu and Z. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5067–5072 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Sun, Q. Wei, H. Ju, J. Feng, J. Zhu, L. Mai, E. J. Cairns and J. Guo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 494001 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, L. Wang, M. Yang, J. Wu, F. Chen, W. Huang, N. Han, H. Ye, F. Zhao, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702061 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Feng, F. Lv, J. Zhou, C. Lin, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Wang, J. Li and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800036 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shu, F. Li, C. Hu, P. Liang, D. Cao and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2918–2926 RSC .
B. Chen, Y. Meng, F. He, E. Liu, C. Shi, C. He, L. Ma, Q. Li, J. Li and N. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zai, S. Xiang, Y. Liu, X. He, Z. Xu, K. Wang, Z. Ma and X. Qian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601056 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, R. Zhao, Q. Wu, W. Li, C. Shen, L. Ni, H. Yan, G. Diao and M. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8429–8436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Luo, T. Gao, A. Langrock, A. C. Mignerey and C. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 473–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502161 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Q. Qu, G. Li, T. Gao, F. Qian, J. Shao, W. Liu, Q. Shi and H. Zheng, Small, 2016, 12, 6033–6041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, H. Lu, J. Zhou, C. Ye, C. Shi, N. Zhao and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702909 CrossRef .
Q. Pan, Q. Zhang, F. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Li, X. Ou, X. Xiong, C. Yang and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12578–12586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie, K. Yuan, X. Li, W. Lu, C. Shen, C. Liang, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and B. Wei, Small, 2017, 13, 1701471 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, H. Li, H. Liu, X. Wang, F. Xie, Y. Deng, W. Hu, K. Davey, N. Zhao and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901146 CrossRef .
J. B. Cook, H.-S. Kim, Y. Yan, J. S. Ko, S. Robbennolt, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501937 CrossRef .
B. Chen, N. Zhao, L. Guo, F. He, C. Shi, C. He, J. Li and E. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12895–12905 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Zhang, C. Shi, E. Liu, J. Li, N. Zhao and C. He, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3837–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Qin, N. Zhao, C. Shi, E.-Z. Liu, F. He, J. Li and C. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8734–8741 RSC .
B. Chen, N. Zhao, C. Wei, J. Zhou, F. He, C. Shi, C. He and E. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 401, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. González, R. Alcántara, J. L. Tirado, A. J. Fielding and R. A. W. Dryfe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5886–5895 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Z. Wang and Y. Q. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, A. Banwait, S. Grixti, N. Koratkar and C. V. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5373–5384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ouyang, C. Ling, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Shi and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4390–4396 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, Z. Xu, J. Huang, M. Ma, L. Fu, X. Shen, J. Li and M. Fu, Small, 2019, 15, 1805405 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ye, Y. Gong, J. Lin, B. Li, Y. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ai, C. Ruan, M. Shen and L. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5542–5549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, P. Liang, Z. Chen, L. Bai, H. Shen, X. Liu, X. Xia, Y. Zhao, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10211–10219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Z. Wei, C. Wang and J. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 285, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, F. Bahmani, M. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Zhang, F. Liang, S. H. Kazemi, U. Kaiser, G. Meng and Y. Lei, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 202–207 RSC .
B. Chen, E. Liu, F. He, C. Shi, C. He, J. Li and N. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 541–549 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, E. Liu, T. Cao, F. He, C. Shi, C. He, L. Ma, Q. Li, J. Li and N. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Fan, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34777–34787 RSC .
L. Zhang, W. Fan and T. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 43130–43140 RSC .
B. Chen, H. Lu, N. Zhao, C. Shi, E. Liu, C. He and L. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2018, 387, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, B. Li, Y. Xue, J. Li, Y. Zhang and F. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19445–19454 RSC .
J. Shuai, H. D. Yoo, Y. Liang, Y. Li, Y. Yao and L. C. Grabow, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3, 064001 CrossRef .
N. Zheng, G. Jiang, X. Chen, J. Mao, Y. Zhou and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9305–9315 RSC .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, B. Qiu, S. Zhou, M. Zhang, H. Huang, B. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702486 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Wu, Z. Zhou, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2221–2227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, L. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Cheng, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12794–12798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Yu, Y. Chen, P. Gao, C. Li and C. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21880–21885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, K. Rui, C. Zhang, Z. Ma, J. Xu, W. Sun, W. Zhang, J. Zhu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40317–40323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, G. Wang, X. Liu, X. Zheng and H. Wang, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 3603–3618 CrossRef .
T. Xiang, Q. Fang, H. Xie, C. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, D. Liu, S. Chen, A. Khalil, S. Tao, Q. Liu and L. Song, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6975–6983 RSC .
Y. Cai, H. Yang, J. Zhou, Z. Luo, G. Fang, S. Liu, A. Pan and S. Liang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 522–529 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, R. Bi, G. Liu, Y. Tian and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26982–26989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Zhen, H. Liu and C. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 3069–3076 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Wu, M. Zhou, L. Liu, Y. Dong, Q. Fu, M. Wu and Y. Lei, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 3099–3105 RSC .
K. Zhang, P. Li, S. Guo, J. Y. Jeong, B. Jin, X. Li, S. Zhang, H. Zeng and J. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22513–22518 RSC .
Q. Wei, M.-R. Gao, Y. Li, D. Zhang, S. Wu, Z. Chen and Y. Sun, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1441–1448 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, H. Kang, M. Shang, L. Jiao and J. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 11878–11884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiang, S. Tao, W. Xu, Q. Fang, C. Wu, D. Liu, Y. Zhou, A. Khalil, Z. Muhammad, W. Chu, Z. Wang, H. Xiang, Q. Liu and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6483–6491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. Wu, T. Liu, W. Kang and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24859–24866 RSC .
W. Wang, B. Jiang, C. Qian, F. Lv, J. Feng, J. Zhou, K. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801812 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, R. R. Gaddam, N. A. Kumar and X. S. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700317 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Zhao and G. Dong, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Hu, F. Qin, P. Zhang, L. Zou, H. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. Lai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14004–14010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Guo, B. Liu, M. Liang, Z. Lv, K. R. Adair and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707480 CrossRef .
H. Liu, B. Liu, H. Guo, M. Liang, Y. Zhang, T. Borjigin, X. Yang, L. Wang and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 639–648 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-T. Shi, W. Kang, J. Xu, Y.-W. Sun, M. Jiang, T.-W. Ng, H.-T. Xue, D. Y. W. Yu, W. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 27–37 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, T. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Chang, L. Ma, F. Huang, D. Chen and J. Y. Lee, Small, 2013, 9, 3693–3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jing, G. Lian, F. Niu, J. Yang, Q. Wang, D. Cui, C.-P. Wong and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 546–555 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, J.-G. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Hua, Y. Li and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13419–13427 RSC .
S. Zhang, B. V. R. Chowdari, Z. Wen, J. Jin and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12464–12472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. Zhang, Q. Sun, S. Li, M. Norouzi Banis, X. Han, Q. Dong, J. Yang, G. Wang, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, X. Yu, J. Zhao, W. Zhao, R. Xu, Y. Liu and H. Shen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15558–15565 RSC .
P. Ge, H. Hou, C. E. Banks, C. W. Foster, S. Li, Y. Zhang, J. He, C. Zhang and X. Ji, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 310–323 CrossRef .
S. Liu, W. Lei, Y. Liu and W.-H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Qin, L. Zou, M. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Lai and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12189–12195 RSC .
C. Zhao, J. Kong, L. Yang, X. Yao, S. L. Phua and X. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9672–9675 RSC .
R. Wang, S. Wang, D. Jin, Y. Zhang, Y. Cai, J. Ma and L. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 195–205 CrossRef .
X. Hu, Y. Li, G. Zeng, J. Jia, H. Zhan and Z. Wen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1592–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, L. Xu, X. Xu, X. Zhou and L. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 504, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X. Yao, J. Yin, G. Peng, P. Cui and X. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7938–7943 RSC .
S. Gong, G. Zhao, P. Lyu and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1187–1195 RSC .
Q. Zhu, C. Zhao, Y. Bian, C. Mao, H. Peng, G. Li and K. Chen, Synth. Met., 2018, 235, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Su, R. Zhou, B. Sun, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Miao, P.-P. Wang, Y.-C. Xiao, H.-T. Fang, L. Zhen and C.-Y. Xu, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33741–33748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Kang, D. Cao, C. Li, D. Cao, Z. Kang, D. Sun, R. Wang and Y. Cao, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801222 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Du, Z. Guo, S. Wang, R. Zeng, Z. Chen and H. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1106–1108 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Liang, F. C. Robles Hernandez, H. Deog Yoo, Q. An and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, D. Ren, H. Wang, Y. Hu, S. Guo, H. Yuan, P. Hu, L. Zhang and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3687–3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, P. Saha, Q. Cheng and C. Li, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 174, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Dong, Y. Liu, X. Wang and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32324–32332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, N. Li, X. Zhao and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5383–5389 RSC .
L. Chen, F. Chen, N. Tronganh, M. Lu, Y. Jiang, Y. Gao, Z. Jiao, L. Cheng and B. Zhao, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 3151–3160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Q. Wei, X. Xu, C. Shi, X. Liu, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13696–13702 RSC .
J. Duan, G. Qin, L. Min, Y. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38084–38092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Feng, R. Meng, L. Zu, Y. Feng, C. Peng, J. Huang, G. Liu, B. Chen and J. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1372 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Kumar, W. Li, M. Choi, S. M. Kim and J. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 285, 517–527 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, W. Qiao, X. He, X. Guo, L. Xi, W. Zhong and Y. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 012408 CrossRef .
B. Xu, L. Wang, H. J. Chen, J. Zhao, G. Liu and M. S. Wu, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 93, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, W. Zhao, R. Xu, D. Wang, B. Li, X. Zhou and H. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, S. Wang, C. Xiong and G. Hu, Carbon, 2018, 133, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, B. Wang, X. Zhao, G. Wang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 187, 55–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Zhan, K. Wu, Z. Li, L. Wang, B. Geng, L. Wang and D. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14061–14069 RSC .
X. Lin, D. Xue, L. Zhao, F. Zong, X. Duan, X. Pan, J. Zhang and Q. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 483–491 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Duan, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Yang and B. Lu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 37–45 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Wang, C. Yu, X. Yan, Q. Liu, B. Xu and L.-m. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 262, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, Y. Jiao, Y. Han, A. Mukhopadhyay, L. Yang and H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702998 CrossRef .
W.-j. Tang, X.-l. Wang, D. Xie, X.-h. Xia, C.-d. Gu and J.-p. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18318–18324 RSC .
Y. Jiao, A. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Ma, L. Yang, A. M. Hafez and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702779 CrossRef .
J. Lu, G. Xia, S. Gong, C. Wang, P. Jiang, Z. Lin, D. Wang, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12613–12622 RSC .
W. Ding, L. Hu, J. Dai, X. Tang, R. Wei, Z. Sheng, C. Liang, D. Shao, W. Song, Q. Liu, M. Chen, X. Zhu, S. Chou, X. Zhu, Q. Chen, Y. Sun and S. X. Dou, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1694–1702 CAS .
P. Li, Y. Yang, S. Gong, F. Lv, W. Wang, Y. Li, M. Luo, Y. Xing, Q. Wang and S. Guo, Nano Res., 2018, 12, 2218–2223 CrossRef .
K. Leng, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Tang, B. Tian, C. T. Nai, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9208–9215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, C. Sun, M. Yang, G. Zhao, S. Wang, F. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Shao, Y. Wu, B. Huang and X. Hao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 716, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, C. Sun, M. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Shao, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Jin, L. Zhang, Z. Wen and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4010–4018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Mahmood, S. K. Park, K. D. Kwon, S. J. Chang, J. Y. Hong, G. Shen, Y. M. Jung, T. J. Park, S. W. Khang, W. S. Kim, J. Kong and H. S. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501115 CrossRef .
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai, L. Nurdiwijayanto and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 997–1005 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jin, N. Liu, B. Chen and D. Mei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 28215–28224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cai, J. He, Q. Liu, T. Yao, L. Chen, W. Yan, F. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao, T. Hu, Z. Sun and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Paz and J. J. Palacios, 2D Mater., 2016, 4, 015014 CrossRef .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, K. Prasanna, K. Karuppasamy, J. Jung and H.-S. Kim, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 833, 333–339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kutana, E. S. Penev and B. I. Yakobson, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5820–5825 RSC .
F. Ersan, G. Gökoğlu and E. Aktürk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28648–28653 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barik and S. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25837–25848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Tang and X. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 931–937 RSC .
G. Cai, L. Peng, S. Ye, Y. Huang, G. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9837–9843 RSC .
S. Wang, B. Liu, G. Zhi, X. Gong, Z. Gao and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 424–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Kang, M. Jiang, Y. You, Y. Cao, T.-W. Ng, D. Y. W. Yu, C.-S. Lee and J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1484–1490 RSC .
G. Jia, D. Chao, N. H. Tiep, Z. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 136–142 CrossRef .
Z. T. Shi, W. Kang, J. Xu, L. L. Sun, C. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Q. Yu, D. Y. W. Yu, W. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Small, 2015, 11, 5667–5674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Shao, H. Geng, Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, M. Ulaganathan, Z. Dai, B. Li, Y. Zong, X. Dong, Q. Yan and W. Huang, Small, 2017, 13, 1702181 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chaturvedi, P. Hu, C. Kloc, Y.-S. Lee, V. Aravindan and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19819–19825 RSC .
J. Li, H. Yan, W. Wei and L. Meng, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 15148–15154 RSC .
Q. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Yu, J. Ge, H. Zhang and B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9411–9419 RSC .
J. Xu, L. Dong, H. Tang and C. Li, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 7803–7809 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Woo, L. Yadgarov, R. Rosentsveig, Y. Park, D. Song, R. Tenne and S. Y. Hong, Isr. J. Chem., 2015, 55, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, H.-P. Komsa, Y. Niimi, A. V. Krasheninnikov, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2857–2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun and Z. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 455, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, W. Lei, D. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1440–1445 RSC .
S. Wang, B. Liu, G. Zhi, X. Gong and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 954–963 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiuhong, W. Xia, W. Zhenjun, H. Jia, L. Dongdong, W. Qiang and W. Shuangyin, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 175402 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tao, J. He, T. Shen, Y. Hao, J. Yan, Z. Huang, X. Xu, M. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900460 CrossRef .
S. Gong, G. Zhao, P. Lyu and K. Sun, Small, 2018, 14, 1803344 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, W. Wu, Z. Pan, X. Wu and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 763, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia and Q. Tan, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 779, 156–166 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhandavat, L. David and G. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1523–1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Tao, T. Li, S. Du, J. Li, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35206–35215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, H. J. Kim, J. T. Lee, G. W. Chang, X. Shi, W. Kim, M. Ma, K. j. Kong, J. M. Choi, M. S. Song and J. H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2489–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Q. Zhu, T. Chen, W. Chen, J. Ye and J. Huang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219, 399–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chu, Q. Yu, D. Yang, L. Xing, C.-Y. Lao, M. Wang, K. Han, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Du, K. Xi, Y. Bao and W. Wang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 13, 344–351 CrossRef .
D. Z. Kong, Y. Wang, Y. Von Lim, S. Z. Huang, J. Zhang, B. Liu, T. P. Chen and H. Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 460–470 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, G. Li, J. Dong, Q. Sun and X. Meng, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1587–1593 RSC .
M. Sakthivel, R. Sukanya, S.-M. Chen and B. Dinesh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12474–12484 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Biao Chen
	Biao Chen is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Naiqin Zhao at Tianjin University and Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao at the University of Adelaide. He received his BS degree from Tianjin University in 2013. His current research is focused on nanostructure design, fabrication and properties for energy and environment applications, including lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, photocatalysis, and solar cells.

Dongliang Chao
	Dongliang Chao obtained his PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) on January 2017. He joined the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA, USA) in 2016 as a joint-researcher. Dr Chao continued serving as a Research Fellow at NTU from January 2017. He is currently a Research Fellow at the University of Adelaide (UoA, Australia), working on materials for next-generation safe and low-cost energy storage.

Enzuo Liu
	Enzuo Liu is an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Tianjin University (China). Prior to joining Tianjin University in 2009, he completed his PhD in physics at Tsinghua University (China), in 2007, and worked in Prof. Jianzhong Jiang's group at Zhejiang University (China) as a postdoc. His research aims at improving the properties of nanocomposite through interface engineering.

Mietek Jaroniec
	Mietek Jaroniec received his PhD degree from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. Since 1991, he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State, he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University. His research interests revolve around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State, he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.

Naiqin Zhao
	Naiqin Zhao is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University. She obtained her BSc and PhD from Tianjin University. She was a visiting scholar at Illinois Institute of Technology and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; and a visiting professor at Tohoku University and Vanderbilt University. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and characteristics of carbon nanophases and their applications in structural composites and energy storage fields.

Shi-Zhang Qiao
	Shi-Zhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor and Australian Laureate Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials of the University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 398 papers in refereed journals with over 45900 citations (h-index 112). Dr Qiao is a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society).

Broader context
Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been widely studied as promising anode materials for alkali metal ion batteries (AMIBs) in recent years, since they exhibit high Li+, Na+, and K+ diffusion speed ascribed to their layered structure and they have high theoretical capacity based on the four-electron transfer reaction under a low cutoff voltage. Even though numerous efforts have been devoted to the development of various architectures and composites of TMDs for enhancing the performance of AMIBs, the charge storage mechanisms have not been systematically discussed and highlighted. In addition, the intrinsic structure of TMDs, including surface defects, interlayer spacing expansion, phase control, alloying, and heteroatom doping, also shows an important effect on the charge storage mechanisms and electrochemical performance of AMIBs. This review summarizes the progress in the development of strategies for intrinsic structure engineering and highlights the corresponding charge storage mechanisms by combining computational and experimental approaches. The “intrinsic structure–electrochemical properties–storage mechanisms” relationships have been elucidated to provide a critical analysis and reliable mechanistic understanding.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the emerging strategies for tuning the intrinsic structure of TMDs.	 


4	Ti	1T/semiconducting	
11 and 12
	1T/semiconducting	
11 and 12
	1T/semiconducting	
11 and 12

5	V	1T/metal	
11 and 12
	1T/metal	
11 and 12
	—	—
5	Nb	2H/metal	
12 and 45
	2H/metal	
12 and 41
	1T/metal	
12 and 45

6	Mo	2H/semiconducting	
12 and 45
	2H/semiconducting	
12 and 41
	2H/semiconducting	
12 and 45

6	W	2H/semiconducting	
12 and 45
	2H/semiconducting	
12 and 41
	1T′/semiconducting	
45 and 47

7	Re	1T′/semiconducting	
48 and 49
	1T′/semiconducting	
45 and 46
	—	—

 	Fig. 2  Atomistic structures of monolayer TMDs. (a) 1H-MX2 having hexagonal symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. (b) 1T-MX2 having tetragonal symmetry with octahedral coordination. (c) 1T′-MX2 having distorted tetragonal symmetry with distorted octahedral coordination. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 43. Copyright 2014, Science. Schematic illustration of multilayer TMDs. (d) 2H-MX2 having hexagonal symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. (e) 3R-MX2 having rhombohedral symmetry with trigonal prismatic coordination. Reproduced with permission from: (d and e) ref. 45. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Summary of electrochemical storage mechanisms for MX2 in AIMBs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Enlarged XRD patterns of the fully charged MoS2 electrodes after cycling under different voltages for one cycle. The peaks marked with “♦” in (a) correspond to the Para film. (b–e) Corresponding TEM images with contrast profiles along the arrow-direction indicating the average interlayer distance. (f) Scheme for the structural changes and lithium storage performance of MoS2 cycled in different voltage windows. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical sodiation process in MoS2 starting from the original 2H-MoS2 structure (a, x = 0); the sodiation proceeds through a phase transition from the 2H to 1T structure (b, x = 0.625) by S ion shifting and reordering. Further sodiation occurs via two intermediate phases (c, x = 0.75), (d, x = 1.0) by Na ion ordering with intact Mo and S backbones. The Mo–S layers start to collapse when more than 1.5 Na ions are inserted (e, x = 1.75). Na ion intercalation stops and the sodiation reaction switches to the conversion style with the final phase (f, x = 3.0) featuring Na2S and isolated Mo atoms. (g) Simulated voltage profile of MoS2 through the intermediate phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Formation entropies and Li binding energies as the descriptors for evaluating the Li intercalation mechanism for MX2 electrode materials in LIBs. The spheres and squares denote the data for MX2 bulk and bilayers, respectively. The shadow and unfilled regions represent the lithiation of MX2 structures followed by the reversible intercalation reaction mechanism and irreversible conversion reaction mechanism, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. First two-cycle charge–discharge curves (b) and the corresponding in situ XRD patterns collected at the selected charged/discharged states between 0.01 and 3.0 V at 0.1 A g−1 (c) of the exfoliated Nb2S nanosheet based anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  CV plots of the MoS2 electrode with a cutoff voltage of (a) 0.05 V and (b) 0.8 V. Ex situ XRD patterns (c) and Raman spectra (d) of MoS2 electrodes at different states as labeled. (e) Atomic vibration direction of different Raman modes for MoS2. (f) The proposed electrochemical reaction mechanism for the MoS2 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of reversible Li+ storage in VS2 nanosheets (a), Na+ storage in VS2 nanosheet assemblies (b), and K+ storage in VSe2 nanosheets (c). (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of the VSe2 nanosheet electrodes at the different states (D: state of discharge, C: state of charge). HRTEM images of the VSe2 nanosheet electrodes at the (e) original, (f) discharged (0.5 V), (g) fully discharged (0.01 V), and (h) fully charged (2.6 V) states. Reproduced with permission from: (a) ref. 95. Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing; (b) ref. 96. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (c–h) ref. 97. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Snapshots of trajectories for lithiated (a) 2H-MoS2, (b) graphene/2H-MoS2 and (c) graphene/2H-MoS2/graphene composites following 6 ps AIMD simulations at 300 K. The formed LixSy species are labeled by circles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. CV curves measured for (d) 2H-MoS2, (e) NDG/2H-MoS2 and (f) NDG/2H-MoS2/NDG at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The CV profiles of MoS2/C composites at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 (the inset is for an overview of the composites and pure carbon). The HRTEM images of MoS2/C-66 discharged to 0.01 V (b), recharged to 0.50 V (c), 0.75 V (d), 1.50 V (e), and 3.00 V (f) after initially discharged to 0.01 V. The insets in (e) and (f) are for the corresponding line profile of contrast along the blue line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) In situ XRD patterns of the MoS2/C MTs anode operated at different states of charge against the voltage during the initial cycle. (h) Proposed schematic atomistic models of the illustrated reaction mechanism for the MoS2 anode during the sodiation and desodiation processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Optimized atomistic configurations of vacancy defects in 2H-MoS2 monolayers. (b) The adsorption energies of Li adsorbed on different sites around the point defect and the most stable adsorption configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) The pathways of the lowest Na+ diffusion barrier across (I) the perfect MoS2 monolayer, (II) defective MoS2 with one vacancy, and (III) two vacancies and their corresponding potential energy curves. The purple, yellow, and green balls represent Mo, S, and Na, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) HRTEM images of BD-MoS2. Comparison of (c) charge/discharge profile, (e) rate capacity, and (d) cycle performance for the BD-MoS2 and pristine MoS2 electrodes. (f) Z′ as a function of ω−1/2 in the semi-infinite region for the calculation of the Warburg coefficient (σw). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic representation of the synthesis of UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2. HRTEM images of (h) UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 and (i) UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2. Nyquist plots of (j) UT-TiO2/C@DP-MoS2 and (k) UT-TiO2/C@DR-MoS2 electrodes in the second discharge process at 0.1 A g−1 over the frequency range from 100 kHz to 100 mHz. (c) Linear fits of the relationship between Z′ and ω−1/2 in the low-frequency region at 1.71 V. The inset in (l) is the corresponding equivalent circuit model of the system studied. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Top and front views of M (M = Na, Li) intercalation geometries in 2H-MoS2 at (a) the octahedral Oh site above the center of a hexagon, and (b) the tetrahedral Th site above a Mo atom. (c) Main diffusion path between Oh sites via a Th site in 2H-MoS2 layers. The teal, olive, and violet spheres denote Mo, S and M atoms, respectively. The spacing between any two layers is equivalent to half of the lattice constant c as indicated. (d and e) Relative energy along the diffusion coordinate from Oh to Th with respect to the species M intercalated at the most stable Oh position in 2H-MoS2 with the indicated lattice constant c. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, IOP. (f) Top and side views of the optimized MoS2/MoS2 interface (the blue dotted line indicates the K+ diffusion path). (g) Energy profiles along the diffusion path in the selected interlayer spacings of 2H-MoS2/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


4.2.2.1 Hydro-/solvo-thermal method
NH4+	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	Excess thiourea	6.7	
137 (2014)
NH4+	MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h	Excess urea	9.68–11.0	
138 (2015)
NH4+	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	Excess thioacetamide	9.8	
139 (2017)
NH4+	MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h (+700 °C for 1 h in 5% H2/Ar)	Excess L-cysteine	7.1	
140 (2017)
NH4+	MoS2: 220 °C for 3 days	Excess thiourea	9.8	
141 (2017)
NH4+	MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+700 °C for 2 h in Ar)	Excess thiocarbamide	6.56	
142 (2017)
NH4+	MoS2: 220 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in 8% H2/Ar)	Excess L-cysteine	6.6	
143 (2018)
NH4+	MoS2: 160 °C for 24 h	Excess thiourea	10	
145 (2018)
NH4+	MoS2: microwave at 250 °C	Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate	9.4	
147 (2018)
NH4+	MoS2: 210 °C for 24 h	Excess thiourea	9.1	
126 (2019)
NH4+	WS2: 200 °C for 12 h	Ammonium paratungstate	10.3	
148 (2015)
NH4+	MoSe2: 220 °C for 2 days	Excess selenourea	10.0	
149 (2017)
NH4+	MoSe2: 190 °C for 6 h	Excess octylamine (OA)	10.0	
150 (2017)
NH4+	MoSe2: 250 °C for 1 h (+550 °C for 2 h in Ar)	Excess OA	8.5	
151 (2015)
Carbon	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h (+450 °C for 2 h in 5% H2/N2)	Glucose	10.0	
152 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h	Glycerol	9.8	
153 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h	Glycerin	9.3	
106 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+700 °C for 2 h in N2)	Ethylenediamine	9.2	
134 (2019)
Carbon	MoSe2: 200 °C (+500 °C for 5 h in N2)	Ethylenediamine	10.2	
155 (2018)
Carbon	MoSe2: 200 °C for 12 h	Ethylenediamine	11.5	
156 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: 190 °C for 8 h (+700 °C for 1 h in 5% H2/Ar)	OA	9.8	
157 (2016)
Carbon	MoS2: 240 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 2 h in N2)	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide	10.4	
158 (2013)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in N2)	Pyrrole	10.3	
159 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: 220 °C for 18 h	Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)	7.07	
161 (2015)
Carbon	MoS2: 190 °C for 18 h (+500 °C for 3 h in N2)	PVP	13.4	
162 (2017)
Carbon	MoSe2: 180 °C for 12 h (+500 °C in Ar)	PVP	8.7	
164 (2018)
Carbon	ReS2: 240 °C for 18 h	PVP	7.4	
165 (2019)
Carbon	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 2 h in Ar)	Polyvinyl alcohol	8.6	
166 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h (+700 °C for 3 h in Ar)	Polydopamine (PDA)	10.2	
167 (2014)
Carbon	MoS2: 200 °C for 24 h (+500 °C for 4 h in Ar)	PDDA	9.9	
168 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: 210 °C for 12 h (+800 °C for 2 h in 5% H2/Ar)	Poly(allylamine hydrochloride)	6.9	
169 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: 240 °C for 24 h (+800 °C for 3 h in 5% H2/N2)	Polyquaternium-10	6.42	
170 (2016)
O	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	Precursor molar ratio of S:Mo = 2:1	6.8	
171 (2015)
O	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	Precursor molar ratio of S:Mo = 2:1	9.7	
172 (2019)


4.2.2.2 CVT method
Carbon	MoS2: MoOx/aniline and sulfur at 650 °C for 5 h	Aniline	10.2	
173 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: MoOx/PMA and sulfur at 600 °C for 5 h	Phosphomolybdic acid (PMA)	6.6	
174 (2012)
Carbon	MoS2: ATTM/PDA at 400 °C for 2 h + 700 °C for 2 h	PDA	7.2	
175 (2016)
Carbon	MoS2: GO/MoOx/PDA and sulfur at 500 °C for 3 h	PDA	7.5	
135 (2018)
Carbon	MoSe2: PPy-PMo12@TiO2 and selenium at 700 °C for 2 h	Polypyrrole-phosphomolybdic (PPy)	12.6	
176 (2019)


4.2.2.3 Exfoliation–restacking method
Li+	MoS2: LixMoS2 hydrothermal at 160 °C for 48 h	Residual Li	6.35	
177 (2010)
PEO	MoS2: LixMoS2 and PEO mixed and centrifuged	Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)	14.5	
178 (2015)


4.2.2.4 Template-intercalation method
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/OA and dopamine stirred (+850 °C for 2 h in Ar)	PDA-OA	9.8	
179 (2015)
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/OA and dopamine stirred (+800 °C for 2 h in Ar)	PDA-OA	9.9	
180 (2017)
Carbon	MoSe2: MoSe2/OA and dopamine stirred (+800 °C for in N2)	PDA-OA	7.0	
181 (2016)
PANI-OA	MoS2: MoS2/OA and aniline stirred	PANI-OA	10.8	
182 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ immersed in glucose (+800 °C in N2)	Glucose	9.8	
183 (2016)
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and methanol at 180 °C for 24 h	Methanol	8.0	
184 (2017)
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and dopamine stirred (+800 °C in N2)	PDA	9.2	
185 (2018)
Carbon	MoS2: MoS2/NH4+ and PEI stirred (+800 °C for 4 h in Ar)	Polyethyleneimine (PEI)	9.8	
186 (2019)

 	Fig. 14  Illustrations of methods for synthesis of the interlayer-expanded MX2.	 

 	Fig. 15  HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared with (a) 14 mmol and (b) 60 mmol thiourea during the hydrothermal process. (c–h) HRTEM images of MoS2 at different calcination temperatures. HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared at hydrothermal temperatures of (i) 160 °C and (j) 220 °C. HRTEM images of MoS2 (k) before annealing and (l) after annealing at 500 °C. HRTEM images of MoS2 prepared with (m) 0.01 mol L−1 and (n) 0.05 mol L−1 PVP during the hydrothermal process. HRTEM images of MoS2 (o) before annealing and (p) after annealing at 800 °C. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 126. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–h) ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i and j) ref. 158. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH; (k and l) ref. 159. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (m and n) ref. 171. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (o and p) ref. 172. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  The typical atomic structures of 0.67 Li atoms intercalated into (a) non-expanded MoS2 and (b) interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. (c) The formation energies of x Li atoms in non-expanded MoS2 and interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. (d) The OCV profiles with respect to the Li content (x) for non-expanded MoS2 and interlayer-expanded O-MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The energy barrier for Na+ diffusion in bulk bilayer MoS2, monolayer MoS2, and MoS2 with a d-spacing of 7.3 or 10 Å. Insets show the layer distance established (left) and Na+ diffusion path (right). (f) Nyquist plots of MoS2-SA/N-RGO electrodes obtained at the 50th discharge state. (g) Cycling performance of the MoS2-SA/N-RGO and bulk MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Li+ adsorption in MoS2/MoS2, MoS2/G/MoS2, and MoS2/r-G/MoS2 interlayers, respectively. (b and d) The mean square displacement and (c and e) the root-mean-square displacement of Li+/Na+ ions as a function of time of Li+/Na+ diffusion on the pristine MoS2 nanosheets and the MoS2/PANI hybrid nanosheets. (f) Nyquist plots of the MoS2/PANI hybrids, the MoS2@PANI hybrids and the annealed MoS2 nanosheets in LIBs. Electron transport pathways within MoS2 monolayers in pure MoS2 powder (g) and across MoS2 monolayers in the MoS2/NC heteroaerogel (h). Reproduced with permission from: (a) ref. 179. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH; (b–f) ref. 182. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g and h) ref. 186. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The occupation of electrons in Mo 4d orbitals under the crystal fields of 1T phase and 2H phase. (b) Calculated PDOS of 4d states of Mo for the 1T phase and 2H phase. Snapshots of trajectories for lithiated (c) 2H-MoS2 bilayer and (d) 1T-MoS2 bilayer nanosheets following 6 ps AIMD simulations at 300 K. The formed LixSy species are labeled by circles. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 188. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing; (c and d) ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


4.3.2.1 Hydro-/solvo-thermal method
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, P123, and G in AS	MoS2: 230 °C for 24 h	G substrate	—	—	
190 (2016)
H3PMo12O40, CN2H4S, and G in H2O	MoS2: 180 °C for 20 h	G substrate	6.3	89	
191 (2018)
Na2MoO4·2H2O, L-cysteine, and HC in H2O	MoS2: 220 °C for 24 h (+calcination)	NH4+ trapping	6.6	12	
192 (2016)
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, and GO in DMF/H2O	MoS2: 220 °C for 3 days	NH4+ trapping	9.8	73.0	
141 (2017)
Na2MoO4·2H2O, L-cysteine, and CFC in DMF:H2O = 3:2	MoS2: 200 °C for 12 h	NH4+ trapping	8.2–9.1	—	
193 (2017)
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, KSCN, CO(NH2)2, and CFC in H2O	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	NH4+ trapping	8.2–9.1	58.3	
194 (2019)
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, CN2H4S, and GO in H2O	MoS2: 220 °C for 24 h	NH4+ trapping	10.6	70	
195 (2019)
MoCl5, selenourea, and CNF in DMF	MoSe2: 220 °C for 2 days	NH4+ trapping	10.0	78.6	
149 (2017)
Na2MoO4·2H2O, CN2H4S, and PEG in H2O	MoS2: 190 °C for 24 h	C trapping	9.7	69	
196 (2018)
MoO3, C2H5NS, and GF in ethanol	MoS2: 200 °C for 18 h	NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor	6.4	100	
197 (2017)
MoO3, C2H5NS, urea, and CC in ethanol	MoS2: 180 °C for 24 h	NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor	7.7	100	
198 (2018)
MoO3, C2H5NS, urea, and AAO in ethanol	MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h	NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor	7.1	100	
199 (2018)
MoO3, C2H5NS, and ZIF-67 in ethanol	MoS2: 200 °C for 16 h	NH4+ trapping/solid Mo precursor	8.2	100	
200 (2018)
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and CN2H4S in H2O	MoS2: 210 °C for 18 h under magnetic	9 T magnetic field	9.4	100	
201 (2019)
WCl6 and C2H5NS in water	WS2: 210 °C for 24 h under magnetic	8 T magnetic field	—	100	
201 (2019)


4.3.2.2 CVT method
Mo, Co and C based precursor and S power	MoS2: 600 °C for 3 h	Co doping	6.9	-	
202 (2018)


4.3.2.3 2H phase template method
2H-MoS2 and Li in naphthalene-THF	MoS2: stirred and centrifuged	1 Li intercalaiton	—	70	
203 (2016)
2H-MoS2 and Na in naphthalene-THF	MoS2: stirred and centrifuged	1 Na intercalation	—	—	
203 (2016)
2H-MoS2/NH4+ in methanol	MoS2: solvothermal at 180 °C for 24 h	C intercalation	8.0	—	
184 (2017)
2H-MoS2@CC	MoS2: 800 °C for 3 h in NH3	N-Doping	—	—	
204 (2018)
2H-WS2@CFC	WS2: 800 °C for 2 h in NH3	N-Doping	—	—	
205 (2018)
2H-MoSe2 and KMnO4	MoSe2: calcination at 300 and 500 °C, respectively	O-Doping	—	—	
206 (2018)


4.3.2.4 Exfoliation–restacking method
1T-LixMoS2 and PEO in H2O	MoS2: mixed and centrifuged	PEO intercalation	14.5	—	
178 (2015)
1T-MoS2 and GO in H2O	MoS2: sonicated and vacuum filtering	rGO intercalation	—	—	
207 (2016)
1T-MoS2, PDDA-G, and N2H4·H2O in H2O	MoS2: heated and centrifuged	PDDA-G intercalation	20.5	—	
208 (2018)

 	Fig. 19  Illustrations of methods for the synthesis of 1T phase MX2.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the phase transformation energy barrier between the metastable 1T phase and stable 2H phase. High-resolution XPS spectra of Mo 3d of (b) 1T-MoS2/G and (c) MoS2. (d) HRTEM image of the as-prepared 1T-MoS2 nanotube. (e) Raman patterns of the 1T-MoS2 nanotube of a fresh sample, sample after 30 d in air, sample after 120 d in air, and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. (f) X-ray diffraction spectra of the 1T-MoS2 nanotube and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. (g) Phase percentage of 1T-MoS2 under different magnetic fields in magneto-hydrothermal processing. (h) Magnified top-view HAADF-STEM image of MoS2-8T, from which a high fraction of 1T phase is observed and the intensity profiles from the selected areas confirm the 2H and 1T phases. The green area indicates the 1T phase, and the red area indicates the 2H phase. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 191. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (d–f) ref. 199. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (g and h) ref. 201. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the 2H phase and decreased interlayer spacing in MoS2 during the annealing process. (b) Rate capability of the 1T-MoS2/graphene superlattice, control superlattice, and 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. CV of (c) MoS2-PEG and (d) MoS2-PEG-A at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (e) Nyquist plots and (f) rate capability of MoS2-PEG and MoS2-PEG-A. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 208. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c–f) ref. 196. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

1T-MoS2/graphene	89	1163, 820, 700 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, and 2 A g−1, respectively	
191 (2018)
Annealed HC@1T-MoS2	12	943, 735, and 561 mA h g−1 at 0.25, 1, and 4 A g−1, respectively	
192 (2016)
1T-MoS2-PEG	69	866, 733, 537, and 364 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, 5, and 10 A g−1, respectively	
196 (2018)
1T-MoS2/CC	100	680, 386, 276 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, and 2 A g−1, respectively	
198 (2018)
1T-MoS2 nanotube	100	1080, 1020, 875, and 589 mA h g−1 at 0.2, 1, 5, and 20 A g−1, respectively	
199 (2018)

 	Fig. 22  (a) Lowest energy diffusion paths of a single lithium atom and (b) calculated energy profiles along the paths for one Li atom-adsorbed on the MoSxSe2(1−x) monolayer. Schematic representation of the Li diffusion path on Mo1−xWxS2 alloy of x = 0.33 from one top position to another through a hollow site. (c) Bare surface, (d) lithiated surface. The blue, green, yellow, and maroon balls denote Mo, W, S, and Li atoms, respectively. (e) Energy profiles for lithium diffusion on the monolayer Mo1−xWxS2. The blue line indicates a bare surface, and the red line indicates a lithiated surface. Reproduced with permission from: (a and b) ref. 214. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (c–e) ref. 215. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Diffusion path and corresponding (b) diffusion energy profiles for Li on metallic heteroatom-doped monolayer MoS2. The projected DOS for (c) pristine and the case for substitution of Mo with (d) Co in monolayer MoS2. (e) Diffusion path and corresponding (f) diffusion energy profiles for Li on non-metallic heteroatom-doped monolayer MoS2. The projected DOS for monolayer MoS2 with substitution of S (g) N and (h) I. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) XRD patterns, (b) Nyquist plots of MSCF, OMSCF-300, OMSCF-400, and OMSCF-500. (c) XRD pattern of the OMSCF-400 electrode after 60 cycles at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 charged to 3 V. (d) Rate performance of MSCF, OMSCF-300, OMSCF-400, and OMSCF-500. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
