Fluorescent monomers as building blocks for dye labeled polymers : synthesis and application in energy conversion, biolabeling and sensors  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS35478D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS35478D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5366-5407Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFluorescent monomers as building blocks for dye labeled polymers: synthesis and application in energy conversion, biolabeling and sensors

        
          
            Alexander M. 
            Breul
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Martin D. 
            Hager
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Ulrich S. 
            Schubert
          
          
        
      *abc
aLaboratory of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Humboldtstraße 10, 07743 Jena, Germany. E-mail: ulrich.schubert@uni-jena.de; martin.hager@uni-jena.de;  Fax: +49 (0)3641 9482 02;   Tel: +49 (0)3641 9482 00
bJena Center for Soft Matter (JCSM), Friedrich Schiller Universität Jena, Philosophenweg 7, 07743 Jena, Germany
cDutch Polymer Institute (DPI), P.O. Box 902, 5600 AX Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 
      26th November 2012
    First published on 12th March 2013AbstractThis review focuses on side-chain functionalized polymers derived from direct (co)polymerization of fluorescent dyes. This overview about polymerizable dyes includes 1,8-naphthalimides, fluoresceins, rhodamines, coumarins, azo-dyes, oxadiazoles, diverse aromatic dyes as well as selected other dyes that cannot be classified within these groups. The discussed dyes have been functionalized with a polymerizable unit in order to apply straight-forward polymerization procedures. Therefore, the center of attention is set to the optical properties of the polymerizable dyes and the applicable polymerization techniques. Furthermore, the various applications (i.e., in biomedicine and pharmacy, as thermo-responsive materials and energy transfer materials, for dispersion of carbon nanotubes and others) of each polymer are discussed.
Alexander M. Breul
Alexander M. Breul was born in Gera (Germany) in 1986. He studied chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena (Germany), where he graduated in 2010. Since 2010 to date, he has been a PhD student in the group of Prof. Ulrich S. Schubert at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena, where he has been working on the design of polymers with light-harvesting units.
Martin D. Hager
Martin D. Hager was born in Coburg (Germany) and studied chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena (Germany), where he graduated in organic and macromolecular chemistry in 2005. In 2007, he received his PhD in chemistry (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany) for work on conjugated rod–coil polymers under the supervision of Prof. E. Klemm (scholarship of the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie). Subsequently, in 2007 he joined the group of Prof. U. S. Schubert (Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands and then Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany). His research is focused on conjugated polymers for solar-cell applications and self-healing materials.
Ulrich S. Schubert
Ulrich S. Schubert studied chemistry at the Universities of Frankfurt and Bayreuth (Germany) and the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (USA). His PhD was performed under the supervision of Prof. C. D. Eisenbach (Bayreuth) and Prof. G. R. Newkome (Florida). After postdoctoral training with Prof. J.-M. Lehn at the Université Strasbourg (France), he moved to the Munich University of Technology (Germany) to obtain his habilitation in 1999 (with Prof. O. Nuyken). From 1999 to 2000, he held a temporary position as a professor at the Center for NanoScience (CeNS) at the LMU Munich (Germany). From 2000 to 2007, he was Full-Professor at the Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands. Since 2007, he has been Full-Professor at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. His awards include the Habilitandenpreis of the GDCh (Makromolekulare Chemie), the Heisenberg-Stipendium of the DFG, the Dozenten-Stipendium of the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie and the VICI award of the NWO.
Introduction
Organic dyes were in the focus of intense research during the last few decades.1,2 Their main benefit developed from coloration purposes of bulk materials in the 19th century to tailor-made functional dyes nowadays.3 A wide range of applications are accessible, ranging from organic dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)4–10 over selective labeling of proteins11–14 or synthetic polymers2 to light harvesting arrays.15 Furthermore, organic dyes are applied in hair colorings, paper production, textile industry, leather tanning industry, food technology as well as in agricultural research,16 resulting in a worldwide production of approximately 70000 tons per year.17
The incorporation of organic dyes into polymeric architectures attracted interest due to their potential application in organic electronic devices, in particular, in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs),7,18,19 white polymer light emitting diodes (WPLEDs)7,20–22 as well as in sensor molecules in biochemical and environmental applications.23–25 Additionally, fluorescent systems are capable of mimicking photosynthetic proteins in plants by incorporating the chromophores into polymers as donor molecules for Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET) processes.26,27 In contrast to main-chain π-conjugated polymers, in side-chain pendant monomers, covalently attached to a polymeric backbone, the optoelectronical properties are mostly independent from the degree of polymerization and the number of repeating units, respectively. Furthermore, monomers that carry polymerizable functionalities, e.g., double bonds in terms of (meth)acrylate-, vinyl- or styrene units, are capable to be directly polymerized either by a straight-forward free radical polymerization (FRP) technique or by one of the commonly applied controlled radical polymerization (CRP) techniques, in particular, by the reversible addition–fragmentation transfer (RAFT) polymerization,7,28 or the atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP),29,30 or the nitroxide mediated polymerization (NMP).31 Additionally, the living anionic polymerization technique can also be applied for the synthesis of well-defined polymers.32
In contrast to postpolymerization labeling procedures, the content of the dye in the polymer can be adjusted by the amount of dye-functionalized comonomers in the polymerization feed. However, the reactivity ratios of dye-functionalized monomers must be considered. Depending on the structure of the monomer, copolymerization of bulky moieties can be unfavorable. In addition, this procedure avoids additional polymer analogous reactions and, thus, it is more efficient. In the case of polymer-labeling at specific sites with exactly one dye, e.g., chain-end-labeling or labeling of linkers in block copolymers, the modification by postpolymerization attachment of a fluorescent dye is still the method of choice.2 The drawbacks of polymer analogous reactions are functionalization efficiencies below 100% as well as partially sophisticated purification techniques in order to separate the desired polymer from the corresponding reagents. Due to the coiling of polymers in solution, highly efficient reactions, in particular, click-reactions, are required for polymer modifications, which limits the number of possibilities for potential reactions.33 In the case of unspecific polymer-labeling along the polymer chain, another tailor-made monomer that is bearing the corresponding anchoring group must be added to the polymerization feed.7 Moreover, a wide range of applications of polymerizable dyes is based on the donation of fluorescent nanoparticles to biological substrates, in particular, living cells. These particles are typically prepared by postpolymerization conjugations of dyes onto preformed particles. The advantage of directly polymerizing the dyes into the polymers as comonomer is the location of the dyes in the core and not only on the surface of the particle, resulting in an enhanced fluorescence of the particles, which are, in addition, not vulnerable to dye-leakage.34,35 Furthermore, this distribution within the whole particle avoids the blocking of functional groups on the surface of the nanoparticles, which are required for the interaction with specific substrates (e.g., proteins or enzymes). By introducing targeting units (e.g., peptides or sugar moieties), the binding efficiency can be enhanced and targeted delivery can be attained.
This review article covers the developments during the past three years that have been made in the field of fluorescent polymers derived from monomeric building blocks that carry polymerizable functionalities (the number of publications shows the viability of this research area). For this purpose, this contribution was subdivided according to the class of fluorescent polymerizable dyes. Herein, the most important classes of dyes, which were incorporated into polymer backbones as side-chains by direct polymerization, are described, focusing on the optical properties and application of the luminescent polymers. Scheme 1 depicts the typical structure of (co)polymers bearing fluorescent chromophores as side-chains.
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the monomeric building blocks and their corresponding (co)polymer structures reviewed in this contribution. 
Application of fluorescing monomers
The majority of all examples given in this review exclusively deal with the labeling of polymer nanoparticles (NPs) for cell uptake studies. One possibility for the preparation of these particles is the miniemulsion polymerization.36 For this purpose, a liquid two-phase system is typically sonicated via ultrasound to form an emulsion with well-defined compartments. The hydrophobic phase contains styrene and the fluorescent monomer, whereas functionalized acrylic acid (AA) or aminomethyl methacrylate monomers are applied in the hydrophilic phase. Furthermore, amino acids, DNA, antibodies or peptides, for instance, can be added to the stock solutions for specific functionalization of the resulting nanoparticles. After initiation and polymerization, the particle sizes are in the range of 50 to 200 nm. A second method for NP formation is the nanoprecipitation of polymers. In this case, a polymer solution is dropped into water or vice versa: water is dropped into a polymer solution.37,38 The nanoprecipitation method represents a versatile method because theoretically every hydrophobic polymer prepared by any polymerization technique can be precipitated. However, the stability of the particles is strongly influenced by the type and the chain-length of the polymer. The miscibility of the polymer solution in water must also be considered. For this purpose, an acetone–water system is typically applied. Depending on the concentration of the polymer solution, well-defined NPs in the range of 50 to 500 nm can be obtained. The concentration of the dye monomers in the polymers for the nanoprecipitation procedure can in theory be varied up to 100%. Practically, dye contents up to 10% are applied. In contrast, the amount of fluorescence dye in the miniemulsion polymerization is 1 to 2 mol%. As the third method, the dialysis procedure can be mentioned. In the following sections, it plays a minor role, but the principle is analogous to the precipitation.39 As further NP preparation methods, emulsification–solvent evaporation, spray drying, salting out and milling can be listed.39 The size and shape of the nanoparticles can be directly characterized by dynamic light-scattering (DLS) techniques, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and secondary electron microscopy (SEM) as well. In selected cases, also analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) can be applied as a characterization method. For cell imaging tests, living cells in a culture medium are incubated for a specific time with a labeled nanoparticle suspension. After some washing steps, these cells are investigated by confocal laser scanning microscopy. In the case of a successful uptake of the nanoparticles, the cells show the emission of the dye NP upon irradiation of the dye in the absorption maximum. It is also possible to quantify the uptake by a fluorescent activated cell sorter (FACS). So far, only fluorescein and rhodamine dyes were utilized for applications with a biological background. In two examples, also coumarin and thiazole dyes were applied.35,40 Recently, a comprehensive study about the whole range of possible organic fluorophore platforms for fluorescence imaging was published.41 The authors provide a guide structured according to the emission of utilized dyes from far-red to near infrared fluorescence.
A wide range of applications focuses on electronical devices. Therein the active layer material generally consists either of homopolymers of the corresponding fluorescent dyes or of (block)copolymers which are bearing a second functional moiety (e.g., electron- and hole-transporting monomers). Due to the fact that the efficiency intrinsically drops down if unfunctionalized monomers are incorporated into the polymer backbone, the degree of functionalization should be 100% in the ideal case. The direct polymerization of functional dyes covers this advantage in contrast to post-functionalization methods of polymer analogous reactions. Only in exceptional cases, homopolymers were copolymerized with nonfunctional monomers (e.g., styrene) to tune the phase separation behavior which strongly influences the performance of organic electronic devices.42 In general, organic electronics are characterized by recording a current–voltage curve. The efficiency of an organic solar cell device is calculated by several values: the fill factor (FF) as the maximum rectangular area under curve, the short circuit current (ISC) as the intersection with the y-axis, and the open circuit voltage (VOC) as the intersection with the x-axis.43 A variation of the graphical illustration of these characteristics is the plotting of the current density versus the voltage. So far, poly(3-hexyl thiophene) (P3HT) has been considered as the gold standard for organic solar cell devices because it combines a low bandgap and high quantum yield with easy processability and low production costs. Side chain dye-pendant macromolecules do not reach high efficiencies of up to 10% because the introduction of dyes with a maximum conjugation length in the side chain is a synthetic challenge.44 For this purpose, usually polymerizable conjugated oligomers are applied for organic electronics. In particular, the conjugated system of fluorine chromophores as well as small heterocycles can be extended with a limited synthetic effort.
The following sections also contain information on copolymerized fluorescence dyes that were successfully applied as sensor materials. In this context, two basic concepts were observed. Firstly, polymeric sensors were synthesized where sensitive moieties were directly attached to the chromophore or the chromophore itself is directly changed by the analyte. Thus, the absorption and emission spectra are altered upon exposure of the sensor material to the analyte. For these systems, the sensitivity as well as the stimulus concentration range of the material strongly depends on the content of dye. In the second approach, two or more fluorescent dyes are copolymerized with functional monomers that interact with several stimuli (e.g., pH-value or temperature). The most prominent candidate is the N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) monomer that shows a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) behavior. Polymers based on NIPAM monomers feature shrinkage and/or precipitation above the lower critical solution temperature in aqueous media. In block copolymer architectures where different dyes are incorporated in each block, this shrinkage leads to a decrease in the distance between two different chromophores. In case of an overlap between the emission of a donor dye and the absorption of a corresponding acceptor dye, a quenching of the donor emission in combination with the appearance of the acceptor emission occurs. If the distance between two different chromophores is below the Förster radius, an energy transfer takes place – the Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET). Hence, the emission of the polymer can be tuned by external stimuli. In general, the existence of a FRET process is proven by excited-state lifetime studies. For this purpose, the decay of the exited-state lifetime of the donor is recorded. A faster decay (i.e., shorter lifetime) of the donor luminescence provides evidence for the presence of FRET. In general, a block copolymer architecture requires the application of a controlled and/or living polymerization technique. In order to prevent self-quenching of the dyes in one block, the content must be low enough on the one hand and high enough that every polymer chain is statistically functionalized with at least one dye moiety. As sensing moieties, a wide range of chromophores can be applied. In the case of color changes, a difference in the emission intensity or wavelength is required. For this purpose, mainly two different types of chromophores are applied because the introduction of functional groups leads only to a fine-tuning of the emission for the majority of the dyes. Hence, it is often desired that the emission changes are visible to the naked eye. The typical emission for sensing dyes has eye-catching colors (i.e., blue, green, yellow, red, sometimes also orange or purple). Small differences in the emission wavelengths are more difficult to quantify (e.g., changes from turquoise to green) and, thus, the detection limit is degraded. For the FRET based sensors, a large stokes-shift is required to avoid the self-quenching of the dye emission.
A series of carbon modifications are nowadays in the focus of intense research.45,46 In particular, single- and multi-walled carbon nanotubes are insoluble in several organic solvents. Thence, an interaction between organic molecules attached to polymers leads to a functionalization of these modifications. As a consequence, the solubilizing properties of the polymers are combined with the carbon nanotube features and, thus, the nanotubes can be suspended in organic solvents. In these cases, dye contents in the range of approximately 0.5% to 100% are applied. To obtain a homogeneous solubilization and functionalization, typically well-defined polymers are utilized, prepared by controlled or living polymerization techniques. In this context, aromatic dyes are exclusively applied due to their good interaction with NTs.
The last field of application of polymers labeled with polymerizable fluorescence dyes is the study of polymer properties. In order not to influence the general properties of a polymer too much by incorporating additional functionalities, in particular, by fluorescence dyes, the content of dye monomer must necessarily be kept as low as possible (i.e., typically below 1 mol%). In general, the mechanical and thermal properties of polymers determine their application. For this reason, the experiments are a combination of standard experiments (e.g., for film drying behavior or mechanical characteristics) with a fluorescence microscope which enables visualization of the observed process. The polymerizable dyes incorporated into these polymers require a high fluorescence intensity of the polymer. Furthermore, the dye itself should have a low influence on the overall properties of the observed polymer. Basically, commercially available polymerizable dyes fulfill these criteria.
All further tailor-made applications will be described in the following sections. According to their unique purpose, all polymers reveal an optimized content of dye. In all other cases, the characterization of these polymers was adjusted to their specialized field of interest.
Polymerizable aromatic dyes
This section contains information on side-chain pendant polymerizable dyes, i.e. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in polymeric architectures (for the exact structures, see Scheme 2). The simplest alignment of two fused benzene rings is the naphthalene system. The most prominent candidates for polymerization are the 2-naphthalenes that can be directly functionalized with acrylate (N1), methacrylate (N2) as well as vinyl (N3) units. Naphthalene shows an absorption maximum at λabs = 285 nm and an emission maximum at 345 nm. Most of the naphthalene containing monomers are commercially available, in particular N1 to N3 and N6 to N7. A large number of publications deal with naphthalene monomers for the labeling of polymers. In particular, N1 was copolymerized with N-dodecylmethacrylamide.47,48 Additionally, N3 was copolymerized with styrene49 and maleic anhydride.50 Furthermore, the copolymerization behavior of N3 with ethylene,51 sodium 2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulphonate and acrylamide52 as well as sodium styrenesulfonate,53,54 and AA55 was studied. In contrast, the aromatic anthracene moiety absorbs at 362 nm and emits at 407 nm. The synthesis of a series of polymerizable anthracene dyes has been described earlier.56 Labeled An1 containing copolymers could be obtained by copolymerization with styrene,57,58 methyl methacrylate (MMA),59–62 2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA),63 azacrown ether methacrylate monomers,64p-tert-butoxy styrene (PTBS) and methacrylic acid (MAA),65 as well as N-(4-cyanatophenyl) maleimide (CyOPMI), 4-hydroxybutyl vinyl ether (HBuVE) and MMA.66An3 could be polymerized with N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone (VP),67 as well as with vinyl terminated poly(siloxanes).68 Besides their good labeling properties, anthracene containing monomers are also capable of undergoing Diels–Alder reactions, e.g., in PMMA copolymers,69 and photodimerization.59–71 Moreover, polymerizable pyrenes were used to label polystyrenes,72–77 AA in ionic liquids,78 and MMA.49,76,79
 Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the chemical structures of fluorescent aromatic chromophore bearing monomers. 
Due to the absence of any heteroatoms in the chromophore moieties, all monomers are suitable for advanced polymerization techniques, i.e. RAFT, ATRP, NMP, ROMP and living anionic polymerization. Firstly, block copolymers from N2 and DMAEMA were obtained using ATRP.80 Fluorescent Py2 bearing macroinitiators are also available for this kind of CRP technique.81 PPy2-b-PSt-b-PEO triblock copolymers could also be obtained using the ATRP technique.82 This triblock architecture enabled the encapsulation of the model drug Nile red by self-assembly (proven by TEM as well as AFM measurements) and its release under UV-irradiation (proven by UV-vis absorption and emission spectroscopy). A schematic representation of this process is displayed in Fig. 1. For the RAFT polymerization as second prominent representative for CRP processes, a copolymerization with (acetoacetoxy)ethyl methacrylate (AEMA) was carried out using An1 as monomer for the second block.83 Furthermore, diblock copolymer architectures of PPy2-b-PVP are accessible.84 CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs) were coated with the diblock copolymer to prepare a color distinctive, ratiometric pH sensor. Due to the change in the PVP conformations dependent on the pH value, the color of the QDs in solution changed from blue to red. Schubert and coworkers reported the RAFT copolymerization of Py2 with MMA and di(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (DEGMA).85,86 The thermo-responsive behavior of the polymers was utilized for the application as temperature sensor. In addition, well-defined nanoparticles could be obtained from the PMMA-copolymers by applying fractionation by preparative analytical ultracentrifugation.87 Ghiggino et al. provided evidence that diphenylanthracenes DPA1 and DPA2 are suitable monomers for the RAFT polymerization technique.88 The authors formed an “oligomer” with one repeating unit by setting the monomer/CTA ratio to 1 in the polymerization feed (stoichiometric application of the RAFT agent), which determines the targeted degree of polymerization. In this manner, a “macro”-RAFT-agent could be obtained which is functionalized with exactly one fluorescent dye. As a consequence, the placement of the diphenylanthracene dye in the polymer chain is adjusted by the structure of the monomer: in the single functionalized DAP1, the dye is placed at the chain end; in contrast, the dye is placed in the middle of the chain in the case of the double functionalized DPA2. Both RAFT agents were applied for the polymerization of AcN. In principle, a sophisticated RAFT agent synthesis can be avoided because the RAFT polymerization procedure features a good tolerance towards many functional groups.28 Moreover, fluorescent macroinitiators labeled with Py2 for the nitroxide-mediated crosslinking polymerization process in aqueous miniemulsions were reported.89 The norbornene-functionalized pyrene bearing two chromophores in the monomer unit (Py4) was synthesized and subsequently polymerized by ROMP.90 Its synthesis by 5-(amino methyl)bicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene (NBMA) and 1-bromopyrene as well as its subsequent polymerization is protected by the patent application. The polymer featured good transmittance in combination with a high thermal stability.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the encapsulation of Nile red within the hydrophobic core of the polymer aggregates of PPy2-b-PS-b-PEO and its release upon disruption of the polymer aggregates by UV light.82 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
Controlled radical polymerization techniques have also been applied for the production of organic photovoltaic devices. In this context, Thelakkat and coworkers designed block copolymers based on Per1 where the poly(Per1)-block acted as the acceptor moiety of the active layer in organic bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells.42,91,92 A P3HT block had in this case the function of the donor material. Per1 could be polymerized in a controlled manner by NMP. The material revealed a good phase separation behavior, resulting in a considerable performance of organic solar cell devices. A power conversion efficiency η of 0.2% could be observed.
During the last few years, several groups also published living anionic polymerization procedures using polymerizable aromatic dye molecules, in particular, An3 by Natori and coworkers.93,94 By the application of an asymmetric anionic polymerization procedure, the polymerization of 2,7-bis(4-tert-butylphenyl)fluoren-9-yl methacrylate (F1) as well as the analogous acrylate (F2) was realized by Nakano et al.95,96 The authors were able to photoinduce racemization of this optically active polymer with helical conformation. Mezzenga et al. also polymerized styryl functionalized mono- and oligo-fluorenes (F5, n = 1, 2) using the living anionic polymerization procedure.97 By copolymerization with VP, the authors obtained well-defined block copolymers, which resulted in a phase separation. Furthermore, the capability of the material to host COOH-modified single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) in the PVP-block was described. Finally, star-shaped polymers, in particular, 3-, 4- as well as 8-arm star polymer architectures, could be obtained by anionic polymerization of F5.98
Together with MAA and EGDMA, An2 could be grafted from a modified glass surface.99 For this purpose, borosilicate glass slides were modified with N,N-diethylaminodithiocarbamoylpropyl(trimethoxy)silane followed by subsequent polymerization using the iniferter polymerization technique. It was found that the N,N-tetraethyl thiuram disulphide chain terminator enhanced the control over the polymerization. In this manner, well-defined polymer-films could be obtained. Moreover, further examples for fluorescent polymer composite materials can be found in the literature: Fe3O4 composite particles were prepared by the groups of Kim and Cheong.100 This material combines the magnetic properties of the iron oxide particles with the fluorescent properties of the poly(styrene-co-MAA-co-N2). Moreover, the immobilization of naphthyl labeled colloids on Au-surfaces could be realized via supramolecular “handcuffs” (i.e. cucurbit[8]uril CB[8]).101 The CB[8] was able to incorporate one viologen moiety that was immobilized on the gold surface as well as one naphthalene moiety on the surface of the nanoparticles.
Another method used to produce monodisperse nanoparticles is the copolymerization of styrene in the presence of a polymerizable surfactant.102 In this case, Py2 was added for labeling. It could be shown that highly monodisperse particles could be obtained (see Fig. 2 for a SEM image of the particles).
 Fig. 2  SEM image of the fluorescent PS-co-PPy2 particles surrounded by a surfactant.102 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission. 
In general, aromatic dyes can also be applied for the separation of SWCNTs due to their strong interaction. Voit et al. copolymerized Py3 with styrene for the dispersion of SWCNTs by adsorption of the copolymer on the surface of the nanotubes.45,46 These π–π stacking interactions of pyrene with SWCNTs were also used to functionalize nanotubes with azobenzene moieties (Azo45 and Azo46, see the corresponding section below for the structures of the monomers)103 as well as silica oxide networks with PEG coronas.104 The dispersion process of SWCNTs is shown in Fig. 3. In the case of the P(Py2-co-Azo45) copolymer composites, the material revealed photoinduced birefringence. Moreover, Chan-Park et al. used An1 for the separation of single walled carbon nanotubes.105,106 In this context, also N2 was applied. Furthermore, copolymers consisting of PS and PEO macromonomers as well as Py2 were utilized for the dispersion of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) in organic solvents.107 The role of the π–π interactions was also investigated by the group of Bucknall who focused their attention on poly(9-vinylphenanthrene)s (polyP1) with C60 fullerenes.108 The results were compared to the PS and polyN3 as homologous series. It could be shown that the solubility of the fullerenes increases nonlinearly with increasing aromaticity. In this case, the experimental wide-angle X-ray scattering measurements correlated with DFT calculations.
 Fig. 3  (a) Dispersion of SWCNTs in THF (A), solution of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45) in THF (B), and solution of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45)/SWNT nanocomposite in THF (C). (b) TEM image of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45)/SWCNT nanocomposite with a zoomed image in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Polymerizable aromatic dyes have also been studied for an application as sensor material. The group of García recently described a cyanide sensor with an extremely low detection threshold for aqueous media based on the fluorescence of copolymers bearing F3 and F4 in the backbone.109 For this purpose, the monomers were copolymerized with ethoxy methacrylate, 2-(2-aminoethoxyethanol) methacrylamide and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate by FRP. Fluorescent polymers can also be applied as thermoresponsive materials. In this context, F5 (n = 1) was copolymerized with DMAEMA and stearyl acrylate for the fabrication of thermoresponsive luminescent electrospun fibers by the group of Chen.110 In addition, the introduction of flexible spacers between the polymerizable methacrylate and the naphthalene unit (N5) enables the application of side-chain pendant naphthalenes in polymeric architectures for the reversible attachment of carbohydrates onto the copolymers by supramolecular self-assembly with cucurbit[8]uril.111 To ensure a better visualization, poly(N5) was labelled with a polymerizable rhodamine dye (Rh8, Scheme 7 in the rhodamine section). An3 was used for the production of stimuli-responsive Janus particles.112 Amphiphilic particles were obtained by photoinitiation and several coupling steps. Fluorescence microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy measurements confirmed the asymmetrical morphology of the resultant particles.
Further applications of polymers composed of polymerizable aromatics are in organic electronic devices. Hirao and coworkers reported the fabrication of non-volatile memory devices based on the homopolymers of F5 (n = 1 to 3).113–116 In particular, polymerizable naphthalenes were successfully applied in gate electrets (i.e., chargeable thin polymer gate dielectrics) on non-volatile organic field-effect transistor memories.117 It could be demonstrated that the electron storing efficiency increases in a homologous polymer series from poly(vinyl alcohol) to poly(N3) (see Fig. 4 for the full series as well as the setting of the device).
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the device setting as well as the electron-storage efficiency of electret materials estimated from the polymer electrets memory characteristics.117 PVNpoly(N3). Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
The pyrene monomer Py2 was applied as additive in a poly(styrene-co-acrylic acid-co-1-pyrenylmethyl methacrylate) copolymer in order to enhance the contrast in fluorescence microscopy measurements in thin film blends with poly[2-methoxy-5(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene]s (MEH-PPVs).118 In addition, a large number of patents was disclosed where polymers based on polymerizable anthracenes are applied as antireflective coatings,119,120 liquid crystalline polymer fibers for display application71,121 as well as photoresists.122 In this context, only some selected examples are cited.
Copolymerized naphthalenes were investigated in terms of their nonradiative energy transfer towards 1,4-bis(5-phenyl oxazolyl-2)benzene.123 For this purpose, scintillation composites composed of N2, MMA and 1,4-bis(5-phenyl oxazolyl-2)benzene were compared to a solid solution of naphthalene and 1,4-bis(5-phenyl oxazolyl-2)benzene in PMMA. It could be demonstrated that the emission intensity of the 1,4-bis(5-phenyl oxazolyl-2)benzene acceptor molecule increases by a factor of two when the naphthalene is covalently attached to the polymeric backbone.
For the investigation of fundamental processes concerning polymer chemistry, several studies were performed. In order to investigate certain dynamic processes in polymers or properties of polymers, a wide range of polymer classes were labeled with a small amount of dye for the visualization of the respective process. Swanson could gain detailed insight into the conformational behavior of poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) at different pH-values and the transition thereof by copolymerizing MAA with An1.124 Phenanthrene containing butyl acrylate–methyl methacrylate copolymers were used to determine the drying behavior of wet latex films via FRET.125,126 Winnik et al. studied several additional effects on the polymer diffusion of P2 or An4 labeled poly(butyl methacrylate),127 and P(MMA-co-BA) latex films.102,128–133 Furthermore, Py2 was added to a poly(dodecylmethacrylate) polymer for the real time monitoring of dynamic processes occurring during film formation of surfactant-templated mesostructured sol–gel films formed by evaporation induced self-assembly.134 In order to determine the structure–property relationship for acrylic dye monomers (i.e. naphthalenes amongst others), two artificial neural network models have been developed for predicting reactivity parameters (ln Q and e values) by performing density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level.135 Dye labeled polymers were applied for the Tg prediction of polymers by calculation.136 Homopolymers based on N3 and N4 were utilized, amongst several other polymers, for the quantitative structure–property relationship correlation of the dielectric constant (ε) for polymers.137An1 was copolymerized with N-neopentyl methacrylamide in a free radical polymerization procedure in order to produce structured polymer Langmuir–Blodgett films.138Py2 as well as Py5 were also used in labeled PS films for investigations on the influence of nanoscale confinement on the glass transition temperature.139 Moreover, the π–π stacking behavior of copolymers composed of pentafluorostyrene (PFS) and N3 or N4, respectively, was examined by the group of Pugh.140
So far, polymers based on polymerizable naphthalenes were applied in mixed ligand monolith capillary column material.141 The composition (including octadecyl acrylate (ODA), N2 and trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate (TRIM) crosslinker) of the column material was altered. The separating capacity of a series of low molar mass organic molecules of this reversed-phase column material dependent on the composition is depicted in the corresponding chromatograms in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Electrochromatograms showing the separation of a series of small organic compounds on monolithic columns with different mole fractions of ODA/N2. NMM = 100% ODA.141 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
Polymers derived from N6 as well as N7 were applied for load bearing hydrogel implants.142 The invention features dual network hydrogels that possess the structural, mechanical and biological properties required of load-bearing three-dimensional support structures.
Azo-dyes
The striking property of azo-dyes is the reversible photoinduced cis–trans isomerization and, thus, this class of dyes is mainly applied in switchable electronic devices or sensors. Nowadays, the Azo1 (derived from the standard dye disperse orange 3) as azobenzene moiety containing monomer is commercially available (the schematic representation of the chemical structures of all azo-dye containing monomers are depicted in Scheme 3). Its synthesis under mild conditions as well as its copolymerization with BA, EtA and MMA was described by Qui and coworkers.143 The polymers revealed a good stability and prevented an undesired phase separation behavior and chromophore precipitation. Furthermore, Nicolescu and coworkers provided a detailed synthesis and characterization of a series of azobenzene functionalized methacrylates (Azo2 to Azo6).144,145 The monomers were copolymerized with MMA by FRP using AIBN as initiator in dioxane and their reactivity ratios (Q-e values) were determined. The authors also applied detailed characterization methods including 1H NMR, UV-vis, FTIR, SEC and DSC–TGA measurements.
 Scheme 3  Schematic representation of monomers bearing pendant azobenzene moieties. 
Kannan et al. prepared a series of polymerizable azo-naphthol dyes, which were functionalized with a variety of electron withdrawing as well as electron releasing groups (Azo7 to Azo15).146 The polymerization was achieved by a free radical polymerization procedure in THF using AIBN as initiator at 60 °C. Holographic grating formation studies were performed, whereas the diffraction grating efficiency was dependent on the time of exposure and intensity ratio of the incident laser beam. The grating efficiency of the polymers bearing the electron withdrawing substituents increased in comparison to the others. In addition, the authors prepared homopolymers from Azo16 and Azo17 as well as copolymers derived from one of these two monomers and a fulgimide functionalized monomer.147 The FRP technique was applied using AIBN as initiator in THF at 60 °C. The copolymers revealed dual-mode optical switching properties due to the reversible cis–trans isomerization of the azobenzenes and the irreversible cis–trans isomerization of the fulgimide moiety (for the structure, see the Fu dye in the “Others” section, Scheme 14).
Colored pigments are usually applied in electronic inks. As a substituent thereof, Feng and coworkers cross-linked Azo18 to Azo23 as well as Azo1 with divinylbenzene (DVB) and styrene.148 These electrophoresis particles were applied for electronic inks. The particles revealed diameters between 200 and 300 nm in combination with a uniform spherical shape. This electrophoresis particle producing process overcomes the problem of the uneven shape of the organic dye particle's defects and the poor movement effect in disperse liquids under the influence of an electric field.
A more sophisticated characterization of the optical properties of azo-dye containing polymers was reported by Lu et al. The authors investigated the third-order nonlinear optical properties of the polymers based on Azo24 and Azo25.149 The ATRP technique was applied for the homopolymerization as well as for the copolymerization with MMA using ethyl 2-bromoisobutyrate, CuBr and PMDETA in cyclohexanone solution. All polymers revealed narrow PDI values. The influences of the different substituents on the optical properties and the kinetics of the polymerization reaction were discussed. The materials revealed a high χ(3) of about 10−11 esu and a rapid response time in the femto-second magnitude.
As example for an electronic device, Xu and coworkers produced memory devices using copolymers containing a maleimide functionalized azo-dye Azo26 as comonomer in the active layer.150 For this purpose, the azobenzene monomer was copolymerized with styrene as well as a carbazole functionalized styrene derivative in a FRP procedure. The introduction of the carbazole moieties reduced the voltage difference from the OFF to the ON state in the devices. The current–voltage (I–V) curves of the two copolymers are depicted in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage (I–V) curve of the memory device based on PS-co-PAzo26 (a) and PStCz-co-PAzo26 (b) using a Hg top electrode.150 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission. 
A series of azo-dye derivatives (blue, magenta, violet and red color depending on the substituent), which consist of two cross-linkable acrylate or methacrylate groups (Azo27 to Azo36) in order to improve their thermal as well as their chemical resistance, have been synthesized by the group of Jaung.151 The materials were applied as color filters based on pigments instead of the established dispersion process. Moreover, surface morphology studies showed the capability of the dyes to act as photoresists.
In contrast to the electronic device applications, polymers composed of polymerizable azo-dyes can also be applied as sensor materials. The group of Abd-El-Aziz functionalized an aryl azo-dye as well as a heteryl azo-dye (Azo37 and Azo38) with a norbornene moiety, which is suitable for ring opening metathesis polymerization using a 2nd generation Grubbs catalyst.152Fig. 7 shows the absorption spectra of the trans–cis photoisomerization as well as the thermal cis–trans isomerization of selected copolymers. The synthesized homo- and copolymer films were tested as reusable acid sensors. The material also changed the color upon variation of the pH value. Furthermore, the authors described methacrylates bearing an azo-dye–coumarin combination as dye.153 For details, see the coumarin section (Cou31, Cou32, Cou34, Cou36 to Cou38).
 Fig. 7  UV-vis absorption spectra of selected copolymers containing Azo37 or Azo38 of the trans–cis photoisomerization (left column, (A), (C) and (E)) as well as the reversible thermal cis–trans isomerization (right column, (B), (D) and (F)).152 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
Aida and co-workers published the synthesis of molecular bottlebrushes using Azo39 as well as Azo40 as monomers.154 In this context, a FRP procedure using AIBN as initiator in benzene was applied. The authors could fabricate a free-standing film with a specific alignment (i.e., vertical alignment of the backbone relative to the plane and horizontally aligned side-chains) of the macromolecules. For this purpose, a hot-pressing method between Teflon sheets was utilized. The material featured a reversible bending behavior on a macroscopic scale under UV- and visible light irradiation due to the cis–trans isomerization of the mesogenic side-chains. Fig. 8 shows the displacement of the polymer film. A similar effect could be demonstrated by Ikeda et al. using Azo41 in liquid-crystalline polymer fibers.155
 Fig. 8  Photomechanical responses of hot-pressed films of poly(Azo40) prepared with parallel arranged Teflon sheets. (A) Photographs of a hot-pressed film (5 mm by 6 mm by 10 mm) before (left) and after (right) exposure to UV light (λ = 360 ± 2 nm). The bent film recovered the initial flat shape upon exposure to visible light (λ = 480 ± 2 nm). (B) Time-dependent change in displacement of the free edge of a hot-pressed film prepared with parallel-arranged Teflon sheets upon alternating irradiation with UV and visible lights.154 Figure copyright AAAS and reproduced with permission. 
Furthermore, a dual-responsive polymer was obtained by copolymerization of Azo24 (R10 = NO2) with DEGMA.156 The group of Schubert applied the RAFT polymerization technique using AIBN as initiator and CBDB as chain-transfer agent in toluene at 70 °C. The chromophore of disperse red 1 combined with the LSCT behavior of the DEGMA comonomer leads to a color change upon the variation of the pH value and the temperature. Images of the color changes are depicted in Fig. 9. Furthermore, the authors also copolymerized the azo-dye with MMA in the same manner for the investigation of the UCST behavior of PMMA.86 However, the UCST sensing regime of the PMMA is much broader than the one of the analogous LCST polymer.
 Fig. 9  Photograph images of the observed color shifts above and below the LCST temperature of copolymer P(DEGMA-co-Azo24) in aqueous solution at pH 7 (left) and pH 1 (right).156 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
Zhu et al. polymerized Azo42 and Azo43 in a controlled manner using the RAFT polymerization procedure.157 For this purpose, CPDB was utilized as chain-transfer agent and AIBN as initiator in anisole as solvent at 80 °C. Furthermore, the authors applied these homopolymers as macro chain–chain transfer agent for the preparation of PS block copolymers. Controlled radical polymerization behavior was proven by a kinetic study. The photoinduced trans–cis–trans isomerization rate of the polymers was determined in chloroform solution. The kinetics of this isomerization displayed a dependence on the different CN and OCH3 substituents. The CN substituted Azo42 revealed a much faster isomerisation rate due to the donor–acceptor effect of the substituted azobenzene. Moreover, photoinduced birefringence and surface relief grating of the homopolymers were investigated in thin films. In addition, the group synthesized a PS-copolymer containing Azo44 as comonomer using the RAFT polymerization technique.158 In contrast to Azo42 and Azo43, respectively, DMF was used as solvent and 2-cyanoprop-2-yl-1-dithionaphthalate (CPDN) as RAFT agent. In this case, the chain was also extended by a further PS block under application of the macro-RAFT agent approach. The polymer was capable of forming complexes with metal ions, i.e. Cu(II) and Eu(III), and is therefore suitable for application as a metal ion sensor.
Coumarins
It has long been known that the absorption and the emission behavior of coumarins can be tuned depending on their functionalization. Nowadays, only the acrylamides and the methacrylamides of CF3-functionalized coumarin dyes Cou1 and Cou2 (Scheme 4) are commercially available (derivatives of Coumarin 120). A copolymer of Cou1 and MMA was successfully applied in an OLED by Haishi et al.159–161 So far, this was the only example of application in organic electronic devices.
 Scheme 4  Schematic representation of the monomers functionalized with coumarin dyes. 
The group of Qiao prepared a PMMA-b-P(Cou2) block copolymer using ATRP as the controlled polymerization technique.162 The general tendency of the coumarin dye to dimerize under certain UV-irradiation wavelengths was utilized to form star-shaped polymers bearing fluorescent cores. Furthermore, Hampp and coworkers studied the copolymers containing Cou3 to Cou6 for application as intraocular lenses.163 The variation of three halide substituents, in particular F, Cl and Br, caused increased dimerization rates and decreased the energy dose required for photochemical dimerization of the coumarin side groups. Furthermore, these materials enabled the tuning of the focal length of an already implanted intraocular lens by 2 diopters. In addition, Wang et al. demonstrated a reduced decoloration of a copolymer bearing naphthopyran and Cou7 moieties in the side-chains due to the preferred dimerization of the coumarin in comparison to the photo-induced ring-opening of the naphthopyran.164 The copolymers were obtained by ATRP using CuBr complexed with PMDETA as catalyst and ethyl-bromoisobutylate as initiator. In contrast, a living cationic polymerization of Cou8 was reported by Minoda and coworkers.165 For this purpose, SnCl4 and a tertiary ammonium salt were applied for the polymerization procedure in order to obtain homopolymers as well as amphiphilic diblock copolymers. The homopolymers revealed reversible photoinduced crosslinking features due to the dimerization of the coumarin moiety.
Finally, Liu et al. synthesized an amphiphilic copolymer by FRP using maleic anhydride, styrene and Cou9 as monomers.166 The polymer revealed a self-assembly to colloids in a selective solvent mixture, i.e. DMF–H2O. Additionally, the emulsification and encapsulation of these colloid particles were investigated. It could be demonstrated that UV cross-linked particles (by coumarin-dimerization) revealed enhanced emulsification and encapsulation of oil-soluble dyes.
Coumarin containing polymer films based on Cou10 to Cou12 were investigated in terms of effects of dilution, polarization ratio, and energy transfer on the photoalignment of the nematic liquid crystalline material E-7 (a commercially available LC mixture consisting of several cyanobiphenyls with long aliphatic tails used for the manufacturing of LC displays).167 Chen and coworkers obtained the polymers utilizing the corresponding monomers by FRP using AIBN as initiator. Adverse effects on a nematic cell's number density of disclinations and its orientational order parameter in the parallel but not the perpendicular regime were observed by dilution of coumarin by inert moieties. In addition, the extent of coumarin dimerization at crossover, Xc, was lowered both by dilution of coumarin and a decreasing polarization ratio.
Abd-El-Aziz and coworkers extensively studied the field of polymerizable coumarin dyes concerning the thermal properties of the resulting polymers, in particular Tg as well as Td values.153 For this purpose, the authors provided a detailed synthetic description of a series of the monomers Cou13 to Cou41 and their corresponding homopolymers obtained by FRP using AIBN as initiator. In this context, the type of polymerizable unit – e.g., methacrylate, styrene and methacrylamide – and the influence – e.g., halides, −OH and azo-moieties – of a wide range of substituents were discussed in detail. All polymers were highly insoluble or poorly soluble in common organic solvents and displayed glass-transition temperatures between 70 and 130 °C. These polymers also revealed a high thermal stability. For selected samples, fluorescence quantum yields of ΦF = 0.1 were determined.
Related to sensor applications, polymerizable coumarin dyes were also discussed in the literature: Su and coworkers prepared a water-soluble copolymer based on VP or acrylamide as well as Cou42 and Cou43, respectively.168–170 These materials were applied as chemosensors for protons and Ni2+ ions. In this case, the authors took advantage of the ability of the piperazine moiety to quarternize under protonation as well as its ability to act as chelating ligand for metal ions.
In addition, Zhu and coworkers provided a versatile approach for the functionalization of dyes by click-chemistry.171 For this purpose, an azide-substituted coumarin dye was converted with propargyl methacrylate in order to form the clicked coumarin monomer Cou44. A RAFT polymerization procedure including a kinetic study finally proved the suitability of the monomer for this type of controlled radical polymerization procedures. In addition, the resulting polymer was capable of forming Eu(III) ion complexes.
With respect to biological applications, Cou2 labeled polymer nanoparticles were injected into a living pig by Grinstaff and coworkers.40 The migration of the particles over 20 cm to the sentinel lymph node could be monitored.
Patel et al. tested the antimicrobial properties of Cou45 based homo- and copolymers with vinyl acetate (VAc) against selected microorganisms, i.e. bacteria, fungi and yeast.172Fig. 10 shows a reduced growth of these microorganisms dependent on the Cou45-content in the obtained (co)polymer films. Cou45 homopolymers revealed the best antimicrobial performance, which can be tuned by the subsequent addition of VAc as comonomer. Furthermore, the authors provided reactivity ratios for the copolymerization behavior of the fluorescent dye according to three linearization methods.
 Fig. 10  Effect of P(Cou45-co-VAc) on the growth of (a) bacteria, (b) fungi and (c) yeast. The increasing polymer numbers indicate the increasing VAc-content (decreasing Cou45-content) of the samples.172 Figure copyright Xpress polymer Letters and reproduced with permission. 
Fluorescein
Fluorescein is a very common dye that is used for labeling purposes. Actually, it belongs to the class of xanthene dyes, but the large amount of publications based on polymerizable fluorescein containing polymers made it necessary to dedicate fluorescein an own section. The chromophore reveals a typical UV-vis absorption band at approximately 490 nm as well as an intensive green fluorescence (λem = 520 nm). Generally, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) is applied to label antibodies, enzymes, proteins or polymers in order to visualize the cellular uptake of the labeled substances. Scheme 5 shows the structures of seven different polymerizable fluorescein containing monomers Fl1–Fl7, whereas Fl1 and Fl2 are commercially available from Sigma-Aldrich.
 Scheme 5  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing fluorescein as chromophore. 
With respect to future biological applications of the labeled polymers, Fl1 or Fl2 were copolymerized with a wide range of different monomers, including NIPAM and N-acryloxysuccinimide (NAOS),173 HEMA,174 NIPAM, AA, N-tert butyl acrylamide (TBAM) and N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS),175 styrene,176,177N-(3-aminopropyl) methacrylamide, poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (PEGMA) and BIS,178–180 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate and PEG575 diacrylate,181 as well as DVB,182 as label for fluorescence microscopy imaging. Additionally, Hwang could show that fluorescent, polyacrylic acid coated magnetic nanodiamonds could be ingested into HeLa cells.183Fl1 was used as dye-comonomer in these experiments.
The group of Guy performed particle penetration tests on porcine skin using PS, PMMA and poly(styrene-co-HEMA) polymer particles.184,185Fl1 was added in small amounts during the polymer synthesis in order to label the particles which were able to deliver Nile red (NR) as model substance into the skin. In the case of PS-co-PHEMA polymer particles, the loading of the model drug was dependent on the hydrophobicity of the polymer that could be tuned via the styrene/HEMA ratio. It could be demonstrated that the NR was released and penetrated into deeper skin layers while the particles remained in the superficial stratum corneum layer. Fig. 11 shows the laser scanning confocal microscopy images of the skin surface indicating the uptake of the labeled nanoparticles as well as the release of NR.
 Fig. 11  Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of the skin surface after incubation with NR loaded Fl1 labeled PS nanoparticles. Panels a and b show fluorescence emission from the skin surface from the NP (panel a) and NR (panel b), respectively. Panel c shows the overlay of panels a and b and the colocalization of NP and “active” at the skin surface. Panels d and e illustrate cross-sectional images, respectively, highlighting fluorescence from the NP and from NR. A distinctly labeled, short, trimmed hair is visible. Panel f is the overlay of panels d and e and suggests some permeation of released NR to the deeper skin layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, Fl1 was copolymerized with MAA using a free radical polymerization procedure by Stöver and coworkers in order to lable cross-linked Ca-polyurea microcapsules and alginate beads, which could be further used to follow the encapsulation process in mouse cells.186,187
The polymerizable methacrylate was also incorporated into cross-linked poly(N-vinylimidazole) hydrogels by Piérola and Pacios to investigate the swelling behavior of these hydrogels, in particular, the morphology and the cross-linking density in different media.188
DeSimone and coworkers fabricated nanoparticles based on polymers bearing fluorescein pendant side chains.189–191 The PRINT method (Particle Replication In Non-wetting Templates) allows the production of monodisperse, shape-specific particles, in particular disk, rod, fenestrated hexagon (hexnut), and boomerang shapes, from an extensive array of organic precursors (for dimensions of different nanoparticle shapes, see Fig. 12). Furthermore, it is possible to control the size of the nanoparticles using this technique as representative of the “top-down” strategy. As a consequence, sufficiently small particles (d = 200 nm) can be uptaken by cells. An additional feature of these particles is the specific alignment of the polymer chains in each type of shape. One utilized polymer is composed of poly(ethylene glycol) monomethylether methacrylate, trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate as cross-linker, 2-aminoethyl methacrylate hydrochloride and Fl2. The group determined the cellular internalization of cylindrical particles as well as the cytotoxicity on HeLa, NIH 3T3, OVCAR-3, MCF-7, and RAW 264.7 cells. No significant cytotoxicity was observed for the uptaken particles. Furthermore, the authors succeeded to postfunctionalize the PRINT particles with human/bovine transferrin through lysine–maleimide reactions, resulting in a highly specific transferrin-mediated uptake by all human tumor cell lines tested. Besides the PRINT process fabricated particles, DeSimone et al. could synthesize fluorescein labeled di- and triblock copolymers.192 The hydrophobic blocks contained basically trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate (TETA) and Fl2, whereas the hydrophilic part was composed of monohydroxytetraethyleneglycol methacrylate (HP4MA), poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEG700DA) and a rhodamine B carrying red fluorescent monomer (Rh1, Scheme 7, rhodamine section). The self-assembly into ribbons and bilayers could be visualized via fluorescence microscopy.
 Fig. 12  Table of dimensions of the different shapes of nanoparticles produced by the PRINT method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
For additional biological studies, Bradley et al. performed systematic copolymerizations of alternatives to the commercial available polymerizable fluoresceins based on styryl functionalities as polymerizable unit.34 For this purpose, the polymerizable unit was introduced on three different positions: analogous to the commercially available acrylate and methacrylate, O-styryl fluorescein Fl3 could be obtained in good yields, while the xanthine-styryl fluorescein Fl4 and phthalic-styryl fluorescein Fl5 were synthesized in moderate yields by various cross-coupling reactions. The fluorescence intensity of the fluorescein incorporated polymer nanoparticles was compared to commonly used 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein surface-labeled polymer nanoparticles as reference. With exception of nanoparticles based on Fl4, the particles revealed an insignificant loss of fluorescence intensity in comparison to the reference samples. As expected, the fluorescence of Fl4 is significantly lowered by the interference with the conjugated system by suppressing the fluorescent anionic quinone form. Finally, the polymer nanoparticles were investigated in terms of cellular uptake using human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) as well as human cervical cancer cells (HeLa). In conclusion, the attachment of the polymerizable functionality to the chromophore affects the fluorescence intensity but not the absorption and emission maxima.
Stenzel et al. functionalized honey comb structured films with RAFT agents and subsequently polymerized Fl2 on the surface.193 After a washing step, the structure of the porous film could be visualized via fluorescence microscopy. Furthermore, the group of Stenzel successfully bound biodegradable glyco-particles bearing glucose units to plant lectin (Concanavalin A, Canavalia ensiformis) and bacteria lectin (fimH, from Escherichia coli).194 The particles were prepared by a controlled RAFT polymerization using styrene, 2-(methacrylamido)glucopyranose and a disulfide diacrylate cross-linker. Fl2 was added during the cross-linking step.
In the context of sensing applications, Ionov coated red fluorescent microtubules with a brush-like PNIPAM and Fl2 containing polymer.195 The brushes were synthesized using the ATRP technique. The authors showed a stimuli-responsive behavior under the influence of the temperature, whereas the coating could swell at temperatures below 35 °C. The swollen microtubules revealed an overlapping emission of the red core and the green fluorescein, while the collapsed species was only red emissive. The fluorescence images of the unfunctionalized as well as the functionalized microtubules are depicted in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Epi-fluorescent images of surface-adsorbed microtubules after immobilization of initiator (a: microtubule signal, b: polymer signal) and after grafting of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-fluorescein o-acrylate) (c: microtubule signal, d:polymer signal).195 Figure copyright Royal Society of Chemistry and reproduced with permission. 
Matyjaszewski et al. prepared fluorescent comb-copolymers via a “grafting-from” reaction from a multifunctional methacrylate backbone polymer which contains ATRP initiator functionalities as side chains.196 On this macroinitiator, the arms were grown in a controlled fashion using butyl acrylate (BA) and Fl2 as monomers. The comb-polymer revealed a pH-dependent fluorescence response.
Further sensor materials were prepared by Synytska and coworkers. The authors coated wax particles with different specifically labeled polymers on each hemisphere, so-called Janus particles.197 For that purpose, the particles were immobilized on relatively large silica particles in order to block one hemisphere from functionalization. A NIPAM–Fl2 monomer mixture could be grafted from the free surface of the particles using the ATRP procedure. The one-side coated wax particles were removed from the silica particles and subsequently functionalized via grafting onto of red fluorescent rhodamine B (Rh9, see Scheme 7 for the exact structure in the rhodamine section) labeled PAAs and PVPs. The complete procedure is illustrated in Scheme 6. A stimuli-responsive aggregation–disaggregation behavior upon pH changes could be observed for selected particles.
 Scheme 6  Schematic representation of the bicomponent Janus particles by “grafting from” and “grafting to” approaches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, Lai and coworkers published a detailed synthesis and characterization of an allyl-functionalized fluorescein dye (Fl6) and its subsequent polymerization with acylamide by FRP.198 The material revealed a pH and temperature dependent behavior in solution. Although the monomer Fl2 was already commercially available, the authors published the synthesis as well as an analogous copolymer based on poly(acrylamide), again featuring the same behavior.199
For the improvement of the mechanical properties of PMMA, Liu and Chan-Park coated disperse SWCNTs in dimethylformamide with poly[methyl methacrylate-co-(fluorescein O-acrylate)] as a surfactant, and subsequently fabricated the resultant poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)-based nanocomposites via solution casting.200 This material revealed improved tensile properties versus pure PMMA, showing 56 and 30% enhancements of the tensile modulus and tensile stress, respectively.
Amongst others, a Fl2 containing polymer was further used for the separation of SWCNTs in terms of their metallicity and diameter by Chan-Park et al.106 A poly(methyl-methacrylate-co-fluorescein-o-acrylate) polymer could enrich the semi-conducting fraction of SWCNTs in solution and, thereby, significantly enhance the performance of field effect transistors (FETs).
The group of Kannan provided the synthesis and subsequent free radical polymerization of Fl7 for holographic grating studies.201 The variation of the spacer-length showed an improved film formation for longer spacing units (m = 10) in comparison to shorter ones (m = 6). In contrast, the thermal stability decreases with increasing spacer length. Furthermore, the influence of the different substituents (i.e., Br, I and NO2) on the lifetime decay and diffraction efficiency was investigated. It could be shown that the different substituents affect the kinetics of the bleaching behavior of the polymers.
Rhodamines
Besides the green emitting fluorescein containing acrylates and methacrylates, the rhodamine functionalized monomers are the second largest group of polymerizable dyes. Similar to fluorescein, the rhodamines also represent a sub-group of xanthene dyes. Their intense red fluorescence (λabs = 548 nm, λem = 570 nm) cause a good contrast to the green fluorescence of fluorescein in confocal microscopy images. So far, the rhodamine B (bearing two diethyl amino substituents) is the most important representative which has been functionalized with polymerizable units. Scheme 7 depicts the structures of monomers (Rh1 to Rh9) that have already been copolymerized. Furthermore, Rh1 and Rh2 are commercially available under the synonym “PolyFluor 570” from Polyscience. Carter et al. functionalized Lissamine rhodamine B with several polymerizable units, in particular, a methacryl functionality (Rh3) as well as a methacrylamide and an allyl unit.202 Amongst these three monomers, only Rh3 underwent free radical polymerization using DMF as solvent and AIBN as initiator. The synthesis of the monomer and the homopolymer is described in detail in this reference.
 Scheme 7  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing rhodamines as chromophores. 
Barthélémy and coworkers prepared a PMMA based copolymer where cholesterol moieties and Rh1 were introduced as comonomers.203 Having this terpolymer in hand, the authors performed in vivo cell uptake studies of this microsphere-forming material in mesostoma flatworms. Selected fluorescence microscopy images of labeled cells of the organism are depicted in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  Fluorescence microscopy images showing the in vivo uptake of rhodamine B-labeled amphiphilic copolymers (5 μg mL−1) into certain cells in selected areas by Mesostoma flatworms at 13 °C. Bars = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Further biological studies by Vauthier et al. included the synthesis of Rh1 labeled core–shell nanoparticles composed of chitosan and an isobutylcyanoacrylate (IBCA)–isohexylcyanoacrylate (IHCA) mixture.204 Using these particles, the authors succeeded in delivering siRNA to tumor bearing mice.
The group of Ishihara synthesized a copolymer consisting of Rh1, BMA and 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine (MPC).205 The material is able to cell-penetrate non-endocytically or to fuse with plasma membranes without overt membrane disruption. With the help of this amphiphilic phospholipid polymer, the mechanism of direct cell-penetration was discovered.
Opaque microparticles on the basis of PEG700 diacrylate and Rh1 made via stop-flow lithography were reported by Doyle and coworkers.206 During this semicontinuos method for the fabrication of hydrogel particles, two anisotropies, in particular magnetic and geometric anisotropy, could also be introduced into the material. Furthermore, genotyping by alkaline dehybridization was reported using that material as substrates.207 The authors were able to discriminate single-nucleotide polymorphisms by the pH-value as an alternative to the temperature-driven non-enzymatic discrimination. A schematic representation of the working principle of the stepwise cleavage of DNA under basic conditions is depicted in Scheme 8.
 Scheme 8  (a) Illustration of the stop-flow lithography. (b, c) Multifunctional encoded hydrogel particles that contain DNA probes on either side and a fluorescent dye (Rh1) in the center. (d) Fluorescence microscopy image of the hydrogel particle after hybridization with fluorescently labeled (green) target DNA. (e) Scheme of the immobilization of the particles by a barrier in a microfluidic channel to form a multiplexed particle assay. (f) Fluorescence microscopy image of the multiplexed immobilized particle assay. (g) Schematic representation of a genotyping method using these particles in an alkaline dehybridization protocol. Scale bars = 100 mm.207 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
The only modification on the xanthene moiety of the rhodamine chromophore (Rh4) was described by Armes and coworkers.208 In this case, the rhodamine 6G was equipped with a polymerizable unit as well as an ATRP initiator functionality. The monomer was copolymerized with a biomimetic comonomer, the 2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl phosphorylcholine (MPC) and 2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DPMA) as block copolymer, using the ATRP technique. In contrast to the commonly applied rhodamine B monomers, Rh4 is highly fluorescent at physiological pH-values.
Besides biological applications, the formation of three-dimensional hydrogel multilayers using the enzyme-mediated redox chain initiation method has been described by Bowman et al. using Rh2 as well as a 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA)/PEG575 diacrylate monomer mixture for the polymerization.181 One of the three layers was rhodamine labeled, while another was colored with fluorescein (Fl2, see fluorescein section, Scheme 5).
Copolymers, in particular stimuli-responsive nanoparticles and microgels, composed of Rh1 or Rh2 as well as NIPAM, have been intensively studied in terms of temperature sensitive swelling/deswelling behavior,209–213 repeated transport of specifically assembled patterns by a reversible buckling process,214 multi-agent delivery in core-stealth nanofibers,215 thermoresponsive behavior of layer-by-layer coated nanogels,216 and nanoparticle distribution in cells depending on the type of dye-attachment (e.g., labile or covalent).217
A FRET process was observed in polymeric ionic liquid polymers containing Rh5 (R = CH3) as comonomer.218 For this purpose, Rh5 was esterified using rhodamine B and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, as reagents. A subsequent free radical polymerization using AIBN as initiator and two polymerizable ionic liquids yielded the final polymer.
Rhodamine containing copolymers were also investigated in terms of sensor materials. Liu and coworkers investigations focused on poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-Rh6) block copolymers, which revealed fluorescence after opening the nonfluorescent spirolactam form to an open amide structure.219 For this purpose, a thiourea functionality was introduced as spacer between the polymerizable group and the chromophore, which enables the switching on of the fluorescence either by Hg2+ ions or pH-values below 6. In addition, the fluorescence can be further enhanced by thermal induced micelle-formation (heating above 34 or 36 °C depending on the composition of the blocks), bearing the labeled NIPAM-block in the core. The polymers were obtained by using a PEO-RAFT agent as a macro-chain-transfer agent for the RAFT polymerization of NIPAM and Rh6. Upon substitution of the PEO block by a PS that was labeled with a second polymerizable dye [i.e., 4-(2-acryloyloxyethylamino)-7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole (Oxa11, see Scheme 14 in the oxadiazole section)], a FRET process was induced by the Hg2+ ions which could be enhanced by collapsing the poly(NIPAM)-block upon heating.220 Furthermore, a P(NIPAM-co-FITC)-b-P(PEGMA-co-Rh7) was prepared.221 In contrast, Rh7 does not reveal the Hg2+ sensitive thiourea functionality but still shows a pH-responsive behavior. At pH < 6, the polymers exhibit a green fluorescence, whereas the red emitting species is formed at higher pH-values. The collapsing of the NIPAM-block and simultaneous micelle-formation induces a FRET process upon heating the polymer. For further approaches, a P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7) was synthesized.222Sp2 is a UV- and visible light switchable fluorescent spiropyran methacrylate monomer used to introduce an additional responsiveness depending on the type of irradiation (for exact structure, see Scheme 14 in the “others” section). In this way, another multi-responsive polymer was obtained. Scheme 9 shows the working principle of this polymeric-micelle-based reversible three-state switchable multicolor luminescent system. These states (i.e., red emissive particle shell, orange emissive particle shell and green emissive particle shell) can be reached via pH-variation, selective irradiation, temperature variation as well as one combination of all parameters.
 Scheme 9  Schematic representation of a polymeric-micelle-based reversible three state switchable multicolor luminescent system from amphiphilic and thermoresponsive diblock copolymer P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh6). RhBAMRh6, SPMASp2.222 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
1,8-Naphthalimides
1,8-Naphthalimide functionalized monomers are synthetically accessible in moderate to very good yields by introducing substituents in the 4-position as well as on the nitrogen of the imide-functionality. The modification of the optical properties or the introduction of additional tailor-made units is most frequently realized by amination of the 4-position on the aromatic system. In contrast, a functionalized imide-functionality can be obtained by imidation of the naphthalic anhydride using the corresponding amine. In every case, the introduction of the polymerizable unit, in particular allyl, acrylate- and methacrylate functionalities, does not significantly influence the optical properties of the chromophore. The structures of the polymerizable naphthalimides are depicted in Scheme 10. The typical synthetic routes and detailed characterization of 1,8-naphthalimides (Nap1 and Nap2) that were copolymerized with MMA were reported by Khosravi et al.223
 Scheme 10  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing 1,8-naphthalimides as chromophore. 
The groups of Yi and Zeng prepared photo-switchable nanoparticles by miniemulsion polymerization bearing Nap3 as well as spiropyran-linked methacrylate moieties.224 The open or closed form of the spiropyran functionality enables or disables a FRET process upon UV or visible light irradiation, respectively, and, thus, the emission color of the nanoparticles can be switched from cyan to red.
Konstantinova et al. synthesized 1,8-naphthalimides bearing a polymerizable allyl functionality at the nitrogen atom of the imide-unit (Nap4 to Nap6) and, subsequently, copolymerized these monomers with MMA using a free radical polymerization (0.1 wt% dye).225 Due to their intense yellow-orange color and bright yellow fluorescence, these three polymers were applied as coloring agents of polyamides fabrics. In addition, Nap14 and Nap15 were also copolymerized with MMA and proved to be good whitening materials for 100% cotton fabrics due to their bright white color and intense bluish fluorescence. For all copolymers, an enhancement of the photo-stability after the polymerization was observed.
Grabchev and coworkers investigated the photophysical properties of styrene-based copolymers bearing 1,8-naphthalimides as side-chains, which are substituted with a chelating ligand at the 4-position (Nap7).226 The polymer acts as sensor for several metal ions, in particular, Zn2+, Fe3+, Co2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, and Mn2+, in acetonitrile. The mechanism of the fluorescence enhancement (FE) of the monomer as well as its dependency on the metal cation is depicted in Scheme 11. In contrast to the other metal ions, an additional response only for Fe3+ ions could be observed in aqueous solutions. After complexation of the metal ions, the material revealed an increase of the fluorescence and, in the case of Fe3+ ions, also a shift of the maximum emission wavelength. Grabchev et al. also suggested an application as an ON–OFF probe due to a considerable increase of the fluorescence intensity under acidic pH-values and the presence of protons, respectively.
 Scheme 11  Schematic representation of the mechanism of the FE by metal ion complexation (top) and its dependency on the metal ion (bottom).226 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission. 
An optical fiber, coated with a polymer that was obtained by auto-polymerization at elevated temperatures of N-allyl-4-(4′-methyl-piperazinyl)-1,8-naphthalimide (Nap8), was utilized for intra-arterial blood pH monitoring in rabbits.227 Bai and coworkers developed a pH-sensor device for in vivo and in vitro application that can potentially be used to monitor acidosis and alkalosis in human patients.
Bojinov et al. successfully incorporated 1,8-naphthalimides Nap9 to Nap13 as comonomer into polyacrylonitriles.228,229 The resulting polymers were investigated in terms of their photo-stability. In this context, the 1,8-naphthalimides serve as UV absorber or hindered amine light stabilizer (HALS) in order to protect the materials from photo-degradation. The design of the yellow-green emitting monomers combined the UV-absorbing characteristics of the 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-1,3,5-triazine moiety with the radical scavenging property of the 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine unit. In order to determine the photo-stability, the compounds were irradiated for 10 h and the degradation was monitored colorimetrically. The compounds including the modified 1,8-naphthalimides revealed a significantly increased photo-stability after copolymerization with acrylonitrile (AN) using a free radical polymerization technique and 0.1 wt% of the dyes.
The group of Tian et al. used tertiary amine and methacrylate substituted 1,8-naphthalimides (Nap16) as “OFF–ON–OFF” switches for proton detection via fluorescence spectroscopy.230 In this case, a well-defined polymer could be obtained by polymerization of the dye using the RAFT polymerization technique. In the pH range between 11 and 3.5, the polymer acts as fluorescence enhancement sensor (OFF to ON). In contrast, the fluorescence intensity decreased at pH-values lower than 3.5 (ON to OFF). These effects were attributed to the different possibilities of the protons to quarternize the two different amines. Moreover, the authors modified the polymerizable 1,8-naphthalimide at the 4-position by introducing an amide functionality instead of the tertiary amines (Nap17).231 In this context, the sensing application of the homopolymer could be extended from protons to fluorine ions. In this case a dependency of the response on the molar mass could be observed. Further investigations of Tian and coworkers concerning 1,8-naphthalimides included a polyacetylene based fluorine chemosensor.232 For this purpose, the naphthalimide moiety was functionalized with an alkyne functionality (Nap18) that undergoes polymerization using an organorhodium complex as catalyst resulting in a conjugated polyacetylene backbone. In contrast to I−, Br− and Cl−, a colorless-to-yellow color change as well as a blue-to-orange emission color change upon F− concentrations between 10 and 100 μM could be observed by the naked eye.
A luminescence conversion light-emitting diode (LUCO LED) based on 1,8-naphthalimides bearing a diphenyl amino group on the 4-position was constructed by Lee et al.233 For this purpose, the dye (Nap19) was copolymerized with MMA in a free radical polymerization procedure (0.05 wt% dye). However, the UV-vis absorption as well as emission of the dye was redshifted after polymerization. The reasons for the behavior were not discussed in this contribution. Nevertheless, the device based on that material featured a good long-term stability for 288 h at 20 mA. The luminescent power versus time plot as well as the layout of the device is depicted in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the architecture of LUCO LEDs and luminescent power versus continuous operating time at 20 mA (DBNNap19).233 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission. 
Lu and Liu synthesized NIPAM based nanogels containing side chain pendent 1,8-naphthalimide chromophores (Nap20).234 The near monodisperse dual responsive polymer particles were obtained by free radical emulsion polymerization. The particles collapse upon heating from 25 to 40 °C, which causes a change in the microenvironment of embedded dyes by shrinkage of the hydrodynamic volume and, thus, the fluorescence intensity increases by a factor of 3.4. Furthermore, the nanoparticles respond to Hg2+ ions. For this purpose, the fluorescence of the nanogels was studied at 25 and 40 °C in the presence of mercury ions. A 57 fold enhancement of the fluorescence intensity could be observed at 40 °C, whereas the intensity increased by a factor of 10 at 25 °C. The working principle of the nanogel particles is illustrated in Scheme 12.
 Scheme 12  Schematic representation of the construction of thermoresponsive PNIPAM nanogel-based dual fluorescent sensors for temperature and Hg2+ ions with enhanced detection sensitivity.234 Figure copyright Royal Society of Chemistry and reproduced with permission. 
Oxadiazoles
It is generally known that 1,3,4-oxadizoles can be obtained by the dehydration reaction of diacylhydrazines, whereas 1,2,5-oxadiazoles are synthetically available by dehydration of bis-oxime compounds of 1,2-dicarbonyls. Although two other isomers exist, only the two latter ones have been applied as functionalized monomer for the polymerization of side-chain pendant polymers.
Carroll et al. provided the synthesis of a methacrylate functionalized 1,3,4-oxadiazole Oxa1 (see Scheme 13 for exact structures of the monomers), which was polymerized by the FRP procedure using AIBN in THF.235 The obtained homopolymers as well as Oxa1 and carbazole moiety containing copolymers were investigated regarding their optical properties, in particular, UV-vis absorption, photoluminescence and electroluminescence in thin films.
 Scheme 13  Schematic representation of polymerizable oxadiazole derivatives. 
The group of Uchiyama developed a polymeric thermometer which was fluorescently labeled with Oxa2.236,237 The copolymer particles were based on NIPAM as thermo-responsive comonomer and a cross-linker (BIS). A decreased water-uptake at elevated temperatures caused a change in the chemical surrounding of the fluorescent dye and, thus, an enhancement of the dye-fluorescence could be observed.
Zhou and coworkers tested the polymers containing oxadiazole functionalized styrene derivatives as repeating unit for electroluminescent devices. The authors started with a free radical polymerization of Oxa3 (chlorobenzene, 90 °C, benzoyl peroxide initiator)238 and went over to more sophisticated polymer architectures, i.e. block copolymers with thiophene substituted styrene blocks by the ATRP technique.239 For their next approach, the authors combined the thiophene as well as the oxadiazole moieties in one monomer (Oxa4/Oxa5).240 As a polymerization technique, also ATRP was applied using CuBr, ethyl 2-bromo-2-methylpropionate (EBP) and Me6TREN in N-methyl pyrolidone (NMP). Additionally, the resulting polymers were investigated in terms of its liquid-crystalline behavior. Furthermore, the authors reported that a change in the substitution position on the styrene (Oxa6 to Oxa12) affects the packing behavior of the polymer.241
The incorporation of Oxa11 into PNIPAM backbones was extensively studied by the group of Liu.242 Firstly, the authors used Br-functionalized silica particles as ATRP initiator for the growth of differently labeled PNIPAM blocks (as spiropyran monomer was utilized as second label).243 These coated particles revealed photoswitchable (due to spiropyran/merocyanine isomerization for the switching on/off the FRET) as well as thermoswitchable behavior (due to NIPAM repeating units). Furthermore, a PS-b-PNIPAM block copolymer was prepared by sequential RAFT polymerization.222 The hydrophobic PS block was Oxa11 and spiropyran labeled, whereas the hydrophilic block was rhodamine labeled (see also rhodamine section). Self-assembly of this polymer in aqueous media displayed micelle formation resulting in a FRET process that can be stimulated by multiple stimuli (i.e., pH-, UV- as well as temperature-variation) to three different states. In the case of an Oxa11 labeled PS block and a Rh4 labeled PNIPAM block, a chemosensor for Hg(II) ions could be obtained.220 Another approach for tuning the FRET process by external stimuli was the copolymerization of Oxa11 with NIPAM, Rh5 (R = H, see Scheme 7 in the corresponding section for exact structure) and a polymerizable crown ether by emulsion polymerization in water.244 In this manner, a further sensitivity towards K(I) ions could be introduced.
Maynard applied a symmetric double-functional trithiocarbonate RAFT agent for the copolymerization of Oxa12 with NIPAM.245 Subsequently, the endgroups were converted to protein-binding maleimide functionalities in order to connect two proteins by one polymer chain.
A wide range of publications focused on the application of oxadiazoles containing polymers in optoelectronic devices, in particular OLEDs, phosphorescent light emitting diodes and high performance memory devices. In this context, Oxa13 was copolymerized with polymerizable carbazoles.246Oxa14 to Oxa16 were copolymerized with polymerizable triphenylamines or carbazoles, respectively, using the NMP technique (also block copolymers were synthesized).247,248Oxa17 and Oxa18 were used for the construction of random copolymer architectures with carbazole or triphenylamine moieties by NMP249,250 and Oxa19 to Oxa26 were polymerized by FRP and ROMP, respectively.251
Others
A wide range of other dyes which are capable to be polymerized are listed in this section (see Scheme 14 for exact structures). So far, polymer films based on Nile blue NB1 were applied as ethanol sensor due to their solvatochromic behavior.252 In the case of Nile blue, the change of the maximum absorption wavelength in ethanol is significantly stronger in comparison to other solvents. Furthermore, NB2 and NB3 were copolymerized with BA for application as plasticizer-free fluorescent ion (i.e. H+ and Na+) optode microsphere sensors.253 However, the authors claimed that the approach of directly polymerizing the functionalized dye is not suitable due to the formation of side-products with undesired H+-binding properties and, therefore, undesired spectral properties. In contrast, the general problem of leaching of the plasticizer was overcome by grafting of the dye via amide or urea bondage onto the polymer with a low Tg.
 Scheme 14  Schematic representation of a series of polymerizable monomers bearing different types of chromophores. 
So far, only some examples for stimuli-responsive polymers with some other non-classical chromophores exist. Spiropyranes in their closed form are not fluorescent. In contrast, the open merocyanine form is fluorescent. A switching between these two states can be obtained by UV- and visible light irradiation, respectively. For this purpose, Sp1 was copolymerized with MMA and a donor triarylamine monomer in order to enable or disable the energy transfer between those two chromophores.254 Furthermore, the details about the copolymerization of Sp2 with NIPAM222,243 or MMA224 can be found in the oxadiazole or naphthalimide section, respectively.
As second example for stimuli-responsive polymers based on polymerizable dyes that do not belong to the above listed ones, Men'shikova and coworkers reported the synthesis of Lu as well as its seed emulsion polymerization with styrene and DVB as comonomers.255 As a result, monodisperse core–shell particles were obtained which sorb toluene vapor. This process was monitored by solid-state 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. In the case of benzene vapor, the fluorescence also increased during the uptake.
The incorporation of luciferin analogous chromophores (i.e., thiazoles Thia1 to Thia5) was carried out by Schubert et al. According to their polymerizable functionalities, Thia1 and Thia2 were copolymerized with MMA;256 in contrast, Thia3 and Thia4 were copolymerized with styrene.257 The application of the RAFT polymerization technique using AIBN as initiator, CPDB as CTA and toluene as solvent enabled the formation of well-defined statistical copolymers. Thia5 was copolymerized with MMA and a photoactive Ru(II)-complex.258 The photophysical properties of all polymers were characterized by time-resolved lifetime measurements. Solvent-dependent donor lifetime measurements are depicted in Fig. 16. The non-exponential decay in the presence of the Ru(II) acceptor in comparison to the single-exponential donor alone decay curve (Thia5-containing copolymer) proves a FRET process.
 Fig. 16  Donor fluorescence curves of compound P(Thia5-co-MMA) (donor alone polymer, upper curves with longer fluorescence) and of P(Thia5-co-MMA-co-Ru(II)) (donor–acceptor polymer, lower curves with quenched fluorescence) in different solvents: acetonitrile (red squares), dichloromethane (blue circles), chloroform (black triangles). Excitation wavelength: 290 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the group of Schubert published the synthesis and characterization of a series of polymerizable oligo(phenylene ethynylene)s.259 For the monomers OPE1 to OPE3, the length of the conjugated system was altered (OPE1: dimer, OPE2: trimer) as well as the optoelectronical properties (OPE2: donor trimer, OPE3: acceptor trimer with benzothiadiazole moiety). The monomers were suitable for RAFT polymerization using AIBN as initiator, CPDB as CTA and toluene as solvent. Notable side-chain interactions in dilute solutions were induced within the homopolymers upon variation of the solvent/non-solvent ratio. Furthermore, the distance between the dyes was enlarged by copolymerization of the OPEs with MMA, which caused different types of resonant energy transfer in donor- and acceptor containing copolymers. Furthermore, worm-like conformations of the polymers in dilute solutions could be observed.260
In order to show that oligo(phenylene ethynylene)s are suitable for organic electronic devices, OPE4 and OPE5 were copolymerized with hole-transporting polymerizable carbazoles by Lin et al. using a FRP procedure.261–264 An oxadiazole containing dendron was attached to the terminal pyridine moiety by supramolecular self-assembly. This construction was tested as polymeric light-emitting diode.261 The device displayed an electroluminescence emission of 519 nm under a turn-on voltage of 6.5 V, with a maximum luminance of 408 cd m−2 at 18 V and a luminance efficiency of 0.39 cd A−1 at 100 mA cm−2, respectively. Additionally, the surface of gold NPs could be modified using these materials.262,263 As a result, the polymers crosslinked. As alternative to gold NP substrates, the crosslinking by organic substrates was also described.264
Furthermore, Haeussler et al. investigated the optoelectronical properties of benzothiadiazole-containing pendant polymers prepared using the RAFT polymerization technique.265 For this purpose, the authors synthesized block copolymers from BTD1 to BTD4 as well as a vinyl triarylamine as second block. The polymers were spin-casted and tested in organic photovoltaic devices. The characteristics (i.e. current–voltage curve as well as absorption spectrum and incident photon to current efficiency) of this device are depicted in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Left: current–voltage curve of a 147 nm organic solar cell device consisting of a blend of a BTD3 containing block copolymer as well as PCBM (blend ratio 1:4) as active layer. Right: incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) and absorption spectra of active layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Lu and coworkers published the synthesis of a series of 1,3,4-thiadiazole containing monomers (TD1 to TD3).266 The monomers were polymerized by the FRP procedure using AIBN as initiator and cyclohexanone as solvent. HOMO and LUMO energy levels were determined by cyclovoltammetry as well as by fluorescence emission spectroscopy. The energy levels were found to be −6.35 to −6.14 eV and −3.02 to −2.84 eV, respectively. The polymers revealed either blue or green light emission.
With respect to future biological applications, the Hoechst dyes are generally suitable for the coloration of nuclei for fluorescence microscopy due to their binding to the DNA. Their polymerizable derivative H reveals a maximum absorption wavelength of 355 nm and emits in the blue to cyan region of the visible light spectrum. So far, to the best of our knowledge, no publications exist, where H was polymerized or copolymerized although it is commercially available. This is also the case with the (meth)acrylamide functionalized ethidiumbromides EtBr1 and EtBr2 which bind to nucleic acids. The double functionalization of these monomers enables only the formation of cross-linked polymer architectures.
Optical properties of the dyes
In general, the optical properties of each dye can be fine-tuned by the introduction of functional groups. To the best of our knowledge, polymerizable aromatic dyes were so far not further modified on the aromatic system. Basically, these chromophores reveal only one reactive position which is used to introduce the polymerizable group. In contrast, a wide range of substituents can be introduced in azo-dye chromophores. Dependent on the substitution of the aryl moieties and the cis–trans isomerization, the absorption spectra of azo dyes cover all colors from yellow to violet. The synthetic strategy of the formation of azo-compounds enables a large variety of structures. The photochemical trans–cis back-isomerization of an azobenzene series showed that this process depends on the steric hindrance of the substituents.146 In the particular case of Azo7 to Azo14 the switching rate was observed as follows: H > CH3 > NO3 > CN > OCH3. For the halides, the order was Cl > F > Br > I. Noteworthy, also the thermal properties are influenced by the substituents. It was observed that electron withdrawing groups displayed enhanced stability and electron donating groups decreased the Tg values (up to 35 K variation). This finding is also supported by other azo-dye containing polymer studies.144,145 Among the halogen containing polymers, the thermal stability follows the inductive effects of halogens that are apparently overwhelmed by the polarizability and electron repulsion factors.
The optical properties of coumarin dyes can be influenced by the substitution on the 4-position. The absorption and emission wavelengths increase in the following order: H < CH3 < CF3. Furthermore, the linker plays a significant role. Ether linkers at the 7-position lower the maximum wavelengths of the absorption as well as the emission in comparison to amide linkers. Furthermore, an extension of the aromatic system in the case of benzocoumarins leads to an increase of the absorption of approximately 50 nm for the absorption and 40 nm for the emission.267
The exact position of the emission wavelength of a dye is also influenced by the microenvironment of the chromophore.268 Dependent on the polarity of the solvent, the HOMO/LUMO levels of the dyes can be stabilized at different energetic levels. Differences in the polarities of the ground and excited state of a chromophore increase this effect. In addition, additives like salts and pH-buffers, for instance, can also affect the emission wavelength. The attachment of a dye to a polymer chain leads to an embedding of this dye into a polymer coil in solution. As a consequence, also the polymer coil belongs to the microenvironment of the chromophore, and, thus, it can be adjusted by the choice of comonomer. Standard monomers (e.g., styrene or MMA) usually do not have any influences on the optical properties. In contrast, stimuli-responsive monomers (e.g., DEGMA, PEGMA, DMAEMA and NIPAM) strongly respond to temperature changes. The reversible formation of hydrogen bonds in aqueous solutions causes the LCST behavior of these polymers. Above the LCST temperature, the water molecules are pulled out of the polymer coil and, consequently, the microenvironment of the dye is altered. Noteworthy, the majority of all dyes do not feature solvatochromic behavior. In particular, NB253 and merocyanines269 are reported for solvatochromism.
In general, the optical properties, in particular, maxima of the absorptions and emissions, are preserved after polymerization. However, negligible shifts (±5 nm) of the absorption and emission spectra of the dyes after polymerization can be observed. Due to π–π stacking effects, bathochromic shifts in homopolymers as well as polymers with high dye content can be expected for all dyes. In electronic application a close packing of the chromophores is sometimes targeted to tune the optical properties by excimer formation. Furthermore, film-formation can also cause these effects. These shifts in the absorption maximum of up to 10 nm can be minimized by the introduction of bulky substituents on the dye itself. However, these effects cannot be fully prevented.

Table 1 lists the available optical property data – if reported – of all dyes reviewed in this contribution.
Table 1 Summary of the available data for absorption and emission maxima of the reviewed monomers in their according solvent




Monomer
Absorption λmax [nm]
Emission λmax [nm]
Solvent




Aromatic monomers
285–470
340–440




Anthracene An1–An5
362
407
Cyclohexane


Diphenyl anthracene DPA1–DPA2
372
403, 425
Cyclohexane


Naphthalene monomers N1–N7
285
345





F1, F2
320


THF



F3

445


Water (buffered)



F4

290, 354


Water (buffered)



Per1

434
435
Dichloromethane


Phenanthrene monomers P1–P2
254,
378
Cyclohexane


Pyrene
338
375
DMSO



Py1–Py5

377, 395, 467
377, 394, 416 (shoulder), 435 (shoulder)
THF






Azo-monomers
260–520







Azo2

336


Dioxane



Azo3

341


Dioxane



Azo4

360


Dioxane



Azo5

349


Dioxane



Azo6

343


Dioxane



Azo9

350 (E)






438 (Z)



Azo16

379 (E)


Chloroform


300, 473 (Z)



Azo17

366 (E)


Chloroform


260, 453 (Z)



Azo24

460 (NO2)






417 (Br)


405 (OCH3)



Azo25

462 (NO2)






415 (Br)


403 (OCH3)



Azo26

333


THF



Azo42

445


Chloroform



Azo43

365


Chloroform



Azo44

420, 520
430
DMF



Azo45

449


THF






Benzothiadiazoles
365–470
490–660





BTD1

365
490
Homopolymer as thin film



BTD2

415
541
Homopolymer as thin film



BTD3

440
610
Homopolymer as thin film



BTD4

467
658
Homopolymer as thin film






Coumarin monomers
320–400
450–510




Coumarin 1 monomers (CH3-substituent, amide linkage)
373
450
EtOH


Coumarin 152 Monomers (CF3-substituent, amide linkage)
397
510
EtOH



Cou7–Cou10 (CH3-substituent, ether linkage)
320










Fluorescein monomers
485–555
510–585





Fl1–Fl6

485
514





Fl7

532–547 (Erythrosin)
556–581
THF, acetone or DMSO (Homopolymers revealed redshift in absorption- and emission spectra in more polar solvents, polymers tend to bleach, thermal stability of the polymers: erythrosin > Eosin Y > Eosin B)


537–547 (Eosin)
557–564


535–552 (Eosin)
554–571






Naphthalimide monomers
280–460
510–530





Nap1

441
511





Nap2

443
512





Nap3

424
450–620
Dichloromethane



Nap4

404


Toluene


406
Chloroform


408
EtOH


404
DMF



Nap5

410


Toluene


414
Chloroform


440
EtOH


442
DMF



Nap6

430


Toluene


436
Chloroform


446
EtOH


458
DMF



Nap7

428
517
Acetonitrile



Nap9

436
526
DMF



Nap10

340, 434
526
DMF



Nap11

434
524
DMF



Nap12

286, 338, 434
527
DMF



Nap13

290, 340, 436
527
DMF



Nap14

342 (354)


Toluene


344 (356)
Chloroform


342 (354)
EtOH


342 (356)
DMF



Nap15

342 (354)


Toluene


344 (356)
Chloroform


344 (356)
EtOH


344 (356)
DMF



Nap16

414 (pH = 11.2)
520
DMSO–water 1/1


406 (pH = 7.6)


390 (pH = 3.4)


390 (pH = −0.6)



Nap17

365
465
Dichloromethane–DMSO 9/1



Nap18

365
455
Acetonitrile



Nap19

440
550
Chloroform






OPE monomers
290–435
370–530





OPE1

296
371
Chloroform



OPE2

318, 369
402
Chloroform



OPE3

312, 431
529
Chloroform



OPE4

320, 385
445
THF



OPE5

350
440
THF






Oxdiazoles
230–470
380–560





Oxa1

315
380
Chlorobenzene



Oxa2

275, 456
560
Water



Oxa3

330
402
Chloroform



Oxa4–Oxa5

371 (C8)
437, 464
Chloroform


372 (C10)
437, 461



Oxa11

470
518
Water



Oxa13


ca. 310

ca. 390
THF



Oxa17

293


As film



Oxa18

311


As film



Oxa19, Oxa22, Oxa25
241, 292, 339
424
Dichloromethane



Oxa20, Oxa23
237, 284, 341
414
Dichloromethane



Oxa21, Oxa24, Oxa26
234, 292, 337
434
Dichloromethane






Rhodamine monomers
530–550
560–570




Rhodamine B Rh1–Rh3, Rh5–Rh9
548
570





Rh4

530
566
Aqueous HCl, pH = 2






Thiadiazoles
310–325
390–400





TD2

311
390
DMF



TD3

321
398
DMF






Thiazoles
250–370
410–450





Thia1

342, 334
410, 411
Acetonitrile



Thia2

368, 361
446, 447
Acetonitrile



Thia3

253, 370
445
Acetonitrile



Thia4

250, 361
447
Acetonitrile



Thia5

375
447
Dichloromethane






Others









EtBr

439
512





Fu

396 (E)
−(E)
Chloroform




528 (C)
635–649 (C)





Lu



582
EtOH–Water 20/80



NB2–NB3

493
574
Toluene


499
596
Acetone


504
598
DMF


628
667
EtOH


635
674
Water


457
556
1.0 N HCl (pH = 1)


522
668
0.1 N NaOH (pH = 11)



Sp2

470–650


As polymer NP suspension in water




Conclusions
The incorporation of dye-bearing monomers into polymeric architectures is an ongoing field of research. The widest range of applications of polymerizable dyes focuses on the simple addition of a labeling monomer to the polymerization feed for visualization purposes in macroscopic biological objects (e.g., living cells) by fluorescence microscopy. In these cases, straight-forward free radical polymerization techniques or emulsion polymerizations are applied exclusively. In general, anthracene derivatives or fluorescein/rhodamine monomers are well-established depending on their micro-environment in the polymer (hydrophobic or hydrophilic character). In addition, more sophisticated polymerization techniques (i.e., various kinds of controlled radical polymerization techniques) are required for the application of polymers as sensor materials or molecular switches due to the reproducible adjustment of the polymer chain-length in combination with narrow polydispersity index values. The fluorescence response as well as the absorption behavior of these systems can be tuned by the choice of the chromophore. For this purpose, an enlargement of the pool of dye-functionalized monomers (e.g., dye classes that have not yet been modified with polymerizable units, so far) can potentially lead to an extension of the playground of a wide range of external stimuli for sensing and/or switching of polymers. However, one has to keep in mind that important groups of dyes, for instance the phenothiazines, can act as radical scavenger and, thus, these molecules are not suitable for radical polymerization techniques. This problem can be circumvented by an appropriate functionalization (e.g., the introduction of norbornene moieties for ROMP). Moreover, side-chain pendant polymer chains feature enhanced solubility and therefore enhanced processability for the fabrication of organic electronical devices, compared to their main-chain conjugated counterparts. Furthermore, they tend to phase-separate more easily in block copolymer architectures, which are accessible by well-known controlled radical polymerization techniques nowadays. Due to the short effective conjugation length, the brush-like polymers do not reach the best performances of conjugated polymers. In order to overcome this drawback, an enlargement of the conjugated system as well as the incorporation of band-gap lowering moieties (e.g., thiophenes or benzothiadiazoles) might be performed to enhance the efficiencies. An alternative therefore could be the addition of fluorescing dyes, which separately cover a certain part of the UV- and the visible light spectrum. Related to this approach, artificial organic antenna systems are thinkable for mimicking the light-harvesting part of the photosynthesis, for instance. Due to the asymmetry of the monomers, their synthesis will always be the limiting factor in this approach. Besides the “downwards” energy transfer, energy upconversion is also a future field for polymerizable fluorescent dyes.270 So far, the photon upconversion was achieved by triplet–triplet annihilation within polymeric matrices. Future developments will also be extended to polymer bound systems.
With respect to future biological applications, the variation of the particle size and the visualization could lead to new information about a number of biological processes. Thereby, the extension of the fluorescence colors of the dyes over the entire visible light spectrum might enable the monitoring of parallel processes that influence each other. So far, only the green and red fluorescent particles of fluorescein and rhodamine, respectively, have been well-established. However, one has to keep the specific characteristics of each class of dyes in mind (e.g., toxicity of azo-compounds or hydrophobicity of aromatic dyes) that influence the biological behavior.
In terms of suspending SWNCTs or MWNCTs, the optical properties of the dye moieties play a minor role. Usually aromatic units are applied (e.g., pyrenes) due to their excellent interaction with the material. Chain-end functionalized polymers with one dye per polymer chain already feature the desired capability. Hence, the optimum is already achieved. Nevertheless, the functionalization of the solubilising polymer chains with dye moieties offers a wide range of possibilities. For example, electronic sensor materials on the molecular scale are imaginable.
Moreover, the application of diverse sensor systems is elucidated. The list of potential analytes in different environments or media is endless. As a consequence, tailor-made systems need to be developed for every system. So far, 1,8-naphthalimides have been overrepresented in the class of chemosensors due to their easy functionalization and good response to several anions and cations.
In contrast, the development of molecular switches or electronic memory devices goes in the direction of azo-compounds. The required synthetic effort for a functionalization is rather limited. One might speculate that also other compounds (e.g., fulgides or merocyanines) that undergo a large shift in a binding angle and/or binding distance by external stimuli will be incorporated into polymer architectures in the future.271
With respect to electronic devices, robust monomers which do not tend to bleach over a long time period must be investigated. In some cases, this issue is only a task of device engineering (e.g., the exclusion of oxygen). The benchmark for liquid crystalline displays or OLED application should be at least five years and for organic solar cell devices even longer. For this purpose, small heterocycles (e.g., thiazoles or oxadiazoles) might be a good alternative due to their good stability and low cost production potential.
In general, the studies reviewed in this article support the conclusion that the incorporation of dye molecules leads to modified thermal properties of the polymers. The majority of all investigations showed that an increased content of dye affects an enhanced Tg value. The changes are fluent from low dye content polymers with predominant properties of the comonomer to homopolymers consisting of a polymerizable dye. At least all polymers are stable up to at least 250 °C. Nevertheless, the introduction of dye monomers leads to a decrease of the thermal stability. Furthermore, solubility mediating flexible alkyl side-chains influence the Tg value for conjugated oligomers.241 This thermal property correlates with the length of the chain. However, the direction (i.e., either increase or decrease) cannot be predicted. In addition, the chemical stability of the dyes in the polymer must be considered for each application. For long-term application of pH-sensors, for instance, an ester linkage is not useful.
Finally, all polymerizable dyes that have been reviewed in this contribution, are alphabetically listed in Table 2 including their polymerization technique, selected polymerization conditions (i.e., solvent and temperature) as well as their comonomers and their corresponding applications.
Table 2 Summary of the applied polymerization techniques of the polymerizable dye-containing monomers as well as selected reaction conditions and the corresponding comonomers




Monomer
Polymerization technique
Solvent
Reaction temperature [°C]
Comonomers
Application





a Propylene glycol methyl ether acetate.
b Commercially available.
c 3-(Triethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate.
d Protected by patent.
e Commercially available but no experimental data available.
f Commercially available homopolymers or reference values from Polymer Handbook used.
g Language: Chinese.
h No information published.






AcN

RAFT
Chlorobenzene
70 (16 h)

DPA1 , DPA288
Excitation energy transfer



An1

FRP
PGMEAa
60 (5 h)
PTBS, MAA65
Deep UV lithography


FRP
THF
55 (24 h)
CyOPMI, (HBuVE), MMA66
Negative-tone photoimaging


FRP
Toluene
60
Styrene57,58
Morphology characterization of immiscible polymer blends


FRP
THF–toluene
60 (48 h)
Hexyl methacrylate, MMA59,60
Photodimerization


6-((4′-cyano-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)oxy)hexyl methacrylate71
LC polymer fibres


ATRP
Anisole
70
MMA61
Synthesis and characterization


FRP
THF
55 (2 h) and 62 (12 h)
MMA69
Diels–Alder crosslinking


ATRP
H2O
60 (overnight)
MMA (diblock copolymer)70
Photodimerization


ATRP
Toluene
60 (20 min)
DMAEMA63
Surface labeling


FRP
THF
60 (24 h)
Azacrown ether methacrylate monomers64
Synthesis and characterization


RAFT
THF
62 (20 h)
AEMA83
Amine and metal sensor














Homopolymer and MMA105,106
Separation of SWCNTs














Homopolymer119,120
Antireflective coating














MMA121
LC display element















tBMA122
Photoresist


FRP
Toluene
60
Neopentyl methacrylamide138
Structured polymer Langmuir–Blodgett films


FRP
Benzene
60 (48 h)
MAA124
Studies on PMAA conformation



An2

Iniferter polymerization
Toluene
RT (10–80 min)
MAA, EGDMA99
Cross-linked coatings



An3

FRP
Bulk
70 (48 h)
VP67
Superabsorbent nanogel


FRP

n-Hexane
60 (24 h)
Vinyl terminated poly(siloxanes)68
Polysiloxane labeling


Living anionic polymerization
Cyclohexane or toluene
25 (10 min)
Homopolymer and block copolymer with 4-diphenylaminostyrene
Synthesis and characterization


UV-induced selective surface grafting polymerization
Acetone
25
PS (block copolymer)112
Janus particles



An4

Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
85
MMA, BA129
Polymer diffusion studies



An5

FRP
THF
60 (48 h)
6-((4′-Cyano-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)oxy)hexyl methacrylate71
LC polymer fibres



Azo1













BA, MMA, EtA143
Synthesis and characterization














Styrene, DVB148
Electrophoresis particles for electronic inks



Azo2–Azo6

FRP
Dioxane
80 (1.5 h)
MMA144,145
Synthesis and characterization



Azo7–Azo15

FRP
THF
60 (24 h)
Homopolymers146
Synthesis and characterization



Azo16/Azo17
FRP
THF
60 (48 h)
Homopolymer and Fu copolymer147
Dual-mode optical switchable polymers



Azo18–Azo23













Styrene, DVB148
Electrophoresis particles for electronic inks



Azo24 (R10 = NO2)
RAFT
Toluene
70 (12 h)
DEGMA, Py285,86,156
Sensor for temperature and pH value



Azo24/Azo25
ATRP
Cyclohexanone
80 (4–8 d)
MMA149
Third-order nonlinear optics



Azo26

FRP
Cyclohexanone
70 (8 h)
Styrene, carbazole monomers150
Memory devices



Azo27–Azo36

FRP
Propylene glycol mono-methylether acetate
230 (30 min)
Homopolymers151
Color filters



Azo37/Azo38
ROMP
Dichloro-methane
Rt (90 min)
Homopolymers and copolymers with Azo37 or Azo38152
Reusable acid sensors



Azo39/Azo40
FRP
Benzene
50
Homopolymers154
Reversibly bending polymer films



Azo41

FRP
Toluene
60 (48 h)
Homopolymers155
Three-dimensional photomobility



Azo42/Azo43
RAFT
Anisole
80
Homopolymers and PS block copolymers157
Photoinduced birefringence



Azo44

RAFT
DMF
80 (24 h)
Homopolymers and PS block copolymers158
Metal ion detector



Azo45/Azo46
FRP
THF
60 (2 d)

Py2
103

Functionalization of SWCNTs



BTD1–BTD4

FRP and RAFT
Chlorobenzene
70 (16 h)
Homopolymers and block copolymers with polymerizable triphenylamines265
Organic solar cell



Cou1













MMA159–161
OLED



Cou2

ATRP

p-Xylene
100 (48 h)
PMMA block copolymer162
Core cross-linked star polymers


Radical miniemulsion polymerization
H2O–CH2Cl2
Rt (20 min)
1,4-Phenylene bismethacrylate40

In vivo large-animal-lymph migration of NPs



Cou3–Cou6













Homopolymer163
Intraocular lenses



Cou7

ATRP
THF
60 (20 h)
Homopolymer and naphthopyran copolymer164
Photo-crosslinking



Cou8

Living cationic polymerization
CH2Cl2
0
Homopolymer and methoxyethoxyethyl vinyl ether165
Reversible photoinduced crosslinking



Cou9

FRP








Maleic anhydride, styrene166
Self-assembly of photosensitive particles



Cou10–Cou12

FRP
DMF
60 (16 h)
Homopolymers, MAA copolymers167
Photoalignment of liquid crystals



Cou13–Cou41

FRP
Xylene
Reflux (18 h)
Homopolymers153
Synthesis and characterization



Cou42/Cou43

FRP
Dioxane
75 (24 h)
VP168,169
Sensors


Acrylamide170



Cou44

RAFT
DMF
60
MMA and labelled PMMA-b-PS171
Eu(III) complexation



Cou45

FRP
DMF
70
Homopolymer and VAc172
Antimicrobial coatings



DPA1/DPA2

RAFT
Chlorobenzene
70 (16 h)

AcN
88

Excitation energy transfer



EtBr1/EtBr2
























F1

Living anionic polymerization
Toluene
–78
Homopolymer96
Conformational study



F2

Living anionic polymerization
Toluene
–78 (12 h)
Homopolymer95,96
Conformational study



F3/F4

FRP
DMF
65 (5 h)
2-Ethoxyethyl methacrylate, 2-Ethoxyethyl methacrylate, EGDMA109
Cyanide sensor membrane



F5

Living anionic polymerization
THF
–78
VP (block copolymer)97
Self-assembly


Living anionic polymerization
THF
–78 (1.3 h)
Star-polymers98
Ordered microporous films


FRP
Benzene
70 (16 h)
DMAEMA and stearyl acrylate110
Thermoresponsive luminescent electrospun fibers


Living anionic polymerization
THF or t-butylbenzene
–78 or20
Homopolymers113–116
Non-volatile memory devices



Fl1

RAFT
Dioxane
60
NIPAM, NAOS173
Multifunctional nanomedicines














HEMA, ethylene dimethacrylate174
Optimization of femtosecond laser micromachining


Radical dispersion polymerization
EtOH
70
Styrene176
Polymer particles


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (8 h)
Styrene, NIPAM177
Fe3O4 core–shell composite particles


FRP
Bulk
70 (5 h)
DVB182
Fiber coatings


FRP
Igepal-cyclohexane
Rt (1 h)

N-(3-Aminopropyl) methacrylamide, BIS, PEGMA178–180
Cellular delivery of anionic NPs, gold nanorod coating, functionalized plasmonic-fluorescent NPs


Radical dispersion polymerization
H2O
μW, 600 W (10 s)
AA183
Coating of magnetic nanodiamonds


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
75 (3 h)
Styrene, MMA, styrene/HEMA184,185
Cell uptake of polymer NPs


FRP
EtOH
60 (21 h)
MAA186,187
Polyurea microcapsules


FRP
H2O
70 (44 h)

N-Vinylimidazole, BIS188
Studies on the swelling behavior of crosslinked polymers



Fl2

FRP
EtOH–H2O
25
NIPAM, TBAM, AA, BIS175
Imprinted polymer nanoparticles


Radical photo-polymerization
H2O
Rt (10 min)
HEA and PEG575 diacrylate181
Formation of three-dimensional hydrogel multilayers


FRP
DMSO
RT
Trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate, 2-aminoethyl methacrylate hydrochloride189–191
NP formation by PRINT method


Radical photo-polymerization
DMF
70 (1 min)
HP4MA, PEG700DA, TETA, Rh1 (diblock and triblock particles)192
Multiphase amphiphilic rods


RAFT
H2O–acetone
60 (1 to 9 h)
NIPAM, N-acryloyl glucosamine193
Thermo-dependent switcher


RAFT
DMA
70
Styrene, 2-(methacrylamido)glucopyranose, disulfide diacrylate194
Degradable cross-linked glyco-particles


ATRP
Acetone
70 (1 h)
NIPAM195
Coating of fluorescent microtubuli


ATRP
Anisole
80 (25 h)
PBPEM-g-BA copolymer196
pH-Responsive fluorescent molecular bottlebrushes


ATRP
Acetone
70
NIPAM and tBA197
Janus particle sensor


FRP
THF
70 (8 h)
Acylamide199
pH and temperature responsive material














MMA200
SWCNT composite material














MMA106
Separation of SWCNTs



Fl6

FRP
THF
70 (10 h)
Acylamide198
pH and temperature responsive material



Fl7

FRP
THF
60 (24 h)
Homopolymers201
Holographic grating studies



Fu

FRP
THF
60 (48 h)
Homopolymer and Azo16/Azo17 copolymers147
Dual-mode optical switchable polymers



H
























Lu

Radical seed emulsion polymerization
H2O
40–60
MAA, styrene, DVB255
Stimuli-responsive polymers



N1

FRP
Toluene
60

N-Dodecylmethacrylamide47,48
Photolithography and photoreaction














Homopolymer136

T
g prediction by calculation



N2

ATRP
CHCl3
25 (48 h)
DMAEMA80
Stimuli-responsive multifunctional membranes


Radical emulsifier-free emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (15 min)
Styrene and MAA copolymer100
Fe3O4 composite particles


Radical soap-free emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (8 h)
DVB and MMA or styrene101
Colloid immobilization on Au surface














Homopolymer105,106
Separation of SWCNTs














Homopolymer135
Calculation of polymer properties


FRP
Bulk
50 (24 h)
MMA123
Nonradiative energy transfer


FRP
Cyclohexanol–ethylene glycol–H2O
60 (12 h)
ODA, TRIM141
Column material



N3

Radical emulsifier-free emulsion copolymerization
H2O
60 (6 h)
Styrene49
Particle labeling


FRP
Benzene
80
Maleic anhydride50
Conformational studies


Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization
Toluene
40
Ethylene51
Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization


FRP
DMSO
60 (21 h)
Sodium styrenesulfonate53,54
Nanostructured micellar films, hybrid photosensitizers














AA (as block copolymer)55




Free radical micellar copolymerization
H2O
50 (16 h)
Sodium 2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulphonate and acrylamide52
Terpolymer for enhanced oil recovery














Homopolymer108
Investigations on polymer/fullerene miscibility














Homopolymer137
Calculation of the dielectric constant














Homopolymer117
Non-volatile organic field-effect transistor memory


FRP
Bulk
70
Homopolymer and PFS140
Studies on π–π stacking interactions



N4













Homopolymer137
Calculation of the dielectric constant


FRP
Bulk
70
Homopolymer and PFS140
Studies on π–π stacking interactions



N5

ATRP
Toluene
RT

Rh8
111

Self-assembly and reversible switching



N6/N7













Homopolymers142
Load bearing hydrogel implants



Nap1/Nap2
FRP
Bulk
70 (12 h)
MMA223
Synthesis and characterization



Nap3

Radical miniemulsion polymerization
H2O
60 (210 min)
MMA, Sp2224
Photo-switchable nanoparticles



Nap4–Nap6

FRP
Bulk
70 (8 h)
MMA225
Coloring agents



Nap7

FRP
Bulk
80 (8 h)
Styrene226
Metal ion sensor



Nap8

FRP
H2O
50 (6 h)
3-(Trimethoxysilyl)-1-propano methacrylate, HEMA227
Intra-arterial blood pH monitoring



Nap9–Nap13

FRP
Bulk
70 (12 h)
AN228,229
UV absorber, hindered amine light stabilizer



Nap14/Nap15
FRP
Bulk
70 (8 h)
MMA225
Whitening materials



Nap16

RAFT
NMP
70 (36 h)
Homopolymer230
Switchable polymer



Nap17

RAFT
NMP
70
Homopolymer231
Fluoride ion sensor



Nap18

Alkene polymerization
THF (Et3N)
RT (24 h)
Homopolymer232
Fluoride ion sensor



Nap19

FRP
Bulk
80 (24 h)
MMA233
LUCO LED



Nap20

Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (8 h)
NIPAM, BIS234
Dual-fluorescent sensors for temperature and Hg2+



NB1

Radical photopolymerization
EtOH–H2O
RT (20 min)
PEGDMA252
EtOH sensor



NB2/NB3












BA253
Plasticizer-free fluorescent. H+ and Na+ optode microsphere sensors



OPE1

RAFT
Toluene
70
Homopolymer260
Conformational study



OPE1–OPE3

RAFT
Toluene–THF
70
Homopolymers, statistical copolymers, MMA259
Energy transfer studies



OPE4/OPE5

FRP
THF
60 (24 h)
Homopolymer and polymerizable carbazole methacrylate261
Polymer light-emitting diode


Homopolymer and N-vinyl carbazole264
Supramolecular cross-linking


Homopolymer and benzoic acid acrylates263
Surface-modified gold NPs


Homopolymer and N-vinyl carbazole262



Oxa1

FRP
THF
50–60 (48 h)
Homopolymer and carbazole methacrylate copolymer235
Electroluminescent films



Oxa2

Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (4 h)
NIPAM, BIS236,237
Hydrophilic fluorescent nanogel thermometer



Oxa3

FRP
Chlorobenzene
90

N-Vinylcarbazole238
OLED


ATRP
Toluene
110 (2 d)
BECThS (block copolymer)239
OLED



Oxa4/Oxa5

ATRP
NMP
110 (4 d)
Homopolymers240
LC electroluminescent polymer



Oxa6–Oxa12

FRP
Chlorobenzene
90 (36 h)
Homopolymers241
LC polymers



Oxa11

RAFT
Dioxane
80 (12 h)
P(St-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)220
Sensor material


RAFT
Dioxane
80 (12 h)
P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222
Sensor material


ATRP
Isopropanol
25 (1.5 h)
P(NIPAM-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Sp2)243
Photoswitchable and thermotunable multicolor fluorescent hybrid silica NPs


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (7 h)
NIPAM, BIS, Rh9244
K+ sensor



Oxa12

RAFT
DMF
80
NIPAM245
Homodimeric protein–polymer conjugates



Oxa13

FRP
THF
50–60 (24 h)
Carbazole methacrylate246
Polymer light-emitting diodes



Oxa14/Oxa15
NMP
Diglyme
130
Homopolymers, polymerizable triphenylamines (random copolymers and block copolymers)247
OLED



Oxa16

NMP

o-Dichlorobenzene
130
Homopolymer, polymerizable carbazole (as block copolymer)248
OLED



Oxa17

NMP
DMF
135
Polymerizable carbazoles249
Memory device



Oxa18

NMP
DMF
135
Polymerizable triphenylamine250
Memory device



Oxa19–Oxa21

FRP
THF
60 (3 d)
Homopolymer251
OLED



Oxa22–Oxa24

ROMP
CH2Cl2
RT (overnight)
Homopolymer251
OLED



Oxa25/Oxa26
FRP
THF
60 (7 d)
Homopolymer251
OLED



P1













Homopolymer108
Investigations on polymer/fullerene miscibility



P2

Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (20 h)
BA, MMA, AA125,126
Study of the drying behavior of wet latex films


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
80 (20 min)
BMA, bisphenol A dimethacrylate127
Study of branching effects


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
85 (30 min)
MMA, BA128,129
Polymer diffusion studies


MMA, BA, AA131,132


MMA, BA, MAA133



tBMA, EHA, MAA133



Per1

NMP

o-Dichlorobenzene
125 (10 to 24 h)
Block copolymer with P3HT or PS42,91,92
Organic solar cells



Py1













Homopolymer
LC displays



Py2

Radical dispersion polymerization
Ionic liquid
70 (24 h)
AA78
Particle labeling


Emulsifier-free radical polymerization
H2O
70 (18 h)
Styrene72–75
Film labeling


FRP
Bulk




Styrene,76,77 MMA76
Labeling for Tg determination


Radical dispersion polymerization
MeOH–H2O
80 (12 h)
MMA49
NP labeling


ATRP
Anisole
70 (1 h), 90 (24 h)
MMA (block and random copolymer)79
Self-assembly characterization


ATRP
Anisole
90 (24 h)
MMA (block copolymer)81
Photo- and pH-responsive composite NPs


ATRP
THF
60 (18 h)
PS-b-PEO (triblock terpolymer)82
Photoresponsive self-assembly


RAFT
Benzene
60 (12 h)
VP (block copolymer)84
Ratiometric pH sensor


RAFT
Toluene
70 (12 h)
DEGMA, Azo2485,86
Sensor for temperature and pH value


NMP
Bulk
125 (4 h)
Styrene, DVB89
Fluorescence labeled macroinitiator


Radical miniemulsion polymerization
H2O
60–70 (6 h)
Styrene102
Fluorescent particle preparation


FRP
THF
60 (2 d)

Azo44 and Azo45103
Functionalization of SWCNTs


ATRP
THF
60 (12 h)
PEG-b-TEPMAc (triblock terpolymer)104
Functionalization of SWCNTs


FRP
Benzene
50 (48 h)
PS, PEGMA107
Dispersion of MWCNTs


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O




Styrene, AA118
Contrast enhancement in fluorescence microscopy measurements


FRP
EtOH–H2O–HCl
RT
Dodecylmethacrylate, Hexanedioldimethacrylate134
Sol–gel silica thin films


FRP
Bulk




Styrene and tBMA139
Studies of effects on the Tg



Py3

Living anionic polymerization
Toluene
50 (5 h)
Styrene (block copolymer)45,46
Dispersion of SWCNTs



Py4

ROMP








Homopolymer90
Synthesis and characterization



Py5

FRP
Bulk




Styrene139
Studies of effects on the Tg



Rh1

Radical photo-polymerization
DMF
70 (1 min)
HP4MA, PEG700DA, TETA, Fl2 (diblock- and triblock particles)192
Multiphase amphiphilic rods




FRP
MeOH
Reflux (72 h)
MMA, cholesterol monomer203
Delivery of xenobiotics


FRP
H2O
40 (40 min)
IBCA, IHCA204
NPs for the intravenous delivery of siRNA


FRP
EtOH
60 (12 h)
BMA, MPC205
Cell-penetrating macromolecules


Radical photo-polymerization
H2O
rt
PEG700DA206,207
Production of opaque microparticles by stop-flow lithography


Radical photo-polymerization
Ethylene glycol
RT
AA, acrylamide (copolymer)209
Three-dimensionally patterned hydrogel pads


FRP
Paraffin oil
Rt (3 h)
BIS, NIPAM210
Thermoresponsive microgel particles


Radical photo-polymerization
Acetone
RT (2 to 5 min)
NIPAM211
Surface-confined hydrogels


FRP
H2O
70
BIS, allyl amine, NIPAM212,213
Responsive hydrogels


FRP
H2O
75 (2 h)
BIS, NIPAM214,215
Transfer of colloidal patterns by the reversible buckling process, Core-sheath nanofibers


Radical dispersion polymerization
H2O
70 (6 h)
BIS, NIPAM, AA216
Thermoresponsive nanogels


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (12 h)
BIS, NIPAM217
Cell uptake of polymer NPs



Rh2

Radical photo-polymerization
H2O
Rt (10 min)
HEA and PEG575 diacrylate181
Formation of three-dimensional hydrogel multilayers



Rh3

FRP
THF
80 (72 h)
VP197
Janus particle sensor


FRP
DMF
70 (24 h)
Homopolymer202
Synthesis and characterization



Rh4

ATRP
MeOH
Rt (63 h)
MPC and DPA (block copolymer)208
Fluorescently labeled biocompatible polymers



Rh5

FRP
MeOH
75 (2 h)
Polymerizable ionic liquids218
FRET in polymeric ionic liquids


Radical emulsion polymerization
H2O
70 (7 h)
NIPAM, BIS, Oxa11244
K+ sensor



Rh6

RAFT
Dioxane
70 (1.5 h)
PEO-b-PNIPAM block copolymer219
Sensor material



Rh7

RAFT
Dioxane–THF
70 (2 h)
P(St-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7) block copolymer220
Sensor material


RAFT
Dioxane–H2O
70 (12 h)
P(NIPAM-co-FITC)-b-P(PEGMA-co-Rh7)221
Sensor material


RAFT
Dioxane
70 (5 h)
P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222
Sensor material



Rh8

ATRP
Toluene



N5
111

Self-assembly and reversible switching



Rh9

FRP
THF
80 (72 h)
VP197
Janus particles



Sp1

FRP
THF
70 (3 d)
MMA, polymerizable triphenylamine254
Polymeric switch



Sp2

RAFT
Dioxane
80 (12 h)
P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222
Sensor material


Radical miniemulsion polymerization
H2O
60 (210 min)
MMA, Nap3224
Photo-switchable nanoparticles


ATRP
Isopropanol
25 (7 h)
P(NIPAM-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Sp2)243
Photoswitchable and thermotunable multicolor fluorescent hybrid silica NPs



TD1–TD3

FRP
Cyclohexanone
65 (6 h)
Homopolymers266





Thia1/Thia2
RAFT
Toluene
70
MMA256
Synthesis and characterization



Thia3/Thia4
RAFT
Toluene
70
Styrene257
Synthesis and characterization



Thia5

RAFT
DMA
85
MMA, polymerizable Ru(II) complex258
Energy transfer study




Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Thuringian Ministry for Education, Science and Culture [grant #B514-09049, Photonische Mizellen (PhotoMIC), grant #B514-09051, NanoConSens] for financial support. Additionally, the Dutch Polymer Institute (technology area HTE) is acknowledged for financial support.
Notes and references
B. Happ, A. Winter, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2222–2255 RSC .
M. Beija, M. T. Charreyre and J. M. G. Martinho, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 568–602 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Zollinger, Color chemistry: syntheses, properties, and applications of organic dyes and pigments, Wiley VCH, Weinheim, 3rd edn.,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. Graetzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
M. Graetzel, Nature, 2003, 421, 586–587 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Baranoff and M. Graetzel, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1172–1178 CrossRef CAS .
G. Moad, M. Chen, M. Haeussler, A. Postma, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 492–519 RSC .
X. Z. Liu, R. Zhu, Y. Zhang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3789–3791 RSC .
W. Zhang, Z. Fang, M. J. Su, M. Saeys and B. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1533–1537 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Sharma, P. Suresh and J. A. Mikroyannidis, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1427–1432 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keppler, S. Gendreizig, T. Gronemeyer, H. Pick, H. Vogel and K. Johnsson, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Tsien, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1998, 67, 509–544 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Griffin, S. R. Adams and R. Y. Tsien, Science, 1998, 281, 269–272 CrossRef CAS .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763–775 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Hasselman, D. F. Watson, J. R. Stromberg, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten, J. S. Lindsey and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25430–25440 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Martinez-Huitle and E. Brillas, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 87, 105–145 CrossRef CAS .
E. Guivarch, S. Trevin, C. Lahitte and M. A. Oturan, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2003, 1, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Grimsdale, K. L. Chan, R. E. Martin, P. G. Jokisz and A. B. Holmes, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 897–1091 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nuyken, S. Jungermann, V. Wiederhirn, E. Bacher and K. Meerholz, Monatsh. Chem., 2006, 137, 811–824 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Shih, C. F. Shu, Y. L. Tung and Y. Chi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 251110 CrossRef .
J. J. Lu, H. Li, B. Yao, B. Zhao, C. Weng, G. T. Lei, P. Shen, Z. Y. Xie and S. T. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 4203–4208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Lin, Y. D. Lin, C. Y. Wu, P. T. Chow, C. H. Sun and T. J. Chow, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5925–5931 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, L. K. Povlich and J. Kim, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2179–2189 RSC .
D. T. McQuade, A. E. Pullen and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2537–2574 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yang, Y. Tian, C. Y. Chen, A. K. Y. Jen and W. C. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Friesen, T. Kajita, E. Danielson and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 2756–2762 CrossRef CAS .
B. Happ, J. Schaefer, R. Menzel, M. D. Hager, A. Winter, J. Popp, R. Beckert, B. Dietzek and U. S. Schubert, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6277–6287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Moad, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Aust. J. Chem., 2009, 62, 1402–1472 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 1997, A34, 1785–1801 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski and J. H. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2921–2990 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hawker, A. W. Bosman and E. Harth, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3661–3688 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hadjichristidis, M. Pitsikalis, S. Pispas and H. Iatrou, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3747–3792 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kempe, A. Krieg, C. R. Becer and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 176–191 RSC .
F. Thielbeer, S. V. Chankeshwara and M. Bradley, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 4386–4391 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vollrath, D. Pretzel, C. Pietsch, I. Perevyazko, S. Schubert, G. M. Pavlov and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1791–1797 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mailaender and K. Landfester, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 2379–2400 CrossRef CAS .
K. Letchford and H. Burt, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2007, 65, 259–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vollrath, A. Schallon, C. Pietsch, S. Schubert, T. Nomoto, Y. Matsumoto, K. Kataoka and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 99–108 RSC .
J. P. Rao and K. E. Geckeler, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 887–913 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. V. Zubris, O. V. Khullar, A. P. Griset, S. Gibbs-Strauss, J. V. Frangioni, Y. L. Colson and M. W. Grinstaff, ChemMedChem, 2010, 5, 1435–1438 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, W. Y. Lin, K. B. Zheng, L. W. He and W. M. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 622–661 RSC .
M. Sommer, S. Huttner, S. Wunder and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2523–2527 CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Yan, S. B. Yang, J. Cui, L. Jakisch, P. Potschke and B. Voit, Polym. Int., 2011, 60, 1425–1433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Yan, J. A. Cui, P. Potschke and B. Voit, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2603–2612 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Xu, T. S. Li, G. L. Zeng, S. Zhang, W. Shang, Y. J. Wu and T. Miyashita, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 194, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Xu, T. S. Li, G. J. Li, Y. J. Wu and T. Miyashita, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 219, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
T. Taniguchi, T. Ogawa, Y. Kamata, S. Kobaru, N. Takeuchi, M. Kohri, T. Nakahira and T. Wakiya, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 356, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
I. Popescu, A. Airinei, D. M. Suflet and M. I. Popa, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 2195–2203 CrossRef CAS .
N. Naga, Y. Wakita and S. Murase, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 110, 3770–3777 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Zhong, P. Y. Luo, Z. B. Ye and H. Chen, Polym. Bull., 2009, 62, 79–89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zapotoczny, M. Golonka and M. Nowakowska, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5868–5876 CrossRef CAS .
D. Drozd, K. Szczubialka and M. Nowakowska, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 215, 223–228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. J. Metting, R. M. Briber, F. Weilnboeck, S. H. Shin, B. G. Jones and G. S. Oehrlein, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 1735–1741 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Liu, M. A. Winnik, F. Di Stefano and J. Vanketessan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 1495–1504 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Lopez-Barron and C. W. Macosko, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 9392–9404 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Lopez-Barron and C. W. Macosko, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2637–2647 RSC .
M. Kondo, M. Takemoto, T. Matsuda, R. Fukae and N. Kawatsuki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 83, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondo, T. Matsuda, R. Fukae and N. Kawatsuki, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 234–235 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neugebauer, D. Charasim, A. Swinarew, A. Stolarzewicz, M. Krompiec, H. Janeczek, J. Simokaitiene and J. V. Grazulevicius, Polym. J., 2011, 43, 448–454 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, L. Luo, S. Huang, B. M. Polishak, X.-H. Zhou, S. Liff, T. R. Younkin, B. A. Block and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 951–959 RSC .
S. El Habnouni, V. Darcos, X. Garric, J. P. Lavigne, B. Nottelet and J. Coudane, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3321–3330 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakamoto, T. Anase, H. Osuga and K. Kimura, React. Funct. Polym., 2011, 71, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huh, K. O. Kwon, S. H. Cha, S. W. Yoon, M. Y. Lee and J. C. Lee, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2093–2100 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, J. W. Kim, J. H. Lee and K. D. Ahn, React. Funct. Polym., 2009, 69, 737–742 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Bueno, I. M. Cuccovia, H. Chaimovich and L. H. Catalani, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 705–713 CAS .
R. A. Domingues, I. V. P. Yoshida and T. D. Z. Atvars, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2010, 48, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Kim, J. D. Luo, Y. J. Cheng, Z. W. Shi, S. Hau, S. H. Jang, X. H. Zhou, Y. Tian, B. Polishak, S. Huang, H. Ma, L. R. Dalton and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8091–8098 CAS .
H. Morikawa, Y. Kotaki, R. Mihara, Y. Kiraku, S. Ichimura and S. Motokucho, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 682–683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondo, M. Takemoto, T. Matsuda, R. Fukae and N. Kawatsuki, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2011, 550, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ugur, O. Yargi, E. Gunister and O. Pekcan, Appl. Clay Sci., 2008, 42, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ugur, O. Yargi and O. Pekcan, Appl. Clay Sci., 2009, 43, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ugur, O. Yargi and O. Pekcan, Polym. Compos., 2010, 31, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ugur, S. Sunay and O. Pekcan, Polym. Compos., 2010, 31, 1611–1619 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Evans, R. W. Sandoval and J. M. Torkelson, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6645–6648 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and J. M. Torkelson, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4546–4553 CrossRef CAS .
H. Minami, A. Kimura, K. Kinoshita and M. Okubo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6303–6307 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, J. A. Yoon, J. Kim, C. F. Huang, K. Matyjaszewski and E. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4426–4434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, L. Chen, H. L. Wang, Z. B. Zhang, X. L. Zhu, E. T. Kang and K. G. Neoh, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 14151–14158 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Feng, Y. Zhao, M. Pelletier, Y. Dan and Y. Zhao, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3470–3477 CrossRef CAS .
S. Menon and S. Das, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 4448–4457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Demetriou and T. Krasia-Christoforou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
K. Paek, S. Chung, C. H. Cho and B. J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10272–10274 RSC .
C. Pietsch, A. Vollrath, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Sensors, 2010, 10, 7979–7990 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pietsch, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1005–1008 RSC .
I. Perevyazko, A. Vollrath, S. Hornig, G. M. Pavlov and U. S. Schubert, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 3924–3931 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, K. P. Ghiggino, E. Rizzardo, S. H. Thang and G. J. Wilson, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1112–1114 RSC .
P. B. Zetterlund, N. Alam and M. Okubo, Polym. J., 2008, 40, 298–299 CrossRef .

          D.-J. Liaw, US Pat., 20 110 092 666,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Sommer, S. Huttner, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183308 CrossRef .
M. Sommer, A. S. Lang and M. Thelakkat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7901–7904 CrossRef CAS .
I. Natori, S. Natori, H. Sekikawa, T. Takahashi and H. Sato, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 118, 69–73 CAS .
I. Natori and S. Natori, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2010, 21, 784–788 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakamoto, Y. Fukuda, S. I. Sato and T. Nakano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9308–9311 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wanatabe, T. Sakamoto and T. Nakano, Chirality, 2011, 23, E28–E34 CrossRef .
C. X. Li, J. C. Hsu, K. Sugiyama, A. Hirao, W. C. Chen and R. Mezzenga, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5793–5801 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hsu, K. Sugiyama, Y. C. Chiu, A. Hirao and W. C. Chen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7151–7158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bossi, M. J. Whitcombe, Y. Uludag, S. Fowler, I. Chianella, S. Subrahmanyam, I. Sanchez and S. A. Piletsky, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2149–2155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Govindaiah, Y. J. Jung, J. M. Lee, T. J. Park, D. Y. Ryu, J. H. Kim and I. W. Cheong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 343, 484–490 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tian, N. Cheng, N. Nouvel, J. Geng and O. A. Scherman, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5323–5328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Taniguchi, N. Takeuchi, S. Kobaru and T. Nakahira, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 327, 58–62 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vijayakumar, B. Balan, M. J. Kim and M. Takeuchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4533–4539 CAS .
C. Zhang, W. Zhu, L. Gao and Y. M. Chen, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2011, 29, 762–771 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Pan and M. B. Chan-Park, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 949–960 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Pan, L. L. Li and M. B. Chan-Park, Small, 2010, 6, 1311–1320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsuoka, M. Yamamoto, K. Adachi, Y. Tsukahara and T. Konno, Des. Monomers Polym., 2010, 13, 387–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Campbell, B. Gurun, B. G. Sumpter, Y. S. Thio and D. G. Bucknall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 8989–8995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vallejos, H. El Kaoutit, P. Estévez, F. C. García, J. L. de la Peña, F. Serna and J. M. García, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1129–1138 RSC .
Y. C. Chiu, C. C. Kuo, J. C. Hsu and W. C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3340–3347 CAS .
J. Geng, F. Biedermann, J. M. Zayed, F. Tian and O. A. Scherman, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4276–4281 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Liu, M. W. Ren and W. T. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11048–11053 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Liu, J. C. Hsu, W. C. Chen, K. Sugiyama and A. Hirao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1974–1979 CAS .
K. Sugiyama, A. Hirao, J. C. Hsu, Y. C. Tung and W. C. Chen, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4053–4062 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hsu, C. L. Liu, W. C. Chen, K. Sugiyama and A. Hirao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 528–533 CAS .
J. C. Hsu, C. X. Li, K. Sugiyama, R. Mezzenga, A. Hirao and W. C. Chen, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8440–8449 RSC .
K. J. Baeg, Y. Y. Noh, J. Ghim, B. Lim and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3678–3685 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Cossiello, A. Cirpan, F. E. Karasz, L. Akcelrud and T. D. Z. Atvars, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 219–225 CrossRef CAS .

          D. McKenzie, D. Abdallah, A. G. Timko and M. D. Rahman, WO Pat., 2 009 136 242,  2009 Search PubMed .

          M. Padmanaban, S. Chakrapani, F. M. Houlihan, S. Miyazaki, E. W. Ng and M. O. Neisser, WO Pat., 2 011 039 560,  2011 Search PubMed .

          R. Ashizawa, H. Kita, M. Kondo and K. Hiraga, WO Pat., 2 011 125 876,  2011 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Cameron, J. W. Sung, J. P. Amara, G. P. Prokopowicz, D. A. Valeri, L. Vyklicky, W.-S. S. Huang, W. Li, P. R. Varanasi and I. Y. Popova, Eur. Pat., 2 216 684,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. A. Aldongarov, N. N. Barashkov, I. S. Irgibaeva, O. A. Khakhel and Y. E. Sakhno, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 15, 398–401 CAS .
L. Ruiz-Perez, A. Pryke, M. Sommer, G. Battaglia, I. Soutar, L. Swanson and M. Geoghegan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2203–2211 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Haley, Y. Q. Liu, M. A. Winnik and W. Lau, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2008, 5, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Turshatov, J. Adams and D. Johannsmann, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5365–5372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Liu, W. F. Schroeder, J. C. Haley, W. Lau and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9104–9111 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Tomba, X. D. Ye, F. G. Li, M. A. Winnik and W. Lau, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2055–2064 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Tomba, D. Portinha, W. F. Schroeder, M. A. Winnik and W. Lau, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 367–378 CAS .
Y. Q. Liu, W. Schroeder, M. Soleimani, W. Lau and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6438–6449 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Schroeder, Y. Q. Liu, J. P. Tomba, M. Soleimani, W. Lau and M. A. Winnik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 3085–3094 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Schroeder, Y. Q. Liu, J. P. Tomba, M. Soleimani, W. Lau and M. A. Winnik, Polymer, 2011, 52, 3984–3993 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soleimani, J. C. Haley, W. Lau and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 975–985 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, H. M. Soyez, B. S. Dunn, J. I. Zink, A. Sellinger and C. J. Brinker, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 47, 300–310 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yu, B. Yi and X. Y. Wang, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 3997–4001 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Liu and C. Z. Cao, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 811–818 CAS .
J. Xu, L. Wang, G. J. Liang, L. X. Wang and X. L. Shen, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2011, 51, 2408–2416 CAS .
T. S. Li, M. Mitsuishi and T. Miyashita, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2115–2119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, C. B. Roth and J. M. Torkelson, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46, 2754–2764 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pugh, M. Paz-Pazos and C. N. Tang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 331–345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Karenga and Z. El Rassi, Electrophoresis, 2011, 32, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Chen and L. Weng, US Pat., 20 100 029 789,  2010 Search PubMed .

          F. Qiu, C. Ge, X. Gu and D. Yang, Chin. Pat., 101 805 421,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. A. Nicolescu, V. V. Jerca, D. M. Vuluga and D. S. Vasilescu, Polym. Bull., 2010, 65, 905–916 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Nicolescu, V. V. Jerca, C. Draghici, D. M. Vuluga and D. S. Vasilescu, Des. Monomers Polym., 2009, 12, 553–563 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. S. Rosalyn, P. Kannan, A. Y. Nooraldeen, P. Mangayarkarasi and P. K. Palanisamy, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2008, 10, 3368–3376 Search PubMed .
C. Saravanan and P. Kannan, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2009, 94, 1001–1012 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Feng, J. Duan, X. Li, Z. Wen and W. Xu, Chin. Pat., 101 544 850,  2009 Search PubMed .
N. J. Li, J. M. Lu, X. W. Xia, Q. F. Xu and L. H. Wang, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 80, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Xu, Y. H. Liu, N. J. Li, X. W. Xia, J. F. Ge and J. M. Lu, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 1160–1167 CrossRef .
S. H. Kim, C. K. Jang, S. H. Jeong and J. Y. Jaung, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2010, 18, 994–1009 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, P. O. Shipman, P. R. Shipley, B. N. Boden, S. Aly and P. D. Harvey, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 2099–2106 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, P. O. Shipman, E. G. Neeland, T. C. Corkery, S. Mohammed, P. D. Harvey, H. M. Mohamed, A. H. Bedair, A. M. El-Agrody, P. M. Aguiar and S. Kroeker, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 84–103 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hosono, T. Kajitani, T. Fukushima, K. Ito, S. Sasaki, M. Takata and T. Aida, Science, 2010, 330, 808–811 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshino, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, M. Kinoshita, Y. L. Yu and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1361–1363 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pietsch, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5653–5656 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Cao, W. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. R. Chen, Z. P. Cheng, J. H. Wu and X. L. Zhu, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2008, 2, 589–601 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, X. L. Zhu, J. Zhu and Z. P. Cheng, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3048–3053 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Otani and M. Haishi, Jap. Pat., 2 010 027 956,  2010 Search PubMed .

          N. Ohtani and M. Haishi, Ultraviolet polymer light-emitting diodes, Doshisha University, Science and Engineering Research Institute, Kyoto, JAPON,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Haishi, T. Yamamoto, M. Murata and N. Ohtani, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 109, 012011 CrossRef .
M. Spiniello, A. Blencowe and G. G. Qiao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 2422–2432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schraub and N. Hampp, Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2011, 7885, 78851Z CrossRef .
B. J. Xie, G. Wang and X. C. Zhao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 122, 3377–3382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Motoyanagi, I. Nishimura and M. Minoda, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 4701–4707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zhao, F. Fei, C. L. Yi, J. Q. Jiang, J. Luo and X. Y. Liu, Acta Phys.–Chim. Sin., 2010, 26, 3230–3236 CAS .
C. Kim, J. U. Wallace, S. H. Chen and P. B. Merkel, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3075–3080 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu, S. L. Ding and Z. X. Su, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 1315–1322 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu, Y. L. Hu and Z. X. Su, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 703–709 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Wang, Y. L. Hu and Z. X. Su, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68, 1137–1143 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Li, J. Zhu, Z. P. Cheng, W. Zhang and X. L. Zhu, React. Funct. Polym., 2009, 69, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Patel, M. G. Patel, A. K. Patel, K. H. Patel and R. M. Patel, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2008, 2, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Rowe, D. H. Thamm, S. L. Kraft and S. G. Boyes, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 983–993 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, D. Jani, J. Linhardt, J. F. Kunzler, S. Pawar, G. Labenski, T. Smith and W. H. Knox, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2009, 26, 1679–1687 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hoshino, H. Koide, T. Urakami, H. Kanazawa, T. Kodama, N. Oku and K. J. Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6644–6645 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srisopa, A. M. I. Ali and A. G. Mayes, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 2070–2080 CrossRef CAS .
P. Govindaiah, S. J. Lee, J. H. Kim and I. W. Cheong, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5058–5064 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saha, S. K. Basiruddin, R. Sarkar, N. Pradhan and N. R. Jana, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18492–18498 CAS .
S. K. Basiruddin, A. Saha, N. Pradhan and N. R. Jana, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7475–7481 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Maity and N. R. Jana, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 137–144 CAS .
L. M. Johnson, C. A. DeForest, A. Pendurti, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1963–1972 CAS .
L. Moreau, A. Balland-Longeau, P. Mazabraud, A. Duchene and J. Thibonnet, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1464–1466 RSC .
I. P. Chang, K. C. Hwang and C. S. Chiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15476–15481 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, G. J. Price and R. H. Guy, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 6, 1441–1448 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, P. Griffin, G. J. Price and R. H. Guy, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2009, 6, 1449–1456 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. J. Mazumder, N. A. D. Burke, F. Shen, M. A. Potter and H. D. H. Stover, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 1365–1373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. A. J. Mazumder, H. D. H. Stover, A. P. Hitchcock and I. M. Shirley, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 3038–3047 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Pacios and I. F. Piérola, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 1579–1586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. M. Tian, R. A. Petros, M. E. Napier and J. M. DeSimone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11306–11313 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. A. Gratton, M. E. Napier, P. A. Ropp, S. M. Tian and J. M. DeSimone, Pharm. Res., 2008, 25, 2845–2852 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Herlihy, J. Nunes and J. M. DeSimone, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8421–8426 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Wang, Y. Wang, S. S. Sheiko, D. E. Betts and J. M. DeSimone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 5801–5806 Search PubMed .
E. H. Min, S. R. S. Ting, L. Billon and M. H. Stenzel, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 3440–3455 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. S. Ting, E. H. Min, P. B. Zetterlund and M. H. Stenzel, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5211–5221 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ionov, V. Bocharova and S. Diez, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 67–71 RSC .
A. Nese, N. V. Lebedeva, G. Sherwood, S. Averick, Y. C. Li, H. F. Gao, L. Peteanu, S. S. Sheiko and K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5905–5910 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berger, A. Synytska, L. Ionov, K. J. Eichhorn and M. Stamm, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9669–9676 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Guan, S. J. Lai and Z. X. Su, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 122, 1968–1975 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lai, X. L. Guan and Z. X. Su, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2011, 5, 600–605 CAS .
X. Q. Liu and M. B. Chan-Park, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 3414–3419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manickasundaram, P. Kannan, R. Kumaran, R. Velu, P. Ramamurthy, Q. M. A. Hassan, P. K. Palanisamy, S. Senthil and S. S. Narayanan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2011, 22, 25–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, S. Vasudevan, C. O. Oriakhi, J. Shields and R. G. Carter, Synthesis-Stuttgart, 2008, 957–961 Search PubMed .
L. De Jong, X. Moreau, A. Thiéry, G. Godeau, M. W. Grinstaff and P. Barthélémy, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
H. de Martimprey, J. R. Bertrand, C. Malvy, P. Couvreur and C. Vauthier, Pharm. Res., 2010, 27, 498–509 CrossRef CAS .
T. Goda, Y. Goto and K. Ishihara, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 2380–2387 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Suh, K. W. Bong, T. A. Hatton and P. S. Doyle, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 13813–13819 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Zhang, A. J. DeConinck, S. C. Slimmer, P. S. Doyle, J. A. Lewis and R. G. Nuzzo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Madsen, N. J. Warren, S. P. Armes and A. L. Lewis, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Zarzar, P. Kim, M. Kolle, J. Brinker, J. Aizenberg and B. Kaehr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9356–9360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Musch, S. Schneider, P. Lindner and W. Richtering, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 6309–6314 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. DuPont, R. S. Cates, P. G. Stroot and R. Toomey, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3876–3882 RSC .
E. C. Cho, J. W. Kim, D. C. Hyun, U. Jeong and D. A. Weitz, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3854–3859 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Cho, J. W. Kim, A. Fernandez-Nieves and D. A. Weitz, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hyun, G. D. Moon, E. C. Cho and U. Y. Jeong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2155–2162 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jo, S. W. Lee, K. T. Kim, Y. S. Won, H. S. Kim, E. C. Cho and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 968–972 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Wong, C. B. Mueller, A. M. Diez-Pascual and W. Richtering, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15907–15913 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tenuta, M. P. Monopoli, J. Kim, A. Salvati, K. A. Dawson, P. Sandin and I. Lynch, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e25556 CAS .
S. Wakizono, K. Yamamoto and J. Kadokawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 222, 283–287 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hu, C. H. Li and S. Y. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 724–729 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hu, L. Dai and S. Y. Liu, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4699–4710 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hu, X. Z. Zhang, D. Wang, X. L. Hu, T. Liu, G. Y. Zhang and S. Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19030–19038 RSC .
C. H. Li, Y. X. Zhang, J. M. Hu, J. J. Cheng and S. Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5120–5124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khosravi, H. S. Panah, K. Gharanjig, M. Khorassani, M. K. Zadeh and F. A. Taromi, Iran. Polym. J., 2010, 19, 491–499 Search PubMed .
J. A. Chen, P. S. Zhang, G. Fang, P. G. Yi, X. Y. Yu, X. F. Li, F. Zeng and S. Z. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 3354–3362 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Konstantinova and P. M. Miladinova, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 111, 1991–1998 CrossRef CAS .
I. Grabchev, S. Dumas and J. M. Chovelon, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Bai, W. Z. Jin, L. X. Wu, Y. L. Song, J. J. Jiang, X. D. Zhu and D. W. Yang, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2011, 58, 1232–1238 CrossRef .
V. B. Bojinov, I. P. Panova and D. B. Simeonov, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 78, 101–110 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Bojinov and I. P. Panova, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2008, 93, 1142–1150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, J. B. Jiang, B. Leng, X. Xiao and P. Zhao, Polymer, 2009, 50, 5681–5684 CrossRef .
H. Tian, P. Zhao, J. B. Jiang and B. Leng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1715–1718 CrossRef .
J. L. Hua, Y. Qu, Y. H. Jiang and H. Tian, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 1544–1552 CrossRef .
Y. S. Lee, J. Y. Jin, Y. M. Kim and S. H. Lee, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1804–1808 CrossRef .
S. Y. Liu and C. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10716–10723 RSC .
D. D. Evanoff, J. B. Carroll, R. D. Roeder, Z. J. Hunt, J. R. Lawrence and S. H. Foulger, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 7882–7897 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uchiyama, C. Gota, K. Okabe, T. Funatsu and Y. Harada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2766–2767 CrossRef .
S. Uchiyama, C. Gota, T. Yoshihara, S. Tobita and T. Ohwada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 2829–2836 CrossRef .
P. Wang, C. P. Chai, Q. Yang, F. Z. Wang, Z. H. Shen, H. Q. Guo, X. F. Chen, X. H. Fan, D. C. Zou and Q. F. Zhou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 5452–5460 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Yang, H. Jin, Y. D. Xu, Z. H. Shen, X. H. Fan, D. C. Zou and Q. F. Zhou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 5670–5678 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Y. D. Xu, H. Jin, Z. H. Shen, X. F. Chen, D. C. Zou, X. H. Fan and Q. F. Zhou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1502–1515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Xu, Q. Yang, Z. H. Shen, X. F. Chen, X. H. Fan and Q. F. Zhou, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2542–2550 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Liu and J. M. Hu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8315–8330 CrossRef .
S. Y. Liu, T. Wu, G. Zou and J. M. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3788–3798 CrossRef .
S. Y. Liu, J. Yin, C. H. Li and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 12213–12220 CrossRef .
L. Tao, C. S. Kaddis, R. R. O. Loo, G. N. Grover, J. A. Loo and H. D. Maynard, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2148–2150 RSC .
P. Rungta, V. Tsyalkovsky, C. F. Huebner, Y. P. Bandera and S. H. Foulger, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2486–2493 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuchiya, H. Kasuga, A. Kawakami, H. Taka, H. Kita and K. Ogino, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 1461–1468 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tsuchiya, K. Sakaguchi, A. Kawakami, H. Taka, H. Kita, T. Shimomura and K. Ogino, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Fang, C. L. Liu and W. C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4778–4786 RSC .
W. C. Chen, Y. K. Fang, C. L. Liu, G. Y. Yang and P. C. Chen, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2604–2612 CrossRef .
Y. D. Zhang, C. Zuniga, S. J. Kim, D. K. Cai, S. Barlow, S. Salman, V. Coropceanu, J. L. Bredas, B. Kippelen and S. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4002–4015 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan, S. Ibrahim, Y. Kostov and G. Rao, Bioautomation, 2008, 9, 31–39 Search PubMed .

          E. Bakker and W. Ngeontae, WO Pat., 2 009 023 287,  2009 Search PubMed .
E. M. Lee, S. Y. Gwon, Y. A. Son and S. H. Kim, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 86, 600–604 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Men'shikova, Y. E. Moskalenko, A. V. Gribanov, N. N. Shevchenko, V. B. Faraonova, A. V. Yakimanskii, M. Y. Goikhman, N. L. Loretsyan, A. V. Koshkin and M. V. Alfimov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2010, 83, 1997–2005 CrossRef CAS .
R. Menzel, A. M. Breul, C. Pietsch, J. Schaefer, C. Friebe, E. Taeuscher, D. Weiss, B. Dietzek, J. Popp, R. Beckert and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 840–848 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Breul, C. Pietsch, R. Menzel, J. Schaefer, A. Teichler, M. D. Hager, M. Gottschaldt, J. Popp, B. Dietzek, R. Beckert and U. S. Schubert, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 1339–1347 CrossRef CAS .
B. Happ, J. Schaefer, R. Menzel, M. D. Hager, A. Winter, J. Popp, R. Beckert, B. Dietzek and U. S. Schubert, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6277–6287 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Breul, J. Schaefer, G. M. Pavlov, A. Teichler, S. Hoeppener, C. Weber, J. Nowotny, L. Blankenburg, J. Popp, M. D. Hager, B. Dietzek and U. S. Schubert, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 3192–3205 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Pavlov, A. M. Breul, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 904–916 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Yang, C. W. Wu, D. Sahu and H. C. Lin, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9692–9703 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chu, T. C. Liang, H. Padhy, S. J. Hsu and H. C. Lin, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 2266–2276 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Liang and H. C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4753–4763 RSC .
T. C. Liang and H. C. Lin, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 2734–2753 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haeussler, Y. P. Lok, M. Chen, J. Jasieniak, R. Adhikari, S. P. King, S. A. Haque, C. M. Forsyth, K. Winzenberg, S. E. Watkins, E. Rizzardo and G. J. Wilson, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7101–7110 CrossRef .
Y. X. Tao, Q. F. Xu, J. M. Lu and X. B. Yang, Dyes Pigm., 2010, 84, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
T. Z. Yu, Y. L. Zhao, X. S. Ding, D. W. Fan, L. Qian and W. K. Dong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 188, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagy, S. Gokturk and L. Biczok, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 8784–8790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cha, M. G. Choi, H. R. Jeon and S. K. Chang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 14–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Simon and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20817–20830 RSC .

          B. L. Feringa and W. R. Browne, Molecular Switches, John Wiley & Sons, Weinheim,  2011 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Alexander M. Breul
	Alexander M. Breul was born in Gera (Germany) in 1986. He studied chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena (Germany), where he graduated in 2010. Since 2010 to date, he has been a PhD student in the group of Prof. Ulrich S. Schubert at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena, where he has been working on the design of polymers with light-harvesting units.

Martin D. Hager
	Martin D. Hager was born in Coburg (Germany) and studied chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena (Germany), where he graduated in organic and macromolecular chemistry in 2005. In 2007, he received his PhD in chemistry (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany) for work on conjugated rod–coil polymers under the supervision of Prof. E. Klemm (scholarship of the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie). Subsequently, in 2007 he joined the group of Prof. U. S. Schubert (Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands and then Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany). His research is focused on conjugated polymers for solar-cell applications and self-healing materials.

Ulrich S. Schubert
	Ulrich S. Schubert studied chemistry at the Universities of Frankfurt and Bayreuth (Germany) and the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (USA). His PhD was performed under the supervision of Prof. C. D. Eisenbach (Bayreuth) and Prof. G. R. Newkome (Florida). After postdoctoral training with Prof. J.-M. Lehn at the Université Strasbourg (France), he moved to the Munich University of Technology (Germany) to obtain his habilitation in 1999 (with Prof. O. Nuyken). From 1999 to 2000, he held a temporary position as a professor at the Center for NanoScience (CeNS) at the LMU Munich (Germany). From 2000 to 2007, he was Full-Professor at the Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands. Since 2007, he has been Full-Professor at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. His awards include the Habilitandenpreis of the GDCh (Makromolekulare Chemie), the Heisenberg-Stipendium of the DFG, the Dozenten-Stipendium of the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie and the VICI award of the NWO.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the monomeric building blocks and their corresponding (co)polymer structures reviewed in this contribution.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the chemical structures of fluorescent aromatic chromophore bearing monomers.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the encapsulation of Nile red within the hydrophobic core of the polymer aggregates of PPy2-b-PS-b-PEO and its release upon disruption of the polymer aggregates by UV light.82 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM image of the fluorescent PS-co-PPy2 particles surrounded by a surfactant.102 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Dispersion of SWCNTs in THF (A), solution of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45) in THF (B), and solution of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45)/SWNT nanocomposite in THF (C). (b) TEM image of polymer P(Py2-co-Azo45)/SWCNT nanocomposite with a zoomed image in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the device setting as well as the electron-storage efficiency of electret materials estimated from the polymer electrets memory characteristics.117 PVNpoly(N3). Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochromatograms showing the separation of a series of small organic compounds on monolithic columns with different mole fractions of ODA/N2. NMM = 100% ODA.141 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic representation of monomers bearing pendant azobenzene moieties.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage (I–V) curve of the memory device based on PS-co-PAzo26 (a) and PStCz-co-PAzo26 (b) using a Hg top electrode.150 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-vis absorption spectra of selected copolymers containing Azo37 or Azo38 of the trans–cis photoisomerization (left column, (A), (C) and (E)) as well as the reversible thermal cis–trans isomerization (right column, (B), (D) and (F)).152 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photomechanical responses of hot-pressed films of poly(Azo40) prepared with parallel arranged Teflon sheets. (A) Photographs of a hot-pressed film (5 mm by 6 mm by 10 mm) before (left) and after (right) exposure to UV light (λ = 360 ± 2 nm). The bent film recovered the initial flat shape upon exposure to visible light (λ = 480 ± 2 nm). (B) Time-dependent change in displacement of the free edge of a hot-pressed film prepared with parallel-arranged Teflon sheets upon alternating irradiation with UV and visible lights.154 Figure copyright AAAS and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photograph images of the observed color shifts above and below the LCST temperature of copolymer P(DEGMA-co-Azo24) in aqueous solution at pH 7 (left) and pH 1 (right).156 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 4  Schematic representation of the monomers functionalized with coumarin dyes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Effect of P(Cou45-co-VAc) on the growth of (a) bacteria, (b) fungi and (c) yeast. The increasing polymer numbers indicate the increasing VAc-content (decreasing Cou45-content) of the samples.172 Figure copyright Xpress polymer Letters and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 5  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing fluorescein as chromophore.	 

 	Fig. 11  Laser scanning confocal microscopy images of the skin surface after incubation with NR loaded Fl1 labeled PS nanoparticles. Panels a and b show fluorescence emission from the skin surface from the NP (panel a) and NR (panel b), respectively. Panel c shows the overlay of panels a and b and the colocalization of NP and “active” at the skin surface. Panels d and e illustrate cross-sectional images, respectively, highlighting fluorescence from the NP and from NR. A distinctly labeled, short, trimmed hair is visible. Panel f is the overlay of panels d and e and suggests some permeation of released NR to the deeper skin layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Table of dimensions of the different shapes of nanoparticles produced by the PRINT method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Epi-fluorescent images of surface-adsorbed microtubules after immobilization of initiator (a: microtubule signal, b: polymer signal) and after grafting of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-fluorescein o-acrylate) (c: microtubule signal, d:polymer signal).195 Figure copyright Royal Society of Chemistry and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 6  Schematic representation of the bicomponent Janus particles by “grafting from” and “grafting to” approaches. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 7  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing rhodamines as chromophores.	 

 	Fig. 14  Fluorescence microscopy images showing the in vivo uptake of rhodamine B-labeled amphiphilic copolymers (5 μg mL−1) into certain cells in selected areas by Mesostoma flatworms at 13 °C. Bars = 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 8  (a) Illustration of the stop-flow lithography. (b, c) Multifunctional encoded hydrogel particles that contain DNA probes on either side and a fluorescent dye (Rh1) in the center. (d) Fluorescence microscopy image of the hydrogel particle after hybridization with fluorescently labeled (green) target DNA. (e) Scheme of the immobilization of the particles by a barrier in a microfluidic channel to form a multiplexed particle assay. (f) Fluorescence microscopy image of the multiplexed immobilized particle assay. (g) Schematic representation of a genotyping method using these particles in an alkaline dehybridization protocol. Scale bars = 100 mm.207 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 9  Schematic representation of a polymeric-micelle-based reversible three state switchable multicolor luminescent system from amphiphilic and thermoresponsive diblock copolymer P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh6). RhBAMRh6, SPMASp2.222 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 10  Schematic representation of the polymerizable dyes containing 1,8-naphthalimides as chromophore.	 

 	Scheme 11  Schematic representation of the mechanism of the FE by metal ion complexation (top) and its dependency on the metal ion (bottom).226 Figure copyright John Wiley and Sons and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the architecture of LUCO LEDs and luminescent power versus continuous operating time at 20 mA (DBNNap19).233 Figure copyright Elsevier and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 12  Schematic representation of the construction of thermoresponsive PNIPAM nanogel-based dual fluorescent sensors for temperature and Hg2+ ions with enhanced detection sensitivity.234 Figure copyright Royal Society of Chemistry and reproduced with permission.	 

 	Scheme 13  Schematic representation of polymerizable oxadiazole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 14  Schematic representation of a series of polymerizable monomers bearing different types of chromophores.	 

 	Fig. 16  Donor fluorescence curves of compound P(Thia5-co-MMA) (donor alone polymer, upper curves with longer fluorescence) and of P(Thia5-co-MMA-co-Ru(II)) (donor–acceptor polymer, lower curves with quenched fluorescence) in different solvents: acetonitrile (red squares), dichloromethane (blue circles), chloroform (black triangles). Excitation wavelength: 290 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Left: current–voltage curve of a 147 nm organic solar cell device consisting of a blend of a BTD3 containing block copolymer as well as PCBM (blend ratio 1:4) as active layer. Right: incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) and absorption spectra of active layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

Aromatic monomers	285–470	340–440	

Anthracene An1–An5	362	407	Cyclohexane
Diphenyl anthracene DPA1–DPA2	372	403, 425	Cyclohexane
Naphthalene monomers N1–N7	285	345	


F1, F2	320	
	THF

F3
	445	
	Water (buffered)

F4
	290, 354	
	Water (buffered)

Per1
	434	435	Dichloromethane
Phenanthrene monomers P1–P2	254,	378	Cyclohexane
Pyrene	338	375	DMSO

Py1–Py5
	377, 395, 467	377, 394, 416 (shoulder), 435 (shoulder)	THF


Azo-monomers	260–520	
	


Azo2
	336	
	Dioxane

Azo3
	341	
	Dioxane

Azo4
	360	
	Dioxane

Azo5
	349	
	Dioxane

Azo6
	343	
	Dioxane

Azo9
	350 (E)	
	

438 (Z)

Azo16
	379 (E)	
	Chloroform
300, 473 (Z)

Azo17
	366 (E)	
	Chloroform
260, 453 (Z)

Azo24
	460 (NO2)	
	

417 (Br)
405 (OCH3)

Azo25
	462 (NO2)	
	

415 (Br)
403 (OCH3)

Azo26
	333	
	THF

Azo42
	445	
	Chloroform

Azo43
	365	
	Chloroform

Azo44
	420, 520	430	DMF

Azo45
	449	
	THF


Benzothiadiazoles	365–470	490–660	


BTD1
	365	490	Homopolymer as thin film

BTD2
	415	541	Homopolymer as thin film

BTD3
	440	610	Homopolymer as thin film

BTD4
	467	658	Homopolymer as thin film


Coumarin monomers	320–400	450–510	

Coumarin 1 monomers (CH3-substituent, amide linkage)	373	450	EtOH
Coumarin 152 Monomers (CF3-substituent, amide linkage)	397	510	EtOH

Cou7–Cou10 (CH3-substituent, ether linkage)	320	
	



Fluorescein monomers	485–555	510–585	


Fl1–Fl6
	485	514	


Fl7
	532–547 (Erythrosin)	556–581	THF, acetone or DMSO (Homopolymers revealed redshift in absorption- and emission spectra in more polar solvents, polymers tend to bleach, thermal stability of the polymers: erythrosin > Eosin Y > Eosin B)
537–547 (Eosin)	557–564
535–552 (Eosin)	554–571


Naphthalimide monomers	280–460	510–530	


Nap1
	441	511	


Nap2
	443	512	


Nap3
	424	450–620	Dichloromethane

Nap4
	404	
	Toluene
406	Chloroform
408	EtOH
404	DMF

Nap5
	410	
	Toluene
414	Chloroform
440	EtOH
442	DMF

Nap6
	430	
	Toluene
436	Chloroform
446	EtOH
458	DMF

Nap7
	428	517	Acetonitrile

Nap9
	436	526	DMF

Nap10
	340, 434	526	DMF

Nap11
	434	524	DMF

Nap12
	286, 338, 434	527	DMF

Nap13
	290, 340, 436	527	DMF

Nap14
	342 (354)	
	Toluene
344 (356)	Chloroform
342 (354)	EtOH
342 (356)	DMF

Nap15
	342 (354)	
	Toluene
344 (356)	Chloroform
344 (356)	EtOH
344 (356)	DMF

Nap16
	414 (pH = 11.2)	520	DMSO–water 1/1
406 (pH = 7.6)
390 (pH = 3.4)
390 (pH = −0.6)

Nap17
	365	465	Dichloromethane–DMSO 9/1

Nap18
	365	455	Acetonitrile

Nap19
	440	550	Chloroform


OPE monomers	290–435	370–530	


OPE1
	296	371	Chloroform

OPE2
	318, 369	402	Chloroform

OPE3
	312, 431	529	Chloroform

OPE4
	320, 385	445	THF

OPE5
	350	440	THF


Oxdiazoles	230–470	380–560	


Oxa1
	315	380	Chlorobenzene

Oxa2
	275, 456	560	Water

Oxa3
	330	402	Chloroform

Oxa4–Oxa5
	371 (C8)	437, 464	Chloroform
372 (C10)	437, 461

Oxa11
	470	518	Water

Oxa13
	
ca. 310	
ca. 390	THF

Oxa17
	293	
	As film

Oxa18
	311	
	As film

Oxa19, Oxa22, Oxa25	241, 292, 339	424	Dichloromethane

Oxa20, Oxa23	237, 284, 341	414	Dichloromethane

Oxa21, Oxa24, Oxa26	234, 292, 337	434	Dichloromethane


Rhodamine monomers	530–550	560–570	

Rhodamine B Rh1–Rh3, Rh5–Rh9	548	570	


Rh4
	530	566	Aqueous HCl, pH = 2


Thiadiazoles	310–325	390–400	


TD2
	311	390	DMF

TD3
	321	398	DMF


Thiazoles	250–370	410–450	


Thia1
	342, 334	410, 411	Acetonitrile

Thia2
	368, 361	446, 447	Acetonitrile

Thia3
	253, 370	445	Acetonitrile

Thia4
	250, 361	447	Acetonitrile

Thia5
	375	447	Dichloromethane


Others	
	
	


EtBr
	439	512	


Fu
	396 (E)	−(E)	Chloroform

	528 (C)	635–649 (C)	


Lu
	
	582	EtOH–Water 20/80

NB2–NB3
	493	574	Toluene
499	596	Acetone
504	598	DMF
628	667	EtOH
635	674	Water
457	556	1.0 N HCl (pH = 1)
522	668	0.1 N NaOH (pH = 11)

Sp2
	470–650	
	As polymer NP suspension in water



AcN
	RAFT	Chlorobenzene	70 (16 h)	
DPA1 , DPA288	Excitation energy transfer

An1
	FRP	PGMEAa	60 (5 h)	PTBS, MAA65	Deep UV lithography
FRP	THF	55 (24 h)	CyOPMI, (HBuVE), MMA66	Negative-tone photoimaging
FRP	Toluene	60	Styrene57,58	Morphology characterization of immiscible polymer blends
FRP	THF–toluene	60 (48 h)	Hexyl methacrylate, MMA59,60	Photodimerization
6-((4′-cyano-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)oxy)hexyl methacrylate71	LC polymer fibres
ATRP	Anisole	70	MMA61	Synthesis and characterization
FRP	THF	55 (2 h) and 62 (12 h)	MMA69	Diels–Alder crosslinking
ATRP	H2O	60 (overnight)	MMA (diblock copolymer)70	Photodimerization
ATRP	Toluene	60 (20 min)	DMAEMA63	Surface labeling
FRP	THF	60 (24 h)	Azacrown ether methacrylate monomers64	Synthesis and characterization
RAFT	THF	62 (20 h)	AEMA83	Amine and metal sensor



	


	


	Homopolymer and MMA105,106	Separation of SWCNTs



	


	


	Homopolymer119,120	Antireflective coating



	


	


	MMA121	LC display element



	


	


	
tBMA122	Photoresist
FRP	Toluene	60	Neopentyl methacrylamide138	Structured polymer Langmuir–Blodgett films
FRP	Benzene	60 (48 h)	MAA124	Studies on PMAA conformation

An2
	Iniferter polymerization	Toluene	RT (10–80 min)	MAA, EGDMA99	Cross-linked coatings

An3
	FRP	Bulk	70 (48 h)	VP67	Superabsorbent nanogel
FRP	
n-Hexane	60 (24 h)	Vinyl terminated poly(siloxanes)68	Polysiloxane labeling
Living anionic polymerization	Cyclohexane or toluene	25 (10 min)	Homopolymer and block copolymer with 4-diphenylaminostyrene	Synthesis and characterization
UV-induced selective surface grafting polymerization	Acetone	25	PS (block copolymer)112	Janus particles

An4
	Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	85	MMA, BA129	Polymer diffusion studies

An5
	FRP	THF	60 (48 h)	6-((4′-Cyano-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)oxy)hexyl methacrylate71	LC polymer fibres

Azo1
	


	


	


	BA, MMA, EtA143	Synthesis and characterization



	


	


	Styrene, DVB148	Electrophoresis particles for electronic inks

Azo2–Azo6
	FRP	Dioxane	80 (1.5 h)	MMA144,145	Synthesis and characterization

Azo7–Azo15
	FRP	THF	60 (24 h)	Homopolymers146	Synthesis and characterization

Azo16/Azo17	FRP	THF	60 (48 h)	Homopolymer and Fu copolymer147	Dual-mode optical switchable polymers

Azo18–Azo23
	


	


	


	Styrene, DVB148	Electrophoresis particles for electronic inks

Azo24 (R10 = NO2)	RAFT	Toluene	70 (12 h)	DEGMA, Py285,86,156	Sensor for temperature and pH value

Azo24/Azo25	ATRP	Cyclohexanone	80 (4–8 d)	MMA149	Third-order nonlinear optics

Azo26
	FRP	Cyclohexanone	70 (8 h)	Styrene, carbazole monomers150	Memory devices

Azo27–Azo36
	FRP	Propylene glycol mono-methylether acetate	230 (30 min)	Homopolymers151	Color filters

Azo37/Azo38	ROMP	Dichloro-methane	Rt (90 min)	Homopolymers and copolymers with Azo37 or Azo38152	Reusable acid sensors

Azo39/Azo40	FRP	Benzene	50	Homopolymers154	Reversibly bending polymer films

Azo41
	FRP	Toluene	60 (48 h)	Homopolymers155	Three-dimensional photomobility

Azo42/Azo43	RAFT	Anisole	80	Homopolymers and PS block copolymers157	Photoinduced birefringence

Azo44
	RAFT	DMF	80 (24 h)	Homopolymers and PS block copolymers158	Metal ion detector

Azo45/Azo46	FRP	THF	60 (2 d)	
Py2
103
	Functionalization of SWCNTs

BTD1–BTD4
	FRP and RAFT	Chlorobenzene	70 (16 h)	Homopolymers and block copolymers with polymerizable triphenylamines265	Organic solar cell

Cou1
	


	


	


	MMA159–161	OLED

Cou2
	ATRP	
p-Xylene	100 (48 h)	PMMA block copolymer162	Core cross-linked star polymers
Radical miniemulsion polymerization	H2O–CH2Cl2	Rt (20 min)	1,4-Phenylene bismethacrylate40	
In vivo large-animal-lymph migration of NPs

Cou3–Cou6
	


	


	


	Homopolymer163	Intraocular lenses

Cou7
	ATRP	THF	60 (20 h)	Homopolymer and naphthopyran copolymer164	Photo-crosslinking

Cou8
	Living cationic polymerization	CH2Cl2	0	Homopolymer and methoxyethoxyethyl vinyl ether165	Reversible photoinduced crosslinking

Cou9
	FRP	


	


	Maleic anhydride, styrene166	Self-assembly of photosensitive particles

Cou10–Cou12
	FRP	DMF	60 (16 h)	Homopolymers, MAA copolymers167	Photoalignment of liquid crystals

Cou13–Cou41
	FRP	Xylene	Reflux (18 h)	Homopolymers153	Synthesis and characterization

Cou42/Cou43
	FRP	Dioxane	75 (24 h)	VP168,169	Sensors
Acrylamide170

Cou44
	RAFT	DMF	60	MMA and labelled PMMA-b-PS171	Eu(III) complexation

Cou45
	FRP	DMF	70	Homopolymer and VAc172	Antimicrobial coatings

DPA1/DPA2
	RAFT	Chlorobenzene	70 (16 h)	
AcN
88
	Excitation energy transfer

EtBr1/EtBr2
	


	


	


	


	




F1
	Living anionic polymerization	Toluene	–78	Homopolymer96	Conformational study

F2
	Living anionic polymerization	Toluene	–78 (12 h)	Homopolymer95,96	Conformational study

F3/F4
	FRP	DMF	65 (5 h)	2-Ethoxyethyl methacrylate, 2-Ethoxyethyl methacrylate, EGDMA109	Cyanide sensor membrane

F5
	Living anionic polymerization	THF	–78	VP (block copolymer)97	Self-assembly
Living anionic polymerization	THF	–78 (1.3 h)	Star-polymers98	Ordered microporous films
FRP	Benzene	70 (16 h)	DMAEMA and stearyl acrylate110	Thermoresponsive luminescent electrospun fibers
Living anionic polymerization	THF or t-butylbenzene	–78 or20	Homopolymers113–116	Non-volatile memory devices

Fl1
	RAFT	Dioxane	60	NIPAM, NAOS173	Multifunctional nanomedicines



	


	


	HEMA, ethylene dimethacrylate174	Optimization of femtosecond laser micromachining
Radical dispersion polymerization	EtOH	70	Styrene176	Polymer particles
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (8 h)	Styrene, NIPAM177	Fe3O4 core–shell composite particles
FRP	Bulk	70 (5 h)	DVB182	Fiber coatings
FRP	Igepal-cyclohexane	Rt (1 h)	
N-(3-Aminopropyl) methacrylamide, BIS, PEGMA178–180	Cellular delivery of anionic NPs, gold nanorod coating, functionalized plasmonic-fluorescent NPs
Radical dispersion polymerization	H2O	μW, 600 W (10 s)	AA183	Coating of magnetic nanodiamonds
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	75 (3 h)	Styrene, MMA, styrene/HEMA184,185	Cell uptake of polymer NPs
FRP	EtOH	60 (21 h)	MAA186,187	Polyurea microcapsules
FRP	H2O	70 (44 h)	
N-Vinylimidazole, BIS188	Studies on the swelling behavior of crosslinked polymers

Fl2
	FRP	EtOH–H2O	25	NIPAM, TBAM, AA, BIS175	Imprinted polymer nanoparticles
Radical photo-polymerization	H2O	Rt (10 min)	HEA and PEG575 diacrylate181	Formation of three-dimensional hydrogel multilayers
FRP	DMSO	RT	Trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate, 2-aminoethyl methacrylate hydrochloride189–191	NP formation by PRINT method
Radical photo-polymerization	DMF	70 (1 min)	HP4MA, PEG700DA, TETA, Rh1 (diblock and triblock particles)192	Multiphase amphiphilic rods
RAFT	H2O–acetone	60 (1 to 9 h)	NIPAM, N-acryloyl glucosamine193	Thermo-dependent switcher
RAFT	DMA	70	Styrene, 2-(methacrylamido)glucopyranose, disulfide diacrylate194	Degradable cross-linked glyco-particles
ATRP	Acetone	70 (1 h)	NIPAM195	Coating of fluorescent microtubuli
ATRP	Anisole	80 (25 h)	PBPEM-g-BA copolymer196	pH-Responsive fluorescent molecular bottlebrushes
ATRP	Acetone	70	NIPAM and tBA197	Janus particle sensor
FRP	THF	70 (8 h)	Acylamide199	pH and temperature responsive material



	


	


	MMA200	SWCNT composite material



	


	


	MMA106	Separation of SWCNTs

Fl6
	FRP	THF	70 (10 h)	Acylamide198	pH and temperature responsive material

Fl7
	FRP	THF	60 (24 h)	Homopolymers201	Holographic grating studies

Fu
	FRP	THF	60 (48 h)	Homopolymer and Azo16/Azo17 copolymers147	Dual-mode optical switchable polymers

H
	


	


	


	


	




Lu
	Radical seed emulsion polymerization	H2O	40–60	MAA, styrene, DVB255	Stimuli-responsive polymers

N1
	FRP	Toluene	60	
N-Dodecylmethacrylamide47,48	Photolithography and photoreaction



	


	


	Homopolymer136	
T
g prediction by calculation

N2
	ATRP	CHCl3	25 (48 h)	DMAEMA80	Stimuli-responsive multifunctional membranes
Radical emulsifier-free emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (15 min)	Styrene and MAA copolymer100	Fe3O4 composite particles
Radical soap-free emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (8 h)	DVB and MMA or styrene101	Colloid immobilization on Au surface



	


	


	Homopolymer105,106	Separation of SWCNTs



	


	


	Homopolymer135	Calculation of polymer properties
FRP	Bulk	50 (24 h)	MMA123	Nonradiative energy transfer
FRP	Cyclohexanol–ethylene glycol–H2O	60 (12 h)	ODA, TRIM141	Column material

N3
	Radical emulsifier-free emulsion copolymerization	H2O	60 (6 h)	Styrene49	Particle labeling
FRP	Benzene	80	Maleic anhydride50	Conformational studies
Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization	Toluene	40	Ethylene51	Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization
FRP	DMSO	60 (21 h)	Sodium styrenesulfonate53,54	Nanostructured micellar films, hybrid photosensitizers



	


	


	AA (as block copolymer)55	

Free radical micellar copolymerization	H2O	50 (16 h)	Sodium 2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulphonate and acrylamide52	Terpolymer for enhanced oil recovery



	


	


	Homopolymer108	Investigations on polymer/fullerene miscibility



	


	


	Homopolymer137	Calculation of the dielectric constant



	


	


	Homopolymer117	Non-volatile organic field-effect transistor memory
FRP	Bulk	70	Homopolymer and PFS140	Studies on π–π stacking interactions

N4
	


	


	


	Homopolymer137	Calculation of the dielectric constant
FRP	Bulk	70	Homopolymer and PFS140	Studies on π–π stacking interactions

N5
	ATRP	Toluene	RT	
Rh8
111
	Self-assembly and reversible switching

N6/N7
	


	


	


	Homopolymers142	Load bearing hydrogel implants

Nap1/Nap2	FRP	Bulk	70 (12 h)	MMA223	Synthesis and characterization

Nap3
	Radical miniemulsion polymerization	H2O	60 (210 min)	MMA, Sp2224	Photo-switchable nanoparticles

Nap4–Nap6
	FRP	Bulk	70 (8 h)	MMA225	Coloring agents

Nap7
	FRP	Bulk	80 (8 h)	Styrene226	Metal ion sensor

Nap8
	FRP	H2O	50 (6 h)	3-(Trimethoxysilyl)-1-propano methacrylate, HEMA227	Intra-arterial blood pH monitoring

Nap9–Nap13
	FRP	Bulk	70 (12 h)	AN228,229	UV absorber, hindered amine light stabilizer

Nap14/Nap15	FRP	Bulk	70 (8 h)	MMA225	Whitening materials

Nap16
	RAFT	NMP	70 (36 h)	Homopolymer230	Switchable polymer

Nap17
	RAFT	NMP	70	Homopolymer231	Fluoride ion sensor

Nap18
	Alkene polymerization	THF (Et3N)	RT (24 h)	Homopolymer232	Fluoride ion sensor

Nap19
	FRP	Bulk	80 (24 h)	MMA233	LUCO LED

Nap20
	Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (8 h)	NIPAM, BIS234	Dual-fluorescent sensors for temperature and Hg2+

NB1
	Radical photopolymerization	EtOH–H2O	RT (20 min)	PEGDMA252	EtOH sensor

NB2/NB3	


	


	


	BA253	Plasticizer-free fluorescent. H+ and Na+ optode microsphere sensors

OPE1
	RAFT	Toluene	70	Homopolymer260	Conformational study

OPE1–OPE3
	RAFT	Toluene–THF	70	Homopolymers, statistical copolymers, MMA259	Energy transfer studies

OPE4/OPE5
	FRP	THF	60 (24 h)	Homopolymer and polymerizable carbazole methacrylate261	Polymer light-emitting diode
Homopolymer and N-vinyl carbazole264	Supramolecular cross-linking
Homopolymer and benzoic acid acrylates263	Surface-modified gold NPs
Homopolymer and N-vinyl carbazole262

Oxa1
	FRP	THF	50–60 (48 h)	Homopolymer and carbazole methacrylate copolymer235	Electroluminescent films

Oxa2
	Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (4 h)	NIPAM, BIS236,237	Hydrophilic fluorescent nanogel thermometer

Oxa3
	FRP	Chlorobenzene	90	
N-Vinylcarbazole238	OLED
ATRP	Toluene	110 (2 d)	BECThS (block copolymer)239	OLED

Oxa4/Oxa5
	ATRP	NMP	110 (4 d)	Homopolymers240	LC electroluminescent polymer

Oxa6–Oxa12
	FRP	Chlorobenzene	90 (36 h)	Homopolymers241	LC polymers

Oxa11
	RAFT	Dioxane	80 (12 h)	P(St-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)220	Sensor material
RAFT	Dioxane	80 (12 h)	P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222	Sensor material
ATRP	Isopropanol	25 (1.5 h)	P(NIPAM-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Sp2)243	Photoswitchable and thermotunable multicolor fluorescent hybrid silica NPs
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (7 h)	NIPAM, BIS, Rh9244	K+ sensor

Oxa12
	RAFT	DMF	80	NIPAM245	Homodimeric protein–polymer conjugates

Oxa13
	FRP	THF	50–60 (24 h)	Carbazole methacrylate246	Polymer light-emitting diodes

Oxa14/Oxa15	NMP	Diglyme	130	Homopolymers, polymerizable triphenylamines (random copolymers and block copolymers)247	OLED

Oxa16
	NMP	
o-Dichlorobenzene	130	Homopolymer, polymerizable carbazole (as block copolymer)248	OLED

Oxa17
	NMP	DMF	135	Polymerizable carbazoles249	Memory device

Oxa18
	NMP	DMF	135	Polymerizable triphenylamine250	Memory device

Oxa19–Oxa21
	FRP	THF	60 (3 d)	Homopolymer251	OLED

Oxa22–Oxa24
	ROMP	CH2Cl2	RT (overnight)	Homopolymer251	OLED

Oxa25/Oxa26	FRP	THF	60 (7 d)	Homopolymer251	OLED

P1
	


	


	


	Homopolymer108	Investigations on polymer/fullerene miscibility

P2
	Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (20 h)	BA, MMA, AA125,126	Study of the drying behavior of wet latex films
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	80 (20 min)	BMA, bisphenol A dimethacrylate127	Study of branching effects
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	85 (30 min)	MMA, BA128,129	Polymer diffusion studies
MMA, BA, AA131,132
MMA, BA, MAA133

tBMA, EHA, MAA133

Per1
	NMP	
o-Dichlorobenzene	125 (10 to 24 h)	Block copolymer with P3HT or PS42,91,92	Organic solar cells

Py1
	


	


	


	Homopolymer	LC displays

Py2
	Radical dispersion polymerization	Ionic liquid	70 (24 h)	AA78	Particle labeling
Emulsifier-free radical polymerization	H2O	70 (18 h)	Styrene72–75	Film labeling
FRP	Bulk	


	Styrene,76,77 MMA76	Labeling for Tg determination
Radical dispersion polymerization	MeOH–H2O	80 (12 h)	MMA49	NP labeling
ATRP	Anisole	70 (1 h), 90 (24 h)	MMA (block and random copolymer)79	Self-assembly characterization
ATRP	Anisole	90 (24 h)	MMA (block copolymer)81	Photo- and pH-responsive composite NPs
ATRP	THF	60 (18 h)	PS-b-PEO (triblock terpolymer)82	Photoresponsive self-assembly
RAFT	Benzene	60 (12 h)	VP (block copolymer)84	Ratiometric pH sensor
RAFT	Toluene	70 (12 h)	DEGMA, Azo2485,86	Sensor for temperature and pH value
NMP	Bulk	125 (4 h)	Styrene, DVB89	Fluorescence labeled macroinitiator
Radical miniemulsion polymerization	H2O	60–70 (6 h)	Styrene102	Fluorescent particle preparation
FRP	THF	60 (2 d)	
Azo44 and Azo45103	Functionalization of SWCNTs
ATRP	THF	60 (12 h)	PEG-b-TEPMAc (triblock terpolymer)104	Functionalization of SWCNTs
FRP	Benzene	50 (48 h)	PS, PEGMA107	Dispersion of MWCNTs
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	


	Styrene, AA118	Contrast enhancement in fluorescence microscopy measurements
FRP	EtOH–H2O–HCl	RT	Dodecylmethacrylate, Hexanedioldimethacrylate134	Sol–gel silica thin films
FRP	Bulk	


	Styrene and tBMA139	Studies of effects on the Tg

Py3
	Living anionic polymerization	Toluene	50 (5 h)	Styrene (block copolymer)45,46	Dispersion of SWCNTs

Py4
	ROMP	


	


	Homopolymer90	Synthesis and characterization

Py5
	FRP	Bulk	


	Styrene139	Studies of effects on the Tg

Rh1
	Radical photo-polymerization	DMF	70 (1 min)	HP4MA, PEG700DA, TETA, Fl2 (diblock- and triblock particles)192	Multiphase amphiphilic rods

	FRP	MeOH	Reflux (72 h)	MMA, cholesterol monomer203	Delivery of xenobiotics
FRP	H2O	40 (40 min)	IBCA, IHCA204	NPs for the intravenous delivery of siRNA
FRP	EtOH	60 (12 h)	BMA, MPC205	Cell-penetrating macromolecules
Radical photo-polymerization	H2O	rt	PEG700DA206,207	Production of opaque microparticles by stop-flow lithography
Radical photo-polymerization	Ethylene glycol	RT	AA, acrylamide (copolymer)209	Three-dimensionally patterned hydrogel pads
FRP	Paraffin oil	Rt (3 h)	BIS, NIPAM210	Thermoresponsive microgel particles
Radical photo-polymerization	Acetone	RT (2 to 5 min)	NIPAM211	Surface-confined hydrogels
FRP	H2O	70	BIS, allyl amine, NIPAM212,213	Responsive hydrogels
FRP	H2O	75 (2 h)	BIS, NIPAM214,215	Transfer of colloidal patterns by the reversible buckling process, Core-sheath nanofibers
Radical dispersion polymerization	H2O	70 (6 h)	BIS, NIPAM, AA216	Thermoresponsive nanogels
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (12 h)	BIS, NIPAM217	Cell uptake of polymer NPs

Rh2
	Radical photo-polymerization	H2O	Rt (10 min)	HEA and PEG575 diacrylate181	Formation of three-dimensional hydrogel multilayers

Rh3
	FRP	THF	80 (72 h)	VP197	Janus particle sensor
FRP	DMF	70 (24 h)	Homopolymer202	Synthesis and characterization

Rh4
	ATRP	MeOH	Rt (63 h)	MPC and DPA (block copolymer)208	Fluorescently labeled biocompatible polymers

Rh5
	FRP	MeOH	75 (2 h)	Polymerizable ionic liquids218	FRET in polymeric ionic liquids
Radical emulsion polymerization	H2O	70 (7 h)	NIPAM, BIS, Oxa11244	K+ sensor

Rh6
	RAFT	Dioxane	70 (1.5 h)	PEO-b-PNIPAM block copolymer219	Sensor material

Rh7
	RAFT	Dioxane–THF	70 (2 h)	P(St-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7) block copolymer220	Sensor material
RAFT	Dioxane–H2O	70 (12 h)	P(NIPAM-co-FITC)-b-P(PEGMA-co-Rh7)221	Sensor material
RAFT	Dioxane	70 (5 h)	P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222	Sensor material

Rh8
	ATRP	Toluene	
	
N5
111
	Self-assembly and reversible switching

Rh9
	FRP	THF	80 (72 h)	VP197	Janus particles

Sp1
	FRP	THF	70 (3 d)	MMA, polymerizable triphenylamine254	Polymeric switch

Sp2
	RAFT	Dioxane	80 (12 h)	P(St-co-Oxa11-co-Sp2)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Rh7)222	Sensor material
Radical miniemulsion polymerization	H2O	60 (210 min)	MMA, Nap3224	Photo-switchable nanoparticles
ATRP	Isopropanol	25 (7 h)	P(NIPAM-co-Oxa11)-b-P(NIPAM-co-Sp2)243	Photoswitchable and thermotunable multicolor fluorescent hybrid silica NPs

TD1–TD3
	FRP	Cyclohexanone	65 (6 h)	Homopolymers266	


Thia1/Thia2	RAFT	Toluene	70	MMA256	Synthesis and characterization

Thia3/Thia4	RAFT	Toluene	70	Styrene257	Synthesis and characterization

Thia5
	RAFT	DMA	85	MMA, polymerizable Ru(II) complex258	Energy transfer study

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
