Augmented Z scheme blueprint for efficient solar water splitting system using quaternary chalcogenide absorber material  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP06807J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP06807J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3788-3803Augmented Z scheme blueprint for efficient solar water splitting system using quaternary chalcogenide absorber material

        
          
            Prashant K. 
            Sarswat
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dhiman 
            Bhattacharyya
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael L. 
            Free
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Mano 
            Misra
          
        
      ab
aDepartment of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, 135 S, 1460 E, Room 412, Salt Lake City, UTAH 84112, USA. E-mail: prashant.sarswat@utah.edu;   Tel: +1-801-520-6919
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UTAH 84112, USA
Received 
      7th November 2015
    , Accepted 6th January 2016First published on 14th January 2016AbstractPhotoelectrochemical hydrogen (H2) production from water is a key method of addressing energy needs using an environmentally friendly approach. In the last two decades we have witnessed the evolution of many different expensive catalysts, photoelectrodes and related technologies, especially those involving precious metals and use of acidic or basic electrolytes for hydrogen production. Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is a relatively new candidate in the category of efficient photocathodes, due to its high absorption coefficient and near optimal energy band gap. In this paper, we demonstrate photoelectrochemical viability of CZTS in combination with other photoanodes such as TiO2, BiVO4, and WO3 for H2 production with the use of an electrolyte of near neutral pH, a single redox mediator, and insignificant potential biasing. A systematic study was performed to understand CZTS performance with each photoanode, band energetics of CZTS with other photoanodes, impedance behavior of each photoelectrode, and utility of a CZTS photocell in place of a CZTS photocathode. Our assessment indicates that a protected CZTS photocell performs well when used in a Z-scheme containing TiO2 nanotubular array-CZTS or nanocrystalline WO3–CZTS. Preliminary experiments indicated that apart from band energetics, porosity and effective surface area of the photoanodes play a crucial role in determining the photoelectrochemical performance of the system.
1. Introduction and background
Solar hydrogen production using a semiconductor photocatalyst–electrolyte system is one of the most promising options for clean fuel generation. For water splitting, a substantial minimum amount of energy (ΔG° = 238 kJ mol−1) is required.1 This can be achieved using a semiconductor, which upon irradiation can produce energy2 equivalent to or greater than the minimum energy required for water splitting. For a single semiconductor water splitting system, the potential of the conduction band edge must be more negative than the potential for proton reduction, and the valence band should be sufficiently positive for efficient water splitting. Many n-type materials have a sufficiently large band gap for water oxidation but are not capable of producing a high current density.1 Smaller band gap p-type materials, which cannot provide sufficient energy for single semiconductor water splitting, have conduction bands more negative than the proton reduction potential.1 Most of the non-oxide semiconductors have reduction potentials that are higher than the proton reduction potential. Hence, they are resistant to photo-reduction. Regarding hole oxidation, many p-type cathodes form downward band bending at the semiconductor/water interface, which acts as a barrier for holes.1 The reduction and oxidation potentials for most water splitting semiconductors depend on the pH value of electrolytes.1 The photoanode (n-type) should be stable if the thermodynamic oxidation potential is lower than the valence band minimum.3 For photocathodes, if the cathode material reduction potential is higher than the water reduction potential, it will be reduced before water reduction takes place. It is also recommended that metal oxide to be used as a photo-anode should have a lower oxidation potential than the oxidation potential of water.3 In many cases, it is preferred that the metal atoms in these oxides should be in a higher valence state, otherwise they will oxidize before oxidation of water takes place. Most of the non-oxide semiconductors possess a higher oxidation potential compared to the water oxidation reaction and hence they are likely to become thermodynamically unstable in aqueous solution if used as photoanodes for water oxidation. Photoelectrodes such as TiO2, BaTiO3, and SrTiO3 have been extensively utilized for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting under UV irradiation.1 Other materials such as BiVO4, WO3, SrTiO3: Rh have also been utilized in the visible spectrum.4–6 Various d10 and d0 class type photocatalysts1,7–23 have been utilized for water splitting. Although various novel materials show promising results, none of them can maintain 1000 hours of stability in typical solutions under solar illumination conditions.24
1.1 Challenges for water splitting photoelectrodes stability and performance
A major challenge related to stability and light utilization is to reduce the current cost of hydrogen production using PV–electrolysis systems, which is currently more than $10 per kg. The current cost of hydrogen production by other methods is ∼$1–4 per kg.25 Amongst non-oxide materials, a GaInP2/GaAs tandem configuration shows high solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency but low stability. I–III–VI materials can be useful due to high photon conversion efficiency and low cost of manufacturing.24 Another factor related to cost is reagent consumption and waste product removal. A shift of ∼59 mV in standard potential generally occurs for each unit increase in pH, making hydrogen production difficult with neutral pH water due to less favorable band energetics.1 The acidic media (concentration ∼ 1 M) is generally used to supply an abundance of hydrogen ions that can be quickly converted to hydrogen gas molecules. The abundance of hydrogen ions makes the process of producing hydrogen gas much easier in acidic pH than at neutral pH. However, the consumption of hydrogen ions from acid enriched solutions requires replenishment of the acid to maintain the high rate of hydrogen production. The added acid contains its associated counter ion, which will accumulate in solution as acid is replenished, thereby necessitating additional processing to remove the counter ion. The need to add acid and to remove accumulated counter ions from acid additions increases the true cost and lowers the overall cycle efficiency. The same principle applies to consumable redox reagents. Addition of high concentrations of acid also increases electrode corrosion and decreases long term performance. Most photocatalyst research has shown water splitting activity with UV irradiation. However, photoactivity using visible light illumination has been limited.1 A material with a band gap of 2.0 eV or more with good chemical environment stability, and a long minority carrier diffusion length is required for single electrode solar hydrogen production.1 Although many potential materials such as Fe2O3 and TaON have shown photocurrent, most of them do not have sufficient photopotential to split water.1 TaON shows good photocurrent but the durability of this electrode is not sufficient. Materials such as SrTiO3 (as a single electrode material) have been utilized for water splitting.5,6,26 However, the high necessary band gap eliminates most of the solar spectrum and thereby reduces practical efficiency.
1.2 Importance of Z-scheme for water splitting and use of CZTS
In a Z-scheme, two different semiconductors are assembled in such a manner that the oxidation and reduction reactions will be carried out by two separate semiconductors.1 Reduction of protons (hydrogen evolution) occurs at the electrode for which the conduction band is located above the potential of the H+/H2 reaction (Fig. 1). In this system, an electron donor species such as Fe2+ will be converted into an acceptor such as Fe3+ by utilization of valance band holes at the hydrogen producing semiconductors. On the other hand water oxidation occurs by valence band holes at the photoanode surface such as BiVO4. The valence band needs to be below the O2/H2O reduction potential line. Most of the metal chalcogenides undergo anodic corrosion and hence cannot generate oxygen.3 Hence, a p–n PEC structure, which contains a photocathode that is stable under the cathodic conditions, can be used to produce hydrogen with photoanodes that are stable under anodic conditions, provided a salt bridge/membrane is used to separate the associated environments. Most of the existing new semiconductor compounds and photoelectrodes suffer from low quantum yield, inefficient solar conversion efficiency, the need for a bias voltage, and high photo-induced corrosion.1,3–6,24,26–33 For high efficiency PEC cells, very efficient p-type photocathodes are required.34–40 Though, many of the p-type electrodes have been investigated, Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) or Cu–Sb–Zn–S (CAZS) electrodes have been least explored.25,34,36–39 The relative position of conduction bands of CZTS and its derivatives are appropriate for producing hydrogen by reduction of H+ ions. Close examination of a CZTS band diagram suggests that the oxygen evolution reaction is not possible at this electrode. The conduction band is ∼0.7 V below the hydrogen evolution potential, whereas the valence band is ∼0.55 V below the oxygen evolution potential.3,40 This suggests that unassisted water splitting is not possible using a single CZTS electrode. Hence, additional experiments were needed to evaluate CZTS in combination with oxygen evolving catalysts or photoanodes. In order to achieve this task, two compartment and single compartment experiments were conducted to evaluate hydrogen generation capabilities in augmentation with photoelectrodes such as TiO2, WO3, and BiVO4. In this piece of research, most of the experiments are designed to operate in a neutral pH environment with regenerating redox reagents. The use of CZTS has been demonstrated to meet the need of band alignment, as well as production of hydrogen gas from water in a Z-scheme system without using a biasing potential. In the proposed system the production of hydrogen and oxygen will be balanced to match the stoichiometry of water and eliminate the need for acid consumption, redox consumption, and counter ion removal, thereby reducing overall operating costs. Most of the experiments have been performed using thin film type photoelectrodes, however, some experimental results have been also presented for nanocrystalline powder.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustrating the Z-scheme arrangement of the photoanode and the photocathode in a solar water splitting system demonstrating the location of the conduction band and the valence band for both electrodes with respect to the hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential. Also shown is the role of electrons and holes in hydrogen reduction and water oxidation respectively and their exchange with the redox mediator present in the solution to prevent photocorrosion. 
2. Experimental
2.1 Synthesis of CZTS thin film
CZTS thin films were grown on a fluorinated tin oxide coated conducting transparent substrate by an electrochemical method. Cu–Zn–Sn alloy layers were electrochemically co-deposited using a bath with a three electrode system. The bath contains ions of interest and a complexing agent. Other details about film morphology, characterization, and electrochemical performance can be found in earlier reports.41,42 These films, which were electroplated with metal precursors (Cu, Zn and Sn), were annealed in a sulfur environment, using a tube furnace and evaporated elemental sulfur for 2 h.
2.2 Fabrication of CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO cell
After confirmation of phase purity and film quality, a thin layer of CdS was deposited over the CZTS layer. The CdS layer was grown using a chemical bath deposition method using acetate media. The film containing the adjacent layers of CZTS and CdS was utilized to fabricate a cell, that was completed when a thin layer of i-ZnO and n-type ZnO were deposited using an RF sputtering technique. Other details about deposition parameters can be found elsewhere.43
2.3 Synthesis of BiVO4 powder and thin film
Synthesis of BiVO4 thin film and powder was carried out using bismuth nitrate and ammonium metavanadate. In a typical synthesis scheme, a stoichiometric quantity of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and NH4VO3 were dissolved in the ethanol–water mixture with a volume ratio of ethanol and water of (Vethanol:Vwater) = 3:1. Nitric acid solution was added to adjust the pH to 4 under stirring until a yellow-milky gel formed. This gel was coated over a fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) glass substrate and subsequently annealed in tube furnace at ∼350 °C for 15–20 minutes to obtain a BiVO4 thin film. Synthesis of BiVO4 powder was carried out using a process discussed elsewhere.6,30,31
2.4 Synthesis of WO3 bulk and nanoflakes array film
WO3 bulk and nanoflakes array film were synthesized on FTO coated glass substrate using a previously reported solvothermal route with some stoichiometry modifications.44,45 For bulk WO3 film synthesis, 1.25 g of tungstic acid (H2WO4) and 0.5 g of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) were dissolved in 10 mL of H2O2 (30% by wt, Fischer Scientific) and subsequently coated on the conducting surface of the FTO glass substrate. Further, the resultant substrate was annealed in air at 500 °C for 2 hours and was labelled FTO–WO3-B. For solvothermal growth of the nanoflakes array film,46,47 FTO–WO3-B was used as a primary substrate (considered as a seed layer). An H2WO4 solution for solvothermal use was prepared by dissolving 1.25 g of H2WO4 into 30 mL of deionized water aided by gradual addition of 10 mL of 30% H2O2 while heating at 95 °C on a hot plate with stirring. The resulting solution was diluted using deionized water to 100 mL in order to obtain a molar concentration of 0.05 M. In a typical procedure described elsewhere, a solution mixture comprising 3 ml of 0.05 M of H2WO4 solution, 0.02 g of oxalic acid, 0.02 g of urea, and 0.5 mL of 6 M HCl were added into 12.5 mL of acetonitrile, and the resultant solution was transferred to a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave. The FTO–WO3-B substrate was placed at an angle against the wall of the Teflon-liner with the conducting side (side with the coated seed layer) facing down. The solvothermal synthesis was conducted at 180 °C for 2 h. Post completion of the synthesis, the autoclave was allowed to cool down to room temperature. The substrate was taken out and annealed in air at 500 °C for 1 hour and was labelled FTO–WO3–NF.
2.5 TiO2 nanotube synthesis
Titania nanotubes were synthesized by electrochemical anodization of titanium foils (0.1016 mm thick, ESPI metals, G1 grade) using a previously reported method.48,49 Titanium foils were cut into 1.5 × 1.5 cm coupons, hand-polished with emery paper, and degreased in an acetone–isopropanol (50% v/v each) mixture by ultrasonicating for 30 minutes. Anodization was carried out at 30 V in a fluorinated ethylene glycol solution (0.5 wt% NH4F + 3 wt% H2O) under constant stirring at 60 rpm for one hour using Pt foil as the counter electrode. The anodized coupons were annealed in air at 500 °C for 2 hours.
2.6 Modification of photoanode with Co-Pi catalyst
Cobalt based oxygen evolution catalysts (Co-Pi or cobalt phosphate) were deposited on the surface of photoanodes by photo-assisted electroplating deposition in a neutral phosphate buffer solution containing Co2+ ions. Co-Pi nanoparticles deposition on the photoanodes was achieved by a similar photochemical method as described in previous reports.50 The photoanodes (BiVO4 on FTO glass) were separately placed in a flask containing 50 mL of sodium phosphate buffer solution (0.01 M, pH = 7.0) prepared by dissolving potassium phosphate monobasic (KH2PO4) in deionized water. To this suspension, 1.25 mL of 0.02 M cobalt nitrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O) aqueous solution was added under stirring. The mixture was subjected to UV light illumination (100 W@365 nm) for 30 min and the resulting precipitate formed on the photoanode substrate, after which it was withdrawn and washed with deionized water thoroughly before drying at 60 °C overnight. It is presumed that such Co-Pi coated photoanodes would exhibit better electrochemical performance than photoanodes without Co-Pi.
2.7 Synthesis of CZTS powder
For CZTS powder synthesis, copper(II) acetate (99.9%), zinc(II) acetate (99.9%), tin(II) acetate anhydrous (≥97%), and thiourea (>99%) were ground to make homogeneous mixture. The molar composition of these salts was chosen in such a way so that stoichiometric ratio of Cu:Zn:Sn in the mixture was ∼2:1:1. This mixture was sintered within annealing tube in the presence of an evaporated sulfur environment for 2 hours at 550 °C. The annealing tube was continuously purged with argon for 25–30 min to displace air, prior to sulfur annealing. Elemental sulfur (99.9%), placed on a quartz boat, was held at a temperature of 150 °C was the primary source of evaporated sulfur. After 2 hours, the product was allowed to cool naturally and was subsequently examined for phase detection. A sponge-type CZTS material was obtained, which easily turned into powder when ground.39 This powder (see Fig. 2p) was washed in KCN (10% by weight in water) solution followed by washing in 50% aqueous solution of isopropyl alcohol to remove residual sulfide phases.39
 Fig. 2  In chronological order of the label, micrographs of SEM images and EDS mapping followed by the element spectra is presented respectively for (a–c) lateral view of the TiO2 nanotubes, with the top view shown in the inset of (a); (d–f) BiVO4 coated on FTO glass with the magnified image shown in the inset of (d); (g–i) Bulk WO3 coated on FTO glass, with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (g); (j–l) WO3 nanoflakes coated on FTO glass with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (j); (m–o) CZTS film coated on FTO glass with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (m). (p) Shows SEM image of CZTS porous powder. 
2.8 ZnO encapsulation
Among several oxides which can be easily coated on CZTS to improve PEC performance, ZnO is best suited for this purpose, as it has adequate transparency and can be easily applied over CZTS nanocrystals. In order to coat CZTS with ZnO, CZTS nanocrystals were dispersed ultrasonically in deionised water for 30 minutes. Then a dilute aqueous solution of 0.04 M Zn(NO3)2 was added into the reaction mixture and subsequently stirred. A sodium hydroxide aqueous solution was added into this mixture until the pH reached 10. At this point segregated ZnO encapsulated CZTS crystals were observed clearly. These nanocrystals were centrifuged and subsequently filtered using filter paper. After repeated washing steps the nanocrystals were dried at in a vacuum oven. It is essential to note that the thickness of CZTS/ZnO encapsulation can be controlled by changing the molar concentration of Zn(NO3)2 solution.
3. Characterization
The various morphologies of the synthesized TiO2, BiVO4, and WO3 thin films and WO3 nanoflakes arrays were characterized using a field emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-4800 SEM) maintained at ultrahigh vacuum (∼10−8 Torr). An intense electron beam from a tungsten filament at 3 kV accelerating voltage and 15 μA emission current setting was used for imaging at very high magnification (∼45000×). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping was achieved using an Oxford EDX detector attached to the SEM. The EDS studies were performed at 20 kV accelerating voltage and high probe current over a 25 mm × 25 mm sample area. Raman spectroscopy of BiVO4 and WO3 substrates were carried out in order to investigate phase purity and vibrational properties. Raman examination results for CZTS and TiO2 can be found in our earlier reports.49,51 A R3000 QE Raman spectrometer was utilized in backscattering mode. Raman measurements were performed using a laser with a wavelength of ∼785 nm and a power of ∼95 mW. The wavelength stability and drift were examined using standard silicon sample measurements and it was observed to be less than 1 cm−1 over a 12 h period. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out using a Rigaku Miniflex XRD (CuKα = 1.54059 Å) from 2θ = 20 to 80° with a step size of 0.015° and dwell time of 1 degree min−1. The diffraction patterns were analyzed using Rigaku PDXL2 analysis software and indexed with standard JCPDS cards.
4. Results and discussion
4.1 Morphological characterization
Ordered arrays of self-aligned vertically oriented titania nanotubes are illustrated in the SEM micrographs shown in Fig. 2(a–c). Fig. 2 shows the sidewall view of the ordered array of titania nanotubes with the top view shown in the inset. Each nanotube has an outer diameter of ∼60 nm with a consistent 12 nm wall thickness, while the length of the nanotubes ∼1.5 μm.
SEM images exhibiting the nanoparticulated morphology of BiVO4 are shown in Fig. 2(d–f). A closer inspection of the BiVO4 thin film suggests that the nanoparticles are present in an aggregated form. EDS mapping succinctly provides the elemental distribution of the key components of bismuth vanadate. In addition, the spectrum of the mapped area reveals the stoichiometry of the BiVO4 film which contains 17.1 wt% Bi, 2.1 wt% V and 80.8 wt% O. Fig. 2(g–i) presents FESEM images of as-prepared and annealed WO3 bulk film, and the film consisting of nanoflake arrays (Fig. 2(j–l)). As evident, there was discernible variation in film morphology between the bulk and the nanoflake films. The nanoflake films grow perpendicular to the substrate, with the thickness of the nanoflake film ranging from 22–30 nm, and a height of 1–2 μm. Micrographs of EDS mapping clearly show the presence of tungsten, while the spectrum confirms the near accurate WO3 stoichiometry, with 26.9 wt% W and 73.1 wt% O. SEM images of the CZTS thin film coated on FTO glass with the corresponding EDS micrographs showing the even distribution of the four components, are illustrated in Fig. 2(m–o). Fig. 2(p) shows SEM image of CZTS porous powder.
4.2 Phase examination

4.2.1 Vibrational properties. 
Raman scattering technique provides the information about vibrational properties of materials and crystal lattice distortions, and have been utilized for accurate phase investigation of many of the materials, utilized in this study.41,51 Raman spectra of annealed BiVO4 powder and BiVO4 thin film on FTO glass substrate, prepared by hydrothermal method has been shown in Fig. 3. A broad peak observed between 800–900 cm−1 and centered at 867 cm−1 confirms the presence of BiVO4.52 Bismuth vanadate contains pentavalent vanadium and typically four vibrations of (VO4)3− are associated with the material, viz. the A1 symmetric stretching mode observed at around 824–880 cm−1 (v1), the E anti-symmetric bending mode in the region between 305 and 345 cm−1 (v2), the F2 anti-symmetric stretching mode between 780 and 855 cm−1 (v3) and the F2 symmetric bending mode between 340 and 365 cm−1 (v4).40 First, the discussion related to the Raman spectra of BiVO4 powder is presented. The BiVO4 powder exhibit a peak at 239 cm−1, which can be attributed to external vibrational modes. A small and rather indistinct peak appears around 308 cm−1 which can be attributed to anti-symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v2) while a rather broad and significant peak around 360 cm−1 can be due to symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v4). The weak shoulder peak around 723 cm−1 was due to anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3) whereas the dominant Raman mode at 865 cm−1 can be attributed to symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1). A very weak shoulder bump around 630 cm−1 corresponds to the weak BiO stretching vibration.40
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of BiVO4 powder exhibit the following peaks at: 239 cm−1 (external vibrational modes), an indistinct peak at ∼308 cm−1 (anti-symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v2)), a rather broad and significant peak at ∼360 cm−1 (symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v4)), very weak shoulder bump ∼630 cm−1 (weak BiO stretching vibration), light shoulder peak at ∼723 cm−1 (anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3)), and the dominant Raman mode at 865 cm−1 (symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1)). (b) Raman spectra of BiVO4 thin film exhibit the following peaks at: a distinct peak at ∼343 cm−1 (overlap of anti-symmetric (v2) and symmetric (v4) bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra), a distinct peak ∼726 cm−1 (anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3)), dominant Raman mode at ∼825 cm−1 (symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1)), and a peak at ∼1000 cm−1, which is not present in BiVO4 powder, can be attributed to anti-symmetric stretching mode of (VO4)3− (v3). 
As for the Raman spectra of BiVO453 thin film, a distinct peak visible at 343 cm−1 can be caused by the overlap of anti-symmetric (v2) and symmetric (v4) bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra. The distinct peak around 726 cm−1 was due to anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3) while the dominant Raman mode at 825 cm−1 can be attributed to symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1). The peak at 1000 cm−1, which is not present in BiVO4 powder, can be attributed to anti-symmetric stretching mode of (VO4)3− (v3).

Fig. 4 shows Raman spectra of WO3 that matches well with earlier reported Raman spectra of WO3.54 Two peaks at 325 and 272 cm−1 are assigned to be the bending δ(O–W–O) vibration modes. Though none visible here, researchers had earlier stated that peaks appearing below 200 cm−1 can be attributed to lattice vibrations. The dominant peak at 807 cm−1 was induced by the anti-symmetric stretching of the W–O–W bonds or more precisely the anti-symmetric W–O stretching (ν) modes. The typical Raman mode at 717 cm−1 corresponds to the anti-symmetric W–O bending (δ) modes whereas the weak shoulder around 680 cm−1 was induced by the symmetric O–W–O deformation (γ) modes. A rather weak bump close to 950 cm−1 can be caused by symmetric stretching mode of metal–oxygen bond i.e. short terminal WO (ν) band prevalent in most transition metal oxides.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Raman spectra of WO3 powder and film exhibit the following peaks at: two peaks at 272 and 325 cm−1 (bending δ(O–W–O) vibration modes), a typical Raman mode at 717 cm−1 (anti-symmetric W–O bending (δ) modes), a weak shoulder at ∼660 cm−1 (symmetric O–W–O deformation (γ) modes), a dominant peak at 807 cm−1 (anti-symmetric stretching of W–O–W bonds or more precisely the anti-symmetric W–O stretching (ν) modes). A rather weak bump close to 950 cm−1 can be caused by symmetric stretching mode of metal–oxygen bond i.e. short terminal WO (ν) band prevalent in most transition metal oxides. 
Raman spectra of straight nanotubes show three distinct peaks that correspond to anatase phase of TiO2. Such three modes were obtained at 395 cm−1 (B1g), 516 cm−1 (A1g) and 640 cm−1 (Eg), respectively and they correspond well with earlier reported Raman spectra of TiO2.48


4.2.2 X-ray diffraction analysis. 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on annealed TiO2 nanotubes samples (Fig. 5(a)) to determine the crystalline phases of the nanoarchitectured oxide morphology. The TiO2 nanotube sample shows predominate diffraction patterns for anatase (indexed by A, JCPDS #01-070-7348) and rutile (indexed by R, JCPDS #01-076-0318) phase titania, as well as the underlying titanium substrate (indexed by Ti, JCPDS #00-044-1294) with Ti exhibiting a hexagonal lattice system. Fig. 5(b) exhibits the XRD patterns for WO3 nanoflakes morphology. The intense diffraction peaks were narrow and sharp indicating that WO3 nanoflakes are present in crystalline phase. All diffraction peaks were indexed to orthorhombic β-WO3 phase (JCPDS #20-1324). Fig. 5(c) shows XRD patterns of the BiVO4 thin film on conductive FTO glass substrate. The sample exhibits prominent diffraction peaks of pure BiVO4 which can be assigned to monoclinic BiVO4 (JCPDS #14-0688).
 Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of TiO2 nanotube array (TNA) indicating the peak indices for anatase (A) and rutile (R) phase titania, as well as the underlying titanium substrate (Ti); (b) X-ray diffraction pattern of WO3 nanoflake morphology indexed by orthorhombic β-WO3 phase (Δ); (c) X-ray diffraction pattern of BiVO4 thin film indexed by monoclinic BiVO4 phase (□). 

4.3 Photoelectrochemical cell: CZTS (on FTO coated glass) and other photoanodes
In order to examine photoelectrochemical performance of CZTS electrode, a two compartment cell was fabricated using CZTS on FTO photocathode and photoanodes. For a comparison three different photoanodes (Co-Pi coated BiVO4 on FTO, WO3 nanoflakes on FTO, and TiO2 nanotubular arrays) were chosen. For electrolyte, 0.1 M potassium phosphate aqueous solution was used. In order to connect two half-cell compartments, a filter paper soaked with concentrated sodium chloride was utilized as a salt bridge. Electrochemical measurements were performed under simulated sunlight irradiation (ABET Technology, AM 1.5). Fig. 6a shows a schematic diagram of such a water-splitting system. Some experiments were performed without putting external bias while some experiments were also conducted with application of bias voltage. Fig. 6b shows I–V curves of different photoelectrochemical system (CZTS in combination with different photoanodes). It can be seen that with increase in applied bias, photocurrent increases. It was also interesting to observe that without any external bias, change in photocurrent was realized during illumination. Hydrogen evaluation analysis was performed using a portable hydrogen detector, which shows hydrogen production when electrodes were illuminated. Fig. 6c suggests that CZTS–TiO2 nanotubular arrays and CZTS–WO3 system are better choices for solar hydrogen system compared to CZTS–BiVO4. The change in photocurrent while being illuminated was at least ∼100 μA in the case of TiO2 nanotubular arrays photoanode, whereas such a change was lowest for BiVO4 photoanode and the change in current was less than ∼10 μA, when applied bias was ∼1.5 V. It can be seen that such a performance is comparable with many water-splitting systems. In some cases this performance was found to be superior than photoelectrochemical systems such as RGO–CuGaS2 composites.55
 Fig. 6  (a) A schematic of the two-compartment photoelectrochemical experimental setup showing the cathodic and the anodic chamber connected by a salt bridge while being illuminated by a solar simulator. (b) Potentiodynamic (J vs. V) plot of conjugated CZTS photocathode–Co-Pi coated n-type (TiO2/WO3/BiVO4) photoanode system in phosphate buffer solution in two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation. (c) Absolute current density vs. time plots for CZTS–TiO2 and CZTS–BiVO4 system in phosphate buffer solution, at zero biasing condition under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation. 

4.3.1 CZTS photocell–BiVO4 system for water splitting. 
Most of the metal oxides have a higher oxidation potential than water oxidation at pH = 0, and they are already oxidized below the water oxidation potential. As a result, they are stable at the water oxidation potential. Hence, they can be used as suitable photoanodes (see Fig. 7). On the other hand, most of the non-oxide semiconductors have lower oxidation potentials than the water oxidation potential at pH = 0. Thus, when these non-oxide semiconductors reach the water oxidation potential, they convert to metal oxides, and are therefore unstable. Therefore, these semiconductors are thermodynamically unstable in aqueous solution. For CZTS, it is expected that its anion component will be oxidized to a neutral or positive valence state (S or SO4−).3 However, the reduction potential of the CZTS is more negative than the standard hydrogen reduction potential, which indicates that it will be stable under reduction conditions during illumination. If a hole-blocker oxide layer is applied on these semiconductors, it can allow photogenerated electron migration from the conduction band to solution via the oxide layer, but holes will be restricted due to the low valence band edge of the oxide layer.3 The inability of the holes to reach the surface will protect the underlying semiconductor from oxidation by solution species. Among transparent oxides, SnO2, In2O3, ZnO, CdO, MgIn2O4, and CdSb2O6 are widely used as transparent conductors with or without dopants.52 Among them, ZnO and SnO2 are cost effective, hence they can be used to prevent oxidation of CZTS.56 Apart from protective layer, the use of CdS thin layer over CZTS coating will provide, additional band bending and photovoltage assistance for water splitting. Hence, additional experiments were conducted using a CZTS photocell in combination with another photoanode (such as BiVO4) for solar water splitting. In this case also, we used a similar configuration to what we used earlier (see Fig. 6a). Photoelectrochemical characterization of CZTS thin films photocell and BiVO4 thin films has been carried out in aqueous solution containing Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator at pH 7. It is important to note that n-InGaN on sapphire electrode shows 5 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V and ∼2.1 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V biasing.24 In this case 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution was used as an electrolyte. Such a current response is an equivalent of ∼50% of theoretical AM 1.5 G maximum for this band gap (2.2 eV) material. Similarly, a Fe2O3/DSC device with an efficiency of ∼1.17% was observed, which was only ∼8% of its maximum (for band gap 2.1 eV). In our case a response of ∼1 mA was observed at neutral pH condition (see Fig. 8). Solar to chemical conversion efficiency (η) can be calculated using following formula:  where Vmp is bias voltage, Voc is the open circuit potential, Pin is light energy input, and Jmp is current density.
 Fig. 7  A schematic illustration showing the comparison of the relative conduction and valence band positions of oxide and non-oxide semiconductors with respect to hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential. This illustration demonstrates the advantage of using a p-type non-oxide semiconductor (CZTS in our case) as a photocathode for production of hydrogen gas while a n-type oxide semiconductor (TiO2/WO3/BiVO4) can be used as a photoanode for oxygen evolution in a Z-scheme. 
 Fig. 8  Current-potential plot of conjugated CdS coated CZTS photocathode–BiVO4 photoanode system containing Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator in two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation. 
We have shown solar to chemical conversion efficiency plots in Fig. 9. It can be seen (Fig. 9a) that STH was highest in case of TiO2–CZTS system (without ZnO layer and when we used phosphate buffer). STH efficiency was lowest for BiVO4–CZTS combination. The highest STH was observed, when applied biasing was ∼0.65 V. In case of photocell, it can be seen (Fig. 9b) that with increasing biasing voltage, solar to hydrogen (STH) efficiency increases, saturates around voltage ∼0.70 V, and shows a maximum. At this value the efficiency value was ∼1.1%. At zero biasing condition, the STH value was ∼0.6%. These results suggest that STH improvement was tremendous when CZTS photocell was used in place of CZTS thin film electrode.
 Fig. 9  (a) STH efficiency – applied bias plots for TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 photoanode–CZTS photoelectrode combination. (b) STH efficiency plot is shown for CZTS photocell–photoanode combination. 

4.4 Band diagram

Fig. 10a shows a band diagram and possible band energetics, drawn from band position information from the literature. It should be noted that it is a wired configuration, and in this case photoelectrode producing relative low photocurrent will mainly govern the operating current density.57 As in this configuration, both electrodes are simultaneously irradiated with AM 1.5 G illumination, it is expected that both electrode will absorb solar photons based on their band gap energy. In case of BiVO4, that has a band gap energy of ∼2.5 eV, it can potentially absorb solar photons up to a wavelength ∼500 nm.57 In case of nanostructured WO3, that has a band gap energy of ∼2.7 eV,58 the absorbance cut-off wavelength will be relatively less ∼460 nm. For, TiO2 NTA, that has a band gap energy of ∼3.2 eV, it is believed that solar photons up to a wavelength of ∼390 nm, will be absorbed. A possible explanation for higher photocurrent in the case of CZTS–TiO2 combination can be understood by examining photoelectrochemical kinetics of these immersed electrodes in solution. When the photoanode is immersed in electrolyte, holes that are produced during photonic excitation are utilized in oxidation reactions, whereas electrons in the conduction band migrate towards the photocathode via an external circuit and will be utilized in the reduction reaction. The top of valence band should be more positive compare to oxygen evolution potential, which is a condition for the photoanode to generate oxygen. Similarly for the photocathode, the bottom of the valence band should be more negative compared to that of the hydrogen evolution potential. It can be seen that our system fulfils these criteria very well. In the case of n-type electrode (such as TiO2 or WO3), in order to equalize the Fermi level, some of the electrons will be depleted from it. The depletion of electrons will cause an upward bending of bands, and depletion width of photoanode will accommodate the positive charge. In contrast, the Helmholtz layer of solution, contains the negative charge. Such a condition, creates a gradient that directs positive holes (photogenerated minority carriers) towards the solution. In case of p-type photocathodes, an analogous process will occur, where an electric field gradient will direct negatively charged photogenerated minority carriers towards the solution. Now, let us re-examine the band-diagram, showing the relative position of all photoanodes used in the experiments. The difference between conduction band edge and water oxidation potential, (or barrier height) can be correlated with the maximum internal energy, which can be extracted from this combination. It can be seen that such a barrier was highest in the case of TiO2.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the relative conduction and valence band positions of TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 and CZTS in electrolyte with respect to hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential and their subsequent band bending (note that the absolute band position and the diagram will be different for different pH condition). In this figure, we have shown a complete circuit for BiVO4 and CZTS combination, and others combination are shown with dotted lines. In (b) this diagram is shown for TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 and CZTS photocell combination. In this condition stepwise band alignment is more useful for charge transfer across band and electrolyte–electrode interface. 
In the second case (see Fig. 10b), the CZTS electrode was modified by depositing a CdS layer and a ZnO layer. The growth of CdS layer (n-type) over the p-type CZTS absorber layer will enable the formation of a space charge (depletion) region of the p–n junction interface. Such a junction enhances the charge carrier separation. Additionally, the difference in potential of valence bands of CdS and CZTS, further intensifies charge separation. The formation of a strong electric field and p–n junction interface drives the charge carrier transport from CZTS to CdS. It is believed that positive band offset at the interface helps minimizing interfacial recombination. Now, additional enhancement of photogenerated charge carrier transport from CdS to ZnO layer was achieved due to the nature of band alignment of the CdS/ZnO interface, where the relative position of CBM reduces from CdS to ZnO.59 It should be noted that due to the direct band gap nature (3.3 eV) of ZnO and its relative band position, it is suitable for water reduction, apart from adequate conduction and valence band position while water splitting.59 Finally, ZnO is useful because the flow of electrons from the CZTS/CdS interface towards the electrolyte interface, as well as the flow of the holes, is promoted by it due to its electronic band structure as can be seen in Fig. 10b. One of the key points to be noted is that in most of the cases, the dark current value was very small, which indicates that corrosion is negligible during photoelectrochemical characterization.
4.5 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)

Fig. 11 shows Nyquist plots derived from EIS data for different photocathodes. In these graphs the single depressed semicircles were measured in different biasing conditions during illumination. An equivalent circuit can be fitted that contains electrolyte resistance (that is connected in series to another RC circuit comprising a charge transfer resistive element at electrolyte semiconductor interface) and a constant phase element. These fitting parameters are shown in Table 1. It can be observed that when potential biasing was changed from +0.25 V to −0.50 V (vs. SCE), a lowering in Rct was observed. Such a reduction of resistance is synchronized with an increase in photocurrent density as can be seen in our earlier results. For CZTS, the valence band edge potential, is located at ∼0.50 V–0.40 V vs. RHE. The electrode will be inadequate to oxidize water because the water oxidation potential is ∼0.40 V (vs. RHE) more positive than valence band edge (VBE), at a condition of no biasing. Hence, an external voltage is essential, in order to create appropriate band bending that facilitates oxidation of water at a counter electrode by compensating the potential deficiency. However, as can be seen that in case of TiO2, WO3, or BiVO4, the oxidation of H2O is favorable due to its valence band edge position (see Fig. 10). Hence, applied biasing will favor water oxidation. In Nyquist plots, the intercepts on the real axis are around ∼10–20 Ω, which is related to the resistivity of the electrolyte. It can be seen that with increase in applied bias the diameter of semicircle increases, which is an indication of lower electrolyte conductivity (or higher resistivity) and unfavorable charge transfer. In case of TiO2 NT, Bode plots at different biasing condition were analyzed, and the data show a lowering in IR in the oxide layer with reduction in frequency. A systematic change in impedance was observed and almost in every case (all frequency) impedance was always higher for electrodes under dark conditions. It was observed that during illumination, total capacitance increases for most of the cases. It can be understood as increased charge transfer at the electrode–solution interface and enhanced reaction rate at the surface of the photoelectrode.
 Fig. 11  Nyquist plot for (a) CZTS photoelectrode and (b) TiO2 NT electrode, recorded in phosphate buffer solution at different biasing condition. It can be seen that with change in biasing potential internal resistance changes, that can be viewed as change in charge transfer activity across electrolyte–electrode interface. 
Table 1 Summary of the various parameters for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy which were used in fitting Nyquist plots to the equivalent Randal circuit where Rp is the solution resistance, Rct is the charge transfer resistance, and Cf is the constant phase element that takes into account the non-idealities in the capacitance of the Helmholtz layer




Electrode

R
p (ohm)

R
ct (ohm)

C
f (farad)
Bias (V)




CZTS
617
29.69
5.47 × 10−6
0.25


CZTS
293
29.17
7.67 × 10−6
−0.25


CZTS
151
29.02
10.97 × 10−6
−0.50


TiO2
1490
2.35
8.17 × 10−6
0.25


TiO2
342
2.33
9.27 × 10−6
−0.25


TiO2
17
2.28
68 × 10−6
−0.50


BiVO4
493
23.71
14.54 × 10−6
0.25


BiVO4
252
23.72
17.34 × 10−6
−0.25


BiVO4
237
23.52
16.24 × 10−6
−0.50


WO3
475
33.00
5.60 × 10−6
0.25


WO3
62
32.00
33.54 × 10−6
−0.25


WO3
13
31.00
92.64 × 10−6
−0.50




4.6. Mechanism
The role of CdS in various photoelectrochemical devices have been demonstrated60 including quantum dots based dye sensitized solar cells, where CdS QDs were observed to be highly helpful enhancing the power conversion efficiency for TiO2 nanotubes based devices (sensitized with CdS quantum dots). Similarly, the CdS–CIGS combination demonstrated an efficient solar water splitting system when decorated with Pt clusters. Hence, few experiments were conducted and analyzed where CZTS absorber layers were coated with CdS layers. Photoexcitation of the Z-scheme [n-type SC – CZTS (CdS)] photoelectrode system with subsequent charge transport mechanism can be summarized by the following reactions: CZTS + hν → CZTS(e + h)(1) CZTS(e + h) → CZTS + hν + Δ(heat)(2) CdS + CZTS(e) → CdS(e) + CZTS(3) CdS(e) + Ox → CdS + Red(4)where eqn (1) and (2) are the photoexcitation and recombination events. It is presumed that the photogenerated electron–hole pairs of CZTS are able to be separated in a region known as charge separating junction (boundary between CdS and CZTS) and act as relatively longer lived carriers.61Eqn (3) shows the electron transfer from CZTS to CdS, and eqn (4) is the electron transfer from CdS to the redox couple (Ox) resulting in reduced products (Red). The electrons generated in CZTS conduction band will travel downward across other bands with favorable band energetics and will be transferred to solution, which in turn leads to the reduction of H+ to H2 gas. 2H+ + 2(e) → H2(5) Scavenging of accumulated holes in the valence band of CdS is important to maintain stability of the absorber layer (eqn (4)). If there is extensive accumulation of holes, CdS will begin to oxidize and result in diminishing photoelectrochemical performance overtime. Sacrificial electrolytes containing Fe2+/Fe3+ ions are used to stabilize chalcogenide sensitizers as they have suitable redox potentials.62 The presence of Fe3+ acts as an electron acceptor (from Fe3+ to Fe2+) whereas the Fe2+ acts as a hole scavengers (from Fe2+ to Fe3+) to facilitate charge carrier localization and hence prolong separation by trapping at energy levels close to the conduction or valence bands, respectively. Therefore, the presence of Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple could be effective in producing materials that delay electron–hole recombination, thereby increasing the lifetime of the electron–hole separation. In this study, the electrolyte used consists of FeCl3. The Fe3+ ions act as redox mediators, to which the conduction band of the n-type photoanode (TiO2/WO3/BiVO4) donates an electron and as a result, Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+. Fe3+ + n-type(e) → Fe2+(6) Fe2+ acts as a hole scavenger and is oxidized to Fe3+ to prevent (eqn (4)). Fe2+ + CdS(h) → Fe3+(7) The n-type photoanode ensures oxygen production at the anode. Upon illumination on the n-type semiconductor, as the electrons are excited to the conduction band and further make its way to the redox couple, the photogenerated holes cause oxidation of water to oxygen gas. The electrons released in the oxidation of water flow through the external circuit and result in the generation of the anodic current as shown in eqn (8) and (9). H2O + n-type(h) → OH− + H+ → O2− + 2H+(8) O2− → 1/2O2 + 2e(9) For the second case, uncoated CZTS was used as the photocathode while the n-type photoanode (such as BiVO4) was coated with cobalt based oxygen evolution catalysts (Co-Pi) while phosphate ions acted as the redox mediator. It is also important to note that the interface between the n-type semiconductor and Co-Pi phases in the photoanode system plays an important role in charge transfer as upon illumination,63 holes generated in the n-type semiconductor migrate to the Co-Pi phase. The enhanced activity for oxygen evolution was directly observed from photocatalytic water oxidation over [n-type (Co-Pi) – CZTS] photoelectrode system. We observed that Co-Pi catalyst deposited on the photoanode effectively enhanced the anodic photocurrent. A possible mechanism can be understood based on these equations: n-type + hν → n-type(e + h)(10) n-type(e + h) → n-type + hν + Δ(heat)(11) n-type(h) + Co-Pi → n-type + Co-Pi(h)(12) n-type(e) + Ox → n-type + Red(13) The equations suggest that Co-Pi played the role of cocatalyst. It help photon driven oxidation occurred via Co-Pi catalyst oxidation (from photogenerated holes from semiconductor) (eqn (12)), leading to the enhancement of electron and hole separation efficiency and longer lifetime of holes. The mechanism, defining the role of Co-Pi is not perfectly understood. In some cases it is believed that charge is being transferred to and stored in the Co-Pi film without an occurrence of water oxidation stable stage.64 It is reported that such a trapping or storage is useful and promote the recombination of electrons in conduction band and conversion of cobalt to a lower oxidation state.64 Another report suggests that Co-Pi treatment results in reduction of back electron/hole recombination events.65 The use of Co-Pi significantly affects the kinetic competition between water oxidation and back electron/hole recombination, by favoring the later process.65Eqn (10)–(13) represent a generalize way to understand the mechanism.
Due to phosphate ions present in the solution, dissociation of phosphoric acid takes place according to the following reactions: H3PO4 ↔ H2PO4− ↔ HPO42− ↔ PO43−(14) Under illumination, HPO42− further changes to HPO4− as shown in eqn (15), and the electron is donated to the photocathode CZTS conduction band (eqn (16)), which ensures hydrogen production at the cathode as indicated in eqn (5). HPO42− + hν → HPO4−(e)(15) HPO4−(e) + CZTS → HPO4− + CZTS(e)(16) In the absence of an electron acceptor, electrons and holes generated (eqn (10)) from Co-Pi/n-type photoanode would recombine quickly (eqn (11)), and as a result photocatalytic water oxidation would not take place. In order to prevent this, HPO4− scavenges the electrons (eqn (13) and (17)) from the conduction band of the n-type semiconductor while the Co-Pi cocatalyst traps the photogenerated holes as mentioned earlier, causing oxidation of water as shown in eqn (8). HPO4− + n-type(e) → HPO42−(17) OH˙ radicals generated from water oxidation can initiate formation of phosphate radicals too (PO4H2˙, PO4H˙−, PO4˙2−) from the reaction of OH˙ with phosphate ions contained in high concentrations in the water matrix.
Thus, a comparison of the two cases, one in which CdS photo-absorber layer is coated on the p-type CZTS with Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple, and the other in which Co-Pi cocatalyst is coated on the n-type semiconductor with phosphate radicals as mediator, has been presented for efficient photocatalytic water oxidation and subsequent hydrogen production.
Here one question can be asked regarding enhanced efficiency for NT TiO2–CZTS system or CZTS–NC WO3 system compared to that CZTS–BiVO4 system. One common similarity in TNT and NC WO3 system is their enhanced effective surface area of interaction. As can be seen in earlier reports that surface area is one of the leading factors deciding the overall performance of solar water splitting system.66 Such an effect and their leading contributions can be validated using photocathodes made from bulk TiO2 or bulk WO3. In our preliminary experiments we have demonstrated that bulk WO3 is not as effective as a photoanode as NC WO3. Similarly, effect of nanocrystallinity can be demonstrated using TNT electrodes with different effective surface area. A relative increment in surface area of was twice, when inner pore diameter decreases from 80 nm to 20 nm.67 A change in nanotube diameter not only alters the surface area but also the roughness and contact angle of the electrodes.67 In our case we have observed that current density (for two compartment system, with unprotected CZTS) drops to ∼1.3 × 10−4 A cm−2 from 1.6 × 10−4 A cm−2 when inner pore diameter increment was ∼25%.
5. Further scope of development and additional preliminary results
5.1 Porous layer utilization
To understand the effect of porous CZTS structure on charge carrier generation, a schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 12a, in which the paths of light rays are shown. It can be seen that, a light ray would be reflected internally in a porous nanocrystalline structure. Such a morphology enhances the light propagation path length, which enhances charge carrier generation. The SnO2 layer possesses good light harvesting capacity when coated on the CZTS surface. A greater amount of light would be used by the SnO2/CuZnSnS4 core/shell combination for generating the charge carrier when porous material is used. Furthermore, it has been known that the SnO2 nanorods, grown on a conductive glass substrate, can directly transport the excited electrons to the outer surface, utilizing the excellent charge transport property of SnO2 to its full advantage. From the energy band diagram (Fig. 12b), it can be seen that both the conduction band and the valence band of SnO2 are lower than that of CZTS, thereby inducing band bending. It is essential to note that the protective oxide layer should form a staggered type-II band alignment with CZTS. Another important criteria for the protective layer is that the surface in contact with the solution must have favourable reaction kinetics towards the reduction reaction. During irradiation, electron–hole pairs are generated. The photo-induced electrons tend to move from the conduction band of the CZTS to the conduction band of the protective oxide layer and subsequently to the solution. On the other hand photo-induced holes tend to move from the valence band of the CZTS to the valence band of the oxide. Thus, the photo-induced electrons and holes can effectively separate in the heterojunction, which decreases the recombination ratio of photo-induced electrons and holes, thereby leading to improved PEC performance.
 Fig. 12  (a) A schematic illustration of the porous photoactive materials used as cathode or anode demonstrating greater light absorption due to multiple scattering. (b) Schematic representation of the charge carrier movement in transparent protective layer – coated – CZTS – coated – FTO glass photocathode system resulting in reduction of the proton to hydrogen gas upon irradiation. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of porous CZTS at different scan rate, arrow indicates the reduction in scan rate. 
For measurement of the relative electrochemical area, Jaramillo's method was adopted.68 In this method intrinsic specific capacitance of various CZTS films were assumed to be the same. Correspondingly, electrochemical area can be evaluated by comparing capacitive current. Fig. 12c shows a cyclic voltammogram of porous CZTS film at a different scan rate. It was concluded that the area of porous CZTS film is at least 1.5 times larger than the dense CZTS film. Larger area results in greater electrolyte penetration as well as more photon interactions with the film.
5.2 Single compartment system for water splitting
Additional experiments were conducted in order to validate the proof of concept for a single compartment impregnated electrode for water splitting. Fig. 13a shows a single compartment system for water splitting. For this system a composite photocatalyst6 was prepared by an impregnation method. The obtained photocatalyst was suspended in water as well as in acidic solution. Fig. 13b shows an optical micrograph of suspension surface containing a photocatalyst made from CZTS and BiVO4 powders. It can be seen that almost half of the area contains BiVO4 whereas the rest of the area contains CZTS crystals. These photocatalyst particles can contact each other, to reduce the charge transport distance for overall enhanced water splitting. During visible light irradiation the generation of an electron–hole pair is expected at both CZTS and BiVO4. Holes at BiVO4 are responsible for oxygen generation, whereas electron generation at the conduction band of CZTS is responsible for water reduction. Residual electrons and holes in two photocatalysts were counter balanced by redox mediators. Redox mediator (Fe3+/Fe2+) was also used in this system. During irradiation this system indicates the generation of hydrogen and oxygen. Gas evolution was observed for a few minutes of experimentation, after which the rate of reaction decreased. It is believed that use of ZnO provides more stability to the CZTS crystals.56,69 It was observed that gas evolution capability slightly increased when acidified solution (pH ∼ 4) was used. For a system containing CZTS powder and BiVO4 powder in separate compartment with a Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple, we have observed an indication of gas evolution (D-240 gas analyzer, Pacer Industries). However, additional details and validation are needed to evaluate gas quantifications and STH efficiency. These experiments are in progress.
 Fig. 13  (a) A cartoon of the single compartment photoelectrochemical cell containing CZTS and BiVO4 nanoparticles. (b) 2D and 3D topographical image of the CZTS–BiVO4 composite system. (c) The two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under irradiation from the solar simulator, showing hydrogen and oxygen gas evolution in the respective chambers. 
5.3 Effect of crystal size, doping, and surface modifications
Size has significant effects on electronic, optical and photoelectrochemical properties of photovoltaic material crystals.33 Generally, nanostructures have a wider band gap compared to their corresponding bulk materials.33 Such a band gap enhancement can cause a shift in conduction as well as valence band position. Fig. 14 shows the Mott–Schottky plots for CZTS (nanocrystals and micro-powder) obtained from electrochemical impedance measurements data. Negative slopes of these curve indicates that both materials are p-type. All electrochemical experiments were conducted at near neutral pH conditions. The flat-band potentials can be obtained from the intercepts of the extrapolated lines. A significant difference in the flat-band potentials between nanocrystals and micropowders can be seen, with the flat-band potential of nanocrystals less than that of micropowders by ∼0.45 V.33 Such a measurement suggests that there is a difference of ∼0.45 eV in the valence band edge of the two morphologies. From the band diagram, it can be observed that by controlling the size of CZTS crystals, band offsets (from the oxygen evolution potential) can be modified. These results match well with earlier conclusions made regarding the change in band gap position due to porosity or grain size.33
 Fig. 14  Mott–Schottky diagram and band position of CZTS (a) nanocrystalline and (b) microcrystalline powder. Analysis of the Mott–Schottky plot of the CZTS powders were carried out under dark conditions in phosphate buffer solution by polarizing from 2 V to −2 V (vs.Ag/AgCl). 
Surface modifications with noble metal such as Pt were observed to be useful for improved hydrogen evolution capability.1 Improvement was also observed when a CdS layer was deposited on a CZTS electrode. However, water splitting without biasing and without use of precious metals is still difficult using CZTS. An improvement in photocurrent was observed when porous CZTS photocathode was used for water splitting.34 A porous structure is useful to promote stronger light absorbance and to shorten the minority carrier diffusion length.34 Porous material allows more electrolyte insertion per unit area and therefore promotes ease of charge transport. Although a relatively small charge carrier diffusion length is a factor for high current response, the crystallinity of sample should be maintained or improved for better performance. A strategy to reduce valence band-offset, without affecting conduction band level was adopted to improve the performance of oxide materials by doping with nitrogen and sulfur. Use of antimony modified (antimony substituted for tin in CZTS) semiconductor (CAZS) can be potentially beneficial as its band gap is ∼2.15 eV.37 It was earlier observed that such an electrode shows a photocurrent response at ∼zero biasing voltage.37 The tops of the valence bands are generally shifted to higher potential energies when nitridation is performed. Thus using simple modifications with nitrogen or antimony, the CZTS band gap can be tuned for optimized performance.
6. Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated a Z-scheme system for CZTS-other photoanode combinations. Photoelectrochemical tests have been performed using CZTS photocathode as well as CZTS photocell in combination with TiO2, BiVO4, and WO3. It was observed that CZTS–TiO2 system performs reasonably well, either in case of photocathode or photocell. Solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency was calculated for this system in electrolyte containing Fe3+/Fe2+ and phosphate redox couple at near neutral pH condition. We have observed maximum STH efficiency ∼1.1% at biasing of ∼0.6 V, for CZTS photocell–TiO2. It was interesting to observe that STH efficiency was significant even at near zero biasing condition ∼0.5% for CZTS photocell–TiO2. The efficiency was significantly less (at least one order of magnitude) when CZTS photocathode–TiO2 system was utilized. EIS spectroscopy was also conducted to evaluate the effect of biasing on charge transfer activity of different photoelectrodes. All initial results convincingly indicate that the CZTS augmented water splitting system has a great potential for low cost hydrogen production. This material can be used with other oxygen evolving catalysts for single as well as dual compartment water splitting systems. Electrode based systems appears to be more efficient for water splitting compared to suspension based systems as estimated using preliminary experimental data.
References
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yao, H. Wu, Y. Li, J. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Guo and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3192–3197 CAS .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 Search PubMed .
H. Kato, Y. Sasaki, N. Shirakura and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12327–12333 CAS .
Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513–1519 RSC .
C. Zeng, T. Hu, N. Hou, S. Liu, W. Gao, R. Cong and T. Yang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 61, 481–485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and T. Nonami, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 6367–6370 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, Y. Zhang, W. Xie, S. Sun, J. Ding, J. Bao and C. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6077–6083 CAS .
G. Jiang, B. Tang, X. Li, Z. Wei, X. Wang, W. Chen, J. Wan and L. Shen, Powder Technol., 2014, 251, 37–40 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pfaff, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 3017–3021 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. C. Chen and M. Greenblatt, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 108, 184–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama and Y. Inoue, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, X. Xu, J. Zhu, W. Liu, R. Yuan, X. Fu, Y. Zhang and Z. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 127, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Sauvet, S. Baliteau, C. Lopez and P. Fabry, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4508–4515 CrossRef CAS .
N.-H. Yang, C.-C. Tseng, J.-L. Wu, C.-C. Juan, S.-J. Lin and S.-Y. Chang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7093–7099 RSC .
Y. Huang, J. Wu, Y. Wei, J. Lin and M. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 456, 364–367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onsuratoom, S. Chavadej and T. Sreethawong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5246–5261 CrossRef CAS .
F. Madaro, R. Saeterli, J. R. Tolchard, M.-A. Einarsrud, R. Holmestad and T. Grande, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 1304–1313 RSC .
V. V. Atuchin, J. C. Grivel, A. S. Korotkov and Z. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1285–1291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Soldat, R. Marschall and M. Wark, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3746–3752 RSC .
M. Machida, J.-i. Yabunaka and T. Kijima, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1939–1940,  10.1039/A905246A .
K.-i. Shimizu, Y. Tsuji, T. Hatamachi, K. Toda, T. Kodama, M. Sato and Y. Kitayama, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 1064–1069 RSC .

          T. G. Deutsch and J. Turner, DOE Hydrogen Program Annual Merit Review, http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review12/pd035_turner_2012_o.pdf, 2012.
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Jimbo, T. Hisatomi, G. Ma, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, H. Katagiri and K. Domen, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 101202 CrossRef .
C.-W. H. Chi-Hung Liao and J. C. S. Wu, Catalysts, 2012, 2, 26 Search PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536–17542 CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Saito, Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3833–3835 RSC .
H. S. Park, H. C. Lee, K. C. Leonard, G. Liu and A. J. Bard, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2277–2287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8308–8316 RSC .
L. Liao, Q. Zhang, Z. Su, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Lu, D. Wei, G. Feng, Q. Yu, X. Cai, J. Zhao, Z. Ren, H. Fang, F. Robles-Hernandez, S. Baldelli and J. Bao, Nat. Nano, 2014, 9, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, W. Luo and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15479–15485 CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Han and J. Ya, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 15029–15037 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rovelli, S. D. Tilley and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8018–8024 CAS .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 2013, 7 CrossRef .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 2861–2864 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sarswat, M. L. Free and G. Kumar, J. Spectrosc., 2013, 2013, 9 Search PubMed .
R. L. Frost, D. A. Henry, M. L. Weier and W. Martens, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2006, 37, 722–732 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, J. Electron. Mater., 2012, 41, 2210–2215 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4422–4426 CrossRef CAS .

          P. K. Sarswat, S. Kar and M. L. Free, Bifacial photodetector using CZTS absorber material, in Emerging Electronics (ICEE), 2012 International Conference on, 2012, pp. 1–3, 15–17, DOI: 10.1109/ICEmElec.2012.6636255 2012.
D. Li, D. Chandra, K. Saito, T. Yui and M. Yagi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 542 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Zheng, G. Song, C. W. Kim and Y. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5279–5282 RSC .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Kalanur, Y. J. Hwang, S. Y. Chae and O. S. Joo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3479–3488 CAS .
P. K. Sarswat, Y. R. Smith, M. L. Free and M. Misra, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2015, 4, Q83–Q91 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bhattacharyya, P. K. Sarswat, M. Islam, G. Kumar, M. Misra and M. L. Free, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70361–70370 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Sarswat and M. L. Free, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 1613–1623 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, S35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stoughton, M. Showak, Q. Mao, P. Koirala, D. A. Hillsberry, S. Sallis, L. F. Kourkoutis, K. Nguyen, L. F. J. Piper, D. A. Tenne, N. J. Podraza, D. A. Muller, C. Adamo and D. G. Schlom, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042112 CrossRef .
L. Xu, M.-L. Yin and S. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8566–8570 CAS .
S. H. Sonawane, B. A. Bhanvase, A. A. Jamali, S. K. Dubey, S. S. Kale, D. V. Pinjari, R. D. Kulkarni, P. R. Gogate and A. B. Pandit, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 189–190, 464–472 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bornoz, F. F. Abdi, S. D. Tilley, B. Dam, R. van de Krol, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16959–16966 CAS .
P. P. González-Borrero, F. Sato, A. N. Medina, M. L. Baesso, A. C. Bento, G. Baldissera, C. Persson, G. A. Niklasson, C. G. Granqvist and A. Ferreira da Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 061909 CrossRef .
M. G. Mali, H. Yoon, B. N. Joshi, H. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab, D. C. Lim, S. Ahn, C. Nervi and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21619–21625 CAS .
S. Park, Y. Seo, M. S. Kim and S. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2013, 34, 7 Search PubMed .
M. Graetzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujihara, T. Ohno and M. Matsumura, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 3705–3709 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Jiang and R. Xu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 9945–9951 CrossRef CAS .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, F. Le Formal, A. Kafizas, S. R. Pendlebury and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20649–20657 CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Anitha, L. Jin-Hyung, L. Jintae, B. Arghya Narayan, J. Sang Woo and M. Bong Ki, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 065102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, B. A. Pinaud, Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e107942 Search PubMed .
A. M. El Saeed, M. A. El-Fattah and A. M. Azzam, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 121, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustrating the Z-scheme arrangement of the photoanode and the photocathode in a solar water splitting system demonstrating the location of the conduction band and the valence band for both electrodes with respect to the hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential. Also shown is the role of electrons and holes in hydrogen reduction and water oxidation respectively and their exchange with the redox mediator present in the solution to prevent photocorrosion.	 

 	Fig. 2  In chronological order of the label, micrographs of SEM images and EDS mapping followed by the element spectra is presented respectively for (a–c) lateral view of the TiO2 nanotubes, with the top view shown in the inset of (a); (d–f) BiVO4 coated on FTO glass with the magnified image shown in the inset of (d); (g–i) Bulk WO3 coated on FTO glass, with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (g); (j–l) WO3 nanoflakes coated on FTO glass with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (j); (m–o) CZTS film coated on FTO glass with the zoomed-out image in the inset of (m). (p) Shows SEM image of CZTS porous powder.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra of BiVO4 powder exhibit the following peaks at: 239 cm−1 (external vibrational modes), an indistinct peak at ∼308 cm−1 (anti-symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v2)), a rather broad and significant peak at ∼360 cm−1 (symmetric bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra (v4)), very weak shoulder bump ∼630 cm−1 (weak BiO stretching vibration), light shoulder peak at ∼723 cm−1 (anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3)), and the dominant Raman mode at 865 cm−1 (symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1)). (b) Raman spectra of BiVO4 thin film exhibit the following peaks at: a distinct peak at ∼343 cm−1 (overlap of anti-symmetric (v2) and symmetric (v4) bending vibration of (VO4)3− tetrahedra), a distinct peak ∼726 cm−1 (anti-symmetric V–O stretching mode (v3)), dominant Raman mode at ∼825 cm−1 (symmetric V–O stretching vibration (v1)), and a peak at ∼1000 cm−1, which is not present in BiVO4 powder, can be attributed to anti-symmetric stretching mode of (VO4)3− (v3).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Raman spectra of WO3 powder and film exhibit the following peaks at: two peaks at 272 and 325 cm−1 (bending δ(O–W–O) vibration modes), a typical Raman mode at 717 cm−1 (anti-symmetric W–O bending (δ) modes), a weak shoulder at ∼660 cm−1 (symmetric O–W–O deformation (γ) modes), a dominant peak at 807 cm−1 (anti-symmetric stretching of W–O–W bonds or more precisely the anti-symmetric W–O stretching (ν) modes). A rather weak bump close to 950 cm−1 can be caused by symmetric stretching mode of metal–oxygen bond i.e. short terminal WO (ν) band prevalent in most transition metal oxides.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of TiO2 nanotube array (TNA) indicating the peak indices for anatase (A) and rutile (R) phase titania, as well as the underlying titanium substrate (Ti); (b) X-ray diffraction pattern of WO3 nanoflake morphology indexed by orthorhombic β-WO3 phase (Δ); (c) X-ray diffraction pattern of BiVO4 thin film indexed by monoclinic BiVO4 phase (□).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A schematic of the two-compartment photoelectrochemical experimental setup showing the cathodic and the anodic chamber connected by a salt bridge while being illuminated by a solar simulator. (b) Potentiodynamic (J vs. V) plot of conjugated CZTS photocathode–Co-Pi coated n-type (TiO2/WO3/BiVO4) photoanode system in phosphate buffer solution in two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation. (c) Absolute current density vs. time plots for CZTS–TiO2 and CZTS–BiVO4 system in phosphate buffer solution, at zero biasing condition under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  A schematic illustration showing the comparison of the relative conduction and valence band positions of oxide and non-oxide semiconductors with respect to hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential. This illustration demonstrates the advantage of using a p-type non-oxide semiconductor (CZTS in our case) as a photocathode for production of hydrogen gas while a n-type oxide semiconductor (TiO2/WO3/BiVO4) can be used as a photoanode for oxygen evolution in a Z-scheme.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current-potential plot of conjugated CdS coated CZTS photocathode–BiVO4 photoanode system containing Fe3+/Fe2+ redox mediator in two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under 1.5 AM chopped irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) STH efficiency – applied bias plots for TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 photoanode–CZTS photoelectrode combination. (b) STH efficiency plot is shown for CZTS photocell–photoanode combination.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the relative conduction and valence band positions of TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 and CZTS in electrolyte with respect to hydrogen reduction potential and water oxidation potential and their subsequent band bending (note that the absolute band position and the diagram will be different for different pH condition). In this figure, we have shown a complete circuit for BiVO4 and CZTS combination, and others combination are shown with dotted lines. In (b) this diagram is shown for TiO2, WO3, BiVO4 and CZTS photocell combination. In this condition stepwise band alignment is more useful for charge transfer across band and electrolyte–electrode interface.	 

 	Fig. 11  Nyquist plot for (a) CZTS photoelectrode and (b) TiO2 NT electrode, recorded in phosphate buffer solution at different biasing condition. It can be seen that with change in biasing potential internal resistance changes, that can be viewed as change in charge transfer activity across electrolyte–electrode interface.	 

CZTS	617	29.69	5.47 × 10−6	0.25
CZTS	293	29.17	7.67 × 10−6	−0.25
CZTS	151	29.02	10.97 × 10−6	−0.50
TiO2	1490	2.35	8.17 × 10−6	0.25
TiO2	342	2.33	9.27 × 10−6	−0.25
TiO2	17	2.28	68 × 10−6	−0.50
BiVO4	493	23.71	14.54 × 10−6	0.25
BiVO4	252	23.72	17.34 × 10−6	−0.25
BiVO4	237	23.52	16.24 × 10−6	−0.50
WO3	475	33.00	5.60 × 10−6	0.25
WO3	62	32.00	33.54 × 10−6	−0.25
WO3	13	31.00	92.64 × 10−6	−0.50
CZTS + hν → CZTS(e + h)	(1)
CZTS(e + h) → CZTS + hν + Δ(heat)	(2)
CdS + CZTS(e) → CdS(e) + CZTS	(3)
CdS(e) + Ox → CdS + Red	(4)
2H+ + 2(e) → H2	(5)
Fe3+ + n-type(e) → Fe2+	(6)
Fe2+ + CdS(h) → Fe3+	(7)
H2O + n-type(h) → OH− + H+ → O2− + 2H+	(8)
O2− → 1/2O2 + 2e	(9)
n-type + hν → n-type(e + h)	(10)
n-type(e + h) → n-type + hν + Δ(heat)	(11)
n-type(h) + Co-Pi → n-type + Co-Pi(h)	(12)
n-type(e) + Ox → n-type + Red	(13)
H3PO4 ↔ H2PO4− ↔ HPO42− ↔ PO43−	(14)
HPO42− + hν → HPO4−(e)	(15)
HPO4−(e) + CZTS → HPO4− + CZTS(e)	(16)
HPO4− + n-type(e) → HPO42−	(17)

 	Fig. 12  (a) A schematic illustration of the porous photoactive materials used as cathode or anode demonstrating greater light absorption due to multiple scattering. (b) Schematic representation of the charge carrier movement in transparent protective layer – coated – CZTS – coated – FTO glass photocathode system resulting in reduction of the proton to hydrogen gas upon irradiation. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of porous CZTS at different scan rate, arrow indicates the reduction in scan rate.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A cartoon of the single compartment photoelectrochemical cell containing CZTS and BiVO4 nanoparticles. (b) 2D and 3D topographical image of the CZTS–BiVO4 composite system. (c) The two-compartment photoelectrochemical setup under irradiation from the solar simulator, showing hydrogen and oxygen gas evolution in the respective chambers.	 

 	Fig. 14  Mott–Schottky diagram and band position of CZTS (a) nanocrystalline and (b) microcrystalline powder. Analysis of the Mott–Schottky plot of the CZTS powders were carried out under dark conditions in phosphate buffer solution by polarizing from 2 V to −2 V (vs.Ag/AgCl).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
