Recent advances in electron acceptors with ladder-type backbone for organic solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA05440A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA05440A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17256-17287Recent advances in electron acceptors with ladder-type backbone for organic solar cells

        
          
            Zuo-Quan 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Tong-Tong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fu-Peng 
            Wu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiu-Dong 
            Lin
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liang-Sheng 
            Liao
          
          
        
      *
      Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China. E-mail: zqjiang@suda.edu.cn; lsliao@suda.edu.cn
Received 
      8th June 2018
    , Accepted 9th August 2018First published on 9th August 2018AbstractLadder-type non-fullerene acceptors have developed very rapidly since 2015 as they have tunable structure, a broad absorption region and good morphology control. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of non-fullerene organic solar cells (NF-OSC) increased from below 6% to over 13% and, in this review, we analyze the fundamental concepts of organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells and different building blocks of non-fullerene acceptors to have an overview of high-performance photovoltaic materials. Meanwhile, we also discuss several design guidelines for chemical construction and modification, which primarily focus on backbone variations, side-chain engineering, and end-cap group substitution. The PCE of several backbones, such as IDT, IDTT, BDCPDT, etc. have successfully exceeded 10% PCE, which demonstrates great potential for future optimization. Side-chains can affect intermolecular packing by forming a 3-D conformation along with the rigid backbones. End-cap groups can regulate electronic properties of the acceptors directly and provide the main electron-transport channels which influence frontier orbital properties. Although design principles and mechanistic understanding of ladder-type acceptors have been explored, there are also many opportunities and challenges of device mechanisms and molecular optimization which need to have deep study and investigation. We hope this review will assist readers to better understand the design principles of high-performance photovoltaic materials, molecular design, and structure–property relationships.Zuo-Quan JiangZuo-Quan Jiang obtained his organic chemistry Ph.D. degree from Wuhan University in 2009. He joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) of Soochow University as associate Professor in 2011 after two years of post-doctoral training at the University of Washington and City University of Hong Kong. In 2015, he took a one-year collaborative study with Prof. Seth R. Marder at Georgia Institute of Technology as visiting scholar. In 2017, he was promoted to a full Professor in FUNSOM. His current research interests focus on the design and synthesis of novel conjugated optoelectronic materials.Tong-Tong WangTong-Tong Wang received her bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2017. Currently, she is a graduate student in chemistry at FUNSOM of Soochow University. Her research interests focuses on the synthesis of conjugated molecules for organic solar cells.Fu-Peng WuFu-Peng Wu received his master's degree from Soochow University in 2018 and he is now a Ph.D. candidate at the Technical University of Dresden. He is interested in the synthesis and application of organic n-type semiconductors.Jiu-Dong LinJiu-Dong Lin received his master's degree from Soochow University in 2018. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of non-fullerene acceptor materials in organic solar cells.Liang-Sheng LiaoLiang-Sheng Liao received his Ph.D. degree in Physics from Nanjing University in 1996, and then he joined in the department of physics of Fudan University as postdoc fellow (1996–1997) and associate Professor (1997–2000). After working at Eastman Kodak Company as a Senior Research Scientist from 2000 to 2009, he joined the FUNSOM of Soochow University as a full Professor. He has over 20 years' research experience in organic optoelectronics and now is also working on industrialization in the Institute of Organic Optoelectronics (IOO) as executive director. His current research interests include materials and architectures of OLEDs, quantum dot LEDs, organic solar cells, and perovskite solar cells.
1. Introduction
We cannot escape hearing the news about energy crisis, climate change, and global warming, which are viewed as the big challenges for sustainable development for human beings.1,2 To prevent global warming by using renewable energy sources is promising and significant for preserving the ozone layer from harmful emissions of burning fossil fuels.3,4 The amount of sunlight that falls on the surface of the earth ranges in amounts of 89000 terawatts per year.5 Thus, solar energy is a green, safe, and sustainable energy source without worrying about a shortage of supply from sunlight.
Although currently silicon-based solar cells are practical in people's daily life, their high cost and fragile features may be problematic for further wide applications.6–8 An organic solar cell (OSC) which uses organic molecules or polymers to form an active layer could be an important alternative for future renewable energy because the organic compounds are inexpensive and rollable on flexible substrates, which is quite different from a silicon solar cell.9–14 One major requirement for commercializing organic solar cells is to enhance power conversion efficiency (PCE) of them. In 1986, the first organic solar cell was invented by C. W. Tang with barely 1% PCE.15 During the past two decades, the discoveries of new organic molecular systems, including materials in the active layer and the interfacial layer coordinated together, have boosted PCEs to over 13%.13–37 The device fabrication process also changed from vacuum deposition to solution spin-coating; the latter, which is well-known as the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) developed by groups at Cambridge25 and at Santa Barbara,26 contains a blend of a donor and an acceptor to produce a single active layer. This technique allows the formation of a phase-separated interpenetrating donor/acceptor network which offers a continuous pathway for charge carrier transport and wide range for exciton dissociation.27
Nowadays, the rising-star of materials in the active layer of an OSC is the non-fullerene acceptor, as shown in Fig. 1. The term “non-fullerene” refers to acceptor molecules that do not belong to fullerene derivatives, such as PC61BM and PC71BM, which dominated this field for a long time because of their superior electron transport ability.28,29 After being matched with narrow-bandgap donor materials, the best fullerene-based single junction OSC can exceed 11% PCE.30 Despite this performance, poor absorption, limited variation in energy levels, and relatively high cost are some major drawbacks that deter further improvements in fullerene acceptors.31 Thus, research of non-fullerene acceptors has been experiencing very rapid growth and many effective molecular systems have been developed. At the beginning, an imide-based material is the pioneer of non-fullerene acceptors and many useful units have been developed, such as perylene diimide (PDI)32–36 and naphthalene diimides (NDI) blocks.37–42 Currently, electron acceptors with ladder-type backbones bearing an Acceptor–Donor–Acceptor (A–D–A) motif draw great attention because of their easier synthesis and higher efficiency (>13%).43–49
 Fig. 1  Structure of BHJ OSCs. 
Thus far, several reviews have partially summarized development of some non-fullerene acceptors for OSC applications.44,50–55 The target of this review will mainly focus on the design and synthesis of ladder-type acceptors with aspects of backbone modulation, side chain engineering, end group modification, and other effective ways to tune and optimize this new material system. Hopefully, this review will assist readers to better understand the molecular design and structure–property relationship towards future rational designs of high-performance photovoltaic materials. As for non-fullerene acceptors without the ladder-type backbone or other related areas in OSC, we refer the readers to several more comprehensive reviews.56–66 In this review, we first introduce the fundamental concepts of organic BHJ solar cells and their function with a non-fullerene acceptor (Section 2). And then we sort out materials according to the backbone of the ladder-type core (Section 3). Additionally, we give detailed analyses on chemical modification methods on molecular structures (Section 4). Finally, we define the ongoing challenges and opportunities in this rising area to move the field forward (Section 5).
2. Physical principles of organic solar cells
2.1 Operating principles of non-fullerene organic solar cells
Generally, there are three steps in the process of the conversion of photon energy to electrical energy in non-fullerene acceptors based organic cells: (a) donor and/or acceptor materials in the active layer absorbs photons and then generates excitons; (b) excitons migrate to the donor/acceptor interface and dissociate to form free charge carriers (electron and hole); (c) free charge carriers transport to and are collected at their respective electrodes, as shown in Fig. 2.67 Due to the short diffusion lengths of excitons, typically ∼10–20 nm in OSC active blend films, donor and acceptor should have a larger interfacial area to produce more photocurrent.
 Fig. 2  (a) Operating principles of non-fullerene organic solar cells. (b) Important parameters for OSCs. 
The PCE of an organic solar cell can be calculated by the following equation, where Voc is the open-circuit voltage, Jsc is the short-circuit current density, FF is the fill factor, and Pin is the energy of incident light:    Jmax and Vmax are the current and voltage at the maximum power point on J–V curves, respectively. For an ideal cell, the J–V curve should have a rectangular shape, and therefore, the FF approaches unity.

V
oc generally follows the energy difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor material and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor material. It is also affected by the rates of carrier generation and recombination, presence of energetic tail states or trap states, and some other factors that can influence the donor ionization potential or acceptor electron affinity such as the film morphology, surface composition, or the alignment of interfacial dipole moments. Thus, Voc depends on the donor or acceptor materials used, while the other factors also play important roles. Generally, a Voc loss can be observed in an OSC due to the need of driving force to separate the excitons and recombination energy loss.68

J
sc is closed relevant to the process of charge generation, which depends on the generation of excitons after light absorption and the process of excitons transfer to the interface of donor/acceptor then separating to free carriers. Thus, other factors that can change the charge generation, charge transportation, charge recombination and charge collection can also influence the Jsc. Materials with increased mobilities can reduce charge accumulation and recombination and could result in enhanced Jsc. Thermal annealing, solvent annealing, and introducing an interfacial layer are also found to be effective for Jsc improvement.69
FF depends on efficient extraction of photo-generated carriers from the device. Besides, FF is least understood among OSC performance parameters and it is also challenging to achieve a high FF. It is found that higher charge mobility, better active layer morphology, and less charge recombination are of significance to increase FF.70
In the following Section 2.2–2.4, relationships between these several performance parameters of OSCs and energy level, charge mobility, or energy loss will be discussed.
2.2 Energy level tuning of non-fullerene acceptors
Energy level tuning of non-fullerene acceptors is an efficient method to improve non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) based organic solar cells because the Voc is dependent on the difference of energy level between LUMO of the acceptor (LUMOA) and HOMO of the donor (HOMOD) and Jsc is associated with the band gap (Eg) of donor or acceptor. To get a larger Voc, usually a shallower LUMOA or deeper HOMOD are required so lower band gap of donor-materials (or acceptor-materials) are designed to increase absorption of the solar irradiation spectrum. However, there is a contradiction existing in Voc and Jsc as shown in Fig. 3. If we elevate LUMOA or reduce HOMOD to get larger Voc, then a larger band gap will be formed corresponding to lower Jsc, and vice versa.
 Fig. 3  The relationship between Voc and Jsc. 
Therefore, it is of significance to explore how to effectively tune the energy levels of non-fullerene acceptors while balancing Voc and Jsc. In A–D–A type non-fullerene acceptors with a ladder-type backbone, we can modify either the D or A part to tailor the energy levels.71–75 For example, incorporating F at the typical A moiety dicycanovinylindan-1-one (IC) would improve intramolecular interaction due to the electron-withdrawing effect of F, and downshift the LUMO energy levels and reduce the bandgap, which is beneficial for light harvesting and enhancing Jsc. However, the downshifted LUMO will cause a smaller Voc.76 But, if the weak electron-donating methyl group is appended to the IC, it can slightly elevate the LUMO level and hence improved Voc in PSCs.77 Adding electron-donating side-chains – such as alkoxyl groups – to the D moiety is also an effective way to increase the HOMO of an acceptor for a narrow bandgap, but a caution should be taken in case the HOMO of the acceptor could surpass the HOMO of the donor and lead to destructive exciton recombination.78
2.3 Improving charge mobility of non-fullerene acceptors
High charge mobility can improve charge transport while reducing recombination and then achieving a higher FF, thus increasing PCE.79 High-performance non-fullerene acceptor-based OSCs with enhanced charge mobility can be achieved by side-chain engineering, conjugation length extension, fluorination, heavy atom effect (e.g., a selenium atom) and better film processing control. For example, ITIC-Th exhibits a higher electron mobility than its counterpart ITIC with phenyl side chains because the easy polarization of a sulfur atom and sulfur–sulfur interaction can enhance the intermolecular interaction.80 By incorporating another group (e.g., by extending the conjugation length of an indacenodithiophene (IDT) unit or introducing a Se atom into an IDT unit), Liao et al. designed and synthesized two NFA-based fused 10-heterocyclic ring IDTIDT-IC and IDSe-T-IC, respectively, which has a higher charge mobility than the referent IDT-based NFAs, thus producing a higher PCE.81,82
A thienyl-fused indanone end-group, ITCC, was also rationally designed and synthesized by Hou's group, which shows a closer π–π stacking distance and a higher electron mobility compared to that of ITIC, which contains phenyl-fused indanone end-groups.83 Therefore, to improve the electron mobilities of ITIC, it is also imperative to finely tune the terminal acceptor unit to increase the local intermolecular p–p interaction and LUMO distribution on the acceptor unit.84 Finally, through controlling blend ratios, film thicknesses, thermal annealing times, solvents and times for solvent vapor annealing, and additive concentrations, an optimal morphology can be produced which is beneficial for a higher charge mobility and higher fill factor, and thus higher PCE.
2.4 Reducing energy loss of non-fullerene acceptors organic solar cells
Another terminology associated with device performance is energy loss (Eloss). It will be introduced briefly next and more information can be found in a ref. 68. Usually, Eloss can be defined as Eloss = Eg − eVoc, where Eg is the lowest optical bandgap of the donor or acceptor as shown in Fig. 4.85,86 Therefore, to increase the PCE, the Eloss should be decreased by reducing the driving force through simultaneously increasing charge transfer energy and decreasing the recombination as much as possible.
 Fig. 4  Origin of energy loss. 
For example, a record PCE of 13.1% was achieved for a state-of-the-art non-fullerene OSC by Hou and co-workers, which was fabricated using a fluorinated donor (PBDB-T-SF) and acceptor (IT-4F).87 An interesting fact for ladder-type acceptors in devices is that they seem to have Eloss below 0.6 eV which is smaller than the traditional PCBM-based BHJ OSCs.88–92 Usually, HOMO–HOMO and LUMO–LUMO offsets should be above 0.3 eV to have an effective exciton separation.93 However, some systems having a smaller offset than 0.3 eV (even a near zero HOMO or LUMO offset) have been reported recently. For example, Liao et al. reported IDTIDSe-IC which enabled a PCE of 8.02% with a Voc of 0.91 V when combined with polymer J51 as donor. What's more, the HOMO difference between J51 and IDTIDSe-IC is as small as 0.1 eV and the hole transfer from IDTIDSe-IC to J51 can still be efficient.94 Another work is reported by Yan et al. which has a high PCE of 9.5% and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of nearly 90% in OSCs when the LUMO difference is negligible.90
3. Performances of OSCs based on ladder-type electron acceptors with different backbones
A ladder-type backbone is the core to constructing new acceptors and we can classify the reported molecules in this aspect. A tricyclic backbone is perhaps the smallest unit in this family. A free rotated biphenyl unit, for example, can be fused by carbon, silicon, or nitrogen to form corresponding fluorene, silafluorene, and carbazole blocks which showed obviously better planarity than the parent biphenyl unit. In 2015, S. V. Bhosale et al. reported a non-fullerene electron acceptor N5 as shown in Scheme 1.95 The core of the N5 is a fused dibenzosilole and two 2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-1,3-dione groups acted as electron withdrawing groups (EWGs). It is should be noted that two thiophene groups were inserted between the donor part and acceptors; these thiophene units can be viewed as bridges between D–A, and surely, they could also minimize the energy gap for their electron-rich features. The thermal stability of N5 was excellent decomposition temperature ca. 393 °C from DSC analysis, and the authors used it to match with a classical donor polymer, P3HT. The blended film of P3HT:N5 was a good nanoscale interpenetrating network with a broad spectrum IPCE over the visible range and PCE was 2.76%, which represented the highest value reported at that time for solution-processable BHJ devices using DBS-based non-fullerene acceptors.
 Scheme 1  Chemical structures of acceptors based on tricyclic backbones. 
As compared to silafluorene, the fluorene unit is more accessible in organic synthesis. Wan and Chen et al. reported a non-fullerene acceptor, DTBTF, whose core was an alkylated fluorene.96 This DTBTF adopted two thiobarbituric acids as terminal groups and thiophene, the same as N5, as the electron-rich bridge. An all-small-molecule organic solar cell based on DR3TSBDT:DTBTF blended film showed a PCE of 3.84%. Additionally, a Voc as high as 1.15 V with a low energy loss of only 0.59 eV was obtained. Based on the fluorene core, Zhang and Chen et al. also reported other DICTiF97 and DCF-2HT,98 in which the latter molecule had additional hexyl side chains on the thiophene bridge. With the same donor polymer PBDB-T, DICTiF can achieve higher PCE of 7.11% than that of DCF-2HT, which was mainly due to the higher FF of the DICTiF-based device, but the authors did not give further analysis on this difference. Two fluorene units can be arranged to be a 9,9′-spirobifluorene to form a 3D conformation. Based on this new unit, a series of molecules have been developed. Zhan et al. systematically synthesized two isomers, SBF1 and SBF2, but both exhibited very low performance (PCE < 1%). The linear conjugated SBF2 has a little higher Jsc, which could be ascribed to its wider absorption. Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) shows that SBF2 neat film has strong (100) and (010) diffraction peaks because of its high crystallization while SBF1 is amorphous, and the electron mobility of SBF2 (7.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is higher than that of amorphous SBF1 (6.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). That is mainly because the coplanar molecular structure of SBF2 makes it easy to be crystalline due to π–π stacking among molecules.99 Yan and Peng also adopted this linear conjugated backbone, but they changed the bridge and EWG. The authors believed that the bulky 3D spirobifluorene unit can suppress molecular aggregation of SFBRCN. This acceptor exhibited a relatively wide optical bandgap of 2.03 eV, which provided a complementary absorption to commonly used low bandgap donor polymers, such as PTB7-Th. As a result, a high PCE of 10.26% was achieved.100 Cho and Choi et al. utilized an unconventional block indenothiophene with asymmetrical conformation to construct the acceptor PhITBD. The asymmetric structure was employed to enhance the internal morphology and efficient tuning of the energy levels. Another symmetrical acceptor, IDT-2BM, was also synthesized for comparison. Under optimized conditions the PhITBD blend exhibited a high PCE of 6.57% with a Jsc of 14.07 mA cm−2, whereas the IDT-2BM blend showed a PCE of 3.97% and a Jsc of 9.29 mA cm−2.101
After further enlarging the fused ring system to five-cycle ladder-type acceptors, the device performance exhibited big progress. The reason why the four-cycle ladder backbone is absent in this design is probably due to a synthetic difficulty to balance the arrangement of soluble side-chains and mobility from the planar backbone. Herein, the most reported and effective backbone in ladder-type acceptors with five-cyclic rings is indaceno[2,1-b:6,5-b′]dithiophene (IDT). In 2015, Zhan et al. reported a novel acceptor DC-IDT2T based on this IDT backbone, in which they pointed out that the resulting material by appending a 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (DC) group could have strong electron-withdrawing ability and seemed appropriate for electron acceptor application, which is shown in Scheme 2. Finally, BHJ OSCs based on the PBDTTT-C-T:DC-IDT2T blend yielded a PCE as high as 3.93%. This work demonstrated the great potential of the IDT and DC moieties for use as building blocks for constructing novel non-fullerene acceptors.102 Afterwards, Zhan and Krebs collaborated on using this system in roll-coating fullerene-free OSCs. The best PCE of 1.02% was achieved on a large device area (1 cm2), flexible substrates, ITO free, vacuum-free, and ambient conditions. As compared to the fullerene control devices, the polymer/non-fullerene device showed much better stability (maintained 85% PCE > 50% PCE after 180 h). These preliminary results demonstrated that non-fullerene small molecule acceptors could be promising for industrial manufacture of high-performance OSCs.103 Then, since they used similar technology but a different material system (PTB7-Th & IEIC), they improved the PCE up to 1.79% on an ITO-free substrate, indicating the potential for large scale production of high performance OSCs.104 Here, a new acceptor IEIC was also previously reported by Zhan et al., which differed DC-IDT2T from the two alkyl side-chains on the bridge thiophenes and kept the central ladder-type IDT backbone and end-cap groups constant. IEIC exhibited good thermal stability, strong absorption in the 500–750 nm region with an extinction coefficient of 1.1 × 10−5 M−1 cm−1 at 672 nm, deep LUMO energy level (−3.82 eV) close to those of fullerenes, and a relatively high electron mobility of 2.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. As a result, a maximum PCE of 6.31% was achieved without any post-treatments, which was the highest PCE then for PSCs based on small molecule non-fullerene electron acceptors. It should be noted that this performance was obtained under a low FF of 0.48, implying there was room for IEIC to improve performance.105 This IEIC acceptor was further investigated by Yan et al.; they used the polymer PffT2-FTAZ-2DT developed in their group as donor and demonstrated a high efficiency of 7.3%. To be specific, they obtained a FF of 0.59, obviously larger than that in Zhan's work, indicating a relatively good morphology and charge collection ability of the solar cell device.106 And the IEIC was also suitable for other polymer systems like diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) units and tandem solar cells.107,108 Around the side-chain on the bridge thiophene a systematic study was carried out by Zhan et al. involving different lengths of the straight chains. Via a steric hindrance effect, an increase in carbon number of the side chains slightly downshifted HOMO energy levels, upshifted LUMO energy levels, and thereby gradually increased Voc from 0.84 to 0.95 V.109 Zhan et al. also developed another similar acceptor, DC-IDT2F, by replacing the thiophene bridge with a furan unit, but its performance was inferior to its thiophene analogues, which is shown in Scheme 2.110 Hou et al. reported IEICO by introducing alkoxy side chains on the bridge thiophene; because of the strong electron-donating property of the alkoxy groups, IEICO exhibited a very narrow optical bandgap of 1.34 eV with a high-lying LUMO level of −3.95 eV. By adopting PBDTTT-E-T as the donor material, the IEICO-based fullerene-free PSC device showed a maximum PCE of 8.4% with a relatively high Voc of 0.82 V, and a high EQE of 66% was recorded at 810 nm. Furthermore, a PCE of 10.7% was recorded in a tandem PSC based on PBDTTT-ET:IEICO as a rear cell. As demonstrated in this work, the introduction of strong electron-donating groups (EDG) like alkoxyl chains provided great opportunities for molecular design of low bandgap non-fullerene acceptors without sacrificing Voc, as shown in Fig. 5.111 Following this work, they adopted the PC71BM in tandem OSC device with an active layer of PBDD4T-2F:PC71BM (front cell) & PBDTTT-ET:IEICO (rear cell), thus producing an outstanding PCE of 12.80%, with a Voc of 1.71 V, a Jsc of 11.51 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.65, which was achieved under optimized conditions.112 The intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) can be further enhanced in a fluorinated acceptor IEICO-4F, and this new acceptor had an ultra-narrow bandgap, as low as 1.24 eV. Use of six different polymer donors in the OSC devices all yielded impressive Jsc values over 20 mA cm−2 despite low energy losses of approximately 0.5 eV. The optimal ternary OSC device gave a high PCE of 10.9%, demonstrating the great potential of near-infrared (NIR) acceptors with such narrow bandgaps.113
 Scheme 2  Chemical structures of acceptors based on five-cycle backbones. 
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE curves, (c) light intensity dependence, and (d) photocurrent versus effective voltage for the IEICO-based and IEIC-based PSC devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Liu and Zhu et al. also focused on NIR acceptors; they developed new, deep-absorbing, small-bandgap electron-acceptor materials ATT-1 and ATT-2 and used them in semitransparent OSCs applications. It is known that the maximum photopic (vision in bright light) human eye sensitivity is 555 nm and the maximum scotopic (vision in dim light) sensitivity is 507 nm. Thus, the key to designing this series of materials is the introduction of a thieno[3,4-b]thiophene group, which was previously prevalent in constructing low bandgap polymers.4 Both materials when combined with PTB7-Th and the ATT-1/ATT-2 achieved peak PCEs of 10.07%/9.58% respectively.114,115 The idea of a conformational lock also worked for designing IDT-based acceptors. Xu and Bo et al. developed a material, IDT-BOC6, in which the bridge is a phenyl ring. The relative work was always a thiophene bridge because the phenyl group was considered as a twisted factor that would undermine the planarity. However, in this work, a supramolecular interaction can lock the flat conformation of an IDT-BOC6 acceptor, which can significantly extend the effective conjugation and broaden the absorption spectrum because of the existence of O⋯S and O⋯H interactions. These phenomena were also proved by comparison with the referenced molecule IDT-BC6 without alkoxy chains. As shown in Fig. 6, polymer solar cells (PSCs) based on IDT-BOC6 afforded a PCE of 9.6%. In contrast, PSCs based on similar acceptor IDT-BC6, which cannot form a flat conformation, only exhibited a low PCE of 2.3%.116
 Fig. 6  (a) Simulated molecular geometries obtained by DFT calculations for simplified molecules of IDT-BC6 and IDT-BOC6. (b) Possible rotamers (BO-C and Th-BOC) in IDT-BOC6 and (c) potential energy surface scan of BO-C and Th-BOC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Using an IDT unit as a core and 5-(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazol-4-ylmethylene)-3-ethyl-2-thioxothiazo-lidin-4-one (BR) units as end-capping EWGs, a new non fullerene acceptor, IDT-2BR, was designed and synthesized by Zhan et al. This acceptor was combined with the classic donor P3HT and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) was adopted as an additive in the solution to adjust the morphology of a blended film. As shown in Fig. 7, addition of 1–5% (v/v) CN improved the Jsc from 6.38 to 7.53–8.91 mA cm−2 with little change of Voc and FF. An FF of 68.1% and PCE of 5.12% were the highest values reported in 2015 for P3HT-based fullerene-free solar cells. An important discussion of this ladder-type system was that they believed the hexylphenyl groups on the IDT moiety exhibited a dihedral angle of ca. 115° to the backbone plane, which was beneficial for forming favorable interpenetrating networks without severe self-aggregation when mixing with P3HT. This becomes a critical design principle in the following acceptors' design.117
 Fig. 7  (a) The J–V curves of devices based on P3HT:IDT-2BR (1:0.6, w/w) processed with different CN concentrations under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2; (b) IPCE curves of corresponding devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By changing the aryl side-chains to alkyl side-chains, Holliday and McCulloch et al. reported O-IDTBR and EH-IDTBR; the difference was that the former had straight n-octyl chains and the latter had branched 2-ethylhexyl chains. As shown in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for both materials, the increased planarity of the backbone promoted crystallization and the formation of pure acceptor domains. GIXRD was used to study their crystal packing with P3HT in films, respectively. It was found that the linear (O-IDTBR) chains could promote stronger intermolecular packing, which was particularly enhanced by thermal annealing, relative to branched (EH-IDTBR) chains. One effect of this was to further red-shift the absorption of O-IDTBR relative to the branched counterpart, which resulted in a broader EQE profile, higher Jsc, and an increase in PCE from 6.0% to 6.4% in P3HT-based OSCs.118 Zhan et al. also reported a similar work by using shorter hexyl side-chains; the inverted OSCs based on PTB7-Th:IDT-2BR1 yielded a high PCE of 8.7% which was higher than the previous IDT-2BR performance. The authors found that the IDT-2BR1 had a narrower bandgap, higher HOMO and LUMO, and exhibited a more self-organized film. This might be related to the nearly flat backbone and perpendicular hexyl chains of IDT-2BR1 while the IDT-2BR had increased steric hindrance and weaker molecular packing.119 Ying and Huang et al. modified the IDT-2BR by introducing a fluorine atom. They aimed to promote intermolecular interactions that can lead to appropriate phase separation that was beneficial for exciton dissociation and charge carrier transport, potentially leading to enhanced overall photovoltaic performances. The HOMO/LUMO energy levels were calculated as −5.31/−2.89 eV and −5.69/−3.64 eV for PBTA-BO, the donor material in this system and IFBR, respectively. Thus, there will be a desired cascade energy level alignment from the diagram of PBTA-BO, IFBR, and PC61BM, so a ternary device could be achieved. The binary devices exhibited only 5.7% (with IFBR) and 3.85% (with PC61BM) PCEs, and the subsequent ternary devices can easily exceed 8% PCE, indicating IFBR played a bridging role and provided an additional pathway for charge transfer in the bulk-heterojunction films.120 Zhou et al. end capped the IDT backbone with thiazolidine-2,4-dione, and the resulting BTA2 was matched with P3HT. The fullerene-free organic solar cells based on P3HT:BTA2 realized a doubled Voc of 1.22 V compared to that of the P3HT:PC61BM system. In addition, P3HT:BTA2 (0.6:1, w/w) blend film demonstrated high and balanced electron mobility (3.4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and hole mobility (4.9 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) by thermal annealing and solvent additive, which resulted in a relatively high PCE of 4.5%.121
Yip and Xu et al. reported a new acceptor, IDT-BT-R-CN, by tailor engineering in which the 2-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-3-ethyl-rhodanine (R-CN) replaced the rhodanine end group from the IDT-BT-R acceptor. They found that by pairing with PTB7-Th, both IDT-BT-R and IDT-BT-R-CN resulted in highly efficient charge separation despite small energy offsets between the donor and acceptors. The PTB7-Th:IDT-BT-R based OSCs showed a high PCE of 8.3% with high Voc of 1.02 V, indicating a low energy loss of 0.59 eV. It was reported that one way to increase the Voc was to lower the energy loss which resulted in better device performance.122 Without the a double-bond between the central ladder-type backbone and the end-capped acceptor, it is still also possible to prepare non-fullerene acceptors. Zhan et al. made a try by using the IDT to append directly to the “half-perylene diimide (PDI)” blocks and, although the maximum PCE of C1–3 was just 2.36%, they still proved that the ladder-type backbone played a critical role in improving the performance of non-fullerene acceptors while other reference materials with a simple thiophene core presented PCE as low as 0.58%.123 Sun and Zhan collaborated together to refresh the record of these IDT-based materials by designing IC-C6IDT-IC in which the bridged π-unit was removed. This material was synthesized by a one-step facile reaction of two commercial available starting materials in a high yield. IC-C6IDT-IC possessed strong and complementary absorption in a 500–800 nm range and matched energy levels with the PDBT-T1 donor as well as high electron mobility. The as-cast PDBT-T1: ICC6IDT-IC blended film showed a very smooth surface, strong “face-on” π–π ordering, appropriate phase separation scale, and relatively good charge transport. The as-cast PSC based on the PDBT-T1:IC-C6IDT-IC blend showed efficient exciton dissociation and negligible bimolecular recombination. The as-cast PSCs yield PCEs of up to 8.71%, which was the highest value for fullerene-free PSCs then.124 This acceptor can make great success in small molecule OSCs and over 9% PCEs were achieved by several groups.125,126 Afterwards, Zhan et al. systematically studied IDT oligomers. As the number of IDT units increase, the LUMO energy level stayed similar (around −3.8 eV), while the HOMO level increased from −5.91 to −5.29 eV, and the absorption spectrum red shifted. Relative to IC-2IDT-IC and IC-3IDT-IC, IC-1IDT-IC had more planar main-chain, strong crystallization and π–π stacking, and relatively high electron mobility. The IC-1IDT-IC with just one IDT unit exhibited the best D/A harmony and the best PCE of 7.39%.127 They also collectively studied the acceptor IDIC with five polymers showing distinct chemical structures to prove its superiority and versatility as a non-fullerene acceptor, and the PCE of PDBT-T1:IDIC and PTFBDT-BZS:IDIC devices reached 10.3–11% after using additive DIO to improve crystallinity and phase purity and optimize phase separation of blended films. According to resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) measurements, PDBT-T1:IDIC as cast film showed peak q = 0.01 nm−1 which is generated from mass variation; thus, the domain could be calculated, which was 15 nm. After processing with 0.25% DIO, the PDBT-T1:IDIC film showed two peaks about q = 0.04 and 0.13 nm−1 and domain sizes were 80 and 20 nm or so. As for PTFBDT-BZS:IDIC as a cast film, the domain size was about 50 nm and it decreased to 40 nm after 0.25% DIO treatment. Besides, PDBT-T1:IDIC blended film showed 0.93 relative domain purity without DIO and it increased to 1 with DIO. PTFBDT-BZS:IDIC blended film showed 0.74 relative domain purity without DIO and it increased to 1 with DIO as well. These results prove that DIO treatment can improve crystallinity, enhance phase purity, and optimize phase separation of blended films, thus increasing the performance of devices.128
Jiang and Liao et al. reported a non-fullerene electron acceptor bearing a fused five-cyclic ring containing selenium atoms for the first time in this system, denoted as IDSe-T-IC. A solar cell based on J51:IDSe-T-IC gave a maximum PCE of 8.6%, with a high Voc of 0.91 V, a Jsc of 15.20 mA cm−2, and a FF of 62.0%. The trade-off features of Jsc and Voc existing in PSCs with fullerene acceptors had been minimized in the fullerene-free PSCs based on IDSe-T-IC and J51. In the active layer, J51:IDSe-T-IC blended film had a smooth morphology with a small root-mean-square 1.09 nm, which was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Moreover, a fibrous structure was observed in the film cast from CF solution, which was beneficial for an increase of Jsc and FF. These results demonstrated that fine-tuning the absorption and electronic energy levels of non-fullerene acceptors, and properly selecting a polymer donor to achieve complementary absorption, was a promising way to further improve the performance of PSCs.82 An efficient wide bandgap small molecular electron acceptor IFTIC based on indenofluorene was developed by Gao et al. With strong and broad absorption in the shortwave region (470–690 nm) and suitable energy levels (HOMO = −5.42 eV, LUMO = −3.85 eV) of IFTIC, the devices based on PTB7-Th and IFTIC blended films exhibited a PCE of 6.56% and relatively high Voc of 0.92 V without any post-treatment. This work can provide an option to utilize narrow bandgap polymers by studying wide-bandgap acceptors.129
A fused hexacyclic electron acceptor, IHIC, which is shown in Scheme 3, was designed by Zhan et al.; IHIC exhibited strong near-infrared absorption with extinction coefficients of up to 1.6 × 105 m−1 cm−1, a narrow optical bandgap of 1.38 eV, and a high electron mobility of 2.4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The semitransparent OSCs based on PTB7-Th and IHIC exhibited a champion power conversion efficiency of 9.77% with an average visible transmittance of 36% and excellent device stability. Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements showed that PTB7-Th:IHIC film has strong crystallinity and preferential face-on oriented domains (q ≈ 1.79 Å−1), which is beneficial to an increase of mobility. The blended film exhibits a hole mobility (μh) of 6.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, a higher electron mobility (μe) of 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the μh/μe ratio is 0.57 after optimization. According to grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements, the fitted pure phase domain sizes of PTB7-Th:IHIC blended film are 12.3 nm or so. Results showed that the film has suitable domain sizes for exciton dissociation, which can enhance Jsc. The high efficiency, good transparency, and excellent stability of the ST-OSCs rendered them promising for commercial applications in building-integrated photovoltaics.130
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of acceptors based on six-cycle backbones. 
Going through the acceptors having 5–6 fused cycles, we can discuss the most prevalent ladder-type system with seven fused units. The story should be started from ITIC, the star material first reported by Zhan et al. in 2015, which is shown in Scheme 4. This molecule had a bulky seven-ring fused core of indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT), end-capped with 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (INCN). The push–pull structure in ITIC can induce intramolecular charge transfer and extend absorption. Furthermore, the four rigid 4-hexylphenyl substituents out of the IT main plane can restrict molecular planarity, aggregation, and large phase separation in BHJ blend films. The ITIC film exhibited electron mobility of up to 3.0 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and an average value for five devices was 2.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. This electron mobility was close to those of fullerene derivatives and guaranteed effective charge carrier transport to the electrodes. ITIC in dichloromethane solution (10−6 M) gave strong absorption in the 500–750 nm region with a maximum extinction coefficient of 1.3 × 105 M−1 cm−1 at 664 nm. Relative to its solution, absorption of an ITIC film showed a significant bathochromic-shift of 38 nm and a strong shoulder peak, suggesting that there was some molecular self-organization in the film. The ITIC had a bandgap of 1.59 eV and HOMO/LUMO of −5.48/−3.83 eV. Using the structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-TH:ITIC/PDIN/Al, the blend at a D/A weight ratio of 1:1.3 gave the best performance: Voc of 0.81 V, Jsc of 14.21 mA cm−2, FF of 0.591, and PCE of 6.80%.130 ITIC-Th with thienyl side-chains was also developed by Zhan et al., which was a representative work on side-chain engineering for this type of IDTT-based acceptors. They tried this ITIC-Th with two polymer donors, PTB7-Th and PDBT-T1; the former was a narrow bandgap donor and the latter was a wide bandgap donor. And in these two systems, the additive CN improved Jsc, FF and PCE. In the end, compared with the PTB7-Th:ITIC-Th system, PDBT-T1:ITIC-Th-based devices with 1% CN presented a better PCE of 9.6% and a certified PCE of 8.85%.131 Both ITIC and ITIC-Th developed in Zhan's group were further exploited by searching for various donors to match them; for example, Zhang and Li et al. designed and proposed a new series of wide bandgap polymers: J51, J61, and J71. Soon, the ITIC-based OSCs exceed 11% PCE.132–134 Chen, Woo, and Hou et al. also successfully demonstrated a highly efficient fullerene-free PSC based on the poly thiophene derivative, which achieved an impressive efficiency as high as 10.16%, indicating this IDTT-based acceptor had good versatility in different polymer systems.135 Besides these reports, there were other relative works about the development of polymer donors for ITIC and they really triggered a hot research interest on materials and device optimizations.136–151 These new IDTT-based acceptors were also suitable for more complicated device techniques, such as ternary and tandem OSCs to enlarge the absorption range.152–154
 Scheme 4  Chemical structures of acceptors with IDTT-based seven-cycle backbones. 
These side-chain modifications did not stop; by side-chain isomerism engineering on the alkyl-phenyl substituents of ITIC, a new low bandgap n-OS m-ITIC with meta-alkyl-phenyl substituents was synthesized and characterized by Zhang and Li et al. m-ITIC demonstrated a more crystalline and stronger film absorption coefficient as shown in Fig. 8, slightly (ca. 0.02 eV) upshifted LUMO and HOMO energy levels, and greater electron motility in comparison with its isomer ITIC with a para-alkyl-phenyl substituent. As is shown in the AFM image, the RMS roughness of an ITIC-based as-cast film is 1.06 nm while that of m-ITIC based as-cast film is 0.92 nm, indicating that the connection position of side chains make a difference to film morphology. Non-fullerene PSCs with m-ITIC as acceptor and a medium bandgap conjugated polymer J61 as donor demonstrated a high PCE of 11.77% with a Voc of 0.912 V, a Jsc of 18.31 mA cm−2, and a FF of 70.55%, which was significantly improved over a PCE of 10.57% for the corresponding ITIC-based device under the same experimental conditions.155,156 An end-cap modification was another effective way to modulate the IDTT-based acceptors. To this end, two new acceptors, IT-M and IT-DM, were rationally designed to modify the electronic structure and were synthesized by incorporating methyl-modified end groups. Ade and Hou found that the weak electron-donating property of a methyl group can elevate the LUMO by 0.04 eV (IT-M) and 0.09 eV (IT-DM) in energy, respectively. As compared to ITIC, higher Voc values of 0.94 and 0.97 V were obtained from optimized PBDB-T:IT-M and PBDB-T:IT-DM-based PSCs, respectively as shown in Fig. 9. Finally, from the PBDB-T:IT-M devices, a high PCE of 12.05% was obtained for hero devices by internal testing, and a certified PCE of 11.6% was further recorded.77,157
 Fig. 8  Tapping mode AFM (3 × 3 μm2) topography images and corresponding phase images of: J81:ITIC (a, e) as-cast film, (b, f) thermal annealed film; and J81:m-ITIC, (c, g) as-cast film, (d, h) thermal annealed film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of polymer donor PBDB-T and three SMAs (ITIC, IT-M, and IT-DM) in the film state. (b) Schematic energy-levels diagrams of MoO3, PBDB-T, ITIC, IT-M, IT-DM, and ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Relative works of ITIC-M on the design of polymers and device engineering were also studied by Hou's group and improved performance was achieved.158 It is known that an alkoxyl group has stronger electron-donating ability than a methyl group. By increasing the length of the alkoxyl side chain successively on the end groups, Hou et al. designed and synthesized a new class of ITIC-based small molecule acceptors, IT-O1 to IT-O4, for application in NF-PSCs. They found the modulation of end group side chains had a great impact on the morphology of blended films in SMA-based PSCs and thus this provides a guideline for the molecular design of SMAs. As observed by AFM and transmission electron microscope (TEM) measurements, blended films based on PBDBT:IT-O1 and PBDB-T:IT-O2 demonstrated rather fine and evenly distributed domains with sizes of tens of nanometers and continuous interpenetrating networks, leading to a higher Jsc and FF and thus better PCEs. However, blended films based on PBDB-T:IT-O3 and PBDB-T:IT-O4 showed distinctly larger domains with sizes over 100 nm, which was detrimental to accomplishing efficient exciton diffusion and dissociation, resulting in a significantly lower Jsc and FF.159
Very recently, Hou et al. supplied a new record with binary OSCs; they reported a new acceptor, IT-4F, in which fluorination was used to modify the end phenyl groups. With the newly developed polymer, PBDB-T-SF, a device with PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F as active materials showed down-shifted molecular energy levels relative to their nonfluorinated counterparts. Because of the broad optical absorption range and enhanced absorption coefficient of the active layer, the corresponding OSC device exhibited an obvious improvement in Jsc. AFM showed that the RMS surface roughness of a PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F blended film is 1.76 nm, which proved that the film had a smooth surface and good morphology. The best device fabricated from PBDBT-SF:IT-4F yielded a remarkable PCE of 13%, which is shown in Fig. 10.87 Zhan et al. also designed and synthesized a fluorinated acceptor, ITIC-Th1. Compared with its nonfluorinated counterpart, ITIC-Th, ITIC-Th1 presented a slightly deeper LUMO, redshifted absorption, and a smaller bandgap. FTAZ:ITIC-Th1 BHJ films exhibited stronger molecular packing and longer coherence length, leading to higher electron and hole, yet balanced mobilities. As a result, non-fullerene OSCs based on FTAZ:ITIC-Th1 gave a PCE as high as 12.1%, significantly higher than those of BHJ devices based on FTAZ:nonfluorinated ITIC-Th (8.88%) and FTAZ:PC71BM (5.22%).160
 Fig. 10  (a) J–V curve and histogram (inset) of PCE measurements for 60 PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F-based cells; (b) EQE curve and (c) device performance parameters (PCE, JSC, VOC, and FF) versus the active layer thickness. (d) Storage stability of PBDB-T SF:IT-4F-based OSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Besides the modification on the substitution on the end phenyl rings, to totally replace the end phenyl rings by another aromatic unit, such as thiophene, was proved to be a viable way to design new acceptors. Woo, Ade, and Hou et al. reported that a small molecular acceptor, ITCC, showed a closer π–π stacking distance and a higher electron mobility compared to ITIC, which contained phenyl-fused indanone end-groups, as shown in Fig. 11. In addition, ITCC possessed a higher lying LUMO level of −3.76 eV and thus yields a Voc of greater than 1 V in photovoltaic devices. A PCE of 11.4% demonstrated that the high Voc non-fullerene OSC had a great potential for further improving efficiency. GIWAXS patterns showed that PBDB-T:ITCC blended film had a smaller (010) stacking distance (3.83 Å) compared to PBDB-T:ITIC film (3.93 Å), which is caused by enhanced intermolecular interactions of ITCC molecules. Moreover, R-SoXS measurements showed that PBDB-T:ITCC film had a purer domain with an average composition variation (ACV) of 1.00 while ITIC film had ACV of 0.86. However, due to the blue-shifted optical absorption of ITCC, the Jsc of ITCC-based OSC device is not very high. Predictably, if both of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of a non-fullerene acceptor can be up-shifted simultaneously, improved Voc along with high Jsc and thus further improvement of PCE can be expected.83 Based on ITCC, the methylation method was also carried out on the end-thiophene group to form a newly designed ITCC-M. By adopting an interconnection layer with an optimized thickness to achieve efficient charge collection and recombination and high light transmittance, they were able to fabricate tandem cells with PCEs of 13–14% under an illumination of 0.02–1 sun, which is shown in Fig. 12.47
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of molecular stacking of the highly efficient A–D–A-structured SM acceptor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 12  (a, c) Molecular structures of electron donor and electron acceptor materials in (a) front and (c) rear cells. (d) Molecular structure of the interconnection layer, PCP-Na, in tandem cells. (b) Device architecture of tandem OSCs. (e) Molecular structure of ITIC. (f) Schematic energy level diagram of each material used in this study. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Zou and Yang separately synthesized an isomer of ITCC in which the C3–C4 positions, not the C2–C3 positions, were fused to the EWGs. This new acceptor was named as ITTC (Zou et al.) and ITCPTC (Yang et al.), with different polymer donors of HFQx-T and PBT1-EH, maximum PCEs of 10.4% and 11.8% were achieved.161,162 Unlike the direct A–D–A structure on an IDTT core, Li and Chen et al. used a thiophene as the bridge to link the D/A moieties, which were normal in IDT-based materials as discussed above. This resulting ITTIC with polymer PBDB-T1:ITTIC exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 9.12% with an increased Voc and broader photo response compared with PBDB-T1:ITIC based devices. Interestingly, it was shown that the charge transfer remained effective at a diminished HOMO difference of 0.02 eV between PBDB-T1 and ITTIC, leading to a mitigated energy loss of 0.54 eV in PBDB-T1:ITTIC based devices.88 Zhan et al. synthesized two acceptors, IDT-2BM and IDTT-2BM, for comparison. By optimizing the morphologies, PSCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:IDT-2BM or IDTT-2BM afforded promising PCEs of 4.26% and 4.81%, respectively. The higher PCE of IDTT-2BM-based devices was attributed to higher mobility and more suitable morphology.163
Besides the popular IDTT backbone, there are several other 7-fused-ring ladder-type systems that can be utilized to construct A–D–A non-fullerene acceptors. Lu and Chen et al. designed a new rigid backbone named fluorenedicyclopentathiophene (FT) by fusing the fluorene core as shown in Scheme 5. With this planar backbone, the FDICTF film showed strong absorption in the wavelength region from 500 to 770 nm, and absorption onset of 760 nm corresponds to an optical bandgap of 1.63 eV. Devices with PBDB-T and FDICTF gave a high PCE of 10.06%, a high Jsc of 15.81 mA cm−2, and a high Voc of 0.94 V. From a comparison to DICTF (PCE = 5.93%), an unfused acceptor, the improvement in efficiency was obvious. For morphology control in the active layer, the out-of-plane chains on the fused core of FDICTF can effectively prevent overaggregation in the acceptor phases, contributing to the formation of a favorable interpenetrating donor/acceptor network with a suitable degree of phase separation in the active layers.164 Xu and Bo systematically studied the effect of side chains, and three planar non-fullerene acceptors (FTIC-C8C6, FTIC-C6C6, and FTIC-C6C8) were designed and synthesized. The backbone FT was planar and had six flexible alkyl side chains, which guaranteed a simultaneous enhancement of the π–π interaction (for better charge transport) and solubility (for better microphase separation) of these compounds. Organic solar cells using the acceptor with two n-hexyl and four n-octyl side chains (FTIC-C6C8) demonstrated a higher device performance than those using the other two acceptors which bear shorter side chains (FTIC-C6C6 with six n-hexyl groups) and less long side chains (FTIC-C8C6 with four n-hexyl and two n-octyl groups). The optimized PBDB-T:FTIC-C6C8 blended film had a high PCE of 11.12%, a large Voc of 0.93 V, a high Jsc of 18.55 mA cm−2, and a good FF of 0.65. This result provided an appropriate molecular design strategy for building high-performance non-fullerene acceptors and shows that optimizing alkyl-side chains is a very effective way to further improve the photovoltaic performance of devices.165
 Scheme 5  Chemical structures of acceptors based on other seven-cycle backbones. 
Chen and Sun et al. reported the first dithienocyclopentacarbazole (DTCC)-based n-type organic semiconductor DTCC-IC for acceptor application and it possessed highly extended π-conjugated backbones and versatile modular structures for derivatization. For the first time, a high electron mobility of 2.17 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been tested and the device with DTCC-IC and PTB7-Th exhibits a PCE of up to 6% and a rational high Voc of 0.95 V.166 Zheng et al. also studied the DTCC-based acceptor CDTCN with a longer conjugation length of the backbone. The device with CDTCN and PBDB-T gave a high PCE of 6.23% with a Voc high of 0.96 V, a Jsc of 11.26 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.58.167 By changing the alignment of the classic fused system of the IDTT core, a new seven-ring ladder-type backbone dithienyl[1,2-b:4,5-b′]benzodithiophene (BDCPDT) can be formed. It is noticeable that these two units are structural isomers. To study the isomeric effects of these two units in the use of ladder-type non-fullerene electron acceptors, Jiang, Liao and Forrest et al. designed two isomeric non-fullerene acceptors, BDT-IC and IT-IC, for direct comparison. The isomer BDT-IC showed a smaller energy gap (1.53 eV), stronger intermolecular interactions, and more crystallinity than IT-IC. Specifically, BDT-IC exhibited five times higher electron mobility (0.46 ± 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1), which lead to a reduced charge recombination. Moreover, as-cast OSCs without additional treatments or additives employing BDT-IC paired with the J71 donor exhibited PCE of 10.5 ± 0.4%. Significant impacts of isomeric effects on electronic structure and crystal properties of the IT-IC and BDT-IC isomers were revealed. There was a (100) diffraction peak in J71:BDT-IC blended thin films according to GIXD measurements, which came from BDT-IC as BDT-IC had a (100) diffraction peak located at 0.32 Å−1, indicating that BDT-IC guides the blend morphology. Compared to J71:IT-IC, J71:BDT-IC blended thin film preferred the tight π-stacking in the perpendicular direction with the (010) diffraction peak at 1.76 Å−1, which reduced the recombination of excitons and improved charge transport, thus building high-performance OSCs. These studies help to elucidate the structure–property relationships of high performance NFAs, providing insights into future rational designs of improved non-fullerene acceptor materials.168 But, this is not the first report on a BDT-based acceptor. Before this comparative study, the BDT-IC was named as NFBDT with the same structure and disclosed by Chen et al.; their new acceptor NFBDT exhibited a low optical bandgap of 1.56 eV, resulting in wide and efficient absorption that covered the range from 600 to 800 nm. An optimized PCE of 10.42% was obtained for the PBDBT:NFBDT-based device with an outstanding Jsc of 17.85 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). All of these demonstrated that this modified BDCPDT unit could also be applied for designing other high performance NF-acceptors, and the fused-ring benzodi-(cyclopentadithiophene) unit is a promising block for that.169 Then, a new A–D–A-type small-molecule acceptor NCBDT was designed by modification of the D and A units of NFBDT, which is shown in Scheme 5; the PBDB-T:NCBDT devices demonstrated an impressive PCE over 12%.170
This identical material was also studied by Zhan et al. with the name of ITIC1, and they also synthesized another material, ITIC2, with a conjugated side-chain appended on the BDT core, which is shown in Fig. 13. ITIC2 exhibited an absorption peak at 714 nm, which redshifts 12 nm relative to ITIC1. The absorption extinction coefficient of ITIC2 was 2.7 × 105 m−1 cm−1, higher than that of ITIC1 (1.5 × 105 m−1 cm−1). ITIC2 exhibited a slightly higher HOMO of −5.43 eV and LUMO of −3.80 eV relative to ITIC1 (HOMO = −5.48 eV; LUMO = −3.84 eV), and higher electron mobility (1.3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) than that of ITIC1 (9.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). In a device test, the PCE of ITIC2-based organic solar cells was 11.0%. These results demonstrated that side-chain conjugation was an effective strategy for the design of high-performance non-fullerene acceptors.171 However, it should be noted that this modification way is absent in designing IDTT-based acceptors so far.
 Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE spectra, (c) Jphversus Veff characteristics, and (d) Jscversus light intensity of the optimized devices with the structure of ITO/ZnO/FTAZ:acceptor/MoOx/Ag. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Jiang and Liao et al. reported a new NIR non-fullerene acceptor, BT-IC, with a low-bandgap (1.43 eV), showing a high PCE of 10.5% along with simultaneously high Voc of 0.90 eV and Jsc of 17.5 mA cm−2 when blending with a medium bandgap polymer donor (J71). This molecule first introduced the side-chains on the BDT core, but different from the conjugated side-chains adopted by Zhan et al.; here, they utilized the electron-donating alkoxyl side-chains to strengthen the intramolecular charge transfer. That is why the BT-IC can extend the absorption edge to nearly 900 nm and other results are shown in Fig. 14. Those results demonstrated that the BT-IC acceptor was a unique NIR non-fullerene acceptor with potential applications in tandem/multi junction, semitransparent (or visibly transparent), and ternary blend solar cells, thus deserving further attention.78
 Fig. 14  (a) Transient absorption spectra of blended film J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) at 1.62 eV excitation; (b) blended film J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) at 1.62 eV excitation; (c) dynamics of the J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) blended film; (d) dynamics of the J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blended film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new non-fullerene acceptor, COi8DFIC, which is shown in Scheme 6, was designed and synthesized by Xiao and Ding et al. who used a CO-bridged ladder-type unit (COi8) as electron-donating core. It can absorb 600–1000 nm sunlight with a narrow optical bandgap of 1.26 eV. The OSCs based on COi8DFIC and PTB7-Th achieved a Jsc of 26.12 mA cm−2 and a high PCE of 12.16%. Moreover, by adding PC71BM into COi8DFIC:PTB7-Th film, the highest PCE of the ternary OSCs was increased to be 14.08%.172,173 Jen et al. report a new acceptor 6TIC with a new core terthieno[3,2-b]thiophene (6T) as EDG. 6TIC had a narrow optical bandgap of 1.37 eV and its absorption edge reached 905 nm due to the electron-rich conjugated core and reduced resonance stabilization energy. As compared with PTB7-Th, the OSCs achieved a high PCE of 11.07%, a high Jsc of 20.11 mA cm−2, and a high Voc of 0.83 V. What's more, the semitransparent solar cell based on the PTB7-Th:6TIC exhibited a high PCE of 7.62%.174 Soon after, Zhan et al. reported another acceptor FOIC with the same core and stronger end-cap, EWG 2-(5/6-fluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)-malononitrile (FIC). The introduction of fluorine can enhance intermolecular interactions and charge transport; thus, FOIC showed strong NIR absorption with extinction coefficient of 2 × 105 m−1 cm−1, small bandgap of 1.32 eV, and high electron mobility of 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The RMS roughness of PTB7-Th:FOIC blended film was 0.862 nm, which is smaller than that of PTB7-Th:ITIC3 (0.898 nm), indicating a smoother surface. OSCs based on PTB7-Th:FOIC exhibited a PCE of 12.0% and it only decreased 30% after 30 d in air. These results demonstrated that a 6T core has a great potential to build narrow bandgap non-fullerene acceptors with high performance in devices.175
 Scheme 6  Chemical structures of acceptors based on other backbones. 
Four new fused-ring electron acceptors with a 9-fused system, INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3, based on a fused-nonacyclic IBDT core end-capped with nonfluorinated or fluorinated IC were designed and synthesized by Zhan et al. These four molecules had strong absorptions in the visible and even near-infrared region which are shown in Fig. 15 with high extinction coefficients of 2.1–2.5 × 105 M−1 cm−1. The devices based on FTAZ/INIC series blends exhibited a small energy loss of 0.61–0.63 eV, yet efficient charge dissociation and collection, negligible bimolecular charge recombination, and finally, high PCEs of 7.7–11.5%. Fluorination of INIC significantly enhanced the PCE from 7.7% to >10%, in particular, the OSCs based on difluorinated INIC3 show the best PCE of 11.5%. To understand the morphology of the active layer, AFM was used to obtain surface images of active layers, which are smooth with a root-mean square roughness of 0.54–0.9 nm. Then, a GIWAXS measurement was used, indicating that the blended film of FTAZ and INIC3 exhibit highest crystallinity and maintain both FTAZ and INIC3 semi-crystalline packing at the same time, which is beneficial for film mobility. GISAXS measurements were also used to reveal that the suitable crystallinity of these four materials does no harm to film phase separation and exciton dissociation. These results provided a great potential of the new IBDT and fluorinated IC building blocks for constructing high-performance non-fullerene acceptors.76
 Fig. 15  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3 in chloroform and (b) as a thin film; (c) cyclic voltammograms for INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3; and (d) energy levels for FTAZ, INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
A non-fullerene electron acceptor bearing a fused 10-heterocyclic ring with a band gap of 1.5 eV was designed and synthesized by Jiang and Liao et al., as shown in Scheme 6. When using IDTIDT-IC and PTB7-Th, a low energy loss (<0.6 eV), a high EQE (>60%) value, and a superior PCE of up to 6.5% were achieved. Without any additives, the Voc of the devices reached 0.94 V, which was surprisingly high compared to the often reported 0.76 V for devices based on PTB7-Th:PC71BM. The high Voc can be attributed to the very low energy loss of the donor/acceptor pair.81 To further increase absorption and improve performance of the device, a new acceptor material, IDTIDSe-IC, with a fused 10-heterocyclic ring backbone was reported by Jiang and Liao et al. IDTIDSe-IC exhibited a band gap of 1.52 eV and strong absorption in the 600–850 nm region. Combined with a large band gap polymer, J51 (Eg = 1.91 eV) as donor, broad absorption coverage from 300 nm to 800 nm was obtained due to complementary absorption of J51 and IDTIDSe-IC, which enabled a PCE of 8.02% in the corresponding PSCs. Moreover, an EQE of 50–65% was achieved in the absorption range of IDTIDSe-IC with only about 0.1 eV HOMO difference between J51 and IDTIDSe-IC.94
A new electron acceptor, IUIC with an 11-heterocyclic ring, was designed and synthesized by Zhan et al. It existed as a larger extended π-conjugation with a stronger electron-donating ability, which was beneficial for its absorption and electron mobility. Thus, the absorption edge of IUIC was longer than 900 nm. The OSCs based on PTB7-Th and IUIC achieved a high PCE of 10.2% with an average visible transmittance (AVT) of 31% which was higher than the device based on PTB7-Th and ITIC4 (PCE = 6.42%, AVT = 28%). The AFM results showed that the blended film of PTB7-Th:IUIC with RMS roughness of 1.0 nm was slightly smoother than PTB7-Th:ITIC4 film (RMS roughness was 1.2 nm). GIWAXS revealed that the molecular packing of PTB7-Th is less compact in PTB7-Th:IUIC film. Besides, R-SoXS showed that PTB7-Th:IUIC film has a higher domain purity of 1 than that of PTB7-Th:ITIC4 film (0.87), which would promote charge transport and minimize the possibility of bimolecular recombination. So, the as-cast devices based on PTB7-Th:IUIC exhibited higher EQE, Jsc, and PCE than that of PTB7-Th:ITIC4.176
A new acceptor material, FITP with a fully fused backbone, prepared by fusing two PDI units with an indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IDTT) core, was designed by Chen et al. By blending with PTB7-Th, FITP exhibited a good performance as an electron acceptor with a high PCE of 7.33% and high Voc of 0.99 V.177
This is just an overview of the typical backbones used in constructing effective ladder-type acceptors. During the preparation of this review, we have noted with great pleasure the publications of many valuable papers in different journals. As compensation to this loss, we herein provide a list of representative papers recently published by different groups in the reference section for interested readers to retrieve.178–214
4. Analysis of the molecular structure-from the star molecule ITIC
According to the aforementioned progress based on ladder-type acceptors, we now can summarize the modification techniques used in tuning structure–property relationships. The first efficient ladder-type electron acceptor ITIC, it is a good example for structural analysis (but not limited in this structure), which is shown in Scheme 7.
 Scheme 7  The structural analysis of ITIC for further modification. 
We can carefully disassemble an ITIC molecule into the following units: (1) the conjugated fused backbone; (2) the end-cap EWG; (3) the sp3 hybridized side-chains at the cyclopentane part; (4) the substituents at the middle phenyl position of the backbone, where it should be noted that there is no report on this kind of modification for ITIC series; and (5) the β-position of the end thiophene, but only one work has been reported so far.215 From these five viewpoints, we will continue to discuss the construction ways in current and next molecular designs.
4.1 Construction of ladder-type backbones
Multifused arenes play a key role in modulating properties and variations on the backbone, which is the most conspicuous change. Because a thiophene has less steric hindrance than benzene, it is indispensable in designing planar backbones for highly efficient acceptor molecules. To replace the thiophene with benzene at the backbone, it was found the resulting molecule has an increased bandgap; thus, we can conclude that the introduction of benzene is critical to tune energy levels. Benzene is also important to provide suitable fused positions with side-chain derivations. Normally, fused ring backbones are accomplished by a Friedel–Crafts reaction under acidic conditions, and generally the remaining C–H bonds on the benzene are far enough away from neighboring bonds to avoid any planar torsion. In Scheme 8, it is clear to see how the IDT and IDTT blocks form under similar conditions.216,217
 Scheme 8  Synthetic routes of IDT and IDTT. 
Like the syntheses of IDT and IDTT, other backbone units even without a benzene (for example, thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit) also adopt a similar synthetic strategy. This kind of ring-closure step is effective but now is only limited to forming aryl substituted ladder-type backbones. This is because of the by-products from the elimination reaction if alkyl chains are used instead of aryl chains. To get the same backbone with alkyl chains, researchers have to use a time consuming route consisting of Friedel–Crafts acylation, deoxygenation, and then nucleophilic substitution. So, there is much room for optimizing this synthetic route in the future.
Generally, the ring-closure step forms five-membered cycles, but this Friedel–Crafts way is also useful for constructing six-membered cyclics. Very recently, Jen and Liu et al. reported a new ladder-type framework, in which the key step is ring-closing toward a two-dimensional perylene core in a six-membered closing manner. As a result, the multiple-fused materials bearing a highly planar backbone achieved an optoelectronic response over 1000 nm with the incorporated nitrogen atom.218
4.2 Modification of end electron-withdrawing groups
To date, modification of end-cap groups has proved to be very effective for tuning the performance of materials. The property of an EWG can directly affect the LUMO energy levels, which is critical for charge dissociation and Voc. The IC is the most widely used EWG, with two cyano groups to strengthen the electron-poor feature of 1H-indene-1,3(2H)-dione. The benzene ring offers four positions for modification; herein, appending a weak EDG-like methyl can increase the Voc and EWG-like fluorine can achieve a narrower bandgap for light harvesting. A systematic study on position difference effects was also reported,76,77 and replacing the benzene with thiophene isomers also works in constructing effective acceptors.83
Other end groups were also reported using a similar construction strategy and these are included along with the IC in Scheme 9. It is interesting to point out that a double bond is generally used to connect the backbone and the EWG, and this position can also be adjusted. Recently, Zhang and Li et al. adopted a tandem double bonds system to extend the conjugation length which is shown in Fig. 16. In previous reports, two molecules based on IDT and IDTT cores with double bond π-bridges were designed and synthesized. By introducing double bond π-bridges, the film of these new molecules showed significantly red-shifted absorption, tuned crystallinity, and improved electron mobility, which made their blended film with a polymer donor easier to form appropriate phase separation.219,220
 Scheme 9  Chemical structures of common end electron-withdrawing groups. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structures of IDT-IC, SJ-IC and the corresponding p electronic structures calculated with density functional theory at the B3LYP/6-31G (d, p) level. (b) Synthetic route to SJ-IC. (c) Chemical structure of the donor polymer J61. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.3 Side-chain engineering
Existence of a cyclopentane moiety in the backbones in most reports is quite important for appending suitable side chains to solubilize the resulting acceptor. An alkyl chain is the first choice in many examples of conjugated materials as shown in Scheme 10. However, aryl chains instead of alkyl chains are more popular in building such ladder-type acceptors. We believe this is because the synthetic routes, with ester groups existing in the precursors, can simplify the backbone forming process. That is, the aryl lithium reagent attacks the ester to form a tertiary alcohol, followed by intramolecular cyclization. If an alkyl lithium or alkyl Grignard reagent is used in this step, then the next elimination process competes with the cyclization, which leads to difficult work-up and low yield. Thus, the most feasible way for appending alkyl chains to a multi-cyclopentane system is by using a nucleophilic substitution reaction, and this requires a ketone as the precursor for de-oxygenation. And, the ketone precursor can be also transferred from an ester group by Friedel–Crafts acylation. Obviously, this synthetic route is more complicated. In addition, another problem for this route is low solubility of the rigid ketone. An alternative way to reduce the synthetic difficulty of fully alkyl chains is using mixed side chains, called “asymmetrical sides.” Xu and Bo et al. firstly developed this method by using dialdehyde compounds instead of general diester precursors to simplify the synthesis.221
 Scheme 10  Common used side chains. 
As for the aryl side chain, a current study was done on the meta and para positions for the phenyl group or substantially replacing the phenyl group by thiophene.155,156,160 But in theory, the short alkyl chains involved in removing a conventional benzene group should produce better intermolecular packing, which has been partly proven in an IDT system. Until very recently, the popular IDTT system had adopted the same modification, and a new acceptor, C8-ITIC, which has linear alkyl side chains on an IDTT core, was synthesized through a heterocycle extension strategy. The advantage of this synthetic route is that all intermediates are soluble and readily purified and have general applications in chemical synthesis. Compared to reported ITIC with phenylalkyl side chains, C8-ITIC exhibits a reduction in the optical band gap, higher absorptivity, and an increased propensity to crystallize, which shows the important role of side chains on the properties of acceptor molecules.45
4.4 Short-axis substitution
Many researchers may notice that there are possible substituted positions on the central benzene of IDT or IDTT cores; however, no related reports are available probably due to synthesis difficulty. Another kind of BDCPDT-core based material can easily make this modification by using different side-chains in the precursors.78,169–172 Unlike the aforementioned side-chains on the sp3 hybridized carbon that make them point out of the backbone planes, these kinds of side-chains are appended to the conjugated backbone; thus, they can directly affect energy levels especially the HOMO. This impact is quite similar to that of end-cap groups which are placed along the molecule's long-axis, so it could be described as a short-axis substitution.
Recently, Jiang, Zhang and Li et al. found this short cut. It is predicable that the other relative system bearing central unsubstituted hydrogen can adopt this modification to further improve the materials' performance, as shown in Fig. 17.222 In this work, two new fused-ring electron acceptors (CBT-IC and SBT-IC) were designed and developed by utilizing n-hexyl and n-hexylthio as short-axis substitutions based on the BDCPDT system. The short-axises could readily modify absorption spectra and energy levels of CBT-IC and SBT-IC due to different electron-donating/-withdrawing natures of n-hexyl and n-hexylthio substitutions. Furthermore, compared with BDT-IC without any short-axis substituents, both CBT-IC and SBT-IC exhibited higher maximum absorption coefficients. In the film, however, crystallinity and charge mobility of acceptors were decreased since the short-axises were introduced. Combined with a medium bandgap polymer donor, J71, both of CBT-IC and SBT-IC based OPV devices exhibited a higher PCE over 11%, and higher maximum EQE over 75% than a BDT-IC based device. This work demonstrated that a short-axis could be a very useful approach to optimize materials which may give a way to further designing better non-fullerene acceptors.
 Fig. 17  (a) The structures of IDTT and BDCPDT backbones; (b) three possible ways for modifying ladder-type electron acceptors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2018. 
4.5 β-Substitution on the end-thiophene
The last rings at each side of a backbone are always thiophene, and EWGs are appended from the α-positions. However, the β-position of an end-thiophene is rarely developed when designing new acceptors. Attention should be paid that substitution on the β-position is unfavorable for polymer donors because that substitution could make a twisted conformation to the neighboring rings. However, this is no longer a problem for an acceptor because this is the end group in the ladder-type system.
Very recently, Tang et al. reported a new non-fullerene acceptor, ITC6-IC (in Fig. 18), with long alkyl chains in the terminal electron-donating building blocks to enhance steric hindrance, which made the molecule have a planar structure with a high degree of unified configuration and better solubility in chemical solvents. What's more, the alkyl chains could reduce the structural order of ITC6-IC film, thus enhancing the compatibility of ITC6-IC with polymer donors and facilitating the tunability of blended films. These new results showed that the regiochemistry in OSCs is an area worth studying, and it may provide a new strategy to design high performance materials.215
 Fig. 18  The structures of ITIC and ITC6-IC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5. Ongoing opportunity and challenges for devices
While this review has shown considerable progress with OSCs based on ladder-type acceptors in recent years, and also discussed current design principles and possible modifications with this kind of acceptor, further insightful considerations on physical properties and devices are also needed for next improvements of OSCs. The acceptor is not a unitary material in the active layer in a device, so it is of equal importance to develop highly efficient donors to keep up the pace of emerging effective acceptors.
A number of reasons could explain why this kind of ladder-type molecule is an effective OSC material: its planar backbone has a strong π-orbital overlap that can enlarge the absorption range, it has a relatively low energetic disorder, it may form pure domains but still maintains efficient charge generation, and the out-of-plane side-chains on the fused core can be beneficial for the formation of a favorable interpenetrating donor/acceptor network with a suitable degree of phase separation in the active layers. Thus, these new materials bring many opportunities and challenges in this active research area.
First, lots of researches relating to OSCs have been focused on polymeric donor materials, as they usually have better film morphology and film-forming properties than their monomers. As for the morphology of an active layer, AFM, TEM, R-SoXS, and GIWAXS were used to obtain insights into the behaviors of aggregation and crystallization of donor and acceptor materials. Improved molecular packing and enhanced crystallization of materials can contribute to improvements of Jsc and FF, as improved molecular packing is conducive to an increase in charge-transport characteristics and a reduced recombination. Although semiconducting polymer materials have these morphological advantages, they suffer from difficult purification procedures and synthetic reproducibility, which restricts their commercial development. Therefore, it's a good research direction to develop some small molecular donor materials which are easily synthesized with low cost to build all small molecule blends for OSCs with vast potentials for future development. Some groups126,227–231 have taken a lead in this area but now the most efficient OSCs based on all small molecules still lag behind the widely-studied polymer: ladder-type acceptor OSCs.
On the contrary to the all small molecule OSCs, some researchers realize these ladder-type blocks are also useful for building polymer acceptors, which have been dominated by imide-based acceptors for a long time. For example, the most popular acceptor, N2200,223 is constructed by these and has the best efficiency. But as Zhang et al. reported, a new high efficiency polymer acceptor with a PCE over 9% was designed and synthesized from being inspired by IDIC which has a planar structure, high electron affinity, as well as high absorbance.224 This demonstrates the great potential of a polymer acceptor in coupling with polymer acceptors for high performance all polymer PSCs.
A rigid conjugated backbone endows the ladder-type acceptor with the possibility to extend their absorption in the NIR region. It is well known that about 47% of sunlight is in the region of visible light while 53% of it is in this region. It would be very helpful to improve the efficiency of OSCs if near-infrared light could be effectively utilized. If this acceptor is combined with another narrow bandgap donor, then a semitransparent device could be achievable as shown in Fig. 19. What's more, they could be widely used in tandem OSCs, bioimaging, senor, military equipment and so on.
 Fig. 19  (a) Current–density–voltage characteristics of semitransparent OPVs (STOPVs) based on PCE-10:BT-CIC (1:1.5, w/w) with different Ag cathode thicknesses. (b) Transmission spectra of the corresponding STOPVs with different Ag thicknesses. (c) Outdoor image through a STOPV incorporating a 10 nm thick Ag layer, and (d) CIE coordinates of transmission spectra of devices with different Ag thicknesses using a AM1.5G solar simulated input spectrum (denoted by ‘+’), 10 nm thick Ag (‘□’ square), 15 nm Ag (‘○’ circle), and 20 nm Ag (‘△’ triangle). Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Besides, in the view of manufacturing processes, almost all the reported devices are fabricated by a spin-coating process with a ladder-type acceptor, as shown in Fig. 20. Vacuum sublimation as a viable option should not be ignored. As we know, reproducibility and large-area device's implementation for evaporation techniques are quite superior to the spin-coating technique. Additionally, the organic light emitting diodes (OLED) industry has built up a stream line for large area panels and has great likelihood for success if the OPV materials can be vaporized with high efficiency. Now, the alternatives to fullerenes for vacuum-deposited small-molecule organic solar cells still mainly are comprised of perylene derivatives or halogenated (sub-) phthalocyanines, with the highest PCE of 8.4%.225 How to design ladder-type non-fullerene acceptor materials suitable for vacuum-deposited small-molecule organic solar cells thus is of interest for industrial researchers.
 Fig. 20  (a) PEDOT:PSS PH1000 and ZnO coated PET flexible substrate with an Ag grid (ITO-free substrate), (b) slot-die coating of the active layer of PTB7-TH:IEIC and top PEDOT:PSS layer on the mini roll-coater in sequence, (c) flexographic printing of the top Ag electrode, and (d) long stripes of roll-coated non-fullerene OSCs based on the ITO-free substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Moreover, it is a big challenge for NFA-based OSCs to maintain their stability for a long time. Although organic materials show good thermal stability and photo-stability, their morphological stability still needs to be improved. Most ladder-type based solution-processed solar cells with high performance require additional complicated post-cast treatments or additives to optimize their morphology, which can lead to irreproducibility and increased cost.75,124 These intricate treatments are unfit for large area production and further development. It's of great significance to develop high performance materials without additional treatments in a device, which can lower the cost and increase the stability.
And lastly, there are still some mechanism issues needing deep study and investigation. It has been reported that some systems87–94 can achieve a high Jsc, fill factor, and PCE with low Eloss. But why is it that this only works in certain systems and how does the reduced non-radiative recombination rate contribute to low Eloss? And how can Eloss be further decreased in a more effective way which can be used in most NFA systems? Recently, Hou et al. tentatively proposed that the molecular electrostatic potential maybe is the reason why charge generation can be effective with a small driving force between donor and acceptor.232 It's essential to further set up appropriate theoretical models of the charge transfer phenomenon to have a deep understanding of Eloss and explore efficient ways to decrease it.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Since 2015, rapid advances have been achieved in ladder-type non-fullerene acceptors; thus in this review, we summarized recently reported non-fullerene acceptors in this system according to different backbones and highlighted some important studies. As a very promising subbranch of non-fullerene acceptors, ladder-type materials have several advantages: (i) various tuning modes in molecular design; (ii) a broad absorption region to harvest solar energy; and (iii) good morphology control. Based on these intrinsic features and the great efforts from many groups, the PCE of NF-OSCs increased from below 6% to over 13% and we were able to outline this rapid-growing research area in this review.
Meanwhile, design guidelines for chemical construction of ladder-type acceptors were also discussed. We noted that modifications primarily focus on backbone variation, side-chain engineering, and end-cap group substitution. Based on these reports, several backbones, such as IDT, IDTT, BDCPDT, PT, etc. have successfully exceeded 10% of PCE, indicating great potential for future optimization. As a comparison, backbones shorter than five-fused rings or longer than nine-fused rings are now inferior to the above-mentioned blocks. A short backbone, in many studies, was proved to possess relative low electron mobility which may inhibit performance in devices.96–101 A long backbone, however, shows at least comparable or enhanced electron-mobility.216–218 But, we should point out that acceptors with short backbones have a great potential for building wide bandgap acceptors and have achieved some good results. Side-chains also play an important role in tuning the properties of acceptors.45,160,221 Unlike a mono-substituted side chain on the nitrogen atom of traditional imide-based acceptors, the side-chains formed a 3-D conformation along with the rigid backbones and affected intermolecular packing. The end-cap group can directly tailor the electronic properties of acceptors so now it perhaps is the most efficient tool for improving a material's performance.76,77,83 The modes we discussed above are normally based on a symmetrical conformation; actually, an asymmetrical conformation should also be useful in constructing ladder-type acceptors by introducing different side-chains, end-groups, or substantially using an asymmetrical backbone and this definitely needs further investigation in the future.
To construct an ideal NFA-based OSC system, selection of a concerted donor and the NFA is of vital importance. On one hand, the energy level of donors and acceptors should be matched to insure they have complementary absorption in the light spectrum as well as an appropriate driving force for excitons separation. On the other hand, intrinsic morphologic miscibility between donors and acceptors is supposed to be acceptable to make sure the morphology of the active layer is smooth and homogeneous. As for donor materials, they should not only have good stability in organic solvents, but also have a tendency towards aggregation and self-assembly when forming a film in a device fabrication process. Yang et al. proposed that developing NFA materials with strong absorption in the NIR region and blue region is the key for further development of NFA solar cells, especially for tandem cells.43 Accordingly, donor materials with medium and wide band gaps deserve further future attention.
Ladder-type acceptor research has been extensively explored in just a few years, which soon became a very hot topic for fundamental studies. Although there has been an accumulation of information on the design principles and mechanistic understanding of these materials, there will be plenty of room for next opportunities and challenges. Many possibilities still remain to be explored and hopefully we have listed part of them by analyzing the publications of many excellent papers in various journals. We enthusiastically look forward to the new advancements in this exciting area of research.
In the end, we wish that this review may provide a clear panorama of these novel functional materials for OPV academia and attract more chemists and physicists to move them towards massive industrial applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Abbreviation

ACVAverage composition variation
AFMAtomic force microscopy
AVTAverage visible transmittance
BHJBulk heterojunction
CN1-Chloronaphthalene
DIO1,8-Diiodooctane
EDGElectron donating group

E
g
Band gap energy

E
loss
Energy loss
EWGElectron withdrawing group
FFFill factor
GISAXSGrazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GIWAXSGrazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering
GIXRDGrazing incidence X-ray diffraction
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
ICTIntramolecular charge transfer
IDTIndacenodithiophene
IQEInternal quantum efficiency

J
sc
Short-circuit current density
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
NDINaphthalene diimides
NFANon-fullerene acceptor
NIRNear infrared region
OLEDOrganic light emitting diodes
OSCOrganic solar cell
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PDIPerylene diimide

P
in
Energy of incident light
RMSRoot-mean-square
R-SoXSResonant soft X-ray scattering
TEMTransmission electron microscope

V
oc
Open-circuit voltage
XRDX-ray diffraction

μ
e
Electron mobility

μ
h
Hole mobility

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61575136 and 21572152) and the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0202400). This project was also funded by the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology (Nano-CIC), by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD) and by the “111” Project of the State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs of China.
References
D. W. Cash, W. C. Clark, F. Alcock, N. M. Dickson, N. Eckley, D. H. Guston, J. Jäger and R. B. Mitchell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 8086–8091 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Griggs, M. Stafford-Smith, O. Gaffney, J. Rockström, M. C. Öhman, P. Shyamsundar, W. Steffen, G. Glaser, N. Kanie and I. Noble, Nature, 2013, 495, 305 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Dincer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 157–175 CrossRef .
E. C. Weatherhead and S. B. Andersen, Nature, 2006, 441, 39 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lloyd and S. Subbarao, Energy Policy, 2009, 37, 237–245 CrossRef .
J. Jean, P. R. Brown, R. L. Jaffe, T. Buonassisi and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1200–1219 RSC .

          I. S. E. Fraunhofer, Photovoltaics Report,  2014.
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef PubMed .
A. W. Blakers, A. Wang, A. M. Milne, J. Zhao and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1989, 55, 1363–1365 CrossRef .
D. E. Carlson and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 28, 671–673 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. Aernouts, P. Vanlaeke, W. Geens, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, S. Borghs, R. Mertens, R. Andriessen and L. Leenders, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 22–25 CrossRef .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, S. N. Sariciftci, M. Glatthaar, T. Meyer and A. Meyer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 379–384 CrossRef .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061–4067 CrossRef .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, L. Ye, W. Zhao, B. Yang, Q. Wang and J. Hou, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 248–256 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-D. Chen, C. Cui, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q.-D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035–1041 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 CrossRef .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chen, W.-H. Chang, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, J. You, J. Gao, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5670–5677 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef .
G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510–4515 CrossRef .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef .
C. Kuang, G. Tang, T. Jiu, H. Yang, H. Liu, B. Li, W. Luo, X. Li, W. Zhang, F. Lu, J. Fang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2756–2762 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2010, 132, 1377–1382 Search PubMed .
Q. Wu, D. Zhao, A. M. Schneider, W. Chen and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 138, 7248–7251 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Lu, L. Ye, C. Zhan, J. Hou, S. Zhang, B. Jiang, Y. Zhao, J. Huang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Shi, Y. Liu and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5791–5797 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Wang, J. Wang, J. Hou, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5137–5142 CrossRef PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 583–590 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, O. Awartani, J. Zhao, H. Han, H. Ade, D. Zhao and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8483–8489 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Bhosale, C. H. Jani and S. J. Langford, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 331–342 RSC .
T. Earmme, Y.-J. Hwang, N. M. Murari, S. Subramaniyan and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14960–14963 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Lee, H.-W. Wang, A. Santala, F. Liu, Y. Diao, A. L. Briseno and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500195 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, B. Liu, A. Melianas, J. Bergqvist, W. Tress, Q. Bao, D. Qian, O. Inganäs and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1900–1907 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mori, H. Benten, I. Okada, H. Ohkita and S. Ito, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301006 CrossRef .
L. Gao, Z.-G. Zhang, L. Xue, J. Min, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1884–1890 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef .
Z. Fei, F. D. Eisner, X. Jiao, M. Azzouzi, J. A. Röhr, Y. Han, M. Shahid, A. S. R. Chesman, C. D. Easton, C. R. McNeill, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Nelson and M. Heeney, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705209 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, T. Yu, Z. Bi, W. Ma, Y. Li and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703973 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, B. Gao, Y. Qin, S. Zhang, B. Yang, C. He, B. Xu and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7302–7309 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Hou, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li, R. Yu, B. Gao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800613 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Che, Y. Li, Y. Qu and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 422–427 CrossRef .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1275–1302 RSC .
N. Liang, W. Jiang, J. Hou and Z. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1291–1303 RSC .
S. Li, W. Liu, C.-Z. Li, M. Shi and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1701120 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kuzmich, D. Padula, H. Ma and A. Troisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 395–401 RSC .
S. D. Collins, N. A. Ran, M. C. Heiber and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602242 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. Gu, Z. Pan, B. Zhang, X. Yang, J. Gu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10798–10814 RSC .
S. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Shi, C. Li and H. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3440–3458 RSC .
Z. Liu, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang and X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17604–17622 RSC .
Y. Ma, Z. Kang and Q. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1860–1872 RSC .
J. Yuan, J. Ouyang, V. Cimrova, M. Leclerc, A. Najari and Y. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1858–1879 RSC .
C. Zhan, X. Zhang and J. Yao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93002–93026 RSC .
C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H.-Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and I. McCulloch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2803–2812 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu and F. Gao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 206–221 RSC .
H. Fu, Z. Wang and Y. Sun, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700158 CrossRef .
Y. Lin and X. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 470–488 RSC .
S. A. Lopez, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, J. de Goes Soares and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Joule, 2017, 1, 857–870 CrossRef .
J. D. A. Lin, O. V. Mikhnenko, J. Chen, Z. Masri, A. Ruseckas, A. Mikhailovsky, R. P. Raab, J. Liu, P. W. M. Blom, M. A. Loi, C. J. García-Cervera, I. D. W. Samuel and T.-Q. Nguyen, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 280 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Zhu and Z. Wei, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700258 CrossRef .
F. Gao and O. Inganäs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20291 RSC .
U. Würfel, D. Neher, A. Spies and S. Albrecht, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6951 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, C. Li, W. Lai, A. Zhang, H. Huang and W. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1389–1395 RSC .
A. Casey, J. P. Green, P. Shakya Tuladhar, M. Kirkus, Y. Han, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6465–6470 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Wu, D. Feng, S.-T. Tsai, H.-J. Son, G. Li and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 56–57 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef .
D. Meng, D. Sun, C. Zhong, T. Liu, B. Fan, L. Huo, Y. Li, W. Jiang, H. Choi, T. Kim, J. Y. Kim, Y. Sun, Z. Wang and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 375–380 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, T.-K. Lau, T. Li, K. Liu, Q. Ling, C. Wang, X. Lu, W. You and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1336–1343 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhong, B. Gautam, H.-J. Bin, J.-D. Lin, F.-P. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z.-Q. Jiang, Z.-G. Zhang, K. Gundogdu, Y. Li and L.-S. Liao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1610–1620 RSC .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Q. He, L. Huo, Y. Wu, T. C. Parker, W. Ma, Y. Sun, C. Wang, D. Zhu, A. J. Heeger, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4955–4961 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Liu, F.-P. Wu, Y. Zhou, Z.-Q. Jiang, B. Song, Y. Xia, Z.-G. Zhang, F. Gao, O. Inganas, Y. Li and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5890–5897 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Zhong, F.-P. Wu, Y. Yuan, H.-J. Bin, Z.-Q. Jiang, Z. Zhang, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li and L.-S. Liao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3429–3435 RSC .
H. Yao, L. Ye, J. Hou, B. Jang, G. Han, Y. Cui, G. M. Su, C. Wang, B. Gao, R. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Yi, H. Y. Woo, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700254 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Han, Y. Guo, X. Song, Y. Wang and Y. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4852–4857 RSC .
M. A. Faist, T. Kirchartz, W. Gong, R. S. Ashraf, I. McCulloch, J. C. de Mello, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 685 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939–1948 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, W. Liu, T. Rehman, H.-X. Ju, J. Mai, X. Lu, M. Shi, J. Zhu, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9649–9654 RSC .
A. Mishra, M. Keshtov, A. Looser, R. Singhal, M. Stolte, F. Wurthner, P. Bauerle and G. D. Sharma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14887–14897 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganäs, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef .
Z. Yao, X. Liao, K. Gao, F. Lin, X. Xu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, F. Liu, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2054–2057 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Menke, N. A. Ran, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Joule, 2018, 2, 25–35 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Qian, L. Zhong, J.-D. Lin, Z.-Q. Jiang, Z.-G. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, L.-S. Liao and F. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 430–438 CrossRef .
H. Patil, A. Gupta, B. Alford, D. Ma, S. H. Priver, A. Bilic, P. Sonar and S. V. Bhosale, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2015, 4, 1096–1102 CrossRef .
W. Ni, M. Li, B. Kan, F. Liu, X. Wan, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 465–468 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, M. Li, W. Ni, Q. Zhang, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 366–369 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 49–56 CrossRef .
J. Wang, S. Dai, Y. Yao, P. Cheng, Y. Lin and X. Zhan, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 123, 16–25 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, G. Yang, H. Yan, J.-H. Kim, H. Ade, W. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Duan and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606054 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. U. Kim, G. E. Park, S. Choi, D. H. Lee, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7182–7190 RSC .
H. Bai, Y. Wang, P. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Hou and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1910–1914 RSC .
P. Cheng, H. Bai, N. K. Zawacka, T. R. Andersen, W. Liu, E. Bundgaard, M. Jorgensen, H. Chen, F. C. Krebs and X. Zhan, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500096 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, Y. Lin, M. Beliatis, E. Bundgaard, M. Jorgensen, F. C. Krebs and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1044–1051 RSC .
Y. Lin, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, J. Wang, Y. Yao, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 610–616 RSC .
H. Lin, S. Chen, Z. Li, J. Y. L. Lai, G. Yang, T. McAfee, K. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, H. Hu, J. Zhao, W. Ma, H. Ade and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7299–7304 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, T. Li, Y. Wu, C. Wang, L. Han, Y. Yao, W. Ma and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1486–1494 RSC .
W. Liu, S. Li, J. Huang, S. Yang, J. Chen, L. Zuo, M. Shi, X. Zhan, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9729–9734 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yan, Y. Wu, J. Wang, R. Li, P. Cheng, H. Bai, Z. Zhan, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 139, 627–634 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, H. Bai and X. Zhan, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 744–749 CrossRef .
H. Yao, Y. Chen, Y. Qin, R. Yu, Y. Cui, B. Yang, S. Li, K. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8283–8287 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qin, Y. Chen, Y. Cui, S. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Huang, W. Li, Z. Zheng and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606340 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Zhang, T. Vergote, H. Fan, F. Liu and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15523–15526 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Hu, T. Vergote, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606574 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Feng, M. Li, L. Wu, R. Hou, X. Xu, X. Chen and Z. Bo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3356–3359 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, H. Bai, Z. Wang, P. Cheng, S. Zhu, Y. Wang, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3215–3221 RSC .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C.-H. Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jia, Y. Wu, F. Zhao, C. Yan, S. Zhu, P. Cheng, J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C.-J. Su, C. Wang and X. Zhan, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 257–263 CrossRef .
B. Fan, W. Zhong, X.-F. Jiang, Q. Yin, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602127 CrossRef .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, J. Yang, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 410–414 CrossRef .
Q.-Y. Li, J. Xiao, L.-M. Tang, H.-C. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Yang, H.-L. Yip and Y.-X. Xu, Org. Electron., 2017, 44, 217–224 CrossRef .
Q. He, T. Li, C. Yan, Y. Liu, J. Wang, M. Wang, Y. Lin and X. Zhan, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 128, 226–234 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Q. He, F. Zhao, L. Huo, J. Mai, X. Lu, C.-J. Su, T. Li, J. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Wang and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2973–2976 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bin, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, L. Ye, M. Ghasem, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, C. Sun, L. Xue, C. Yang, H. Ade and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5085–5094 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Zhang, C. He, J. Zhang, H. Yao, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1958–1966 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, T. Li, F. Zhao, L. Han, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. He, J. Wang, L. Huo, Y. Sun, C. Wang, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600854 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Y. Wu, K. Chen, Y. Xia, G. Li, S. K. K. Prasad, J. Zhu, L. Huo, H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, X. Guo, M. Zhang, Y. Sun, F. Gao, Z. Wei, W. Ma, C. Wang, J. Hodgkiss, Z. Bo, O. Inganas, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604155 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Mi, H. Liu, Z. Guo, G. Bie, W. Wei, C. Gao and Z. An, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 140, 261–268 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Yan, T.-K. Lau, J. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701308 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gao, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bin, L. Xue, Y. Yang, C. Wang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8288–8295 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Chen, L. Zhong, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4657–4664 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bin, L. Gao, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Xue, C. Yang, M. Xiao and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13651 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qin, M. A. Uddin, Y. Chen, B. Jang, K. Zhao, Z. Zheng, R. Yu, T. J. Shin, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9416–9422 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ding, J. Yuan, F. Jin, Y. Zhang, L. Han, X. Ling, H. Zhao and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 356–365 CrossRef .
H. Yao, R. Yu, T. J. Shin, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Jang, M. A. Uddin, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600742 CrossRef .
D. Xia, Y. Wu, Q. Wang, A. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Lin, F. J. M. Colberts, J. J. van Franeker, R. A. J. Janssen, X. Zhan, W. Hu, Z. Tang, W. Ma and W. Li, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 6445–6454 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, L. Qiu, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Zou, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 312–320 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganas, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fan, K. Zhang, X.-F. Jiang, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606396 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, Y. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Wu, G. Feng, C. Li, W. Ma and W. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8069–8075 RSC .
F. Lin, W. Huang, H. Sun, J. Xin, H. Zeng, T. Yang, M. Li, X. Zhang, W. Ma and Y. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5636–5645 CrossRef .
L. Qiu, H. Peng, Y. Liu, B. Qiu, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Org. Electron., 2017, 45, 42–48 CrossRef .
J. Wang, J. Peng, X. Liu and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20704–20710 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Zhang, B. Xu, S. Li, B. Yang, W. Yuan and J. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4825–4833 CrossRef .
S. Xu, L. Feng, J. Yuan, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Peng and Y. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18816–18825 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, O. M. Awartani, B. Gautam, D. Liu, Y. Qin, W. Li, A. Bataller, K. Gundogdu, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604241 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Liu, X. Gong, S. Feng, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9559–9566 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhong, L. Gao, H. Bin, Q. Hu, Z.-G. Zhang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602215 CrossRef .
W. Su, Q. Fan, X. Guo, X. Meng, Z. Bi, W. Ma, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 510–517 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, M. A. Uddin, B. Jang, W. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 2993–3000 CrossRef .
S. Chen, H. Yao, Z. Li, O. M. Awartani, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Ade and H. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602304 CrossRef .
T. Liu, X. Xue, L. Huo, X. Sun, Q. An, F. Zhang, T. P. Russell, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2914–2920 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bin, S. Chen, L. Gao, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15011–15018 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bin, L. Zhong, Y. Yang, L. Gao, H. Huang, C. Sun, X. Li, L. Xue, Z.-G. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700746 CrossRef .
D. Liu, B. Yang, B. Jang, B. Xu, S. Zhang, C. He, H. Y. Woo and J. Hou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 546–551 RSC .
W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604059 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, S. Li, X. Liu, H. Yao, F. Wang, S. Zhang, M. Sun and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15175–15182 RSC .
F. Zhao, S. Dai, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Jiang, Q. Ling, Z. Wei, W. Ma, W. You, C. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700144 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Feng, S. Xu, J. Yuan, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11286–11293 RSC .
D. Xie, T. Liu, W. Gao, C. Zhong, L. Huo, Z. Luo, K. Wu, W. Xiong, F. Liu, Y. Sun and C. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700044 CrossRef .
H. Bai, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, R. Li, P. Cheng, M. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Ma and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20758–20766 RSC .
N. Qiu, H. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Ke, H. Feng, B. Kan, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604964 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Feng, X. Xu, J. Song and Z. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7776–7783 RSC .
Q. Cao, W. Xiong, H. Chen, G. Cai, G. Wang, L. Zheng and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7451–7461 RSC .
J. Wei, Q. Tu and Q. Zheng, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 144, 133–141 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Zhong, J.-D. Lin, F.-P. Wu, H.-J. Bin, Z. Zhang, L. Xu, Z.-Q. Jiang, Z.-G. Zhang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, Y. Li, L.-S. Liao and S. R. Forrest, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700107 CrossRef .
B. Kan, H. Feng, X. Wan, F. Liu, X. Ke, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Li, J. Hou and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4929–4934 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kan, J. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Ke, Y. Wang, H. Feng, Y. Zhang, G. Long, R. H. Friend, A. A. Bakulin and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704904 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Ma, W. You and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702125 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1562–1564 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia, D. Li, S. Wang, X. Geng, F. Liu, J. Chen, S. Yang, T. P. Russell and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1494–1496 CrossRef .
X. Shi, J. Chen, K. Gao, L. Zuo, Z. Yao, F. Liu, J. Tang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702831 CrossRef .
T. Li, S. Dai, Z. Ke, L. Yang, J. Wang, C. Yan, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705969 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jia, S. Dai, Z. Ke, C. Yan, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 30, 239–245 CrossRef .
S. Li, W. Liu, C.-Z. Li, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, M. Shi and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14983–14987 RSC .
T. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Xiao, J. J. Rech, H. Niu, W. You and L. Ding, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 700–703 RSC .
P. Wang, H. Fan, C. Zhang and X. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 136–142 RSC .
H. Fan, T. Vergote, S. Xu, S. Chen, C. Yang and X. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 760–767 RSC .
Z. Liao, Y. Wang, Y. An, Y. Tan, X. Meng, F. Wu, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700706 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Luo, T. Liu, W. Cheng, K. Wu, D. Xie, L. Huo, Y. Sun and C. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1136–1142 RSC .
R. Lu, Y. Han, W. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Fei, T. Hodsden, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Heeney, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2004–2009 RSC .
X. Liu, B. Xie, C. Duan, Z. Wang, B. Fan, K. Zhang, B. Lin, F. J. M. Colberts, W. Ma, R. A. J. Janssen, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 395–403 RSC .
J. Sun, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, J. Zhou, L. Yang, R. Geng, F. Zhang, R. Zhu, J. Yu and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2549–2554 RSC .
R. Hou, M. Li, S. Feng, Y. Liu, L. Wu, Z. Bi, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3724–3729 RSC .
Z. Zhang and X. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4266–4270 RSC .
H. Huang, X. Li, L. Zhong, B. Qiu, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4670–4677 RSC .
W. Jiang, R. Yu, Z. Liu, R. Peng, D. Mi, L. Hong, Q. Wei, J. Hou, Y. Kuang and Z. Ge, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703005 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, L. Zhan, F. Liu, J. Ren, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, T. P. Russell and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705208 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, J. Chen, K. Gao, L. Zuo, Z. Yao, F. Liu, J. Tang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702831 CrossRef .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, S. Li, C. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Hou, W. You and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705485 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Luo, H. Bin, T. Liu, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Zhong, B. Qiu, G. Li, W. Gao, D. Xie, K. Wu, Y. Sun, F. Liu, Y. Li and C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706124 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, S. Dai, Z. Ke, L. Yang, J. Wang, C. Yan, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705969 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, T. Li, W. Wang, Y. Xiao, T.-K. Lau, Z. Li, K. Liu, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706571 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, S. K. K. Prasad, J.-D. Chen, W. Cai, Q. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Wu, W. Ma, F. Gao, J.-X. Tang, C. Wang, W. You, J. M. Hodgkiss and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706363 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, X. Ma, Z. Zhang, J. Yu, J. Zhou, X. Yin, L. Yang, R. Geng, R. Zhu, F. Zhang and W. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707150 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, L. Ye, S. Li, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707170 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zuo, X. Shi, S. B. Jo, Y. Liu, F. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706816 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, M. Li, J. Song, Y. Zhou, Z. Bo and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705927 CrossRef .
W. Wu, G. Zhang, X. Xu, S. Wang, Y. Li and Q. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707493 CrossRef .
R. Yu, H. Yao and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702814 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Fang, X. Zhu, B. Xia, K. Lu, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Guo and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702377 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, Y. Jin, S. Dong, W. Zheng, J. Yang, A. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Jiang, T. P. Russell, F. Zhang, F. Huang and L. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1701942 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, N. Qiu, H. Feng, H. Gao, B. Kan, Y. Ma, C. Li, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702870 CrossRef .
A. D. de Zerio and C. Müller, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702741 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Lei, H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701757 CrossRef .
M. Jeong, S. Chen, S. M. Lee, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, Y. Li and C. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702166 CrossRef .
Y. Li, G. Xu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701791 CrossRef .
X. Che, C.-L. Chung, C.-C. Hsu, F. Liu, K.-T. Wong and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1703603 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, M. J. Ford, F. Li, J. Sun, X. Ling, Y. Wang, J. Gu, J. Yuan and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1800029 CrossRef .
S. Feng, C. Liu, X. Xu, X. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Nian, Y. Cao and J. Chen, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 1310–1314 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. Liu, S. Yang, C. Fu, Y. Li, Q. Li and Z. Huai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7271–7280 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huo, C. Yan, B. Kan, X.-F. Liu, L.-C. Chen, C.-X. Hu, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C.-L. Sun, X. Shao, Y. Chen, X. Zhan and H.-L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9587–9594 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Yu, X. Yin, Z. Hu, Y. Jiang, J. Sun, J. Zhou, F. Zhang, T. P. Russell, F. Liu and W. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705095 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Y. Zou, H. L. Yip, K. S. Chen, D. F. Zeigler, Y. Sun and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2289 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, C. Chueh, H. Yip, F. Ding, Y. Li, C. Li, X. Li, W. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6356–6361 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yao, X. Liao, K. Gao, F. Lin, X. Xu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, F. Liu, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2054–2057 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Huang, H. Bin, Z. Peng, C. Zhu, L. Xue, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Ade and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10130–10138 CrossRef .
X. Li, T. Yan, H. Bin, G. Han, L. Xue, F. Liu, Y. Yi, Z. Zhang, T. P. Russelle and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22588–22597 RSC .
S. Feng, C. e. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Bi, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703527 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, L. Zhong, F. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, H. Bin, Z. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Fan, Z. Zhang, L. Liao, Z. Jiang and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2018 DOI:10.1007/s11426-018-9275-6 .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Yao, L. Xue, S. Chen, X. Li, W. Morrison, C. Yang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13503–13507 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Cnops, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, B. Verreet, M. A. Empl and P. Heremans, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3406 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Lin, X. Che, Y. Qu, F. Liu, L.-S. Liao and S. R. Forres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17114–17119 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, K. Zhang, Q. Yin, X.-F. Jiang, Z. Wang, J. Xin, W. Ma, H. Yan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2387–2395 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, P. Shen, X. Dong, C. Weng, G. Wang, H. Bin, J. Zhang, Z. G. Zhang and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4614–4625 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, H. Sasabe, T. Sano and J. Kido, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2021–2025 CrossRef .
B. Qiu, L. Xue, Y. Yang, H. Bin, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, K. Park, W. Morrison, Z.-G. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7543–7553 CrossRef .
Z. Ji, X. Xu, G. Zhang, Y. Li and Q. Peng, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 214–223 CrossRef .
H. Yao, D. Qian, H. Zhang, Y. Qin, B. Xu, Y. Cui, R. Yu, F. Gao and J. Hou, Chin. J. Chem., 2018, 36, 491–494 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Zuo-Quan Jiang	Zuo-Quan Jiang obtained his organic chemistry Ph.D. degree from Wuhan University in 2009. He joined the Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) of Soochow University as associate Professor in 2011 after two years of post-doctoral training at the University of Washington and City University of Hong Kong. In 2015, he took a one-year collaborative study with Prof. Seth R. Marder at Georgia Institute of Technology as visiting scholar. In 2017, he was promoted to a full Professor in FUNSOM. His current research interests focus on the design and synthesis of novel conjugated optoelectronic materials.
Tong-Tong Wang	Tong-Tong Wang received her bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2017. Currently, she is a graduate student in chemistry at FUNSOM of Soochow University. Her research interests focuses on the synthesis of conjugated molecules for organic solar cells.
Fu-Peng Wu	Fu-Peng Wu received his master's degree from Soochow University in 2018 and he is now a Ph.D. candidate at the Technical University of Dresden. He is interested in the synthesis and application of organic n-type semiconductors.
Jiu-Dong Lin	Jiu-Dong Lin received his master's degree from Soochow University in 2018. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of non-fullerene acceptor materials in organic solar cells.
Liang-Sheng Liao	Liang-Sheng Liao received his Ph.D. degree in Physics from Nanjing University in 1996, and then he joined in the department of physics of Fudan University as postdoc fellow (1996–1997) and associate Professor (1997–2000). After working at Eastman Kodak Company as a Senior Research Scientist from 2000 to 2009, he joined the FUNSOM of Soochow University as a full Professor. He has over 20 years' research experience in organic optoelectronics and now is also working on industrialization in the Institute of Organic Optoelectronics (IOO) as executive director. His current research interests include materials and architectures of OLEDs, quantum dot LEDs, organic solar cells, and perovskite solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  Structure of BHJ OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Operating principles of non-fullerene organic solar cells. (b) Important parameters for OSCs.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  The relationship between Voc and Jsc.	 

 	Fig. 4  Origin of energy loss.	 

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structures of acceptors based on tricyclic backbones.	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structures of acceptors based on five-cycle backbones.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE curves, (c) light intensity dependence, and (d) photocurrent versus effective voltage for the IEICO-based and IEIC-based PSC devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Simulated molecular geometries obtained by DFT calculations for simplified molecules of IDT-BC6 and IDT-BOC6. (b) Possible rotamers (BO-C and Th-BOC) in IDT-BOC6 and (c) potential energy surface scan of BO-C and Th-BOC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The J–V curves of devices based on P3HT:IDT-2BR (1:0.6, w/w) processed with different CN concentrations under the illumination of AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2; (b) IPCE curves of corresponding devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of acceptors based on six-cycle backbones.	 

 	Scheme 4  Chemical structures of acceptors with IDTT-based seven-cycle backbones.	 

 	Fig. 8  Tapping mode AFM (3 × 3 μm2) topography images and corresponding phase images of: J81:ITIC (a, e) as-cast film, (b, f) thermal annealed film; and J81:m-ITIC, (c, g) as-cast film, (d, h) thermal annealed film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Normalized UV-vis absorption spectra of polymer donor PBDB-T and three SMAs (ITIC, IT-M, and IT-DM) in the film state. (b) Schematic energy-levels diagrams of MoO3, PBDB-T, ITIC, IT-M, IT-DM, and ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) J–V curve and histogram (inset) of PCE measurements for 60 PBDB-T-SF:IT-4F-based cells; (b) EQE curve and (c) device performance parameters (PCE, JSC, VOC, and FF) versus the active layer thickness. (d) Storage stability of PBDB-T SF:IT-4F-based OSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of molecular stacking of the highly efficient A–D–A-structured SM acceptor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a, c) Molecular structures of electron donor and electron acceptor materials in (a) front and (c) rear cells. (d) Molecular structure of the interconnection layer, PCP-Na, in tandem cells. (b) Device architecture of tandem OSCs. (e) Molecular structure of ITIC. (f) Schematic energy level diagram of each material used in this study. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 5  Chemical structures of acceptors based on other seven-cycle backbones.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE spectra, (c) Jphversus Veff characteristics, and (d) Jscversus light intensity of the optimized devices with the structure of ITO/ZnO/FTAZ:acceptor/MoOx/Ag. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Transient absorption spectra of blended film J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) at 1.62 eV excitation; (b) blended film J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) at 1.62 eV excitation; (c) dynamics of the J61:BT-IC (1:1, w/w) blended film; (d) dynamics of the J71:BT-IC (1:1.5, w/w) blended film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 6  Chemical structures of acceptors based on other backbones.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3 in chloroform and (b) as a thin film; (c) cyclic voltammograms for INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3; and (d) energy levels for FTAZ, INIC, INIC1, INIC2, and INIC3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 7  The structural analysis of ITIC for further modification.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthetic routes of IDT and IDTT.	 

 	Scheme 9  Chemical structures of common end electron-withdrawing groups.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structures of IDT-IC, SJ-IC and the corresponding p electronic structures calculated with density functional theory at the B3LYP/6-31G (d, p) level. (b) Synthetic route to SJ-IC. (c) Chemical structure of the donor polymer J61. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 10  Common used side chains.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The structures of IDTT and BDCPDT backbones; (b) three possible ways for modifying ladder-type electron acceptors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  The structures of ITIC and ITC6-IC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Current–density–voltage characteristics of semitransparent OPVs (STOPVs) based on PCE-10:BT-CIC (1:1.5, w/w) with different Ag cathode thicknesses. (b) Transmission spectra of the corresponding STOPVs with different Ag thicknesses. (c) Outdoor image through a STOPV incorporating a 10 nm thick Ag layer, and (d) CIE coordinates of transmission spectra of devices with different Ag thicknesses using a AM1.5G solar simulated input spectrum (denoted by ‘+’), 10 nm thick Ag (‘□’ square), 15 nm Ag (‘○’ circle), and 20 nm Ag (‘△’ triangle). Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) PEDOT:PSS PH1000 and ZnO coated PET flexible substrate with an Ag grid (ITO-free substrate), (b) slot-die coating of the active layer of PTB7-TH:IEIC and top PEDOT:PSS layer on the mini roll-coater in sequence, (c) flexographic printing of the top Ag electrode, and (d) long stripes of roll-coated non-fullerene OSCs based on the ITO-free substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
ACV	Average composition variation
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AVT	Average visible transmittance
BHJ	Bulk heterojunction
CN	1-Chloronaphthalene
DIO	1,8-Diiodooctane
EDG	Electron donating group

E
g
	Band gap energy

E
loss
	Energy loss
EWG	Electron withdrawing group
FF	Fill factor
GISAXS	Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering
GIWAXS	Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering
GIXRD	Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
ICT	Intramolecular charge transfer
IDT	Indacenodithiophene
IQE	Internal quantum efficiency

J
sc
	Short-circuit current density
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
NDI	Naphthalene diimides
NFA	Non-fullerene acceptor
NIR	Near infrared region
OLED	Organic light emitting diodes
OSC	Organic solar cell
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PDI	Perylene diimide

P
in
	Energy of incident light
RMS	Root-mean-square
R-SoXS	Resonant soft X-ray scattering
TEM	Transmission electron microscope

V
oc
	Open-circuit voltage
XRD	X-ray diffraction

μ
e
	Electron mobility

μ
h
	Hole mobility

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
