Towards the environmentally friendly solution processing of metal halide perovskite technology  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01756J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01756J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 5302-5336Towards the environmentally friendly solution processing of metal halide perovskite technology

        
          
            Minh Tam 
            Hoang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Feray 
            Ünlü
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wayde 
            Martens
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            John 
            Bell
          
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Sanjay 
            Mathur
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Hongxia 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemistry and Physics, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia. E-mail: hx.wang@qut.edu.au
bCentre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
cInstitute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Cologne, 50939 Cologne, Germany
dResearch and Innovation Division, University of South Queensland, Springfield, Qld 4300, Queensland, Australia
Received 
      18th May 2021
    , Accepted 23rd June 2021First published on 23rd June 2021AbstractMetal halide perovskite materials have demonstrated unique properties for applications in optoelectrical devices such as solar cells, light-emitting diodes and photodetectors. The unprecedented world-record energy conversion efficiency of over 25% achieved with solution-processed perovskite solar cells is escalating research towards the commercialisation of the perovskite materials. Nevertheless, the use of large amounts of hazardous and carcinogenic solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and skin-penetrating dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in the current perovskite synthesis protocols are limited for the commercial uptake of perovskite technology as these detrimental solvents can cause environmental, health and safety issues. Therefore, the development of alternative environmentally-friendly, green solvents for the synthesis of perovskite materials including thin films, nanocrystals or single-crystals with desirable properties is critical for the commercialisation of perovskite technologies. In this review, we summarize the research progress of solution-processable perovskite material using low-toxic and green solvent alternatives. We discuss the fundamental properties that need to be considered in screening solvents for the solution processing of metal halide perovskites. By carefully analysing the common features of solvents and anti-solvent systems that have been reported for making perovskite precursor inks for applications in solar cells and light-emitting diodes, we provide insight into the relationship between the solvent molecular ligand – properties of perovskite materials – device performance. We discuss the advantages and challenges of each type of green solvent based on their performance in metal halide perovskite technology, effects on the environment, human health and safety, aiming to provide guidelines towards green metal halide perovskite technology.Minh Tam HoangMinh Tam Hoang received his M.S. from Kumoh National Institute of Technology, South Korea, in 2016. He is currently a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Prof. Hongxia Wang at Queensland University of Technology, Australia. His main research interest is focused on the perovskite materials for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications, specializing in perovskite nanocrystals.Feray ÜnlüFeray Ünlü is a Ph.D. student at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Cologne under the supervision of Prof. Sanjay Mathur. She received her Master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Cologne. She currently works on the compositional engineering and solution chemistry of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites.Wayde MartensDr Wayde Martens is a Senior Lecturer at the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane, Australia. Dr Martens’ research interests are centred on the synthesis and characterisation of nanomaterials for a diverse range of applications such as water purification and energy storage. He specialises in analytical chemistry, vibrational spectroscopy, and the application of machine learning to analytical chemistry.John BellJohn Bell is the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research and Innovation) at the University of Southern Queensland. Prior to joining USQ, Professor Bell was the Head of the School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering at the Queensland University of Technology. John has led projects in the development of energy-efficient smart windows, dye-sensitised solar cell development, and carbonaceous materials. He also has expertise in the area of energy efficiency and occupant comfort in buildings and has carried out extensive research with industry. Professor Bell has received over $28 million in research funding during his 30-year career as a researcher.Sanjay MathurSanjay Mathur is Director of the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Cologne. An Academician of the World Academy of Ceramics, he is a Fellow of the American Ceramic Society and the ASM International. He is the Founder Co-Director of the Institute of Renewable Energy Sources, Xian Jiao Tong University, China, and a World Class University Professor at the Chonbuk University in Korea. He is a SPARC Foreign Faculty at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. His research focuses on the application of nanomaterials and advanced ceramics for energy and health technologies. He holds several patents and has authored/co-authored over 500 original research publications (h-index, 63) and co-edited 13 books.Hongxia WangHongxia Wang is a full professor at Queensland University of Technology, Australia. Her main research interest is in the development of new routes for low-cost solar cells and energy storage devices, with her current research focus being on perovskite solar cells and supercapacitors. She has received several prestigious awards, including the Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship, ARC postdoctoral fellow industry, and the “Solar Energy Journal Best Paper Award for 2016 in the topic of Photovoltaics” by the International Solar Energy Society.
1. Introduction
Semiconductor materials based on metal halide perovskites, which can be described by the general chemical formula of ABX3 (A = methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), Cs+; B = Pb2+, Sn2+; X = Cl−, Br−, I−) have attracted significant attention in the scientific and industrial communities due to their exceptional performance in solar cells and other optoelectrical devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Solar cells that use metal halide perovskites as the light-absorbing materials have demonstrated very competitive power conversion efficiencies (PCE), with the current world record efficiency of over 25% being achieved with low-cost solution processing methods, making it one of the most attractive photovoltaic technologies that can deliver cost-effective solar electricity in the future.1 Solution-processed perovskite-based LEDs with tuneable colour have also achieved remarkable efficiencies. The recorded external quantum efficiency of 21.6% was reported for near-infrared perovskite LEDs, and 23.4% was reported for green perovskite LEDs.2,3 These breakthroughs are attributed to the unique physical and chemical properties of the perovskite materials, including strong light absorption over a broad solar spectrum, long charge carrier life-times,4 high charge carrier mobility and radiative efficiencies,5 low exciton binding energy,6,7 and high tolerance to defects, to name a few.8,9 High-quality perovskite materials in the form of thin films or nanocrystals made by cost-effective solution processing involves dissolving a high concentration (e.g., >0.5 M) of solid perovskite precursor such as lead halides (PbX2: X = I, Br, Cl) and AX (A = MA+, FA+, Cs+; X = I−, Br−, Cl−) in a suitable solvent, which is then used to deposit perovskite films with controlled thickness by spin coating or other printing technology.10 The solvent(s) is then removed by heating the perovskite precursor films at mild temperature (up to 350 °C). The hazardous solvents used in the current protocol for the solution-processing of high-quality perovskite thin films can cause undesirable effects on human and environmental health, such as fertility impairment by N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), skin-penetration by dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), or carcinogenic N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), chlorobenzene (CB) and toluene (TL).11,12 These health and safety concerns associated with exposure to these solvents in the solution processing of perovskite materials may restrict the commercialisation of perovskite-based technologies.
Other deposition techniques like thermal evaporation can also be used to make perovskite films without using hazardous solvents. For example, thermal evaporation of perovskite precursors such as PbI2 and MAI have been developed to fabricate perovskite films. However, the performance of the device is generally lower as compared to solution-based devices.13–16 Considering the simplicity and cost-effectiveness of solution processing, it is anticipated that the large scale production of perovskite film-based devices will be mainly done by solution deposition techniques like slot-die coating or roll-to-roll printing, which are practically and economically more attractive. Although vacuum-based fabrication procedures such as thermal evaporation have also been reported for perovskite film fabrication, the shortcomings of vacuum-based deposition method are the large energy consumption, and the size of the device is restricted by the vacuum deposition chamber. These drawbacks make them less attractive, thus less likely to be the main method for the commercialization of perovskite-based technology. Therefore, the development of solution processing routes that use environmentally benign, biocompatible solvent alternatives with minimal health and safety concerns is of high importance for the large-scale production of perovskite materials for various applications. Recently, alternative less toxic solvents or solvent systems for solution processing perovskite materials have been explored. Understanding the chemistry of the perovskite precursor solution, in particular the correlation of the molecule structure of the solvent with the corresponding properties of perovskite thin films or crystals is critical for the development of green solution processing of perovskite technology. The use of lead is another environmental concern in metal halide perovskite technology. Research on the development of lead-free perovskite materials has been well reviewed in the literature.17–20 Since it seems the presence of lead is essential for making high-performance perovskite-based optoelectrical devices including solar cells and LEDs, this review focuses on the research progress in the use of green solvents for the synthesis of metal halide perovskites (MHP) by solution processing technology. It should be noted that the deposition of charge transport layers in perovskite-based optoelectronic devices can also involve solvents and some of the solvent could be hazardous, depending on the materials. Due to the unique properties of the perovskite materials, they have also demonstrated promising performance in many other areas beyond optoelectronic devices such as energy storage devices, electrocatalytic water splitting, etc., where charge transport materials may or may not be involved. Since the perovskite material is the core component in all these applications, this review only focuses on perovskite synthesis by solution processing, in particular, the development of environmentally friendly solvents for use in solution-processed perovskite fabrication. We first discuss the general material properties and synthesis protocol of MHP. This is followed by the discussion of the fundamental properties of solvents associated with their use in solution processing MHP material synthesis and the development of solubility theory for solvent screening for MHPs. We then provide a detailed summary and discussion of green solvents or solvent systems that have been used to make precursor solutions for perovskite materials, or used as anti-solvents to enhance the morphology and crystallisation of perovskite films. The green solvents or solvent systems for solution processing perovskite materials are classified based on the characteristic chemical ligands in the solvent molecule. The relationship of the molecular structure of solvents with their solvation capability for solid perovskite precursors including lead halides and halide salts AX (A = MA, FA, Cs), and the effect of the characteristic chemical ligands of an anti-solvent molecules on the nucleation, grain growth and crystallisation of perovskite films are discussed. Finally, we remark on the challenges and strategies for creating the safe and sustainable fabrication of metal halide perovskite technology.
2. Metal halide perovskite material properties and synthesis protocol
As mentioned above, metal halide perovskites (MHP) have a general chemical formula, ABX3, which usually adopts a stable cubic crystal structure. As shown in Fig. 1a, A is a monovalent cation that occupies the centre void of a cubic framework formed by the [BX6]4− species. A can be an organic component such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), or inorganic such as cesium (Cs+); B is a divalent metal cation, e.g. lead or tin and X is a mono-anion such as a halide or a mixture of halides (iodide, bromide or chloride). In addition to the cubic 3D structure, low-dimensional perovskite-type materials with large A-site cations (e.g. butylammonium, BA+) have been reported, in which the metal halide octahedra form edge-, face-, and/or corner-sharing networks leading to 2D layered perovskites, 1D chains or 0D isolated octahedra (Fig. 1a).21 These low-dimensional perovskites often exhibit larger exciton binding energies due to strong quantum confinement and site isolation, which is more favourable for applications requiring exciton radiative recombination such as light-emitting diodes and pumped lasers.21–23 MHP in the form of thin films, nanocrystals (NCs) or single-crystals have been made for different applications (Fig. 1b–d). Regardless of the material composition, the most widely used method for the synthesis of the MHP is based on solution processing. To make MHP thin films, spin coating or printing techniques are often used to deposit perovskite precursor solutions containing PbX2 (X = I, Br, Cl) and MA (FA, Cs)X in a polar aprotic coordinating organic solvent or solvent mixture, usually DMF and DMSO, on a suitable substrate. In order to enhance the grain morphology of the perovskite thin films with large grain sizes and uniform coverage, anti-solvent treatment is used as an additional step during solution processing. The anti-solvent is usually an organic (non-polar) solvent such as diethyl ether (DE) or chlorobenzene (CB), which does not dissolve the perovskite.24 These organic solvents evaporate during subsequent film heating to form the perovskite compound. The detrimental effect of the solvent vapour not only causes air pollution, but exposure to the vapour contaminated atmosphere also causes health issues for the operators and other people in the workplace.25–27 As evaluated by the life-cycle assessment of solution-processed perovskite photovoltaic modules, the direct emission of organic solvents during the manufacturing of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) contributes up to 85% of photo chemically generated summer smog by the whole module.28 Regarding the health effects of these solvents, the use of DMF in industry is restricted for women due to its impact on the reproduction of women while DE and CB are classified as highly hazardous in the pharmaceutical industry due to their toxic effects on the human brain, liver and kidneys.25 High exposure to DE and CB can cause unconsciousness and even death.29,30
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of cubic ABX3 perovskite and the low-dimensional perovskite network variations 2D, 1D and 0D, by slicing the 3D network along the crystallographic planes. Reprinted with permission from Yao et al.21 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2021. Examples of perovskites with different morphologies for different applications: (b) perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from Hoang et al.31 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. (c) Perovskite thin film in a perovskite solar cell (PSC) configuration. Reprinted with permission from Pham et al.32 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021. (d) Centimetre-sized perovskite single-crystal. Reprinted with permission from Liu et al.33 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2015. 
In the solution processing of perovskite materials, the solvent plays an important role, controlling the morphology, crystallinity and phase purity of the perovskite films, and therefore their performance in PSCs and other optoelectronic devices. A high concentration of PbX2 in perovskite precursors (usually 0.5–2 M or ∼230–922 mg ml−1 for PbI2, for instance) is required to deposit a reasonably thick film for efficient light absorption in PV applications. The most widely used deposition methods for the solution processing of perovskites are based on spin coating for small-sized PSCs (<1 cm2). For large-sized devices that are needed in practice, coating technologies such as slot-die coating,34 inkjet printing,35 spray coating,36 as well as roll-to-roll printing,37 have been explored to make the MHP films. As depicted in Fig. 2, large amounts of noxious solvent(s) such as DMF, DMSO, NMP or dimethylacetamide (DMAc) are used to dissolve PbX2 and AX to make perovskite precursor solutions in all these solution processing fabrication methods.38–42
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the solution processing of perovskite materials. The perovskite precursor is dissolved in suitable solvents to form the perovskite inks. The ink then is used for the growth of perovskite single-crystals, perovskite nanocrystals and perovskite thin film by different solution deposition techniques including spin coating, inkjet printing, spray coating, sheet-to-sheet blade coating, and roll-to-roll blade coating. 
3. Solution chemistry in perovskite precursor inks
Understanding the nature of the species present in the perovskite precursor solution is crucial for obtaining precise control over the nucleation and crystallization of perovskite grains and their film morphologies, which ultimately impact the device performance. As described above, the main components in perovskite inks are the salts of divalent Pb or Sn metals that exhibit a high propensity to form tri-halide anions (MX3−; M = Sn(II), Pb(II); X = halide). The divalent lead cation (Pb2+) is prone to undergo various complexations with O-, N-, or S-donor ligand of solvents, as well as with halide ions.43 Despite having an electron configuration of [Xe] 4f14 5d10 6s2 with fully occupied d-orbitals and thus no d–d transitions, they exhibit intraatomic and charge transfer transitions, making the probing of Pb(II) chemistry accessible by spectroscopic methods. Additionally, the 6s2 electron lone pair and strong spin–orbit coupling result in various interesting and useful electronic and structural effects manifested in the unique optoelectronic properties of hybrid perovskites.44 Recently, lead chemistry in the perovskite inks was investigated by spectroscopic techniques such as UV-vis absorption,45 photoluminescence46 and Raman spectroscopy47 to gain more insight into metal–solvent interactions. Studies on aqueous lead iodide solutions with the addition of iodide salt go back to the 1920s when it was observed that the addition of iodides facilitated the solubility of PbI2.48 Lanford and Kiehl presumed two possible equilibria involving the formation of the complex anions PbI3− and PbI42− when PbI2 and KI were dissolved in water.49 These complexes were investigated by Horvath and Miko in acetonitrile (ACN) solution via absorption spectroscopy showing characteristic ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) transitions at 366 and 408 nm, respectively. Furthermore, photolysis experiments indicated that under irradiation, the triiodide anion I3− was formed as the predominant species in the presence of oxygen.50 These findings are very important, considering the solution aging effects of the perovskite inks on the resulting thin film quality. In the context of hybrid perovskite research, Kamat and co-workers have reported on the absorption spectra of non-stoichiometric MAPbI3 DMF solutions, confirming the early reported iodoplumbate equilibria: PbI2 + I− ⇌ PbI3−(1) PbI3− + I− ⇌ PbI42−(2)
They showed that the organic cation does not actively play a role in the complexation, leading to the conclusion that lead halide complexes are the primary nucleation species.51 In a study regarding defect formation in perovskite thin films, Stewart et al. observed that the concentration of the PbI42− was decisive for the formation of traps, with trap densities increasing with increasing MAI content (Fig. 3d) and higher PbI2 concentrations in DMSO (Fig. 3a). Interestingly, PbCl2 was found to be inert against dissolution to chloroplumbates in DMSO (Fig. 3b) and higher amounts of PbI42− were suppressed upon the addition of excess MAI (Fig. 3e). These observations indicate the importance of identifying solvent systems conducive to the stability of the perovskite solution. Although all analysed precursor solutions with different stoichiometries resulted in crystalline perovskite thin films with similar optical band gaps, the recombination rates were affected by the MAI concentration in both PbI2 and PbCl2 solutions, with PbCl2-based solutions producing films with lower trap densities (Fig. 3c and f).52
 Fig. 3  Solution chemistry in perovskite precursor solutions in DMSO: (a) iodoplumbates in PbI2 solution; (b) no chloroplumbates in PbCl2 solution; (c) PL emissions of perovskite thin films from different inks; (d) absorption spectra of the MAI/PbI2 inks showing iodoplumbates and increasing amounts of PbI42− with increasing MAI; (e) absorption spectra of the MAI/PbCl2 inks showing iodoplumbates; (f) charge carrier recombination rates as a function of the trap densities of the perovskite thin films obtained from the investigated inks. Reprinted with permission from Stewart et al.52 Copyright American Chemical Society 2016. 
In contrast to the above results, Mastria et al. demonstrated that a higher degree of PbI2 complexation, which was achieved by the addition of HI, led to a lower density of trap states. Interestingly, the work showed that HI addition resulted in smaller grains and better power conversion efficiency (PCE) values, whereas NH4I addition produced bigger grains due to its lower complexation ability, and thus lower PCE values.53 Similarly, X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) investigations showed that an excess of iodides produced more highly coordinated iodoplumbates (PbI42−, PbI53−, PbI64−).54 Further studies included the effect of solvent molecules on the coordination chemistry of Pb in the perovskite solutions resulting in various chemical species. The typical O-donor solvent molecules such as DMSO, DMF, γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and H2O were proposed to compete with iodide ligands. The affinity for binding to Pb2+ was found to decrease in the order H2O > DMSO > DMF > GBL, which was related to their donor numbers.55,56 Raddichi et al. combined experimental absorption spectra and density functional theory (DFT) calculations to investigate the solution chemistry of PbI2 in DMSO, DMF, GBL and ACN. The possible stable lead complexes with coordination numbers up to 6 were calculated as presented in Fig. 4.45
 Fig. 4  The calculated stable coordination complexes of lead-iodide-solvent in solution (X = solvent ligand). Reprinted with the permission of Radicchi et al.45 Copyright, American Chemical Society 2019. 
In order to grow uniform and defect-free thin films, polar solvents are needed to dissolve the ionic precursors, whereas the presence of PbI64− anions was necessary for a higher degree of crystallization and better film quality. Therefore, a combination of solvents, e.g. DMF/DMSO, was shown to be beneficial to reach both solubility and ideal crystallization conditions due to the formation of Pb–I-solvent intermediates. Fig. 5 shows the in situ grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) patterns of mixed-solvent precursor solutions as a function of drying time. It was observed that the GIWAXS pattern of the DMSO/DMF and DMSO/GBL binary mixture exhibited the same diffraction pattern corresponding to the intermediate phase formed from pure DMSO; the solvent had a stronger donor ligand (Fig. 5a, d and g). Similar behaviour was also observed for the mixture of NMP and GBL (Fig. 5e and h). In the DMF/NMP and DMF/GBL mixtures, the GIWAXS patterns showed the distortions of the intermediate structure and the formation of new intermediate phases (Fig. 5b and c). Thus, the formation of the intermediate phase consisting of solvents with different coordination strengths is possible in the solvent mixture and the ratio of the specific intermediate phase can be controlled by adjusting the choice of solvent mixtures.57
 Fig. 5  
In situ GIWAX patterns of MAPbI3 precursor inks with mixed solvents (1:1 v/v) as a function of drying time. (a) DMF/DMSO, (b) DMF/NMP, (c) DMF/GBL, (d) GBL/DMSO, (e) GBL/NMP, and (f) NMP/DMSO. Red and yellow lines show the volumes of the solvents in the mixtures over time, the XRD pattern of the intermediate phases from pure and solvent mixtures are shown in (g1) to (h3). Reprinted with permission from Shargaieva et al.57 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. 
Finally, the investigation of lead perovskite inks by Yang and co-workers showed that the perovskite inks behave as colloidal solutions for concentrations higher than 1 mM rather than real solutions as demonstrated by the Tyndall effect, dynamic light scattering measurements (DLS) and absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 6a–d).58 The proposed crystallization process, depicted in Fig. 6e, goes through (1) the dissolution of PbI2via DMF coordination, (2) MAI coordination occurring at the edges of the inorganic framework, and (3) transformation into a soft framework similar to the perovskite trigonal phase. The size of particles in colloids decreased for a greater excess of MAI, resulting in separated [PbI6]4− octahedra, which leads to smaller perovskite grains in the thin films. The recent studies on the solution behaviour of perovskite inks revealed that the ideal complexation degree in perovskite solutions strongly depends on different chemical parameters such as the type of precursors, solvents, concentrations and additives that need to be considered in the quest for greener solvents.
 Fig. 6  Perovskite colloidal solutions in DMF: (a) the Tyndall effect, (b) size distribution of the colloids via DLS, (c) absorption behaviour of the thin films and inks, (d) absorption behaviour of inks with different stoichiometries; solid lines, MAI/PbI2 ratios; dashed line, MAI/MACl/PbI2 ratios, and (e) Proposed mechanism of the crystallisation of the perovskites as a function of the stoichiometry. Reprinted with the permission of Yan et al.58 Copyright American Chemical Society 2015. 
4. Criteria for suitable solvents in the solution processing of perovskites
In the first report of MHP for photovoltaic application, Kojima et al. employed DMF and GBL as solvents to prepare MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 perovskite precursors59 by taking advantage of the strong dissolving capability of DMF for solid PbI2 and PbBr2. A study by Jung et al. using single-crystal X-ray diffraction and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy confirmed that DMF molecules coordinate with PbI2 or MAI·PbI2 to form intermediate complexes (PbI2·DMF and MAI·PbI2·DMF).60 The intermediates are transformed into perovskite under the subsequent heating of the precursor films. The intermediates also play an important role in the Ostwald-ripening process for the grain growth of the perovskite films.61 However, perovskite films formed from neat DMF often show poor morphologies with many pinholes and high roughness, which is caused by undesirable nucleation and grain growth.62 Fundamentally, the nucleation and grain growth of perovskites are driven by the supersaturation of nuclei in a solution system when the solvents are either removed, or by the addition of an anti-solvent. This process is described by the LaMer mechanism for the formation of classic colloids.60 As mentioned before, previous research has revealed that the nature of the perovskite precursor is a colloidal dispersion in the mother solution, with particle sizes up to the mesoscale, rather than a real solution. The colloid consists of soft coordination complexes in the form of lead polyhalide frameworks such as[PbI3]1−, [PbI4]2−, [PbI5]3−, and [PbI6]4−.58 Thus, controlling the colloidal characteristics is critical to achieving high-quality perovskite films with optimal morphology and crystallinity.63,64
In PV applications, a good solvent should be able to dissolve high concentrations of PbX2 (>0.5 M) in order to make perovskite films with sufficient thickness (>500 nm) for adequate light-harvesting. Although the organic halide component of the MHP dissolves in most solvents, finding a solvent that can dissolve the metal halide component is quite challenging. In the early stage of MHP research, finding suitable solvents for solid perovskite precursors largely relied on an experimental trial-and-error method. Solvents such as DMF, DMSO, NMP and DMAc were found to have a good capacity to dissolve solid PbX2 and MAX in the preparation of perovskite precursor solutions.39 Certain solvents such as GBL poorly dissolve solid PbI2 alone; however, PbI2 and MAI can be dissolved well together in GBL. This is attributed to the formation of a MAI·PbI2·GBL complex.65
Solvent properties like the dielectric constant, dipole moment, atomic charge, volume, and mass influence the solubility of PbX2. The Hansen solubility parameters model (HSPM), which was developed by Charles M. Hansen to predicate the solubility of one material in another, has been used to predict the dissolving ability of a solvent toward solid PbX2.66 HSPM considers three parameters including (i) dispersion (δd), (ii) intermolecular dipole interactions (δp), and (iii) hydrogen bonding (δh) between a solute and a solvent molecule. In the area of MHP synthesis, Gardner et al. firstly used HSPM in their search for possible non-hazardous solvents for the solution processing of perovskite.67 They identified a solvent and a solvent-mixture system consisting of GBL and alcohol-based protic solvents such as ethanol, 1-propanol and acetic acid. The three calculated Hansen solubility parameters, matrix (dispersion (δd), polarity (δp), and hydrogen bonding (δh)) of the solvent or solvent systems for dissolving solid lead acetate/PbCl2/MAI with at least 1 M PbX2 and 3 M MAI are shown in Fig. 7a. Most of the protic solvents (ethanol, 1-propanol and acetic acid) could be mixed with GBL up to 40% volume while still maintaining a clear perovskite solution. Above this concentration, colloidal separation and precipitates were formed (Fig. 7b). Similarly, Babaei et al. also applied the Hansen solubility theory in their exploration of suitable nonhazardous solvents to dissolve solid PbBr2 and PbI2. Among the 63 nonhazardous solvents investigated, they found that a commercial product, PolarClean, which is a diester blend polar solvent (with methyl ester concentration >70%) with a high boiling point temperature (280 °C), was able to dissolve 40 mg ml−1 PbI2 at 60 °C. The formation of the MAPbI3 perovskite film made by a two-step spin coating of PolarClean perovskite solution was claimed based on the optical bandgap measurement by UV-visible spectroscopy.68 Nevertheless, other properties of the perovskite film such as morphology, composition and its performance in solar cells were not reported in this work, which makes it hard to assess the usefulness of this solvent in practice.
 Fig. 7  (a) Hansen space defined in three intrinsic material variables: dispersion (δd), polarity (δp), and hydrogen bonding (δh) of the investigated solvents and solvent systems for PbAc2/PbCl2/MAI to at least 1 M PbX2 and 3 M MAI. The parameters for inks that are hazardous (Haz) (circles) and nonhazardous (Nonhaz) (crosses) and that achieved either solubility (green) or were insoluble (red) are shown. (b) Photographs of perovskite precursors in different solvent mixtures defined from Hansen parameters. Reprinted with permission from Gardner et al.67 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2016. (c) Plots of donor number versus Hansen distance for different solvents related to dimethylformamide. Reprinted with permission from Huang et al.69 Copyright American Chemical Society 2020. (d) Ab initio predictions of ΔHsolv for PbX2, PbX+, Pb2+, and X− complexes in pure solvents, with CH3NH3+ as noted in the labels. Reprinted with permission from Stevenson et al.71 Copyright American Chemical Society 2017. 
Nevertheless, the usefulness of HSPM in solution processing MHP synthesis is limited because the theory does not consider the important ionic interactions of salts and the dative bonding of the solvent, which occurs in precursor solutions of perovskites. Therefore, HSPM is not adequate to fully explain and predict the solubility of PbX2 and MAX in a solvent. For example, GBL is considered to be able to dissolve lead halides according to the Hansen model but experimentally, the solubility of PbI2 and PbCl2 in GBL is very low (less than 4 mg mL−1).65 To address this fundamental flaw, modified Hansen solubility theories have been developed to understand the solubility behaviour of PbX2 and MAX salts in solvents. Huang et al. proposed a concept that combines the Hansen solubility parameters and Gutmann's donor numbers of the solute and solvent molecules to screen less toxic solvents for the solution processing of MAPbI3 materials.69 Gutmann's donor number, which measures the tendency to donate electron pairs to the acceptor has been proven to be a good metric showing the coordinating ability of the solvent with the lead halide precursor.56,70 Based on this consideration, Huang et al. calculated the Hansen distance (Ra) and donor number of each solvent. Ra was determined by the combined effect of the difference between a solute and a solvent on the dispersion (δd), polarity (δp), and hydrogen bonding (δh) according to eqn (3): (3)
The donor number is used to quantify the possibility of forming complexes between the solute and the solvent (adduct), which is not considered in conventional HSPM. By using this modified theory, the authors have found that the solubility of PbI2 and MAI in a solvent is possibly determined by both the Hansen distance and the donor number. As shown in Fig. 7c, the dependence of the solubility of PbI2 on the donor number and Hansen distance can be separated into three distinct regions: In region 1, solvents with low Hansen distance (Ra < 6) can dissolve perovskite materials well, regardless of the donor number. In region 2, solvents with a higher Hansen distance (Ra > 6) and larger donor number (n > 30) can acceptably dissolve perovskite precursors, while solvents in region 3 cannot dissolve PbI2 and MAI due to their large Hansen distance (Ra > 6) and smaller donor number (n < 30). A solvent with a low Hansen distance is critical for its dissolving ability toward solid PbI2 and MAI, while strong coordination between the solvent molecule and solute can compensate for the relatively poor dissolving ability of solvent with moderate Hansen distance.69
Stevenson et al. proposed a different way to enhance the applicability of HSPM in explaining and predicting the solubility of solid PbX2 in a solvent. They showed that the Mayer bond order of a solvent's polar atom, such as N or O, is a more reliable parameter for screening solvents for the solution processing of perovskites than the relative polarity in the Hansen model.71 The Mayer bond order quantifies the electronic state of a solvent's most electronegative atoms such as N or O, which is directly correlated with the Pb2+-solvent complexation in the perovskite precursor. Using this model, the authors carried out ab initio calculations of enthalpy for forming Pb2+: solvent complexes (ΔHsolv:Pb2+) of different solvents. The results showed that the solubility of PbX2 with different halides follows the trend of PbIn > PbBrn > PbCln. Among the different solvents investigated (DMSO, DMF, NMP, acetone (ACE), GBL, ACN, methacrolein (METH)), the enthalpy for the complexation (ΔHsolv:Pb2+) follows the order of DMSO < DMF < NMP < ACE = GBL < METH < CAN (Fig. 7d), which is consistent with the trend of the Mayer bond order of the solvent. The solubility of PbX2 in these different solvents was also in agreement with the experimental results.71 These results showed that the Mayer bond order may be a useful tool for solvent screening for the solution processing of perovskite films. It is worth noting that the effects of organic halides on the solubility of PbX2 in the solvent were not considered in this model. Thus, there is still an urgent need to develop a new theory that can accurately predict the solubility and reaction of solid perovskite precursors in the solvents under different circumstances to unravel the underlying mechanism of the solution chemistry.
In the following, we demonstrate the research on the less toxic solvents or solvent systems that have been reported in the literature for perovskite synthesis by the solution processing method.
3.1 Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
DMSO is a polar aprotic solvent that has been frequently used as a solvent in organic and biochemical material synthesis. The median lethal dose of DMSO is higher as compared to ethanol, and some even define DMSO as a non-toxic solvent. DMSO has been widely used in medical treatments due to its ability to increase the rate of absorption of some compounds by biological tissues.72 DMSO has a strong dissolving ability for PbX2. The experimental solubility of PbX2 in pure DMSO is 600 mg mL−1 for PbI2, 560 mg mL−1 for PbBr2 and 310 mg mL−1 for PbCl2.71 Wu et al. compared the performance of PSC based on MAPbI3, which was made by using a DMSO-based precursor solution with a DMF counterpart. They found that similar to DMF, DMSO reacted with the PbI2 and MAI to form an intermediate phase of PbI2·DMSO·MAI, which slowed the crystallization process of the perovskites. Benefiting from the retarded crystallization, the MAPbI3 film derived from the DMSO-based precursor solution exhibited enhanced morphology with a smoother surface and uniform particle size distribution as compared to films deposited from a DMF-based precursor. As a result, the corresponding PSC delivered an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 12.5%, while the DMF-based devices showed only 9.7% on average.73 In contrast, Wang et al.65 showed that perovskite films made from a DMSO-based precursor solution had incomplete surface coverage due to the strongly retarded crystallization of perovskite in DMSO, which is presumably due to the difficulty of removing DMSO solvent, which has a high boiling point (189 °C). To address this issue, they added 2-methylpyrazine as a co-solvent to accelerate the perovskite film drying process. This solvent quenching strategy favours the nucleation of perovskite particles, contributing to the formation of denser perovskite films. Consequently, the PCE of PSC was enhanced from 10.0% for the DMSO-only solvent to 16.2% for the methylpyrazine–DMSO co-solvent system.65 Inspired by this finding, researchers have explored other co-solvents for use with DMSO in the solution processing of perovskite films. For example, GBL was used as a co-solvent to control the formation kinetics of MAPbI3 perovskite films. The PSCs with decent photovoltaic performance (PCE up to 18%) were made by using the doctor blading deposition of a perovskite solution made with a DMSO–GBL solvent mixture.69,74,75 This phenomenon was explained by the Hansen distance and donor number of the solvent/solvent system. As can be seen in Fig. 7c, DMSO has a high donor number and exhibits strong interaction with solid PbX2 perovskite precursors to form adducts, while GBL has a lower donor number, which helps to form less-stable complexes and improves the evaporation kinetics. In the co-solvent system, the ratio of solvents in the solvent mixture governs the surface tension of the precursor solution, convection, and evaporation rates of the solvent, which in turn affect the crystallisation, grain growth, and thus the quality of the perovskite thin films. Starch-based biopolymers were used as a rheological modifier for DMSO-based perovskite precursor solutions. The interaction between the –OH groups of the starch and the perovskite-DMSO complex led to starch gelatinization, which affects the overall viscosity of the perovskite precursor. Using this gel-like perovskite-starch composite, Giuri et al. fabricated MAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells with PCE of 17.2% and enhanced stability.76 However, the shortcoming of DMSO is that it can easily penetrate the skin, and substances dissolved in DMSO can quickly be absorbed by human tissue, causing health and safety issues. In the case of solution processing perovskite material synthesis, heavy-metal lead and small molecular amines are hazardous to human health. Thus, precaution is needed when handling DMSO-based perovskite solution to avoid direct contact with skin.
3.2 Gamma-butyrolactone (GBL)
GBL is considered to be a less toxic solvent than DMF. GBL has been widely used as a solvent in commercial products such as paint strippers, nail polish removers, stain removers and circuit board cleaners, etc. However, GBL has the potential for drug abuse and is classified as a drug in many countries.77 In the early development of PSC technology, GBL was used extensively as a solvent for perovskite precursors78–81 and PSCs using pure GBL often showed poor performance due to poor film morphology. It has been found that compared to DMSO or DMF, GBL exhibits relatively weak interactions with lead ions (Pb2+) due to its weaker binding strength. Without the presence of MAI or other ionic counterparts, the GBL molecule has very low solvation capacity for solid PbI2. Experimentally, it has been shown that the solubility of PbI2 in pure GBL is less than 4 mg mL−1 and for PbCl2, the solubility is even lower (<2 mg mL−1).71 In the presence of MAI, the solubility of PbX2 in GBL was enhanced by the adduct formation. Adducts of (MA)2(GBL)2Pb3I8 and ordered/semi-ordered (MA)8(GBL)x[Pb18I44] clusters have been confirmed in GBL-based perovskite solution, which are believed to be responsible for the resultant undesirable film quality.47 Fateev et al. found that these undesired adducts could be avoided by adding excessive amounts of iodide ions (MAI or KI) to the precursor, which leads to the complete dissociation of these lead oligomer complexes into simple ions like PbI3− and PbI42−. By using excessive MAI, the authors fabricated MAPbI3 perovskite films with homogeneous surface coverage and high crystallinity from neat GBL solvent.47
Generally speaking, due to its low capacity to dissolve solid PbX2, GBL is often introduced into other solvents such as DMSO to act as a co-solvent, controlling the solvent evaporation rate and crystallization of perovskite material to enhance the film quality.69,74,75,82 Gardner et al. showed that by using lead acetate with a small amount of PbCl2 as the lead source, GBL could dissolve a high concentration (>1 M) of the lead salts in the presence of MAI (PbCl2:PbAc2:MAI = 0.2:0.8:3.0, molar ratio). Nevertheless, poor surface coverage and large pin holes appeared in the perovskite film. Under the guidance of the Hansen solubility model, the authors found that several alcohols could mix well with GBL up to 40% (v/v) without sacrificing the solubility of PbX2-MAI. A solvent mixture composed of GBL/ethanol/acetic acid = 60/20/20 (v/v/v) produced the best perovskite film without pinholes. The performance of the corresponding PSC (13.5%) was similar to the device made by DMF-based precursor (13.6%). For small cells (0.13 cm2), the PCE of 14.5% was achieved using this solvent system.67 Similarly, Cao et al. reported a solvent mixture of GBL with polyethylene glycol (PEG) for dissolving PbBr2 to make CsPbBr3-based PSCs by a two-step sequential deposition. The addition of GBL was found to help adjust the high viscosity of the PEG. The resulting inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite film showed a remarkably smooth morphology, which led to PSCs with a PCE of 8.1%.83
3.3 Acetonitrile (ACN)
ACN is a strong polar aprotic solvent that has a dipole moment comparable to DMF and DMSO. Compared to DMF, it has modest toxicity and is used in industrial products such as perfumes, pharmaceuticals, batteries and pesticides, etc. Nevertheless, ACN has a very poor dissolving ability for PbI2 (<0.1 M).84 DFT-based calculations showed that the chemical binding in the complex formed between ACN and Pb2+ is weak.71 To overcome this issue, Noel et al. used methylamine gas to enhance the solvating power of ACN for MAPbI3 precursor salts.85 As shown in Fig. 8a, the precursor containing MAI:PbI2 (1:1.06 molar ratio) is completely insoluble in neat ACN. Upon treatment with methylamine gas, the precipitate dissolved completely, forming a pale-yellow solution. The ACN/methylamine solvent could dissolve up to 0.5 M of MAPbI3 perovskite. This is ascribed to the formation of the MAPbI3-xMA complex, which is miscible with ACN. The MAPbI3-xMA complex is formed by the uptake of amine molecules into MAPbI3 compound due to the coordination of the N atom in the methylamine with the PbI6-octahedra in the layered PbI2 structure. This interaction leads to a complete collapse of the solid perovskite phase (Fig. 8b and c).86,87 Pinhole-free, smooth MAPbI3 films were obtained upon evaporation of the solvent (Fig. 8d). These films consist of densely packed crystal grains and a smooth surface with a roughness of only 7.8 nm over a large area. Furthermore, this MA-assisted method also provides a “healing” effect to the perovskite films, which improves the overall film quality,87 significantly improving the charge-carrier lifetime of the perovskite films. As a consequence, the performance of the as-fabricated film evaluated in PSCs with both n-i-p and p-i-n architecture delivered a maximum PCE up to 19.0% (for n-i-p) and 16.8% (for p-i-n), respectively.85 Other amine gases, including propylamine, butylamine and pentylamine, can also be used to assist with dissolving perovskite precursors in ACN. However, a pure MAPbI3 film cannot be fabricated by using these large organic amines. Instead, these large amines possibly lead to the formation of two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper-based perovskite compounds.
 Fig. 8  Demonstration of the ACN/methylamine solvent effectivity. (a) MAI:PbI2 (1:1.06 molar ratio) precursor in neat ACN solvent and in ACN/methylamine solvent. Reprinted with permission from Noel et al.85 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. (b) In situ optical microscopy of the morphology evolution of MAPbI3 perovskite crystals upon exposure to methylamine gas and methylamine degassing. Reprinted with permission from Zhou et al.87 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2015. (c) Proposed intercalation of the small amines molecules into layered structure PbI2. (d) SEM and optical images of perovskite film fabricated from the ACN/methylamine solvent system exhibiting good uniformity and smoothness. Reprinted with permission from Noel et al.85 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
In another study, Noel et al. used the ACN/methylamine solvent system to deposit smooth, highly crystalline films of MAPbBr3. In their work, MAPbBr3 material was firstly dispersed into ACN solvent. After this, methylamine gas was purged into the solution until saturation, which resulted in a stable, clear precursor solution.88 The deposited MAPbBr3 thin films from the ACN/methylamine solvent system possessed much-improved surface morphologies with increased texturing and grain orientation as compared to the film deposited from neat DMF. With choline chloride additives, the film achieved photoluminescence quantum efficiencies of up to 5.5% and charge-carrier mobilities of 17.8 cm2 (Vs)−1. The large band gap of MAPbBr3 gave a PCE of up to 8.9% in PSC. The interaction between amines, PbI2 and the formed complex, as well as the overarching influences on the material solubility, were discussed by Kerner et al.89,90 Burkitt et al. added HCl to the ACN/methylamine solvent system in their preparation of the perovskite precursor for the fabrication of MAPbI3 film by slot-die coating. They found that the solution was very suitable for slot-die coating at high line speeds. Thanks to the high evaporation rate of ACN/methylamine, the high-speed slot-die coating could produce PSCs with much-enhanced performance as compared to the spin coating deposition method that is widely used in the laboratory for the fabrication of small-sized devices.91,92
The methylamine-assisted ACN solvent system has also been used for the synthesis of cubic MAPbI3 nanocrystals (NCs) through a ligand-assisted reprecipitation method. The MAPbI3 nanocrystals showed photoluminescence quantum yields exceeding 93%.93 In contrast to coordinating solvents like DMF or DMSO, non-coordinated solvents, like ACN, do not bond to PbI2, leading to the formation of defect-free MAPbI3 nanocrystals upon crystallization, a property that is highly desirable in optoelectronic devices such as light-emitting diodes.94 An issue that needs to be considered for ACN/methylamine solvent systems is that the ACN solvent possesses a very low viscosity (0.25 cP) and a low boiling temperature point (80 °C), resulting in very fast crystallization of the perovskite during spin coating deposition. It is known that the retardation of perovskite crystallization often helps to form better perovskite crystal and film quality with fewer defects, pinholes and surface roughness. To tackle this issue, Deng et al. added 2-methoxyethanol (2-ME) to ACN to prepare precursors for MAPbI3 perovskite films deposited by blade coating.84 Due to the very weak coordination capability and high volatility of these solvents, the fabricated perovskite film had a low crystallinity and poor contact with the substrates. An optimized ratio mixture of 2-ME and ACN (2:3; v/v) can deliver a better perovskite film with compact and smooth morphology but the grain size was small (only several hundred nanometers) and the physical contact with the underlying poly(bis(4-phenyl) (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl) amine (PTAA) was poor. The authors added a small amount of DMSO to slow the crystallization, which consequently led to perovskite films with high crystallinity, large grain sizes (up to 1–2 μm) and improved contact with the substrate. As a result, the PSC fabricated at room temperature delivered a PCE of 21.3% for small areas and 16.4% for a cell with an aperture area of 63.7 cm2.84 Nevertheless, there are practical challenges for employing the ACN/methylamine solvent system in commercial applications as ACN has a high vapor pressure and methylamine gas is extremely flammable, which can make it difficult to control the reaction conditions along with health and safety issues.
3.4 Room temperature molten salts – ionic liquids
In the search for green solvents for perovskite solution processing, ionic liquids (ILs) have recently attracted the attention of researchers. Ionic liquids, which are also called room temperature molten salts, are arguably considered green solvents for many industrial applications such as organic synthesis, batteries, and solar thermal energy. Compared to conventional solvents, ILs have many advantages, including a non-volatile nature at room temperature or below, non-flammable, high thermal stability, strong dissolving ability for various organic and inorganic compounds. Besides being used as additives to control the crystallization of perovskites,95–98 ILs have also been successfully demonstrated as promising solvents for the preparation of perovskite precursors. Moore et al. first showed that methylammonium formate (MAF) could be used as a solvent medium to grow MAPbI3 perovskite. By controlling the reaction time and temperature, a single-phase perovskite was made. However, the morphology of the film was poor with a high surface roughness as compared to other solvents.99 In addition, MAF is unstable and can easily go through condensation reactions with the methylammonium cations in the perovskite precursor to form DMF and water.100 Our recent reports with freshly prepared methylammonium carboxylate protic ionic liquids (e.g., methylammonium formate (MAF), methylammonium acetate (MAAc) and methylammonium propionate (MAP)) showed the in situ formation of perovskite by the addition of PbI2 to the ILs at room temperature, which substantially decreased the annealing temperature required for the formation of polycrystalline perovskite thin films without compromising the final film quality.100 In contrast to the classical aprotic ionic liquids, the protic ionic liquids (PILs) possess an acidic proton on the cation capable of forming hydrogen-bonded aggregates and network structures in solution.
PILs generally possess lower thermal stability, chemical stability, and non-negligible vapor pressure, which can be considered as advantages for the solution processing of hybrid perovskites, where the removal of residual solvents is a critical criterion for achieving high material purity. In order to verify and further investigate these findings, room-temperature PILs synthesized MAF, MAAc and MAP were tested either as pure solvents or in blends with regularly non-applicable green solvents such as water, alcohols, and acetonitrile (Fig. 9). All room-temperature synthesized PILs can dissolve the required high amounts of PbI2/PbBr2 and methylammonium halide. The high solubility of the perovskite precursors was maintained upon blending with the co-solvents. Therefore, these novel solvent systems fulfil the requirements outlined above for the green processing of perovskites. The obtained perovskite materials were phase-pure and showed preferential crystal orientation ((110) vs. (202)) dependent on the co-solvent (Fig. 10). Moreover, the binary and ternary blends of PILs with green solvents like water, ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol can be utilized for hybrid perovskite processing by replacing high-boiling aprotic polar solvents, significantly expanding the range of applicable solvent candidates. Our preliminary studies show that the perovskite inks containing PILs with different anions show good compatibility with solution processing of perovskite, revealing the influence of the PIL anion on the solvation behavior of lead(II) halide precursors. By using a MAP–DMSO–acetonitrile solvent mixture, we successfully fabricated PSCs with PCE of 15.46% based on (MA0.15FA0.85)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3. An ink system of the perovskite precursor was also developed for the large-scale fabrication of perovskite by ink-jet printing.100 The role of PILs in the formation and stabilization of perovskite crystals and, consequently, perovskite inks will require further study.
 Fig. 9  Photographs of binary perovskite ink-systems (PIL main solvent/co-solvent) with increasing co-solvent volume. Green means soluble, red indicates the separation or formation of solids. Reprinted with permission from Öz et al.100 Copyright Elsevier 2018. 
 Fig. 10  (a) XRD pattern of MAPbI3 thin film prepared from methylammonium propionate/water ink (3:2, v/v, c = 0.5 M). (b) XRD patterns of spin-coated MAPbI3 thin films showing the solvent effects. Reprinted with permission from Öz et al.100 Copyright Elsevier 2018. (c) TEM images of MAPbBr3 NCs synthesized from MAP and MAB ILs. (d) Excitation-intensity-dependent photoluminescence quantum efficiencies of the thin films fabricated from MAPbBr3(MAP) and MAPbBr3(MAB) NCs. Reprinted with permission from Hoang et al.101 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. 
We further investigated the effects of anions in MA-based ILs with different carbon chains (methyl formate (MAF), methyl propionate (MAP), methyl butyrate (MAB), methyl valerate (MAV) and non-linear carbon chain methyl benzoate (MABe)) on the morphology and photoemission properties of the corresponding MAPbBr3 perovskite crystals (Fig. 10c). We found that the PILs with long carbon chains such as MAB benefited the photoemission of MAPbBr3 perovskite crystals. This is explained by the protection of perovskite nanocrystals from aggregation by the long alkyl chains of the ILs. Photoluminescence quantum efficiencies of up to 50% were achieved with MAB-based perovskite crystals (Fig. 10d). The alkyl chain was also found to influence the morphology of the perovskite crystals. Instead of a cubic shape formed by MAP, nanorods of MAPbBr3 were obtained when using MAB as the solvent (Fig. 10c).101 Similar PILs based on methylammonium acetate (MAAc) were used for the synthesis of inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3. It was reported that the addition of MAAc improved the solubility of solid CsBr and helped to produce high-quality perovskite films with reasonable thickness. The CsPbBr3 PSC made by this method showed a PCE of 7.37% and decent stability.102
To tackle the viscous nature of the PILs, Chao et al. developed an annealing-assisted solution process for the fabrication of perovskite film from MAAc precursors. By using a warm substrate during the spin coating process, they produced smooth and pinhole-free perovskite films. The authors also stated that the MAAc solvent could promote the rapid crystallization of perovskite and protect the perovskite from moisture. As a result, high-quality perovskite films were fabricated under ambient conditions (humidity ranged from 30% to 80%) and the corresponding MA-based perovskite solar cells showed power conversion efficiencies up to 20.05%.103 The MAAc ILs allowed the quick liquid-to-solid transition of perovskite through a deformed perovskite intermediate structure, which is different from the phase transformation involving complex intermediate in conventional polar solvents such as DMF and DMSO. Dynamic light scattering analysis showed that the MAAc-based perovskite precursor possessed a more uniform distribution of micellar and higher total colloid concentration as compared to the DMF-based counterparts. As can be seen in Fig. 11a, the micellar size in MAAc and DMF increased with increasing concentration. However, the size distribution was not uniform in the DMF solvent, while the micellar size in MAAc was centred in a narrower range, demonstrating the uniform distribution of the micelles. This was explained by the weak interactions between MAAc with PbI2 and MACl, thus hindering agglomeration. In contrast to the intercalation of DMF or DMSO into layered PbI2 crystals, MA+ and Ac− ions tended to form MAPbI3−xAcx alloys with PbI2, which further improved the stability of MAAc-based precursors in ambient conditions. Another advantage of using this PIL is that a reasonably thick perovskite film can be made from MAAc at low precursor solution concentrations (300–400 mg mL−1, half of the DMF solution), which helps to reduce the module price and material waste management in large-scale production.
 Fig. 11  (a) Dynamic light scattering spectra of MAAc and DMF perovskite precursor solution with different concentrations from 10 to 300 mg mL−1. Reprinted with permission from Chao et al.103 Copyright Elsevier 2019. (b) A schematic illustration of the interactions of PbI2 in the two perovskite precursors DMF and MAAc. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al.104 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2020. 
Wang et al. applied MAAc ILs in the precursor solution for the fabrication of CsPbIxBr3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) inorganic perovskite solar cells.104 Differing from the assumption by Chao et al. about the weak interaction between MAAc with PbI2 in ref. 103, they found that compared to DMF and DMSO, MAAc induced different local coordination environments with Pb2+ due to the strong interactions between PbI2 and MAAc molecules, forming Pb–O bonds and N–H⋯I hydrogen bonds. These interactions stabilize the solution and suppress the oxidation of I− in the perovskite precursor. The different working mechanisms of the solubility of PbI2 in DMF/DMSO and MAAc are depicted in Fig. 11b. The high solubility of solid PbI2 in DMF and DMSO molecules is related to the intercalation of these solvent molecules into the layered structures of PbI2, inducing the expansion of the PbI2 lattice. In contrast, the stronger interactions between MAAc ILs and PbI2 mean that each PbI2 is surrounded by the N–H⋯I hydrogen bonds and Pb–O bonds network, which weakens the Pb–I ionic bond, thus enhancing the solubility of PbI2 in the MAAc solvent. Because of this characteristic coordination environment, the phase transformation for forming perovskite compounds, in particular the inorganic perovskite in the MAAc system, is different from the DMF/DMSO system. According to Wang et al., the formation of CsPbI3 in the MAAc-based precursor solution experiences 4 different stages depending on the annealing temperature. In stage I (<80 °C), an intermediate perovskite phase Cs1−xMAxPbAcxI2−xBr is formed. On increasing the temperature to 100–120 °C (stage II), MAAc slowly evaporates from the intermediate perovskite phase. More CsI and PbI2 can be incorporated into the lattice. At a higher annealing temperature of 120–150 °C (stage III), MAAc evaporates continuously, the final perovskite phase is formed, and the intermediate phases disappear. In stage IV (>150 °C), MAAc is removed completely and the pure CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite phase is formed. This retarded crystallization greatly contributes to the formation of a smoother morphology of the perovskite film with reduced trap states. Consequently, the all-inorganic (CsPbI2.5Br0.5) wide band gap PSC with PCE up to 17.1% was achieved.104
In an extreme case, Petrov et al. developed a solvent-free preparation of MAPbI3 (and/or FAPbI3) perovskite films by using in situ formed polyiodide melting salt.105 By mixing MAI (and/or FAI) with iodine powder, they created a highly viscous polyiodide ionic liquid. The MAI3+x and FAI3+x polyiodides exhibited very high reactivity with metallic lead and PbI2. Even a 260 nm thick Pb film could be readily converted into perovskite film upon contact with the polyiodides ILs. The phase diagram of the ternary system MAI–Pb–I2 is shown in Fig. 12. The Gibbs triangle demonstrates the compositional range that can form perovskites, which can be liquid, liquid–solid, or single-phase, through controlling the Pb/MA/I2 atomic ratio. The polyiodide was used to make perovskite films including δ-FAPbI3, MA-stabilized FAPbI3, MAxFA1−xPbI3−yBry and MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites by simply reacting metallic lead or lead compound (PbI2 or PbO). The advantage of this method is that only high concentrations of solid perovskite precursors are used for perovskite formation, without the need for any other solvents, which enhances the material usage with minimum environmental contamination and health impact. If high energy conversion efficiency can be demonstrated, this method is attractive for large-scale production.84
 Fig. 12  The reactivity of metallic lead with reactive polyiodide melts (RPMs) together with reconstructed phase assemblage for one weak interaction depicted on the Gibbs triangle. XRD and Raman analyses of solid and liquid fractions of the products of lead interaction with RPMs of different compositions (#1–#4) are shown around the triangle. The bottom optical pictures and Raman shift plots correspond to pure MAI/I2 precursor RPMs of 1:1–1:4 component ratios without lead. Reprinted with permission from Petrov et al.105 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. 
A similar strategy was also demonstrated by Chen et al. who used MAX or PbX2 (X is I, Br or Cl) powder and MA gas to produce the amine complex ILs precursors MAX·mMA (m ≤ 3) and PbX2·nMA *(n ≤ 1). The ILs were then transformed into methyl ammonium lead halide perovskite films by a pressure processing method.106 The XRD analysis indicated that the crystal lattices of MAI and PbI2 powder were broken in the presence of MA molecules. The formation of amine complexes was confirmed in the FTIR measurement as shown in Fig. 13a and b. Due to the high viscosity (∼200 cP) and poor wettability of the amine complex precursor, pressure processing that employed a squeezing board to spread the perovskite precursor on top of a polyimide film was used to convert the complexes into dense and pin-hole-free films with large grain sizes (Fig. 13c). The PCE of the corresponding PSCs with 1.0 cm2 area was 19.3%,106 which is very impressive. This shows the potential of this method in the large-scale production of perovskite materials for applications beyond PVs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure of the precursor MAI·mMA, its XRD pattern, and its FTIR spectrum in comparison with MAI. (b) Structure of the precursor PbI2·nMA, its XRD pattern and its FTIR spectrum in comparison with PbI2. (c) The steps of the pressure processing method: (I) add amine complex precursors and cover with PI film; (II) apply pressure; and (III) heat and peel off the PI film. Reprinted with permission from Chen et al.106 Copyright Springer Nature 2017. 
3.5 Water
Water is the most sustainable, environmentally friendly solvent. It is generally thought that water is not suitable for the synthesis of perovskite materials due to the poor solubility of solid PbX2 in water and the decomposition of lead halide perovskites in water. Nevertheless, in contrast to the common thought, Liu et al. demonstrated that the presence of water in the perovskite precursor did not necessarily negatively impact the perovskite film preparation process. The study showed that the perovskite precursors (DMF and DMSO solvent) are homogeneous and clear with a water content of 25%. This is ascribed to the ability of water to prolong the film drying process, leading to the formation of perovskite films with large grain size and a reduced wettability when water is completely removed during film annealing.107 Hsieh et al. attempted to apply aqueous lead nitrate precursors in the sequential solution deposition of perovskite film. The study revealed that perovskite crystals could be formed in an aqueous Pb(NO3)2 solution via a two-step reaction: (i) the quick reaction of Pb(NO3) with MAI to form PbI2, and (ii) the slow transformation of PbI2 into MAPbI3 by reacting with MAI. The corresponding MAPbI3-based PSCs showed a PCE of 12.58%. The performance was a bit lower as compared to the DMF-based PSCs (14.38% PCE), which was ascribed to the poorer surface coverage of the perovskite film.108 Despite this, this work has led to encouraging true green solution processing for the synthesis of perovskite materials. Sveinbjörnsson et al. also fabricated mixed-cation and inorganic perovskite films from an aqueous solution containing CsNO3 and Pb(NO3)2. The nitrate salt was transformed into perovskite after being dipped in iso-propanol alcohol (IPA) solution that contained formamidinium halide FAX (X = Br, I) through an ion-exchange reaction as shown in eqn (4): (4)
The high solubility of FANO3 in IPA solvent means it can easily be washed away in IPA solution, leaving a pure perovskite film. Without using any hazardous solvents, the Cs0.1FA0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 PSCs made with this method generated a maximum PCE of 13.0%.109 An additive based on polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was added to the lead nitrate aqueous solution to improve the resultant perovskite film quality. As shown by Du et al., MAPbI3 films fabricated from aqueous nitrate solutions with a PVP additive possessed denser morphologies and reduced defects. The corresponding PSCs exhibited a PCE of 15.19%.110 Cao et al. used water as a solvent to dissolve CsBr to fabricate inorganic CsPbBr3 with a uniform morphology through a two-step spin coating method. The PSCs based on the CsPbBr3 film showed a PCE of 6.12%. It is worth pointing out that DMF solvent was used to dissolve PbBr2 and form a PbBr2 film in this work.111 To solve this, Cao et al. deposited a PbBr2 layer by using a green solvent system composed of PEG/GBL, while aqueous CsBr solution was applied in the second step of the spin coating deposition to fabricate CsPbBr3 PSCs yielding a PCE of 8.11%.83
Overall, while only a limited number of reports on water-based perovskite precursor solutions have been reported, the proven feasibility of using water as a solvent for the synthesis of perovskite by solution processing in these studies does pave the way for the truly green synthesis of perovskite materials.
3.6 Other green solvents for the solution processing of perovskites
Besides the solvents for solution processing perovskite shown above, other low-toxic solvent systems that are much less studied have also been demonstrated for the synthesis of perovskite materials. Akkerman et al. demonstrated a CsPbBr3 nanocrystal (NC) ink by using a solvent mixture composed of isopropanol, hexane, and butylamine. At room temperature, the CsPbBr3 compound directly nucleated and grew in the form of nanocrystals with sizes of 15–20 nm in the solvent mixture. Benefiting from the short propionate ligand for efficient charge transfer, the NCs can be directly applied in PSC fabrication protocols, which led to a device with a PCE of 5.4% and a very high open-circuit voltage (1.5 V). This was considered one of the best performing PSCs devices based on CsPbBr3 at the time.112
It is worth pointing out that the effect of the properties of the solvent on the formation of the perovskite precursor solution depends on the composition of the perovskites. For instance, owing to the greater Lewis acidity of Sn2+ than Pb2+, MASnI3 crystallized much more rapidly as compared to MAPbI3 in DMF.113 Although methyl acetate (MeAc) has a poor dissolving ability for lead halides or lead-based perovskites, it can be a green solvent for the fabrication of lead-free perovskites such as MA3Bi2I9 as demonstrated by Jain et al. By using a precursor containing MAI and BiI3 salt in MeAC, MA3Bi2I9 thin films with good crystallinity were obtained by the spin coating deposition method. The efficiency of the champion PSC device was 1.62%, which is remarkable for bismuth-based perovskites.114 Since propylene carbonates can readily dissolve bismuth salts, inorganic Cs3Bi2I9 NCs were synthesized by using propylene carbonates as the solvent via a sonication-assisted method in which a probe sonication was applied to a precursor of bismuth acetate, cesium iodide, and capping ligand in propylene carbonates, followed by the formation of Cs3Bi2I9 NCs directly in the solution. Despite a modest photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQY = 0.3%) demonstrated by the materials,115 these studies have provided alternative routes for the sustainable synthesis of perovskite materials.

Table 1 summarizes the green solvents that have been developed to replace hazardous DMF for the solution processing of perovskites specialized for PV application.
Table 1 Green solvents for solution processing perovskite material synthesis




Solvent
Perovskite material
Device configuration
Deposition method
PCE (%)
Ref.




PSK: perovskite; 2-MP: 2-methylpyrazine; 1-P: 1-pentanol; EtOH: ethanol; PrOH: 1-propanol; AcOH: acetic acid; 2-ME: 2-methoxyethanol; BCP: bathocuproine; SWCNT: single-wall carbon nanotubes; CPTA: C60 pyrrolidine tris-acid.




DMSO for PbI2
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/PSK/
Two-step spin coating
13.5%

73



IPA for MAI


Spiro-OMeTAD/Au








DMSO
MAPbI3
ITO/c-TiO2/PSK/
One-step spin coating
10.8%

65



DMSO/2-MP/1-P (50/45/5)


Spiro-OMeTAD/Au


16.5%




DMSO/GBL (9/1)
MAPbI3
FTO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag.
Blade coating
16.90%

75







FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au


17.55%




DMSO/GBL (9/1) + PEG additive
MAPbI3
FTO/NiOx/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag
Blade coating
17.02%

69



DMSO/GBL (3/2)
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Blade coating
18.0%

74



DMSO/GBL (1/1)
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag
One-step spin coating
8.87%

82



DMSO/starch
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/LiF/Al
One-step spin coating
17.2%

76



GBL
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au
One-step spin coating
12.0%

78



GBL
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2//PSK/Au
One-step SPIN coating
8.0%

79



GBL
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
12.7%

80



GBL
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
8.85%

81



GBL
MAPbI3
ITO/c-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
9.0%

67



GBL/EtOH






11.0%




GBL/AcOH






14.1%




GBL/EtOH/AcOH






15.1%




GBL/PrOH/AcOH






14.0%




GBL/PEG (4/6) for PbBr2
CsPbBr3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/carbon
Two-step spin coating
8.1%

83



H2O for CsBr












MA/ACN
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/C60/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
19.0%

85







FTO/poly-TPD/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag


16.8%




MA/ACN
MAPbBr3
FTO/SnO2/PSK/SWCNT/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
8.9%

88



MA/ACN/2-ME (3:2) + DMSO additive
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/PSK/fullerene (C60)/BCP/metal
Blade coating
21.3%

84



MA/ACN + HCl additive
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag
Slot-die coating
14.7%

91



MA/ACN + HCl additive
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag
Slot-die coating
12.2%

92



MA/MAI and MA/PbI2 ILs
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Pressure processing
19.3%

106



DMSO-ACN-MAP ILs
(MA0.15FA0.85)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
15.46%

100



MAAc IL + DMSO
CsPbBr3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/carbon
One-step spin coating
7.37%

102



MAAc IL
MAPbI3
ITO/CPTA/BaCl/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Au
One-step spin coating
20.05%

103







ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/LiF/Al


17.25%




MAAc IL
CsPbI1.5Br1.5
FTO/SnO2/PSK/ Spiro-OMeTAD/ MoO3/Ag
One-step spin coating
14.92%

104





CsPbI2Br




15.83%






CsPbI2.5Br0.5




17.10%




H2O for Pb(NO3)2
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Two-step spin coating
12.58%

108



IPA for MAI












H2O for Pb(NO3)2/CsNO3
Cs0.1FA0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Two-step spin coating
13.0%

109



IPA for FAI/FABr












H2O for Pb(NO3)2 + PVP additive
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Two-step spin coating
15.19%

110



IPA for MAI












IPA/hexane/butylamine
CsPbBr3
FTO/c-TiO2//PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
One-step spin coating
5.4%

112



Methyl acetate
MABi2I9
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/P3HT/Au
One-step spin coating
1.62%

114





4. Green anti-solvent used in perovskite material synthesis
4.1 Anti-solvents used in solution processing perovskite synthesis
Anti-solvents are solvents in which a compound (perovskite in this case) is much less soluble. As mentioned above, in solution processing perovskite synthesis, an anti-solvent treatment is commonly used to facilitate the nucleation of perovskite via creating an instantaneous local supersaturation on the substrate. It has become an important step to make dense, pinhole-free perovskite films. Non-polar solvents like chlorobenzene (CB), toluene (TL) or diethyl ether (DE) are commonly used to treat perovskite precursor films during spin coating to accelerate the heterogeneous nucleation. As firstly demonstrated in perovskite fabrication by Jeon et al., one role of the anti-solvent step is to remove excess DMSO residue on the perovskite substrate, leading to the rapid formation of a perovskite-DMSO intermediate phase, which is critical for the formation of extremely homogeneous final perovskite films.116 After this report, anti-solvent treatment has become a popular step in solution processing perovskite to fabricate perovskite films with desirable morphologies for high-performance PSCs.
The criteria for the selection of an anti-solvent are that (i) the anti-solvent should be able to wash away the excess solvent used in the perovskite precursor solution; (ii) the anti-solvent should not dissolve the perovskite or react with the perovskite or decompose it. It has been experimentally defined that solvents with polarity in the approximate range from 2.0 to 4.5 are suitable anti-solvents for solution processing perovskites.117 The polarities and boiling point temperatures of the commonly used solvents are shown in Fig. 14. As can be seen, besides chlorobenzene, diethyl ether and toluene, alcohol-based solvents in the light blue zone may also be suitable anti-solvents in perovskite synthesis.
 Fig. 14  Diagraph of the boiling point versus polarity of commonly used solvents defining suitable solvents for the anti-solvent step. Reprinted with permission from Bu et al.117 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2017. 
According to the precipitation law, crystal nucleation and growth of a material are determined by the supersaturation degree.118 The anti-solvent treatment step creates a heterogeneous supersaturation condition by removing excessive solvent on perovskite precursor films, forming a large density of nuclei.24 Lee et al. studied several common anti-solvents used in perovskite synthesis and they showed that TL was the most suitable for fabricating high quality MAPbI3 films because it drives the perovskite precursor into a metastable zone instead of a supersaturation zone. As shown in Fig. 15a, TL treatment induces a consistent rate of nucleation and grain growth, yielding uniform perovskite film consisting of large grain sizes. In comparison, other anti-solvents such as chlorobenzene (CB), chloroform (CF), dichlorobenzene (DCB), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) generate high nucleation density, resulting in smaller grain sizes. Because the ability to remove or dilute perovskite precursor depends on the dielectric constant and dipole moment of the anti-solvent,39,116 the perovskite precursor film treated with anti-solvent can be driven into different zones including the under-supersaturation zone, metastable zone and supersaturation zone as depicted in Fig. 15b. When the perovskite precursor solution is treated with TL, the perovskite layer is transparent, indicating the existence of a non-stoichiometric intermediate phase in the metastable zone. In the case of CF, CB, or DCB, the perovskite precursor is pushed into the supersaturation state, generating a higher density of nuclei, resulting in perovskite film composed of smaller grains. The PSC using TL as the anti-solvent resulted in the highest PCE of 13.12%, surpassing other devices treated with CF, CB, DCB or IPA (Fig. 15c).119
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM images showing the morphology of MAPbI3 perovskite layers with different anti-solvent treatments. (b) A schematic diagram of the perovskite precursor concentration with respect to various anti-solvents. The inset photos show the perovskite precursor treatment with TL, CF, CB, DCB, and IPA before annealing. (c) I–V graph showing the performance of MAPbI3 PSC with different anti-solvent treatments. Reprinted with permission from Lee et al.119 Copyright Elsevier 2017. 
For the triple cation perovskite Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, diethyl ether (DE) was found to bring the perovskite to the metastable phase, which contributed to a higher PSCs performance as compared to other anti-solvents.120 This indicates that the key role of an anti-solvent step is to bring the perovskite intermediate phase quickly into the metastable zone instead of the supersaturation zone, providing a steady control of the nucleation and crystallization rate to produce film with large grains. Depending on the composition of the perovskites and properties of the anti-solvent molecule, the experimental conditions in the anti-solvent treatment step such as anti-solvent dripping time and dripping volume need to be delicately controlled to make perovskite films with optimum morphology.119–121 Practically, the currently most widely used anti-solvents like CB, TL are not favourable for industrial production due to their detrimental effects on both human health and the environment.11,29,122 Alternative green anti-solvents such as alcohols and acetates are preferable for the large-scale commercial production of perovskites. In the next sections, the alternative green anti-solvents that have been developed for solution processing MHP technologies are discussed. We group the solvents according to their chemical classification.
4.2 Alcohol-based green anti-solvents
Isopropanol alcohol (IPA) is a type of alcohol that has been widely used in hand sanitizers. In the area of metal halide synthesis, IPA has been used as a solvent in precursor solutions in the two-step sequential deposition of MHP layers. However, PSCs made with IPA anti-solvents exhibited inferior performance in comparison to other anti-solvents.117,119,123 Bu et al. found that the use of alcohols (iso-propanol and iso-butanol)-based anti-solvents in the synthesis of the double cation perovskite FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3, led to perovskite films with rough surfaces and some pinholes. The authors proposed that this was due to the dissolution of organic components in the perovskite compound such as methylamine iodide, methylamine bromine, formamidine iodide in the alcohols, leading to the decomposition of the perovskites.117 In order to use the alcohols as anti-solvents, excessive organic salt is needed in the perovskite precursor to compensate for the loss of the organic salt in the anti-solvent treatment step. Zhang et al. used 2-butyl alcohol as an anti-solvent in the MAPbI3 perovskite film synthesis. They obtained uniform, smooth MAPbI3 thin films from the precursor solution containing an excessive amount of MAI (PbI2:MAI = 1:2 M/M). The process required an extra washing step to accurately control the content of MAI. MAPbI3 PSCs made by this method produced a maximum PCE of 14.3%.124 Another option for addressing the loss of organic components in alcohol is to directly add the organic compounds into the anti-solvent to reduce the dissolution of the FAI/MABr from the perovskite films during the anti-solvent treatment. Tian et al. added a moderate concentration of FAI/MABr into the anti-solvent bath in their fabrication of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite films. Among the different anti-solvents investigated, they found that n-butyl alcohol (n-BA) is a more suitable anti-solvent as compared to other anti-solvents including CB, DE, ethyl acetate (EA), methanol, ethanol and IPA.125 The anti-solvent treatment was performed by soaking the spin-coated perovskite film in the anti-solvent bath instead of dripping the solvent on top of the spinning perovskite substrate. In this way, the perovskite film was surrounded by excessive anti-solvent, which caused the inter-diffusion of the anti-solvent diluting the perovskite wet film. Thus, the perovskite film was formed slower in wet conditions, producing smoother and denser films, resulting in PSC with PCE of 17.67%. EA-based anti-solvent systems have also been tested but reproducibility was reported as an issue due to the film's sensitivity to the soaking time.125
Alcohol with medium polarity, by controlling alkyl chain length in the solvent molecule, may suppress the issue of the loss of organic cations in conventional alcohol anti-solvents. Li et al. reported that 2-pentyl alcohol (2-PA) with lower polarity than IPA can remove only unbound MAI and residual solvent, inducing the formation of lead polyhalide soft frameworks for the growth of perovskite films consisting of large crystal grains, excellent smoothness and crystallinity (Fig. 16). The authors also compared the effect of DE, CB and TL on the perovskite film morphology and device performance. Despite having comparable polarity to 2-PA, the low solubility of DE in DMSO makes it difficult to penetrate the perovskite precursor film; as a result, the films showed poorer crystallinity. The weak extraction ability of non-polar solvents like CB and TL to DMF/DMSO solvent led to perovskite films with pinholes (Fig. 16). As a result, the MAPbI3 PSCs device fabricated with the 2-PA anti-solvent achieved the best PCE of 17.14%, which outperformed devices made with DE, CB and TL anti-solvents.123
 Fig. 16  XRD patterns and SEM micrographs showing the morphologies of MAPbI3 perovskite films made with different anti-solvents including 2-PA, CB, TL, IPA and DE. Reprinted with permission from Li et al.123 Copyright Elsevier 2018. 
4.3 Ester-based green anti-solvents
Ethyl acetate (EA), the ester of ethanol and acetic acid, is also considered a green solvent and has been widely used in practice. EA-based anti-solvents have been shown to produce perovskite thin films with better morphologies as compared to CB (Fig. 17a). Bu et al. used EA as the anti-solvent for the synthesis of perovskite thin films and as the solvent to prepare hole transporting materials (HTM) solution to improve the interface property between the perovskite and the HTM layer. They achieved the FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 PSC with a PCE of 19.43%. The performance was slightly higher than the device with CB-based anti-solvent.117 To understand the interaction between the anti-solvent EA and the perovskite film, Zhang et al. determined the molecular electrostatic potential of the solvent based on DFT calculations. The results showed that the intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed between the EA anti-solvent and DMSO solvent in the perovskite precursor effectively prevented EA from evaporation after anti-solvent dripping treatment, thus avoiding the irregular growth of the perovskite intermediate phase (MAI·PbI2·DMSO) during the subsequent drying process (Fig. 17b). Compared to DE, EA-based anti-solvent dripping can further slow the perovskite crystallization, resulting in MAPbI3 perovskite films with larger grain sizes and smoother surfaces. The corresponding PSC devices showed improved performance and stability.126 Nevertheless, the effect of the anti-solvent is dependent on both the composition of the perovskite and the amount of anti-solvent used. Optimisation of the perovskite composition and volume of the EA anti-solvent used during the fabrication of perovskite resulted in an impressive device performance up to 20.93% being achieved with (MAPbI3)1−x(FAPbIBr2)x perovskite. The perovskite film showed μm-sized grains and reduced charge trap density with optimal volume of EA anti-solvent.127 The effect of acetate with different alkyl chains, including methyl-, ethyl-, propyl-, and butyl-acetate, on the crystal growth mechanism was investigated by Yang et al. The results showed that among the different alkyl acetate solvents, methyl acetate is the most suitable anti-solvent to deliver a dense and pinhole-free MAPbI3 film.128 This is attributed to methyl acetate having the highest vapor pressure as compared to the other acetates, which accelerates the evaporation rate of excess DMF and controls the perovskite nucleation process. In addition, the higher water solubility of methyl acetate decreases the moisture effect on the perovskite intermediate phase since the methyl acetate can act as a moisture absorber. By using methyl acetate-based green anti-solvent, PSCs with MAPbI3 produced the highest PCE of 16.3%.128 PSCs with remarkable performance were also achieved with propyl acetate-based anti-solvent. Gao et al. used propyl acetate as an anti-solvent in the fabrication of MAPbI3 PSCs with a configuration of FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Ag. They obtained a PCE of up to 22.38%, one of the highest device performances among PSCs fabricated by green anti-solvents.129
 Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 PSCs made with CB (top) and EA (under) anti-solvents. Reprinted with permission from Bu et al.117 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2017. (b) The molecular electrostatic potential of EA and an illustration of molecular bonding between EA and DMSO solvent, together with their FTIR spectra. Reprinted with permission from Zhang et al.126 Copyright Elsevier 2019. (c) Top view SEM images of perovskite films that have been quenched by CB, TLN, and ANS anti-solvents fabricated inside and outside of the glovebox, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Yavari et al.133 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2018. 
The methyl ester of benzoic acid, methyl benzoate (MB), was used as a non-toxic bi-functional anti-solvent in the fabrication of (FA0.85MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3-based PSCs. A significant enhancement in the perovskite film quality was observed when MB was used for anti-solvent treatment. Specifically, the MB-treated film exhibited better smoothness, larger grain size and less residual PbI2 on the film surface as compared to the conventional anti-solvents like EA and CB. This was attributed to the better dissolving ability of MB for the perovskite precursor than EA and CB, resulting in the recrystallization of the small crystals into larger ones. In this way, MB plays a dual role as both an anti-solvent and digestive-ripening agent for perovskite grain growth. Using this strategy Yun et al. achieved a PCE of up to 22.37% with the MB-based PSCs, whereas the PSCs made from the EA and CB-based anti-solvents produced lower PCEs of 20.77% and 19.38%, respectively.130
Although not a classic ester, tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), which is also called tetraethoxysilane, is another environmentally benign anti-solvent. In the comparison with CB and TL, TEOS allows relatively relaxed fabrication conditions for PSCs since the quality of the perovskite film made from TEOS anti-solvent is less sensitive to experimental conditions such as dripping time and volume. This has many benefits in the practical fabrication of PSC because simple operation conditions and higher device reproducibility are two of the criteria for the commercial success of PSC technology. The advantages are ascribed to the difference in the miscibility of TEOS with DMSO, along with the volatilization of the anti-solvent. The MAPbI3-based PSCs with high reproducibility showed a PCE of 17.02% with the TEOS based low-toxic anti-solvent, which even outperformed the PSCs made with CB and TL (15.4% and 15.6%, respectively) under the same conditions.131 Recently, tetraethyl orthocarbonate (TEOC), which has been mainly used in the synthesis of pharmaceutical intermediates due to its low toxicity, has been reported as a more suitable anti-solvent for PSC fabrication. TEOC has a high boiling point (161 °C), high viscosity (1.06 mPa s) and strong interaction with DMF/DMSO through hydrogen bonding. It can effectively delay the drying process of a perovskite film, leading to enhanced film morphology. The fabricated MAPbI3 PSCs exhibited 18.15% PCE in a device structure that used PCBM as an electron transport layer. In comparison, the PSCs made with CB anti-solvent showed a PCE of merely 15.38% with a similar fabrication process.132
4.4 Ethers-based green anti-solvents
Various ethers with relatively low toxicity have demonstrated good performance in solution processing perovskites. Among them, diethyl ether (DE) has been widely used for the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs.42,134,135 In particular, it exhibits outstanding performance in triple-cation-based PSCs as compared to other kinds of anti-solvent due to its ability to push perovskite precursors into the metastable zone.120 In terms of MAPbI3 PSCs, Wang et al. showed that di-isopropyl ether (DIE) could be a more suitable candidate for the anti-solvent. The PCE of the MAPbI3 PSCs made with a DIE anti-solvent reached 17.09%, surpassing the PCE of PSCs fabricated with other anti-solvents, including DE, chloroform, CB, and TL. This is attributed to the excellent stability of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex in the DIE anti-solvents while other anti-solvents, such as DE, cause the decomposition of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex into PbI2(DMSO)2. The stable MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex in the presence of anti-solvent is crucial to retain the balance ratio of perovskite cations and anions in the final film.136
Methoxybenzene, which is commonly known as anisole (ANS), is a low hazardous solvent that is often used as a fragrance in cosmetics and foods. ANS is considered a potential green solvent to replace CB.137 Zhang et al. prepared MA and FA mixed cation perovskite films with ANS-based anti-solvent. They found that compared to the film made with CB-based anti-solvent, the perovskite films made by ANS anti-solvent possessed smoother surfaces and larger grains. Accordingly, the corresponding PSC showed a PCE of 19.42%, which is slightly higher than the CB-processed PSCs (19.09%).137 A study of the binding modes of the ANS molecule on the (001) surface of MAPbI3 perovskite showed that the ANS molecules usually attach to the perovskite surface by the electrostatic interactions between CH3O− methoxy groups and the PbI6 octahedra on the perovskite surface.138 However, it is unclear whether the same mechanism applies when ANS is used as an anti-solvent in solution processing of perovskite, in which the perovskite precursor is in contact with ANS. Nevertheless, the perovskite film made by using anisole as a green anti-solvent either in the anti-solvent bath method or anti-solvent dripping method showed impressive performance in PSC devices. Depending on the perovskite composition, a PCE of 20.3% for FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.5Br0.5)3 tandem PSCs,139 17.8% for MA0.4FA0.6Sn0.6Pb0.4I3 PSCs,140 and 18.2% for FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 PSCs141 have been reported for the corresponding PSCs. Anisole also offers advantages for PSCs fabricated in atmospheric conditions instead of a glovebox. Yavari et al. fabricated Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 in both an N2 gas environment and ambient air with different anti-solvents including ANS, CB and TL.133 They found that under ambient conditions the TL anti-solvent caused aggregation, resulting in a thin film with pinholes, while using ANS or CB resulted in relatively uniform and smooth films (Fig. 17c). A comparison of the device performances showed that ANS has no notable disadvantages in terms of photovoltaic performance as compared to CB and TL. The PSC fabricated by using ANS as the anti-solvent for the perovskite precursor solution and a solvent for hole transport material reached an impressive stable PCE of 20.2%.
Wang et al. systematically compared the effects of the polarities of different ether-based anti-solvents including DE, ANS, DIE and dibutyl ether (DBE) on perovskite films. The polarities of the solvents are in the order of ANS > DE > DIE > DBE. Among these four solvents, DIE could completely extract DMF solvent during the anti-solvent treatment step without decomposing the MAI·PbI2·DMSO complex intermediate phase. This is ascribed to the suitable polarity of the DIE molecule. Solvents with higher polarities than DIE such as DE and ANS resulted in the perovskite films with high concentrations of PbI2, while the DBE with lower polarity than DIE led to a film with low crystallinity due to presence of residual DMF. The compatibility of DIE with different perovskite compositions was demonstrated, including Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, (FAPbI3)0.9(MAPbBr3)0.1 and FA0.83Cs0.17PbI2.7Br0.3. The corresponding PSCs showed PCEs up to 21.26% 20.15% and 20.05%, respectively.142
4.5 Hydrocarbon-based green anti-solvents
Hydrocarbon-based solvents are considered to be greener solvents than their chlorinated counterparts such as chlorobenzene, dichlorobenzene and chloroform. Several aromatic hydrocarbons including o-xylene, p-xylene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene have been investigated to replace halogenated anti-solvents like CB in perovskite solution processing. The study of using o-xylene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene as anti-solvents in the fabrication of MAPbI3-based PSCs showed that both alternatives can produce high-quality perovskite film with similar film quality to that made by CB. With the PC61BM additive in the anti-solvents, they made PSCs with PCEs of 16.82% for o-xylene and 16.83% for 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene based anti-solvent.143 Similarly, p-xylene anti-solvent was used to fabricate (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbI3)0.15 PSCs, yielding a PCE of 17.8%. However, the device with p-xylene anti-solvent was outperformed by devices made with other anti-solvents due to the low miscibility of p-xylene with DMF/DMSO.144 Petroleum ether (PE), which is classified as a hydrocarbon solvent, has also been used as an anti-solvent in perovskite synthesis by solution-processing. PE is highly volatile and is commonly used as a solvent in material synthesis. However, when PE is used alone as an anti-solvent in perovskite solution processing, the perovskite film showed a discontinuous morphology due to the ultra-rapid extraction of DMF solvent by PE, leading to poor device performance of merely 10.15% for MAPbI3-based PSCs.145 To address this issue, solvents with stronger polarities such as EA were added into PE to balance the DMF extraction rate of the anti-solvent system. This strategy successfully enhanced the morphology of MAPbI3 perovskite films and thus, the device performance.145

N-Hexane is a cheap, relatively safe hydrocarbon solvent. MAPbI3 PSCs made with N-hexane anti-solvent were demonstrated by Lin et al. who achieved a PCE of 11.7%.146 Most recently, Gao et al. compared iso-octane anti-solvent with other anti-solvents including propyl acetate, 2-methyl-1-propanol, ethyl ether and chlorobenzene. They found that iso-octane can promote the more rapid growth of perovskite crystals, leading to perovskite films with extremely smooth surfaces and large grain sizes. Consequently, the MAPbI3 PSC made with the iso-octane anti-solvent achieved a PCE of 22.78%, which is among the highest performance PSCs fabricated with green anti-solvents.129
Nevertheless, to date, the performance of PSCs made with less toxic anti-solvents is generally lower as compared to the PSCs made by using established anti-solvents like CB or DE. DE-based anti-solvents delivered the best single junction PSCs to date, with PCE of 25.2%.147Table 2 summarizes the different types of green anti-solvent that have been studied for use with PSCs. The associated toxicity, molecular structure of each solvent and the best PSC performance are also provided.
Table 2 Green anti-solvent used for solution processing perovskite and PSC devices. The hazardous classification of each solvent is shown according to the Globally Harmonised System (GHS)




Solvent
Molecular structure
Classification according to GHS
Perovskite material
PCE (%)
Less Toxic





a Toxicity (x): x is the toxicity category according to GHS.





Chlorobenzene



Flammable liquids (3)*
Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3
23%148








Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Chronic aquatic hazard (2)








Bromobenzene



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
12.98%149








Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Chronic aquatic hazard (2)








Iodobenzene



Acute toxicity, oral (4)
MAPbI3
13.67%149




Di-chlorobenzene



Acute toxicity, oral (4)
MAPbI3
12%150








Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage (2A)












Skin sensitisation (1)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Acute aquatic hazard (1)












Chronic aquatic hazard (1)








Toluene



Flammable liquids (2)
(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15
19.7%144








Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Reproductive toxicity (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3), (2)












Aspiration hazard (1)









o-Xylene



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
16.82%143
Yes






Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Acute toxicity, dermal (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)









p-Xylene



Flammable liquids (3)
(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15
17.8%144
Yes






Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Acute toxicity, dermal (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)








1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
16.83%143
Yes






Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)












Chronic aquatic hazard (2)








Isooctane



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
22.78%129
Yes






Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)












Acute aquatic hazard (1)












Chronic aquatic hazard (1)









n-Hexane



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
11.7%146
Yes






Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Reproductive toxicity (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)












Chronic aquatic hazard (1)








Trifluorotoluene



Flammable liquids (2)
(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15
20.3%144








Chronic aquatic hazard (2)








Chloroform



Acute toxicity, oral (4)
MAPbI3
20.49%151








Acute toxicity, inhalation (3)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)












Carcinogenicity (2)












Reproductive toxicity (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3), (1).








Diethyl ether



Flammable liquids (1)
FAPbI3
25.2%147
Yes






Acute toxicity, oral (4)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Di-n-propyl ether



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
7.96%136
Yes






Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Di-isopropyl ether



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
21.26%142
Yes






Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Di-n-butyl ether



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
18.64%142
Yes






Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Anisole



Flammable liquids (3)
Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
20.2%133
Yes


Petroleum ether



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
10.15%145
Yes






Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)












Aspiration hazard (1)












Chronic aquatic hazard (2)








Methyl acetate



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
16.3%128
Yes






Serious eye damage (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Ethyl acetate



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
20.93%127
Yes






Serious eye damage (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Propyl acetate



Flammable liquids (2)
MAPbI3
22.38%129
Yes






Serious eye damage (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Butyl acetate



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
12.7%128
Yes






Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Methyl Benzoate



Acute toxicity, oral (4)
(FA0.85MA0.15) Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
22.37%130
Yes


2-Pentanol



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
17.14%123
Yes






Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








2-Butanol



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
15.06%152
Yes






Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Iso-butanol



Flammable liquids (3)
FA0.85MA0.15Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3
15.77%117
Yes






Acute toxicity, oral (4)












Skin corrosion/irritation (2)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (1)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








2-Propanol



Flammable liquids (2)
FA0.85MA0.15Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3
14.75%117
Yes






Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Tetraethyl orthosilicate



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
17.02%131
Yes






Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)












Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)












Specific target organ toxicity (3)








Tetraethyl orthocarbonate



Flammable liquids (3)
MAPbI3
18.15%132
Yes




5. Summary and outlook
Metal halide perovskite-based technologies, including solar cells and other optoelectronic devices, are on the edge of commercialisation. The synthesis of perovskite materials by solution processing offers many advantages in terms of cost-effectiveness and scalability. In this process, solvents are ubiquitous and critical for the quality of the perovskite films and their applications. Hazards associated with the solvents used in metal halide perovskite solution processing cannot be ignored, and could become a limiting factor for the large-scale production of perovskite materials either as thin films or powders (crystals). Therefore, it is of great importance to develop green synthesis protocols for metal halide perovskite materials by using less toxic or non-toxic solvents that have minimum health and environmental effects.
Currently, there is still a lack of fundamental guidelines for solvent screening for metal halide perovskite solution processing. The traditional Hansen solubility model is not adequate to explain or predicate the solubility of solid PbX2 in a solvent due to the lack of consideration of ionic and dative interactions between the tetraethoxysilane solvent and the perovskite precursor solute. A modified Hansen solubility model has made some progress, but the development of new theories that can help in understanding the solution chemistry, rheology, and drying microfluidics of perovskite precursor is still urgently needed to better control the final film quality including morphology, grain size, crystallinity, and phase purity under different experimental environmental conditions. Another important factor is the coordination interactions of the solvent with solid perovskite precursors. Abundant experimental evidence has shown that the ability of a solvent to form complexes with perovskite precursors such as PbX2 and MAX plays a key role in controlling the perovskite morphology. Since the perovskite precursors for solar cells are generally colloidal dispersions in a mother solution, knowledge of the colloidal chemistry of the perovskite precursor solution is needed to guide coordination engineering to achieve better perovskite materials.
To date, most of the reported environmentally benign solvents for metal halide perovskites contain methylamine ligand in the solvent. This is because the compound containing methylamine ligand has a low melting point (ionic liquids) and can be directly used to form perovskite compounds that contain MA. In contrast, the reports on green solvents for highly favourable inorganic perovskite material are quite limited. Among the reported environmentally friendly solvents for perovskite precursors, ionic liquids (ILs) have a remarkable combination of desirable properties such as high polarity, high ionic conductivity, excellent thermal and electrochemical stability and low vapour pressure. The ability to retard the reaction rate of perovskite precursors by the high-viscosity ILs creates an excellent environment for the crystallization of perovskites. Ionic liquids also impede the diffusion of small clusters to meet and form nanoparticles, resulting more homogeneous film formation. Inorganic PSCs fabricated from ILs-based solvents have been demonstrated but the performance still requires further improvement as compared to the state-of-the-art DMF/DMSO-based solvents. ILs can also be used in perovskite technologies as solvents, additives, and interface modifiers in electron transport layers. The flexibility of tuning the cations and anions of ILs to achieve desirable properties makes ILs promising green solvents for commercial production.
Research on the development of the less hazardous anti-solvents in perovskite solution processing has shown several promising candidates including hydrocarbons, ethers, esters, and alcohols. These solvents are generally considered safe with limited exposure doses, although they are not non-toxic. Ideally, a one-step solution deposition of perovskite without using the anti-solvent step is more favourable for industrial applications in terms of processing simplicity and lower module price. If this is not avoidable, the selection of a green solvent should align with the government-regulated permissible exposure limits, recommended exposure limits, and other industrial limiting factors (immediate danger to life and health, lower explosion limit). These solvent systems may be safe on the laboratory scale but are not industrially relevant due to other factors. Toxicology studies to assess their eco-friendliness are necessary.
Lastly, the capability of the green solvents in large-scale production for various applications needs to be demonstrated. With in-depth knowledge of the solution chemistry, approved toxicology and the ability to deliver high-quality perovskite crystals, these green solvents will be the key to the commercialization of perovskite materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
H. W., J. B. and W. M. thank Australian Research Council (ARC) for the financial support to this work (DP190102252, DP210102580). M. T. H. thanks Queensland University of Technology for the QUT Postgraduate Research Award (QUTPRA) scholarship. S. M. and F. U. are grateful for the financial support from German Science Foundation (DFG) provided in the framework of the priority program “SPP 2196 – Perovskite semiconductors: From fundamental properties to devices”.
Notes and references
NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20190802.pdf, 2019.
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao and Z. Yuan, 
            et al., Rational molecular passivation for high-performance perovskite light-emitting diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Kim, S. Kim, A. Kakekhani, J. Park, J. Park and Y.-H. Lee, 
            et al., Comprehensive defect suppression in perovskite nanocrystals for high-efficiency light-emitting diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 1–8 Search PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon and M. E. Ziffer, 
            et al., Impact of microstructure on local carrier lifetime in perovskite solar cells, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Nonradiative recombination in perovskite solar cells: the role of interfaces, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang and S. D. Stranks, 
            et al., Direct measurement of the exciton binding energy and effective masses for charge carriers in organic–inorganic tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis and V. Sundström, 
            et al., Intrinsic femtosecond charge generation dynamics in single crystal CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700–3707 RSC .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. Buonassisi, Identifying defect-tolerant semiconductors with high minority-carrier lifetimes: beyond hybrid lead halide perovskites, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park and K. Zhu, Scalable fabrication and coating methods for perovskite solar cells and solar modules, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 333–350 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Wexler, B. D. Anderson, S. C. Gad, P. B. Hakkinen, M. Kamrin and A. De Peyster, et al., Encyclopedia of toxicology, Academic Press,  2005, vol. 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov and S. I. Seok, 
            et al., Challenges for commercializing perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Borchert, R. L. Milot, J. B. Patel, C. L. Davies, A. D. Wright and L. Martínez Maestro, 
            et al., Large-area, highly uniform evaporated formamidinium lead triiodide thin films for solar cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2799–2804 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chen, H. W. Kang, S. Y. Hsiao, P. F. Yang, K. M. Chiang and H. W. Lin, Efficient and uniform planar-type perovskite solar cells by simple sequential vacuum deposition, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6647–6652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Longo, L. Gil-Escrig, M. J. Degen, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Perovskite solar cells prepared by flash evaporation, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7376–7378 RSC .
R. Swartwout, M. T. Hoerantner and V. Bulović, Scalable Deposition Methods for Large-area Production of Perovskite Thin Films, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 119–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Wang, S. Tan, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang and Y. Yang, Opportunities and challenges of lead-free perovskite optoelectronic devices, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 368–379 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Z. Song and Y. Yan, From Lead Halide Perovskites to Lead-Free Metal Halide Perovskites and Perovskite Derivatives, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Prospects for low-toxicity lead-free perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 965 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Nie, R. R. Sumukam, S. H. Reddy, M. Banavoth and S. I. Seok, Lead-Free Perovskite Solar Cells Enabled by Hetero-Valent Substitutes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2363–2385 RSC .
D. Yao, M. T. Hoang and H. Wang, Low-Dimensional-Networked Perovskites with A-Site-Cation Engineering for Optoelectronic Devices, Small Methods, 2021, 2001147 CrossRef .
G. Pacchioni, Highly efficient perovskite LEDs, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1802 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, C. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Materials chemistry and engineering in metal halide perovskite lasers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 951–982 RSC .
S. Ghosh, S. Mishra and T. Singh, Antisolvents in Perovskite Solar Cells: Importance, Issues, and Alternatives, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000950 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Kim and S. G. Kim, Clinical outcomes of occupational exposure to n, n-dimethylformamide: perspectives from experimental toxicology, Saf. Health Work, 2011, 2, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Verheijen, M. Lienhard, Y. Schrooders, O. Clayton, R. Nudischer and S. Boerno, 
            et al., DMSO induces drastic changes in human cellular processes and epigenetic landscape in vitro, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–12 CAS .
K. Lee, N. Chromey, R. Culik, J. Barnes and P. Schneider, Toxicity of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP): teratogenic, subchronic, and two-year inhalation studies, Fundam. Appl. Toxicol., 1987, 9, 222–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, S. B. Darling and F. You, Perovskite photovoltaics: life-cycle assessment of energy and environmental impacts, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1953–1968 RSC .

          F. Monticelli, Diethyl Ether, Encyclopedia of Toxicolog, 3rd edn,  2014 Search PubMed .

          A. Hartwig, M. Arand and M. Commission, Chlorobenzene [MAK value documentation, 2018], in The MAK Collection for Occupational Health and Safety,  2019, vol. 4, pp. 1893–1909 Search PubMed .
M. T. Hoang, A. S. Pannu, C. Tang, Y. Yang, N. D. Pham and K. Gui, 
            et al., Potassium Doping to Enhance Green Photoemission of Light-Emitting Diodes Based on CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2000742 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, P. Chen, L. Wang, G. J. Wilson and J. Bell, 
            et al., Enhanced perovskite electronic properties via a modified lead(II) chloride Lewis acid–base adduct and their effect in high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5195–5203 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun and X. Liu, 
            et al., Two-inch-sized perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) crystals: growth and characterization, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Patidar, D. Burkitt, K. Hooper, D. Richards and T. Watson, Slot-die coating of perovskite solar cells: An overview, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 22, 100808 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mathies, E. J. List-Kratochvil and E. L. Unger, Advances in Inkjet-Printed Metal Halide Perovskite Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900991 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bishop, J. A. Smith and D. G. Lidzey, Development of Spray-Coated Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48237–48245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dou, J. B. Whitaker, K. Bruening, D. T. Moore, L. M. Wheeler and J. Ryter, 
            et al., Roll-to-roll printing of perovskite solar cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen and Z. Chu, 
            et al., Surface passivation of perovskite film for efficient solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, Room-temperature crystallization of hybrid-perovskite thin films via solvent–solvent extraction for high-performance solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 RSC .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch and G. Gupta, 
            et al., High-efficiency solution-processed perovskite solar cells with millimeter-scale grains, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shen, X. Yu, X. Cai, M. Peng, Y. Ma and X. Su, 
            et al., Understanding the solvent-assisted crystallization mechanism inherent in efficient organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20454–20461 RSC .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Highly reproducible perovskite solar cells with average efficiency of 18.3% and best efficiency of 19.7% fabricated via Lewis base adduct of lead(II) iodide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Persson, K. Lyczko, D. Lundberg, L. Eriksson and A. Płaczek, Coordination chemistry study of hydrated and solvated lead(II) ions in solution and solid state, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 1058–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Claudio, H. Goldwin and J. S. Magyar, Fundamental coordination chemistry, environmental chemistry, and biochemistry of lead(II), Prog. Inorg. Chem., 2003, 51, 1–144 CAS .
E. Radicchi, E. Mosconi, F. Elisei, F. Nunzi and F. De Angelis, Understanding the solution chemistry of lead halide perovskites precursors, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3400–3409 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shargaieva, L. Kuske, J. Rappich, E. Unger and N. H. Nickel, Building blocks of hybrid perovskites: A photoluminescence study of lead-iodide solution species, ChemPhysChem, 2020, 21, 2327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Fateev, A. A. Petrov, V. N. Khrustalev, P. V. Dorovatovskii, Y. V. Zubavichus and E. A. Goodilin, 
            et al., Solution processing of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite from γ-butyrolactone: crystallization mediated by solvation equilibrium, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5237–5244 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Burrage, CCXXIII.—Studies of equilibria in systems of the type lead halide–potassium halide–water, J. Chem. Soc. (Resumed), 1926, 129, 1703–1709 RSC .
O. E. Lanford and S. J. Kiehl, The solubility of lead iodide in solutions of potassium iodide-complex lead iodide ions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1941, 63, 667–669 CrossRef CAS .
O. Horváth and I. Mikó, Spectra, equilibrium and photoredox chemistry of iodobismuthate (III) complexes in acetonitrile, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2000, 304, 210–218 CrossRef .
K. G. Stamplecoskie, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Dual nature of the excited state in organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 208–215 RSC .
R. J. Stewart, C. Grieco, A. V. Larsen, G. S. Doucette and J. B. Asbury, Molecular origins of defects in organohalide perovskites and their influence on charge carrier dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12392–12402 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mastria, S. Colella, A. Qualtieri, A. Listorti, G. Gigli and A. Rizzo, Elucidating the effect of the lead iodide complexation degree behind the morphology and performance of perovskite solar cells, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3889–3897 RSC .
A. Sharenko, C. Mackeen, L. Jewell, F. Bridges and M. F. Toney, Evolution of iodoplumbate complexes in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite precursor
solutions, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rahimnejad, A. Kovalenko, S. M. Forés, C. Aranda and A. Guerrero, Coordination chemistry dictates the structural defects in lead halide perovskites, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2795–2798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hamill Jr., J. Schwartz and Y.-L. Loo, Influence of solvent coordination on hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite formation, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 92–97 CrossRef .
O. Shargaieva, H. Näsström, J. A. Smith, D. Többens, R. Munir and E. Unger, Hybrid perovskite crystallization from binary solvent mixtures: interplay of evaporation rate and binding strength of solvents, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 3314–3321 RSC .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen and S. Yang, 
            et al., Hybrid halide perovskite solar cell precursors: colloidal chemistry and coordination engineering behind device processing for high efficiency, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jung, S.-G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Perovskite precursor solution chemistry: from fundamentals to photovoltaic applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011–2038 RSC .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui and L. Ci, 
            et al., Fabrication of perovskite films with large columnar grains via solvent-mediated ostwald ripening for efficient inverted perovskite solar cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 868–875 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Jeon, S. Lee, R. Kang, J.-E. Kim, J.-S. Yeo and S.-H. Lee, 
            et al., Planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with superior reproducibility, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. Li, M. Li, C. Fei, G. Cao and J. Tian, Colloidal engineering for monolayer CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 films toward high performance perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24168–24177 RSC .
L. Meng, Q. Wei, Z. Yang, D. Yang, J. Feng and X. Ren, 
            et al., Improved perovskite solar cell efficiency by tuning the colloidal size and free ion concentration in precursor solution using formic acid additive, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 41, 43–51 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Di Giacomo, J. Brüls, H. Gorter, I. Katsouras and P. Groen, 
            et al., Highly efficient perovskite solar cells using non-toxic industry compatible solvent system, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700091 CrossRef .

          C. M. Hansen, Hansen solubility parameters: a user's handbook, CRC press,  2007 Search PubMed .
K. L. Gardner, J. G. Tait, T. Merckx, W. Qiu, U. W. Paetzold and L. Kootstra, 
            et al., Nonhazardous solvent systems for processing perovskite photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600386 CrossRef .
A. Babaei, L. Albero-Blanquer, A. M. Igual-Muñoz, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, 
            et al., Hansen theory applied to the identification of nonhazardous solvents for hybrid perovskite thin-films processing, Polyhedron, 2018, 147, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Huang, K.-Y. Tian, H.-C. Huang, C.-F. Li, W.-C. Chu and K.-M. Lee, 
            et al., Controlling Morphology and Interface of Perovskite Layer for Scalable High-Efficiency Solar Cell Fabricated by Using Green Solvents and Blade Coating in Ambient Environment, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26041–26049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lei, M. Li, D. M. Grant, S. Yang, Y. Yu and J. A. Watts, 
            et al., Morphology and Defect Control of Metal Halide Perovskite Films for High-Performance Optoelectronics, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 5958–5972 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stevenson, B. Sorenson, V. H. Subramaniam, J. Raiford, P. P. Khlyabich and Y.-L. Loo, 
            et al., Mayer bond order as a metric of complexation effectiveness in lead halide perovskite solutions, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2435–2444 CrossRef CAS .
B. Swanson, Medical use of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), Rev. Clin. Basic Pharmacol., 1985, 5, 1–33 CAS .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu and K. Zhang, 
            et al., Retarding the crystallization of PbI 2 for highly reproducible planar-structured perovskite solar cells via sequential deposition, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
Z. Bi, X. Rodríguez-Martínez, C. Aranda, E. Pascual-San-José, A. R. Goñi and M. Campoy-Quiles, 
            et al., Defect tolerant perovskite solar cells from blade coated non-toxic solvents, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19085–19093 RSC .
K.-M. Lee, C.-H. Lai, W.-C. Chu, S.-H. Chan and V. Suryanarayanan, Thermal assisted blade coating methylammonium lead iodide films with non-toxic solvent precursors for efficient perovskite solar cells and sub-module, Sol. Energy, 2020, 204, 337–345 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giuri, S. Masi, A. Listorti, G. Gigli, S. Colella and C. E. Corcione, 
            et al., Polymeric rheology modifier allows single-step coating of perovskite ink for highly efficient and stable solar cells, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .

          W. H. Organization
        , Gamma-butyrolactone (GBL) Critical Review Report, Agenda item, 2014, 4, 1–28.
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim and J. A. Chang, 
            et al., Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Depleted hole conductor-free lead halide iodide heterojunction solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. Lee, J. H. Noh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells based on pyrene arylamine derivatives as hole-transporting materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19087–19090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, Solid-state mesostructured perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells: charge transport, recombination, and diffusion length, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 490–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manjunatha, Y.-X. Chu, M.-J. Jeng and L.-B. Chang, The characteristics of perovskite solar cells fabricated using DMF and DMSO/GBL solvents, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 1–6 Search PubMed .
X. Cao, G. Zhang, Y. Cai, L. Jiang, X. He and Q. Zeng, 
            et al., All Green Solvents for Fabrication of CsPbBr3 Films for Efficient Solar Cells Guided by the Hansen Solubility Theory, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000008 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, C. H. Van Brackle, X. Dai, J. Zhao, B. Chen and J. Huang, Tailoring solvent coordination for high-speed, room-temperature blading of perovskite photovoltaic films, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, B. Wenger, M. T. Klug, M. T. Hörantner and M. B. Johnston, 
            et al., A low viscosity, low boiling point, clean solvent system for the rapid crystallisation of highly specular perovskite films, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 145–152 RSC .
R. Warren and W. Liang, Raman spectroscopy of new lead iodide intercalation compounds, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1993, 5, 6407 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, D. Wang and H. Xu, 
            et al., Methylamine-Gas-Induced Defect-Healing Behavior of CH3NH3PbI3 Thin Films for Perovskite Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 9841–9845 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, B. Wenger, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. B. Patel, T. Crothers and Z. Wang, 
            et al., Highly crystalline methylammonium lead tribromide perovskite films for efficient photovoltaic devices, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kerner, T. H. Schloemer, P. Schulz, J. J. Berry, J. Schwartz and A. Sellinger, 
            et al., Amine additive reactions induced by the soft Lewis acidity of Pb 2+ in halide perovskites. Part I: evidence for Pb–alkylamide formation, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5251–5259 RSC .
R. A. Kerner, T. H. Schloemer, P. Schulz, J. J. Berry, J. Schwartz and A. Sellinger, 
            et al., Amine additive reactions induced by the soft Lewis acidity of Pb 2+ in halide perovskites. Part II: Impacts of amido Pb impurities in methylammonium lead triiodide thin films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5244–5250 RSC .
D. Burkitt, R. Swartwout, J. McGettrick, P. Greenwood, D. Beynon and R. Brenes, 
            et al., Acetonitrile based single step slot-die compatible perovskite ink for flexible photovoltaics, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 37415–37423 RSC .
D. Burkitt, R. Patidar, P. Greenwood, K. Hooper, J. McGettrick and S. Dimitrov, 
            et al., Roll-to-roll slot-die coated P–I–N perovskite solar cells using acetonitrile based single step perovskite solvent system, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3340–3351 RSC .
Y. Hassan, O. J. Ashton, J. H. Park, G. Li, N. Sakai and B. Wenger, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of stable and highly luminescent methylammonium lead halide nanocrystals for efficient light emitting devices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1269–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Huang, P. Wang, X. Chen, S. Zhao and Y. Dong, 
            et al., Colloidal synthesis of air-stable CH3NH3PbI3 quantum dots by gaining chemical insight into the solvent effects, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3793–3799 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Seo, T. Matsui, J. Luo, J. P. Correa-Baena, F. Giordano and M. Saliba, 
            et al., Ionic liquid control crystal growth to enhance planar perovskite solar cells efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600767 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Z. Shao, J. Gui, M. Chen, M. Liu and G. Cui, 
            et al., A polar-hydrophobic ionic liquid induces grain growth and stabilization in halide perovskites, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11059–11062 RSC .
N. Ali, C. Liang, C. Ji, H. Zhang, M. Sun and D. Li, 
            et al., Enlarging crystal grains with ionic liquid to enhance the performance of perovskite solar cells, Org. Electron., 2020, 105805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su and M. Cai, 
            et al., Thermally stable MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells with efficiency of 19.19% and area over 1 cm2 achieved by additive engineering, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
D. T. Moore, K. W. Tan, H. Sai, K. P. Barteau, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, Direct crystallization route to methylammonium lead iodide perovskite from an ionic liquid, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3197–3199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Öz, J. Burschka, E. Jung, R. Bhattacharjee, T. Fischer and A. Mettenbörger, 
            et al., Protic ionic liquid assisted solution processing of lead halide perovskites with water, alcohols and acetonitrile, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 632–638 CrossRef .
M. T. Hoang, N. D. Pham, Y. Yang, V. T. Tiong, C. Zhang and K. Gui, 
            et al., A facile, environmentally friendly synthesis of strong photo-emissive methylammonium lead bromide perovskite nanocrystals enabled by ionic liquids, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3433–3440 RSC .
D. Huang, P. Xie, Z. Pan, H. Rao and X. Zhong, One-step solution deposition of CsPbBr 3 based on precursor engineering for efficient all-inorganic perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22420–22428 RSC .
L. Chao, Y. Xia, B. Li, G. Xing, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Room-Temperature Molten Salt for Facile Fabrication of Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells in Ambient Air, Chem, 2019, 5, 995–1006 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Ran, X. Liu, H. Gu, S. Zuo and W. Hui, 
            et al., Tailoring Component Interaction for Air-Processed Efficient and Stable All-Inorganic Perovskite Photovoltaic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13354–13361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Petrov, N. A. Belich, A. Y. Grishko, N. M. Stepanov, S. G. Dorofeev and E. G. Maksimov, 
            et al., A new formation strategy of hybrid perovskites via room temperature reactive polyiodide melts, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 625–632 RSC .
H. Chen, F. Ye, W. Tang, J. He, M. Yin and Y. Wang, 
            et al., A solvent-and vacuum-free route to large-area perovskite films for efficient solar modules, Nature, 2017, 550, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. J. Traverse, P. Chen, M. Elinski, C. Yang and L. Wang, 
            et al., Aqueous-Containing Precursor Solutions for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700484 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-Y. Hsieh, T.-C. Wei, K.-L. Wu, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Efficient perovskite solar cells fabricated using an aqueous lead nitrate precursor, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13294–13297 RSC .
K. Sveinbjörnsson, N. K. K. Thein, Z. Saki, S. Svanström, W. Yang and U. B. Cappel, 
            et al., Preparation of mixed-ion and inorganic perovskite films using water and isopropanol as solvents for solar cell applications, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 606–615 RSC .
C. Du, S. Wang, X. Miao, W. Sun, Y. Zhu and C. Wang, 
            et al., Polyvinylpyrrolidone as additive for perovskite solar cells with water and isopropanol as solvents, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 10, 2374–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, G. Zhang, L. Jiang, Y. Cai, Y. Gao and W. Yang, 
            et al., Water, a Green Solvent for Fabrication of High-Quality CsPbBr3 Films for Efficient Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 5925–5931 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, M. Gandini, F. Di Stasio, P. Rastogi, F. Palazon and G. Bertoni, 
            et al., Strongly emissive perovskite nanocrystal inks for high-voltage solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, P. Guo, N. Zhou, T. J. Marks and R. P. Chang, 
            et al., Solvent-mediated crystallization of CH3NH3SnI3 films for heterojunction depleted perovskite solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11445–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Jain, T. Edvinsson and J. R. Durrant, Green fabrication of stable lead-free bismuth based perovskite solar cells using a non-toxic solvent, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Ali, I. Andreu and B. D. Gates, Green solvent assisted synthesis of cesium bismuth halide perovskite nanocrystals and the influences of slow and fast anion exchange rates, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 4442–4449 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bu, L. Wu, X. Liu, X. Yang, P. Zhou and X. Yu, 
            et al., Synergic interface optimization with green solvent engineering in mixed perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700576 CrossRef .
P. Von Weimarn, The Precipitation Laws, Chem. Rev., 1925, 2, 217–242 CrossRef .
K.-M. Lee, C.-J. Lin, B.-Y. Liou, S.-M. Yu, C.-C. Hsu and V. Suryanarayanan, 
            et al., Selection of anti-solvent and optimization of dropping volume for the preparation of large area sub-module perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, L. Zhao, M. Geng, Y. Li, B. Dong and Z. Xu, 
            et al., Selection of an anti-solvent for efficient and stable cesium-containing triple cation planar perovskite solar cells, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12141–12148 RSC .
K.-M. Lee, C.-J. Lin, B.-Y. Liou, S.-M. Yu, C.-C. Hsu and V. Suryanarayanan, Effect of anti-solvent mixture on the performance of perovskite solar cells and suppression hysteresis behavior, Org. Electron., 2019, 65, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Donald, K. Hooper and C. Hopenhayn-Rich, Reproductive and developmental toxicity of toluene: a review, Environ. Health Perspect., 1991, 94, 237–244 CAS .
S. Li, F. Zhang, Q. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Cui and T. Ji, 
            et al., Entire mirror-like perovskite films for high-performance perovskite solar cells: The role of polar anti-solvent sec-pentyl alcohol, Org. Electron., 2018, 57, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Lian, J. Song, Y. Hao, P. Zeng and H. Niu, sec-Butyl alcohol assisted pinhole-free perovskite film growth for high-performance solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3438–3445 RSC .
S. Tian, J. Li, S. Li, T. Bu, Y. Mo and S. Wang, 
            et al., A facile green solvent engineering for up-scaling perovskite solar cell modules, Sol. Energy, 2019, 183, 386–391 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Tang, X. Li and X. Yuan, Ethyl acetate green antisolvent process for high-performance planar low-temperature SnO2-based perovskite solar cells made in ambient air, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122298 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, I. Jeong, C. Park, G. Kang, I. K. Han and W. Kim, 
            et al., Morphology control of perovskite in green antisolvent system for MAPbI3-based solar cells with over 20% efficiency, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110197 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, G. Kapil, P. Zhang, Z. Hu, M. A. Kamarudin and T. Ma, 
            et al., Dependence of acetate-based antisolvents for high humidity fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite devices in ambient atmosphere, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16482–16489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, J. Meng, J. Lu and R. Zhao, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells with efficiency over 22% fabricated by green antisolvent method, Mater. Lett., 2020, 274, 127995 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yun, F. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Fang, S. Liu and W. Huang, 
            et al., A Nontoxic Bifunctional (Anti) Solvent as Digestive-Ripening Agent for High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Fu, L. Yan, P. Guo, L. Zhou and G. Wang, 
            et al., Improving the performance and reproducibility of inverted planar perovskite solar cells using tetraethyl orthosilicate as the antisolvent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3909–3916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Fu, L. Yan, J. Huang, Q. Ma and M. Humayun, 
            et al., Systematic optimization of perovskite solar cells via green solvent systems, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 123966 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yavari, M. Mazloum-Ardakani, S. Gholipour, M. M. Tavakoli, S. H. Turren-Cruz and N. Taghavinia, 
            et al., Greener, nonhalogenated solvent systems for highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800177 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Lee and H. Kanda, 
            et al., The Synergism of DMSO and Diethyl Ether for Highly Reproducible and Efficient MA0. 5FA0. 5PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi and Y. Jo, 
            et al., Methylammonium chloride induces intermediate phase stabilization for efficient perovskite solar cells, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Wang, L.-L. Deng, X. Wang, T. Wang, H.-R. Liu and S.-M. Dai, 
            et al., Di-isopropyl ether assisted crystallization of organic–inorganic perovskites for efficient and reproducible perovskite solar cells, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17893–17901 RSC .
M. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Zhou, X. Jia, Q. Ma and N. Yuan, 
            et al., Green Anti-Solvent Processed Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiency Beyond 19%, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700213 CrossRef .
A. Torres and L. G. Rego, Surface effects and adsorption of methoxy anchors on hybrid lead iodide perovskites: insights for Spiro-MeOTAD attachment, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26947–26954 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green and J. T.-W. Wang, 
            et al., Perovskite-perovskite tandem photovoltaics with optimized band gaps, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, T. Leijtens, B. Conings, A. Babayigit and H.-G. Boyen, 
            et al., Band gap tuning via lattice contraction and octahedral tilting in perovskite materials for photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11117–11124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pellaroque, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, Y. Zhang, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, 
            et al., Efficient and stable perovskite solar cells using molybdenum tris (dithiolene) s as p-dopants for spiro-OMeTAD, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2044–2050 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Wang, L.-L. Deng, S. Leng, X. Guo and C.-H. Tan, 
            et al., The mechanism of universal green antisolvents for intermediate phase controlled high-efficiency formamidinium-based perovskite solar cells, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 934–942 RSC .
F. Fang, J. Chen, G. Wu and H. Chen, Highly efficient perovskite solar cells fabricated by simplified one-step deposition method with non-halogenated anti-solvents, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 330–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paek, P. Schouwink, E. N. Athanasopoulou, K. Cho, G. Grancini and Y. Lee, 
            et al., From nano-to micrometer scale: the role of antisolvent treatment on high performance perovskite solar cells, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yi, J. Zhuang, Z. Ma, Z. Guo, W. Zhou and S. Zhao, 
            et al., Regulated perovskite crystallinity via green mixed antisolvent for efficient perovskite solar cells, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lin, J. Qiao, H. Dong, F. Ma and L. Wang, Morphology-controlled CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 films by hexane-assisted one-step solution deposition for hybrid perovskite mesoscopic solar cells with high reproductivity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22839–22845 RSC .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu and F. Rotermund, 
            et al., Efficient perovskite solar cells via improved carrier management, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan and Z. Huang, 
            et al., Managing grains and interfaces via ligand anchoring enables 22.3%-efficiency inverted perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, S. H. Chang, L.-C. Chen, C.-L. Tsai, H.-M. Cheng and W.-C. Huang, 
            et al., Interplay between nucleation and crystal growth during the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 thin films and their application in solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 583–589 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jung, S. T. Williams and A. K.-Y. Jen, Low-temperature processed high-performance flexible perovskite solar cells via rationally optimized solvent washing treatments, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62971–62977 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liang, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, L. Sun and D. Xu, Pushing the Envelope: Achieving an Open-Circuit Voltage of 1.18 V for Unalloyed MAPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells of a Planar Architecture, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801237 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Ren, Z. Li, H. Wang and Y. Hao, Mixed antisolvents assisted treatment of perovskite for photovoltaic device efficiency enhancement, Org. Electron., 2018, 56, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Minh Tam Hoang	Minh Tam Hoang received his M.S. from Kumoh National Institute of Technology, South Korea, in 2016. He is currently a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Prof. Hongxia Wang at Queensland University of Technology, Australia. His main research interest is focused on the perovskite materials for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications, specializing in perovskite nanocrystals.
Feray Ünlü	Feray Ünlü is a Ph.D. student at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry at the University of Cologne under the supervision of Prof. Sanjay Mathur. She received her Master's degree in Chemistry from the University of Cologne. She currently works on the compositional engineering and solution chemistry of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites.
Wayde Martens	Dr Wayde Martens is a Senior Lecturer at the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane, Australia. Dr Martens’ research interests are centred on the synthesis and characterisation of nanomaterials for a diverse range of applications such as water purification and energy storage. He specialises in analytical chemistry, vibrational spectroscopy, and the application of machine learning to analytical chemistry.
John Bell	John Bell is the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research and Innovation) at the University of Southern Queensland. Prior to joining USQ, Professor Bell was the Head of the School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering at the Queensland University of Technology. John has led projects in the development of energy-efficient smart windows, dye-sensitised solar cell development, and carbonaceous materials. He also has expertise in the area of energy efficiency and occupant comfort in buildings and has carried out extensive research with industry. Professor Bell has received over $28 million in research funding during his 30-year career as a researcher.
Sanjay Mathur	Sanjay Mathur is Director of the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Cologne. An Academician of the World Academy of Ceramics, he is a Fellow of the American Ceramic Society and the ASM International. He is the Founder Co-Director of the Institute of Renewable Energy Sources, Xian Jiao Tong University, China, and a World Class University Professor at the Chonbuk University in Korea. He is a SPARC Foreign Faculty at the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. His research focuses on the application of nanomaterials and advanced ceramics for energy and health technologies. He holds several patents and has authored/co-authored over 500 original research publications (h-index, 63) and co-edited 13 books.
Hongxia Wang	Hongxia Wang is a full professor at Queensland University of Technology, Australia. Her main research interest is in the development of new routes for low-cost solar cells and energy storage devices, with her current research focus being on perovskite solar cells and supercapacitors. She has received several prestigious awards, including the Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship, ARC postdoctoral fellow industry, and the “Solar Energy Journal Best Paper Award for 2016 in the topic of Photovoltaics” by the International Solar Energy Society.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structure of cubic ABX3 perovskite and the low-dimensional perovskite network variations 2D, 1D and 0D, by slicing the 3D network along the crystallographic planes. Reprinted with permission from Yao et al.21 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2021. Examples of perovskites with different morphologies for different applications: (b) perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from Hoang et al.31 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. (c) Perovskite thin film in a perovskite solar cell (PSC) configuration. Reprinted with permission from Pham et al.32 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021. (d) Centimetre-sized perovskite single-crystal. Reprinted with permission from Liu et al.33 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2015.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the solution processing of perovskite materials. The perovskite precursor is dissolved in suitable solvents to form the perovskite inks. The ink then is used for the growth of perovskite single-crystals, perovskite nanocrystals and perovskite thin film by different solution deposition techniques including spin coating, inkjet printing, spray coating, sheet-to-sheet blade coating, and roll-to-roll blade coating.	 
PbI2 + I− ⇌ PbI3−	(1)
PbI3− + I− ⇌ PbI42−	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Solution chemistry in perovskite precursor solutions in DMSO: (a) iodoplumbates in PbI2 solution; (b) no chloroplumbates in PbCl2 solution; (c) PL emissions of perovskite thin films from different inks; (d) absorption spectra of the MAI/PbI2 inks showing iodoplumbates and increasing amounts of PbI42− with increasing MAI; (e) absorption spectra of the MAI/PbCl2 inks showing iodoplumbates; (f) charge carrier recombination rates as a function of the trap densities of the perovskite thin films obtained from the investigated inks. Reprinted with permission from Stewart et al.52 Copyright American Chemical Society 2016.	 

 	Fig. 4  The calculated stable coordination complexes of lead-iodide-solvent in solution (X = solvent ligand). Reprinted with the permission of Radicchi et al.45 Copyright, American Chemical Society 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  
In situ GIWAX patterns of MAPbI3 precursor inks with mixed solvents (1:1 v/v) as a function of drying time. (a) DMF/DMSO, (b) DMF/NMP, (c) DMF/GBL, (d) GBL/DMSO, (e) GBL/NMP, and (f) NMP/DMSO. Red and yellow lines show the volumes of the solvents in the mixtures over time, the XRD pattern of the intermediate phases from pure and solvent mixtures are shown in (g1) to (h3). Reprinted with permission from Shargaieva et al.57 Copyright Royal Society of Chemistry 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  Perovskite colloidal solutions in DMF: (a) the Tyndall effect, (b) size distribution of the colloids via DLS, (c) absorption behaviour of the thin films and inks, (d) absorption behaviour of inks with different stoichiometries; solid lines, MAI/PbI2 ratios; dashed line, MAI/MACl/PbI2 ratios, and (e) Proposed mechanism of the crystallisation of the perovskites as a function of the stoichiometry. Reprinted with the permission of Yan et al.58 Copyright American Chemical Society 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Hansen space defined in three intrinsic material variables: dispersion (δd), polarity (δp), and hydrogen bonding (δh) of the investigated solvents and solvent systems for PbAc2/PbCl2/MAI to at least 1 M PbX2 and 3 M MAI. The parameters for inks that are hazardous (Haz) (circles) and nonhazardous (Nonhaz) (crosses) and that achieved either solubility (green) or were insoluble (red) are shown. (b) Photographs of perovskite precursors in different solvent mixtures defined from Hansen parameters. Reprinted with permission from Gardner et al.67 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2016. (c) Plots of donor number versus Hansen distance for different solvents related to dimethylformamide. Reprinted with permission from Huang et al.69 Copyright American Chemical Society 2020. (d) Ab initio predictions of ΔHsolv for PbX2, PbX+, Pb2+, and X− complexes in pure solvents, with CH3NH3+ as noted in the labels. Reprinted with permission from Stevenson et al.71 Copyright American Chemical Society 2017.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Demonstration of the ACN/methylamine solvent effectivity. (a) MAI:PbI2 (1:1.06 molar ratio) precursor in neat ACN solvent and in ACN/methylamine solvent. Reprinted with permission from Noel et al.85 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017. (b) In situ optical microscopy of the morphology evolution of MAPbI3 perovskite crystals upon exposure to methylamine gas and methylamine degassing. Reprinted with permission from Zhou et al.87 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2015. (c) Proposed intercalation of the small amines molecules into layered structure PbI2. (d) SEM and optical images of perovskite film fabricated from the ACN/methylamine solvent system exhibiting good uniformity and smoothness. Reprinted with permission from Noel et al.85 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photographs of binary perovskite ink-systems (PIL main solvent/co-solvent) with increasing co-solvent volume. Green means soluble, red indicates the separation or formation of solids. Reprinted with permission from Öz et al.100 Copyright Elsevier 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) XRD pattern of MAPbI3 thin film prepared from methylammonium propionate/water ink (3:2, v/v, c = 0.5 M). (b) XRD patterns of spin-coated MAPbI3 thin films showing the solvent effects. Reprinted with permission from Öz et al.100 Copyright Elsevier 2018. (c) TEM images of MAPbBr3 NCs synthesized from MAP and MAB ILs. (d) Excitation-intensity-dependent photoluminescence quantum efficiencies of the thin films fabricated from MAPbBr3(MAP) and MAPbBr3(MAB) NCs. Reprinted with permission from Hoang et al.101 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Dynamic light scattering spectra of MAAc and DMF perovskite precursor solution with different concentrations from 10 to 300 mg mL−1. Reprinted with permission from Chao et al.103 Copyright Elsevier 2019. (b) A schematic illustration of the interactions of PbI2 in the two perovskite precursors DMF and MAAc. Reprinted with permission from Wang et al.104 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  The reactivity of metallic lead with reactive polyiodide melts (RPMs) together with reconstructed phase assemblage for one weak interaction depicted on the Gibbs triangle. XRD and Raman analyses of solid and liquid fractions of the products of lead interaction with RPMs of different compositions (#1–#4) are shown around the triangle. The bottom optical pictures and Raman shift plots correspond to pure MAI/I2 precursor RPMs of 1:1–1:4 component ratios without lead. Reprinted with permission from Petrov et al.105 Copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure of the precursor MAI·mMA, its XRD pattern, and its FTIR spectrum in comparison with MAI. (b) Structure of the precursor PbI2·nMA, its XRD pattern and its FTIR spectrum in comparison with PbI2. (c) The steps of the pressure processing method: (I) add amine complex precursors and cover with PI film; (II) apply pressure; and (III) heat and peel off the PI film. Reprinted with permission from Chen et al.106 Copyright Springer Nature 2017.	 
	(4)


DMSO for PbI2	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/PSK/	Two-step spin coating	13.5%	
73

IPA for MAI	
	Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
	
	

DMSO	MAPbI3	ITO/c-TiO2/PSK/	One-step spin coating	10.8%	
65

DMSO/2-MP/1-P (50/45/5)	
	Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
	16.5%	

DMSO/GBL (9/1)	MAPbI3	FTO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag.	Blade coating	16.90%	
75


	
	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
	17.55%	

DMSO/GBL (9/1) + PEG additive	MAPbI3	FTO/NiOx/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag	Blade coating	17.02%	
69

DMSO/GBL (3/2)	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Blade coating	18.0%	
74

DMSO/GBL (1/1)	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C60 PCBM/BCP/Ag	One-step spin coating	8.87%	
82

DMSO/starch	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/LiF/Al	One-step spin coating	17.2%	
76

GBL	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au	One-step spin coating	12.0%	
78

GBL	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2//PSK/Au	One-step SPIN coating	8.0%	
79

GBL	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	12.7%	
80

GBL	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	8.85%	
81

GBL	MAPbI3	ITO/c-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	9.0%	
67

GBL/EtOH	
	
	
	11.0%	

GBL/AcOH	
	
	
	14.1%	

GBL/EtOH/AcOH	
	
	
	15.1%	

GBL/PrOH/AcOH	
	
	
	14.0%	

GBL/PEG (4/6) for PbBr2	CsPbBr3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/carbon	Two-step spin coating	8.1%	
83

H2O for CsBr	
	
	
	
	

MA/ACN	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/C60/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	19.0%	
85


	
	FTO/poly-TPD/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag	
	16.8%	

MA/ACN	MAPbBr3	FTO/SnO2/PSK/SWCNT/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	8.9%	
88

MA/ACN/2-ME (3:2) + DMSO additive	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/PSK/fullerene (C60)/BCP/metal	Blade coating	21.3%	
84

MA/ACN + HCl additive	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag	Slot-die coating	14.7%	
91

MA/ACN + HCl additive	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/BCP/Ag	Slot-die coating	12.2%	
92

MA/MAI and MA/PbI2 ILs	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Pressure processing	19.3%	
106

DMSO-ACN-MAP ILs	(MA0.15FA0.85)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	15.46%	
100

MAAc IL + DMSO	CsPbBr3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/carbon	One-step spin coating	7.37%	
102

MAAc IL	MAPbI3	ITO/CPTA/BaCl/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Au	One-step spin coating	20.05%	
103


	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/C61 PCBM/LiF/Al	
	17.25%	

MAAc IL	CsPbI1.5Br1.5	FTO/SnO2/PSK/ Spiro-OMeTAD/ MoO3/Ag	One-step spin coating	14.92%	
104


	CsPbI2Br	
	
	15.83%	


	CsPbI2.5Br0.5	
	
	17.10%	

H2O for Pb(NO3)2	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Two-step spin coating	12.58%	
108

IPA for MAI	
	
	
	
	

H2O for Pb(NO3)2/CsNO3	Cs0.1FA0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Two-step spin coating	13.0%	
109

IPA for FAI/FABr	
	
	
	
	

H2O for Pb(NO3)2 + PVP additive	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Two-step spin coating	15.19%	
110

IPA for MAI	
	
	
	
	

IPA/hexane/butylamine	CsPbBr3	FTO/c-TiO2//PSK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	One-step spin coating	5.4%	
112

Methyl acetate	MABi2I9	FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/P3HT/Au	One-step spin coating	1.62%	
114


 	Fig. 14  Diagraph of the boiling point versus polarity of commonly used solvents defining suitable solvents for the anti-solvent step. Reprinted with permission from Bu et al.117 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2017.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM images showing the morphology of MAPbI3 perovskite layers with different anti-solvent treatments. (b) A schematic diagram of the perovskite precursor concentration with respect to various anti-solvents. The inset photos show the perovskite precursor treatment with TL, CF, CB, DCB, and IPA before annealing. (c) I–V graph showing the performance of MAPbI3 PSC with different anti-solvent treatments. Reprinted with permission from Lee et al.119 Copyright Elsevier 2017.	 

 	Fig. 16  XRD patterns and SEM micrographs showing the morphologies of MAPbI3 perovskite films made with different anti-solvents including 2-PA, CB, TL, IPA and DE. Reprinted with permission from Li et al.123 Copyright Elsevier 2018.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional SEM images of FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 PSCs made with CB (top) and EA (under) anti-solvents. Reprinted with permission from Bu et al.117 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2017. (b) The molecular electrostatic potential of EA and an illustration of molecular bonding between EA and DMSO solvent, together with their FTIR spectra. Reprinted with permission from Zhang et al.126 Copyright Elsevier 2019. (c) Top view SEM images of perovskite films that have been quenched by CB, TLN, and ANS anti-solvents fabricated inside and outside of the glovebox, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Yavari et al.133 Copyright Wiley-VCH GmbH 2018.	 


Chlorobenzene	

	Flammable liquids (3)*	Cs0.05(FA0.92MA0.08)0.95Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3	23%148	


	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (2)	
	
	

Bromobenzene	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	12.98%149	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (2)	
	
	

Iodobenzene	

	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	MAPbI3	13.67%149	

Di-chlorobenzene	

	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	MAPbI3	12%150	


	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage (2A)	
	
	


	
	Skin sensitisation (1)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Acute aquatic hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (1)	
	
	

Toluene	

	Flammable liquids (2)	(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15	19.7%144	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Reproductive toxicity (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3), (2)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


o-Xylene	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	16.82%143	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Acute toxicity, dermal (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


p-Xylene	

	Flammable liquids (3)	(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15	17.8%144	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Acute toxicity, dermal (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	

1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	16.83%143	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (2)	
	
	

Isooctane	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	22.78%129	Yes

	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Acute aquatic hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (1)	
	
	


n-Hexane	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	11.7%146	Yes

	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Reproductive toxicity (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (1)	
	
	

Trifluorotoluene	

	Flammable liquids (2)	(FAPbI3)0.85 (MAPbI3)0.15	20.3%144	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (2)	
	
	

Chloroform	

	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	MAPbI3	20.49%151	


	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (3)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Carcinogenicity (2)	
	
	


	
	Reproductive toxicity (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3), (1).	
	
	

Diethyl ether	

	Flammable liquids (1)	FAPbI3	25.2%147	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Di-n-propyl ether	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	7.96%136	Yes

	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Di-isopropyl ether	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	21.26%142	Yes

	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Di-n-butyl ether	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	18.64%142	Yes

	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Anisole	

	Flammable liquids (3)	Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	20.2%133	Yes
Petroleum ether	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	10.15%145	Yes

	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	


	
	Aspiration hazard (1)	
	
	


	
	Chronic aquatic hazard (2)	
	
	

Methyl acetate	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	16.3%128	Yes

	
	Serious eye damage (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Ethyl acetate	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	20.93%127	Yes

	
	Serious eye damage (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Propyl acetate	

	Flammable liquids (2)	MAPbI3	22.38%129	Yes

	
	Serious eye damage (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Butyl acetate	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	12.7%128	Yes

	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Methyl Benzoate	

	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	(FA0.85MA0.15) Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	22.37%130	Yes
2-Pentanol	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	17.14%123	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

2-Butanol	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	15.06%152	Yes

	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Iso-butanol	

	Flammable liquids (3)	FA0.85MA0.15Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3	15.77%117	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, oral (4)	
	
	


	
	Skin corrosion/irritation (2)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (1)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

2-Propanol	

	Flammable liquids (2)	FA0.85MA0.15Pb (I0.85Br0.15)3	14.75%117	Yes

	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Tetraethyl orthosilicate	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	17.02%131	Yes

	
	Acute toxicity, inhalation (4)	
	
	


	
	Serious eye damage/eye irritation (2A)	
	
	


	
	Specific target organ toxicity (3)	
	
	

Tetraethyl orthocarbonate	

	Flammable liquids (3)	MAPbI3	18.15%132	Yes

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
