Multifunctional polymetallaynes: properties, functions and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00226A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00226A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5264-5295Multifunctional polymetallaynes: properties, functions and applications

        
          
            Cheuk-Lam 
            Ho
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen-Qiang 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Wai-Yeung 
            Wong
          
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Molecular Functional Materials, Department of Chemistry and Institute of Advanced Materials, Hong Kong Baptist University, Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, P. R. China.  and HKBU Institute of Research and Continuing Education, Shenzhen Virtual University Park, Shenzhen, 518057, P. R. China. E-mail: clamho@hkbu.edu.hk; rwywong@hkbu.edu.hk
bShenzhen Key Laboratory of Functional Polymers, School of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: zqyu@szu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: wai-yeung.wong@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      18th March 2016
    First published on 19th July 2016AbstractInsertion of transition metal elements into organic polymeric scaffolds enables a nice coupling of the intriguing physical traits of metal complexes such as electronic, optical and magnetic properties with the solution processability of carbon-based macromolecules. The propensity of these metal-based polymers towards exhibiting metal–metal interactions can also provide additional means for manipulating the structural order and electronic coupling in the molecules. Among these metallopolymers, rigid-rod transition metal σ-acetylide polymers, or polymetallaynes in short, are of much current interest. These organometallic polymers are important functional materials showing unique characteristics including electrical semiconductivity, photo-/electroluminescence, non-linear optical properties, liquid crystallinity, chemosensing capability and photovoltaic effect. Recently, there has been an impressive progress of functional polymetallaynes consisting of a variety of conjugated organic bridging moieties and transition metals. In this review, we summarize the structure–property–function relationships of polymetallaynes of different transition metals, with a major focus on the effect of transition metals and the structural modification of ligands in activating their multifunctional properties. Different emerging applications can thus be realized, for example, as the converters for both light/electricity signals, sensor protectors against intense laser beam and patternable precursors to magnetic metal alloy nanoparticles for data storage, etc.
Cheuk-Lam Ho
Cheuk-Lam Ho received her BSc (Hons.) and PhD degrees both from Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU). After her postdoctoral research at HKBU and The University of Hong Kong, she joined the Department of Chemistry at HKBU in 2012 as Research Assistant Professor. Her research mainly focuses on the development of novel molecular functional materials and metallopolymers. The materials developed have a wide range of applications in the areas of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic solar cells (OSCs) and as patternable precursors to magnetic metal alloy nanoparticles. She has contributed to a total of over 80 scientific papers in the field to date.
Zhen-Qiang Yu
Zhen-Qiang Yu received his PhD degree (with Prof. Er-Qiang Chen) from Peking University in 2007 and in the same year he joined the School of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, where he is currently an Associate Professor. Current research interests include phase behaviors of liquid crystalline polymers and functional liquid crystals with aggregation-induced emission characteristics. In 2015, he joined HKBU as a Visiting Research Fellow with Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong.
Wai-Yeung Wong
Wai-Yeung Wong obtained BSc (Hons.) and PhD degrees from the University of Hong Kong. After postdoctoral studies at Texas A&M University (with Prof. F. Albert Cotton) and the University of Cambridge (with Profs. The Lord Lewis and Paul R. Raithby), he joined HKBU as an Assistant Professor in 1998, advancing to Chair Professor in 2011. He recently moved to work at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University as Chair Professor of Chemical Technology. He is currently the Associate Editor of Journal of Materials Chemistry C, Regional Editor of Journal of Organometallic Chemistry and Editor of Topics in Current Chemistry. His research focuses on metallopolymers and metallophosphors with energy functions and photofunctional properties. He won the RSC Chemistry of the Transition Metals Award, FACS Distinguished Young Chemist Award, Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Prize for Scientific and Technological Innovation, State Natural Science Award from China and JPA Lectureship Award for Asian and Oceanian Photochemist.
1. Introduction
Conjugated polymers have been widely utilized as functional materials owing to their peculiar optical and physical properties.1 The inception of next generation flexible and printable functional materials, especially in the field of electronics, has energized the area of conjugated polymers. Over the past few decades, inclusion of heavy metals into the conjugated organic polymers has gained considerable attention since this can elicit a significant influence on the electronic, optical and magnetic properties of the resulting materials.2,3 The key feature of embedding heavy metal atoms into the π-conjugated polymer chains is to enhance the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) and thus facilitate intersystem crossing (ISC) from the singlet to the triplet manifolds, resulting in an increase in the population of the triplet excited states in metallopolymers. Thus, the emission spectrum from such polymers may contain both fluorescence and phosphorescence bands.4 In particular, inserting transition metal elements into the main chain of polymers through acetylenic units is known to impart novel interesting functional properties, such as photoluminescence, redox activity, optoelectronic and magnetic properties.5 The metal center is normally electron-rich in comparison to the adjacent conjugated ligands which may induce energy transfer within the polymer.6 The manipulation of the functional properties can be readily achieved through synthetic modification of the polymer structure, which can realize different areas of applications based on the distinctive functional properties of the resulting polymers. Many researchers have already exploited the functional properties of organometallic polyynes of groups 8, 10, 11 and 12 (Fig. 1) and successfully demonstrated the utility of heavy metal incorporation into the polyyne framework.3 For example, the study of triplet excitons is important as they play a well-estimated role in both organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)2 and organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells.6a The dynamics of spin singlet and triplet excitations in π-conjugated polymers define their performance as the active layer in OLEDs and OPV cells. If both singlet and triplet excitons can be used in OLEDs to convert electrical energy to light energy, the fraction of excitons that potentially can emit light may reach 100%.7 Similarly in the OPV cells, the photogenerated singlet exciton in the polymer donor domains may recombine before reaching the donor/acceptor interface due to its relatively short lifetime. The much longer lifetime of triplet excitons could be the answer to this energy loss mechanism.4 Therefore, different technologies may substantially benefit from the proper use of the triplet states of spin and this can be fine-tuned by the choice of the bridging spacers and transition metals in the polymetallaynes. In this review, we summarize the key developments of rigid-rod polymetallaynes of late transition metals in terms of their structure–property relationships and their recent emerging applications in various aspects of materials sciences, although significant earlier references which are also mentioned were necessary for discussion. The vast majority of our description here is focused on the group 10 platinum(II)-based congener (so named polyplatinayne), by virtue of the fact that they have been demonstrated to exhibit a wide range of functional properties for applications in emerging fields of optoelectronics and nanoscience. A similar research endeavor has recently been extended to their closest groups 11 and 12 d10 neighbors as the organometallic building blocks (vide infra). The major advances, ongoing challenges and future perspectives of such a research frontier are critically discussed in this review article. These discussions are mainly supplemented with new developments and highlights from the recent literature. Although the corresponding studies on group 8 d6 metallopolyynes were also reported,8,9a these polymers have not been studied in detail in terms of materials applications (vide infra).
 Fig. 1  Polymetallaynes based on different organometallic building blocks derived from groups 8, 10 and 12 transition metal elements. 
2. Polyplatinaynes and other group 10 congeners
The general skeleton of polyplatinaynes with auxiliary coordinated ligands L and bridging spacer groups Ar is depicted in Fig. 2. The prototype for much of this work is trans-[–Pt(PBu3)2CC(p-C6H4)CC–]n at the early stage of development. The work can also be extended to related group 10 transition metal elements (Ni and Pd).10 Recently, the burgeoning field of polyplatinaynes is gaining much research momentum through continued breakthroughs in materials design and device engineering.9 In this section, we will discuss the dependence of the photophysical properties (e.g. phosphorescence efficiency, first triplet state energy (T1) and optical bandgap (Eg)) of polyplatinaynes on their structural features. An overview of their multifunctional properties and related applications in materials sciences is also provided.
 Fig. 2  General skeleton of polyplatinaynes. 
2.1 Synthetic considerations
The structural modification by deliberate synthetic chemistry to produce polymetallaynes of different Eg and T1 states can be accomplished by engineering the types of metal centers and their associated auxiliary ligands, and the central spacer Ar groups. In this way, the excited states of these polymers can be controlled/manipulated with much ease. The majority of polyplatinaynes were prepared by the Hagihara's dehydrohalogenation reaction of platinum(II) halide complex [PtL2Cl2] and diethynylarylene ligands (HCCArCCH) (Fig. 3).3,5,9 In this process, cuprous halide and amine act as the catalyst and acid acceptor/solvent, respectively, and the polymerization proceeds at room temperature smoothly. However, the Hagihara's protocol cannot be applicable to the nickel(II) counterparts, owing to the instability of the dihalo complexes under amine conditions and dialkynyl compounds in oxidizing medium.10a The electronic and optical properties of the synthesized polyplatinaynes can be tailored by varying the nature of Ar and L moieties (Fig. 4). These organometallic polyynes can also be synthesized via the metathesis reaction using bis(trimethylstannyl)alkynyl reagents,10d,e oxidative coupling using the Hay's method10a or Cu-catalyzed alkynyl-ligand exchange.10f Impressively, the Lewis approach nicely provides a new avenue towards the synthesis of trans-[–M(PBu3)2CC–p-C6H4–CC–]n (M = Ni, Pd, Pt) by reaction of trans-[M(PBu3)2Cl2] with one equivalent of [Me3SnCC–p-C6H4–CCSnMe3] without the need of amine solvents.10d,e
 Fig. 3  Formation of polyplatinaynes by copper-catalyzed dehydrohalogenation polymerization. 
 Fig. 4  A spectrum of Eg values (in eV) for Pt polyynes with different spacer groups. *Please refer to the relevant structures in the text. 
With L = PR3 (R = Et, Bu), these metallopolymers are air-stable and generally soluble in chlorinated solvents such as CHCl3, CH2Cl2 and THF. When L = pyridines or bipyridines are used, the polymers become less soluble unless long alkyl chain substituents are introduced which render the characterization of samples by spectroscopy possible. They possess high thermal stability as revealed by thermal gravimetric analysis. The molecular weights of the polymers as measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) can vary depending on the actual structure and geometry of the polymer backbone. For instance, those with diamine ligands typically give lower molecular weights whereas those with straight-chain structures favor higher molecular weight samples.
Table 1 Bandgap and hole mobility data of various Pt(II)-based metallopolyynes




Polymer

E
g (eV)
Hole mobility, μha (×10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1)
Ref.





a The peak value of each system is given in parentheses.






P43

1.85
0.006 (0.01)

64




P59a

1.84
0.15 (0.25)

64




P59b

1.82
0.57 (0.86)

64




P59c

1.81
0.89 (1.00)

64




P51

1.97
0.00627

58




P52a

1.54
0.000116

58




P53a

1.66
0.00332

58




P55

2.72
0.0019

60




P56

2.68
0.00786

60




P57

2.59
0.00277

60




P60a

2.15
1.5 (2.1)

65




P60b

2.05
2.2 (2.8)

65





2.2 Photophysical properties
Upon the absorption of photons by a molecule from its ground state, there are two possible radiative decay processes, fluorescence and phosphorescence. In most of the organic systems, purely fluorescence emission would be observed. However, when a heavy Pt(II) atom is introduced into the molecule or the main chain of a polymer, the ISC rate is generally increased due to the enhanced SOC, which enables the spin-forbidden triplet emission to become partially allowed. In the Pt(II)-containing polyyne polymer, the lowest singlet (S1) and triplet (T1) energy levels, as well as its energy gap and color, can be fine-tuned by controlling the Ar group (Table 1).9b The influence of the heavy metal atom on the ISC rate and the spatial extent of the lowest singlet and triplet excitons of polymetallaynes will be systematically discussed below.
2.3 Tuning of the triplet excited state and optical bandgap

2.3.1 Effect of the π-conjugation length of the aromatic spacer. 
As the delocalization of electrons along the polymer chain can be fully or partially maintained by the π-conjugation between the Pt(II) ion and the spacer group, a red shift in the photoluminescence wavelength would be observed as the effective conjugation length of the aromatic (either carbocyclic or heterocyclic) spacer is increased. Polymer P1a, with the phenylene spacer, has the T1 state of 2.38 eV.11 Schanze et al. have used the oligomer-based approach to perform the systematic investigation of the changes in optical properties that accompany an increase in conjugation length in Pt(II) acetylides.12 In M1, the strong lowest-energy absorption band arises from the long axis π–π* transition and its absorption maximum (λmax) red-shifts continuously as the chain length is increased. However, the shift in λmax becomes negligible from n = 5 to n = 7, indicating that the conjugation in the lowest S1 state is effective through approximately five or six Pt-acetylide repeat units. On the other hand, the triplet excited state is more spatially confined over approximately two repeat units and consequently its energy is not strongly influenced by the number of repeating units, signaling that the effect of SOC induced by the Pt(II) center decreases rapidly as the loading of metal in the chain decreases. Doubling the number of phenyl rings in P1b leads to a red shift in phosphorescence wavelength and a drop in its T1 energy level (2.26 eV).13 Therefore, apart from extending the π-conjugation length by increasing the number of repeat units, an increase of the π-conjugation length in the organic spacer would also cause a red shift of the phosphorescence energy. This observation is in good agreement with the Pt(II)-acetylide species containing various numbers of thienyl rings (P5a–P5c).14,15 Their T1 bands are located at 2.05, 1.67 and 1.53 eV, respectively, and the relative intensity of triplet emissions and the Eg value drop when more thiophene rings are introduced into the ligand. Due to a red shift in the triplet emission along this series, their triplet excited state was suggested to be extended over three or more thiophene rings. The electron-rich ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) spacer in P8 creates stronger donor–acceptor (D–A) interactions between the Pt(II) center and the conjugated spacer along the polymer backbone as compared to P5a and P5b.16 Red shifts of 0.16 and 0.05 eV in Eg were observed for P8a and P8b (2.70 eV for P8a and 2.50 eV for P8b) with respect to their counterparts P5a and P5b containing thiophene ring(s).
The use of fused-ring ligands has been shown to be a powerful approach to lower the Eg of metallopolyynes. The incorporation of electron-rich naphthalene and anthracene in P2 and P3, respectively, was found to have a marked influence on the luminescence properties as compared to P1a due to their effective π-electron delocalization promotion along the backbone of Pt(II) polymers through the more π-extended aromatic linker unit.11 The Eg follows the order of P1a > P1b > P2, which indicates that conjugation of the ligand continues through the metal center. The energetic position of the T1 state of P2 shifts to 1.96 eV as compared to that of P1a, but no phosphorescence emission was observed in the thin film of P2. To circumvent the problem of the possible disruption of conjugation caused by torsion about the single bonds and the unfavorable molecular packing that limits the charge carrier mobility along the polymer chain, aromatic spacers with fused thiophenes (P6 and P7) have been suggested by Khan and co-workers in the design of polymetallaynes.17 The rigid structure and planarization of the backbone are expected to facilitate molecular ordering through π-stacking, resulting in improved charge carrier mobilities. However, by comparing the S1 and T1 excited states in fused (P6 and P7) and non-fused oligothiophenes (P5b and P5c) as the spacers in Pt(II) polyyne polymers, the optical transitions for the S1 and T1 excited states shift to higher energies when going from the non-fused to the fused ring systems with the same number of thiophene rings, despite the planarity of the latter one. The S1 energy levels of P6 and P7 were detected to be 2.76 and 2.67 eV. The shift in the electronic energies between the fused ring and non-fused systems is mainly attributed to two factors: the effectiveness of conjugation and the number of sulfur atoms within the oligothiophene spacer. The greater the number of conjugated double bonds, the lower the energy gap (Fig. 5); and therefore the additional sulfur atoms in the fused thiophene systems as compared to their non-fused counterparts would widen the HOMO–LUMO energy gap. Another way to lengthen the effective conjugation of the Pt(II) polyyne polymer is by increasing the number of triple bonds. For P4 with the number of CC units doubled as compared to P1a, red-shifted phosphorescence wavelength was observed.13b A group of oligopyridine-bridged polyplatinaynes were also reported.18 There is a red-shift of 0.1 eV for Eg from P9a (m = 1) to P9b (m = 2). However, the Eg is blue-shifted by 0.3 eV for P10a–P10b relative to P9b.18a Kinked polymers P10a–P10b with reduced conjugation (alkynyl units at 6,6- or 6,6′′-positions) afforded high-energy T1 states whereas P9b with full conjugation (alkynyl units at 5,5-posiitons) showed a red-shifted T1 state (by 0.3 eV).  
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the number of double bonds within the fused and non-fused oligothiophene spacers. 


2.3.2 π-Conjugation interruption. 
The non-radiative decay of the triplet states in Pt-containing conjugated polymers may be quantitatively described by the energy gap law.19 The non-radiative decay rate is very sensitive to the triplet energy, and increases exponentially as the triplet energy decreases. Therefore, more efficient phosphorescence can be achieved with high-energy triplet states in the Pt(II) polymers. In order to avoid the competition with non-radiative decay and harvest the spin-forbidden phosphorescence emission, polymers with high triplet energy states are necessary, and this can be achieved by the interruption of π-conjugation within the bridging spacers.20 With this in mind, we reported that the nitrogen at the 9-position of the 3,6-carbazole spacer in P11a–P11e acts as an effective conjugation interrupter which limits the conjugation length along the Pt(II) polymer chain and results in the high triplet energy state of P11a–P11e.21 They possess the T1 energy state of about 2.68 eV which does not vary much with the nature of the 9-aryl group substituent. P11a–P11e show Eg values of 3.21 to 3.23 eV and have reduced conjugation relative to P1b with the biphenyl unit, causing a blue-shift in the absorption maxima of the former polymers. Systematic studies of the different linkage positions of carbazole and carbazole–fluorene hybrids as the organic spacers in Pt(II) polyyne polymers have been carried out by us (P12–P15).22 In the 3,6-linked carbazole, there is no conjugation over large distance, while the 2,7-linked species is a highly conjugated polymer. Therefore, a red shift in absorption wavelength was observed for the polymer bearing 2,7-carbazole as compared to the 3,6-analogue. This shift can be explained by considering the increased stabilization of the HOMO of the carbazole upon substitution at the 3,6-position as compared to that substituted at the 2,7-position and by the greater electron density at the 3,6-position in comparison with the 2,7 one. In P12 with the 3,6-linked carbazole trimer, the triplet wavefunction is limited to one carbazole unit, and therefore the T1 state of this polymer is higher relative to that for the carbazole–fluorene–carbazole triad in P15b. The polymer P13a with 2,7-fluorene is a highly conjugated unit and has a longer conjugation length than the polymer with the 3,6-carbazole spacer. An extension of the CC unit in P13d gave rise to a state of lower T1 energy as compared to P13c. A decrease in the triplet quantum yield and lifetime was noted for P13d as a result of increasing non-radiative recombination sites in P13d.22d  
To further investigate the dependence of the ISC rate from S1 to T1 as a function of the extent of π-conjugation along the backbone, systems of Pt(II) alkynylsilanes have been explored. From all the results of optical spectroscopy and theoretical calculations, it was suggested that the silyl group is a good electronic conjugation interrupter. The hindered conjugation in the presence of a SiPh2 unit in P16 shifts the Eg and the phosphorescence band to the blue as compared to other Pt(II) polyynes with aromatic and heteroaromatic spacers.23 Therefore, P16 gave a very high Eg value of 3.70 eV, which is much higher than P1a (Eg = 2.98 eV) and P5a (Eg = 2.85 eV) with 1,4-phenylene and 2,5-thienyl as the organic spacers, respectively. Due to the weak electronic conjugation from the silyl group, P16 exhibited a strong unstructured triplet emission at 508 nm with negligible fluorescence at low temperatures. The reduced conjugation in P16 shifted T1 (2.44 eV) to the blue by 0.06 and 0.38 eV, respectively, as compared to the 1,4-phenylene (P1a) and 2,5-thienyl (P5a) containing counterparts. With the spacer (p-C6H4)CCSiPh2CC(p-C6H4) in P17, the effective conjugation length was lengthened which resulted in a drop in Eg (3.10 eV) as compared to P16. Since the T1 energy state of P17 was close to the value of P16, P17 also displayed a strong triplet emission with enhanced ISC efficiency. Work was then extended to the polyplatinaynes with alternating Si and diethynylfluorene units (P18a–P18g).24 In general, these polymers show smaller Eg (2.95–3.00 eV) than P16 and P17. The phosphorescence efficiency does not change very much with the chain length m in the aromatic spacer but generally decreases with the E group in the order SiMe2 > SiMe2–SiMe2 > SiPh2, which indicates that the T1 state is confined to a single repeat unit. The SiMe2 homologue gave more efficient phosphorescence than the SiPh2 system by over 2 times. Alternation of the R group on Si would not affect the T1 level significantly. The T1 states of P18a, P18b and P18e were measured to be 2.25, 2.25 and 2.26 eV, respectively. All the above results indicate that the heavy atom derivatization with Pt atoms together with the conjugation interruption by the silylene group could boost the triplet emission quantum efficiency and the radiative decay rate of T1 excited states which render them great potential to excel in optoelectronics.
By inclusion of a conjugation interrupting sp3 heavier germanium-based linker, triplet light emission can be triggered with very fast phosphorescence decay rates.25 Similar to the silyl series, a slight bathochromic shift in the absorption maxima and increased extinction coefficients were also observed for the Ge series in P18h–P18m as m increases. The values of Eg are higher for the Ge series (3.47–3.57 eV) than the Si counterparts. The substituents on the Ge atom exert minimal effects on the absorption energies. Again, the GeMe2 systems give more efficient phosphorescence than the GePh2 congeners by over 2 times. But the replacement of GePh2 by SiPh2 reduces the phosphorescence quantum efficiency (17–20% versus 10–13% for the Ge and Si series, respectively) by almost half that is mainly correlated with the heavy atom effect associated with the Ge atoms. With a continuous development in the high T1 energy states of Pt(II) polyynes, P19a–P19d with a diethynylcarbazole instead of a diethynylfluorene unit were prepared.26 In these polymers, the phosphorescence emission efficiency changes significantly with the identity of the E group in the general orders of GeR2 > SiR2 (R = Me, Ph) and EMe2 > EPh2 (E = Si, Ge). The energy of the T1 state for P19 series with carbazole units (ca. 2.70 eV) is higher than that for the corresponding 2,7-fluorene in P18 series, in line with the less conjugative nature of the former chromophore.  
Due to the high T1 energy states of P20–P23 with non-conjugated group 16 heteroatoms, very efficient phosphorescence with fast radiative decay rates were detected in these materials.27 Facilitated by the conjugation-interrupting chalcogen atoms, the observed triplet yields are within 0.46–0.51 eV and are relatively insensitive to the nature of heteroatom units. The use of chalcogen atoms effectively increases the accessibility of the 3π–π* excited states and results in the allowance of spin-forbidden phosphorescence that is observable at room temperature (Fig. 6). The hindered conjugation by different chalcogenide ligands shifts the phosphorescence to the blue relative to the conjugated biphenyl-spaced counterpart P1b and the extent of the blue shift is the largest in P20 (by 0.48 eV) with a diphenyl ether derivative (T1 = 2.73 eV). All the above data reveal that the polyplatinaynes with group 14 Si and Ge units or group 16 conjugation interrupters can effectively enhance the phosphorescence efficiency with the increment of T1 energy as a result of decreasing the non-radiative recombination sites.
 Fig. 6  The photoluminescence spectra of Pt polyynes P20–P23. PL spectra were taken at both 290 and 20 K. 


2.3.3 Effect of functionalization on the aromatic spacer. 
π-Conjugated polymers with D–A architectures are currently of interest because the intramolecular charge transfer can facilitate readily the manipulation of the electronic structure (HOMO–LUMO levels), leading to semiconducting polymers of small Eg. The fluorene structural moiety provides a rigidly planar biphenyl unit within the polymer backbone and facile functionalization at the C9-position. In the series of fluorene functionalized Pt(II) polyynes, the energy of the S1 state depends significantly on the nature of the moiety attached to the C9-position of the fluorene ring.22a,28–30 Among P12a, P13c and P24–P27, P12a with 9-butylcarbazole and P13c with 9,9-dihexylfluorene display the highest S1 states and Eg values. The values of Eg follow the order of P12a (3.10 eV) > P13c (2.92 eV) > P24 (2.90 eV) > P25 (2.10 eV) ≅ P26a (2.10 eV) > P27 (1.58 eV).29,30 It should be noted that the 9-dicyanomethylene group in P27 can enhance the electronic conjugation, while both the C(C6H13)2 and N(C4H9) units in P13c and P12a, respectively, cannot. These facts attest to the importance of tuning the electronic properties of the central fluorene spacer in governing the efficiency of ISC between S1 and T1 excited states. The T1 → S0 transition occurs at 462 and 554 nm for P12a and P13c at low temperatures, respectively, while there is only weak or even no evidence of triplet emissions from P25, P26a and P27. One noteworthy feature here is that a reduction in Eg leads to a lowering of the ISC efficiency. This again implies that reduced conjugation in these 9-anchored biphenyl structures effectively facilitates ISC, and phosphorescence can easily be obtained.  


2.3.4 Effect of functionalization on the acetylenic unit. 
Post-functionalization of a thiophene-containing Pt(II) polyyne polymer by [2+2]-cycloaddition followed by a cycloreversion of tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) or 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) results in a significant drop in Eg in the resulting polymer. In this way, narrow bandgap polymers P29 and P30 have been developed by Michinobu and co-workers.31 As both TCNE and TCNQ units are electron-accepting in nature, both P29 and P30 displayed D–A characteristics with respect to P28, which result in broad intramolecular charge-transfer absorption bands covering the visible to the near IR regions. P29 possesses a well-defined absorption band at 508 nm and since the TCNQ adduct has a stronger electron-accepting feature than TCNE one, P30 reveals a more bathochromically shifted wavelength to 598 nm in its absorption spectrum. The Eg of P29 and P30 are 1.83 and 1.22 eV, respectively, which are consistent with a reduction in the D–A interaction between the metal and the spacer in P29. By introducing the electron-accepting benzothiadiazole and pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione into the main chain of polymers, the Eg values of P31 and P32 notably decrease relative to P29 (Eg = 1.47 and 1.28 eV for P31 and P32, respectively).32 Therefore, functionalization on the triple bonds of polyynes is also an effective method to lower the Eg and broaden the absorption coverage of the resulting Pt(II) polymers, which provides an alternative way in the development of narrow bandgap Pt(II) polymers.  


2.3.5 Effect of the “zigzag” structure of polymers. 
Complementary to the inclusion of a conjugation interrupter in the organic bridge, work regarding the exploitation of the cis-configuration of the Pt(II) metal center in the buildup of polymetallaynes has also proliferated in the field to reduce the effective electronic conjugation. P33 was found to have less effective π-conjugation along the chain in the cis-configuration with the “zigzag” structure as compared to the analogous trans-oriented species. Thus, the lowest energy absorptions of these polymers appear higher in energies than those for the linear structure in the trans-configuration (Eg = 2.42 and 2.50 eV for P33a and P33b, respectively).33  

2.4 Heterobimetallic polyplatinaynes
The innovative design of functional metal polyynes has been demonstrated to be useful in various areas. Though still in its infancy, the idea of incorporating two transition metals in a single metallopolyyne chain also has a significant appeal, and therefore, there is considerable recent interest in the chemistry of organometallic polymers with dual metal centers.34 As mentioned, a synergistic effect is possible between the two different metal centers which may offer better and unique photophysical properties. A distinguishing feature as compared to other Pt(II)-containing polymers was encountered by the incorporation of a luminescent cationic Ir(III) acceptor moiety in P34.34a The presence of an Ir(III) fragment permits charge transfer transitions between the Pt(II) and Ir(III) units (Fig. 7). Generally, a slight decrease in both emission quantum yields and lifetimes are commonly detected in polymers as compared to their corresponding dinuclear/trinuclear model complexes because of an increase in non-radiative decay processes due to the larger mass of the chromophore. The addition of flexible groups (such as the n-butyl group) could also act as a source of non-radiative decay pathways for deactivation of the emissive excited states (via vibration and rotation). However, one interesting characteristic is that the photophysical parameters (emission quantum yields and lifetimes) for P34 do not decrease significantly as compared to its trinuclear model complex. This property is critical because it permits one to take advantage of the good emission quantum efficiencies while retaining the processability of these materials. These materials could therefore have a positive impact on the design of new photonic materials.  
 Fig. 7  Charge transfer transitions between the Pt(II) and Ir(III) units in P34. 
Considerable research attention has been paid in understanding the photophysical properties of porphyrins and its electronic communication processes in the excited states such as energy and electron transfers. In order to address the issue of electronic communication in the polymeric backbone of porphyrin-containing organometallic polymers, Harvey and co-workers developed a series of conjugated organometallic Pt(II)-acetylide/Zn(II) porphyrin-containing polymers P35a–P35b and P36a–P36b.34b,c In these polymers, their absorption spectra are characterized by three regions: π–π* Q bands at 500–600 nm and Soret bands at 400–450 nm and the Pt(II) phenylethynyl moiety in the range of 250–400 nm. The Q and Soret bands are characteristics of the porphyrin macrocycles which exhibit lower-intensity bands belonging to both the mixture of ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) and metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) from the porphyrin unit. In P35a–P35b, there is no red-shift in the peak maxima of the Q bands as the number of repetitive units increases in these polymers, which indicates that these polymers are weak in conjugation along the chain due to the quasi perfect right angle made by the average planes of the porphyrin ring and the aryl groups around the central macrocycle in the solid state. Because of the exciton coupling, the Soret bands exhibit two components and become clearer as the number of repeating units increases, which are usually observed in linear oligomers and polymers of porphyrins. Photoinduced energy transfer processes take place in these polymers, with the upper energy donor and lower energy acceptor, trans-(p-C6H4CC)Pt(PBu3)2(CC-p-C6H4) and Zn(II) porphyrin chromophores, respectively (Fig. 8). Rates for triplet energy transfer from the trans-(p-C6H4CC)Pt(PBu3)2(CC–p-C6H4) spacer to the Zn(II) porphyrin vary from 2.4 × 104 to 1.3 × 106 s−1 in P35a and P35b, respectively.  
 Fig. 8  Energy level diagram of P35a–P35b. 
The bithiazole unit was found to be able to coordinate with the metal center by using its pair of nitrogen atoms.34d A new class of soluble and solution-processable heterobimetallic Pt(II)-acetylide polymers P37a–P37c functionalized with Re(I)-bithiazole based spacers was developed.34e Relative to the bithiazole-based Pt(II) polymers without the Re(CO)3Cl pendant group, the absorption profiles of P37a–P37c experienced a clear red-shift in the spectral wavelengths because the Re(I) fragment exerts an electron-withdrawing effect on the bithiazole core. The Eg values of these polymers were found to be lowered from 2.18 to 1.89 eV as the number of thiophene rings was increased from 0 to 2 for P37a to P37c. Upon the coordination of the Re(CO)3Cl moiety, the Eg of the polymer can be reduced by at most 0.25 eV. Therefore, complexation of the bithiazole functionality with the Re(I) group provides a new avenue to extend the absorption profile and affect the electronic properties of the resulting polymers. More examples on other heterobimetallic polyplatinaynes are available in the literature and will be discussed in the subsequent sections where appropriate (vide infra).
2.5 Applications of polyplatinaynes
The exploitation of conjugated polymers as active components in electronic devices has created a new era in polymer electronics.35 Organic and polymeric materials possess several advantages over their inorganic congeners, including their ease of preparation, low processing temperature and nearly unlimited synthetic variability.36 Polymer electronics is currently expanding its applications to other devices, such as organic field-effect transistors,37 organic solar cells,38 and organic memory devices.39 For various optoelectronic applications to be viable, the control of Eg and frontier orbital energy levels is critical.40 Organometallic poly(aryleneethynylene)s based on heavy metal salts have been widely recognized for their exciting photophysical properties, structural variability and potential magnetic/optoelectronic applications. Here, the exploration of polyplatinaynes for a plethora of different applications will be presented with selected examples (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Various emerging applications of polyplatinaynes. 

2.5.1 Polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs). 
The propensity of heavy transition metals to mix singlet and triplet excited states via SOC leads to the development of molecular or polymeric metal-based materials, which feature high phosphorescence yields and relatively long lifetimes. They can show high triplet quantum yields and be used to sample triplet emission from soluble and processable organic polymers. As shown in Fig. 10 and 11, an effective strategy based on the structural modification of the central spacer group can be devised to obtain the full color fluorescence and phosphorescence emissions spanning from visible (blue to red) to the NIR region to meet the various light-emitting requirements. These properties are particularly useful in OLED applications (Fig. 12). The ability of these metalated compounds to harvest light emission from both singlet and triplet excitons furnishes devices that operate with high quantum efficiency.41,42 Pt(II) polymer P14 consisting of 2-butylcarbazole-2,7-diyl spacer represents the first example of polyplatinayne, exhibiting pure triplet emission under electrical excitation without concomitant singlet emission. This polymer was reported to have a higher level of conjugation than its 3,6-disubstituted counterpart and good luminescence properties comparable to the 2,7-fluorene analogue.43P14 has a strong room temperature phosphorescence emission at 527 nm with no evidence of excimer or oxidized site formation peaks and a relatively high phosphorescence efficiency of 2.5% was recorded. All these features are particularly promising for stable PLEDs. Strong greenish-yellow electrophosphorescence was generated from the P14-based multi-layer PLEDs. These devices gave a prominent EL peak maximum at 528 nm accompanied by a shoulder at 568 nm with the Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) value of (0.36, 0.60). The best PLED can provide the maximum current efficiency (ηL) of 4.7 cd A−1 at a 5 wt% doping level, corresponding to an external quantum efficiency (ηext) of 1.5%. Relative to the electron-rich bithiophene spacer in P5b, the incorporation of an electron-accepting bithiazole moiety (regarded as a hybrid of the thiophene and pyridine groups) into the main chain of Pt(II) polyynes in P38a can red-shift the absorption maximum and reduce Eg by ca. 0.15 eV in P38aversusP5b.44 As the Eg of both P38a and P38b are sufficiently low (ca. 2.40 eV), no phosphorescence was observed under the measured spectroscopic window at both ambient and low temperatures. PLED device with P38b emitted voltage independent green light showing a prominent EL maximum at 500 nm with a shoulder at 522 nm and the CIE coordinates lie at (0.26, 0.58). This non-optimized PLED had a maximum ηL of 0.11 cd A−1 and further investigation is definitely required. One of the critical issues that should be addressed in PLEDs based on conjugated phosphorescent polymers is the way to block the undesired reverse energy transfer from the emissive triplet states of the phosphorescent units to the non-emissive triplet states of the conjugated backbone.  
 Fig. 10  Fluorescence spectra of polyplatinaynes at room temperature. 
 Fig. 11  Different phosphorescent colors from polyplatinaynes at low temperature. 
Owing to the large SOC constant of the heavy Ir(III) ion, significant triplet state characters are associated with many Ir(III) complexes. Successfully harnessing both of the singlet and triplet excited states in Ir(III) triplet emitters has brought revolutionary progress to the field of OLEDs. The unique photophysical features associated with Ir(III) ppy-type (Hppy = 2-phenylpyridine) complexes, such as tunable emission color, high phosphorescence quantum yield, relatively short lifetime, and so forth, would definitely place them in a favorable position to meet the targets in both full-color flat panel displays and low-cost lighting sources. The first examples of phosphorescent heteronuclear oligometallaynes P39 and P40 consisting of dual metal centers (Ir(III) and Pt(II)) in the polymer main chain were reported, and their potential light-emitting application has been described.45 The two different metal centers were found to show a synergistic effect in governing the photophysical behavior of these heterometallic materials. The yellow or orange phosphorescence emissions peaking at 549 and 577 nm for P39 and P40, respectively, are mainly originated from the ligand centered 3π–π* states with a small contribution from 3MLCT transitions conferred by both Ir(III) and Pt(II) centers. This result is in line with their very temperature sensitive phosphorescence emissions and much longer lifetimes as compared to those induced by the Ir(III) center in their respective Ir ppy-type complexes. The trans-Pt(PBu3)2 moiety was found to extend the conjugation length along the main chain in these two polymers as compared to their corresponding metalloligands, which is reflected from the remarkable bathochromic behavior in their emission maxima. With the PLED configuration of Al/LiF/Alq3/BCP/P39 or P40:CBP/PEDOT:PSS/ITO (BCP: 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline; PEDOT:PSS: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate; ITO: indium tin oxide), devices with P39 as the emitter gave yellow electrophosphorescence with an emission maximum at 552 nm while devices made from P40 exhibited orange electrophosphorescence with an emission maximum at 580 nm. Both of the polymers gave the best performance at 10 wt% doping concentration. P39-based device showed a respectable peak ηL of 1.59 cd A−1, ηext of 0.50% and ηP of 0.60 lm W−1, while the best efficiencies for P40-based device were defined by ηL = 1.55 cd A−1, ηext = 0.67% and ηP = 0.55 lm W−1. The Pt(II) centers were found to strengthen the SOC effect to induce their own organic triplet emission, apart from the original phosphorescence arising from the Ir(III) chromophores. There should be an efficient energy transfer from the high-energy triplets induced by the Pt(II) centers to the low-energy ones by the Ir(III) centers and such an energy transfer process was believed not only to maintain good color purity of the emission but also to enhance the phosphorescence intensity of the Ir(III) center.  
Copolymers P41 and P42 with bicarbazole-based polyplatinayne skeletons containing different Ir(III) complexes as phosphorescent centers displayed highly efficient triplet energy transfer from the polymer segments to the Ir(III) units.46 The overall phosphorescence abilities of both polymers were enhanced due to their high triplet energy level to block the undesired back energy transfer. The predominant yellow and red phosphorescent emission bands at ca. 555 and 632 nm with high energy emission bands were observed from P41 and P42, respectively. The intensities of these phosphorescence bands are enhanced with increasing the content of the Ir(III) units. The phosphorescence signals in these polymers were found to be induced through the energy transfer from the T1 state of the Pt(II) skeleton to the T1 state in the respective Ir(III) center. Due to these merits, P41 can produce highly efficient solution-processed PLEDs with an ηL of 11.49 cd A−1, an ηext of 4.38% and an ηP of 3.78 lm W−1, while the red analogues also exhibited very attractive EL performance with an ηL of 5.86 cd A−1, an ηext of 10.1% and an ηP of 2.29 lm W−1. All of these results indicate the great potential of these phosphorescent bimetallic polymers in the field of PLEDs.  


2.5.2 Organic solar cells. 
Organic photocells have been developed for over a decade and conjugated polymers are considered to be intrinsic semiconductors. For instance, polymer P9a and its quaternized analogues are not conducting in the undoped state but become semiconducting upon doping with iodine vapor (σ = 2.5–3.4 mS cm−1).18b In one of the first reported ITO/P1/Al single-layer photocell, photocurrent quantum efficiency is 0.01%.47a The excited states are mostly strongly bound triplet excitons upon photoexcitation and these are confined to one monomer unit. By adding 7 wt% of C60, the quantum efficiency can be increased to 1–2%.47b Next, the photocells with configurations of Au/P5a/Al, ITO/P5b/Al and ITO/P5c/Al gave open-circuit voltages (Voc) ranging from 0.47 to 0.75 V and fill-factors (FF) of 0.30–0.35.14a A single-layer device made with P12a displayed a photocurrent quantum efficiency of 0.01% in the forward bias mode. The effect of air on photocurrent was also studied in which air can increase the photocurrent in P5a-based cells by enhancing exciton dissociation in the polymer film but the photocurrent decreased after annealing under vacuum.47c When light was shone on the P13c and P27-based photocells using ITO as the anode and Al as the cathode, a maximum photocurrent quantum efficiency of ∼0.01% was produced.22a,29a Although single-layer polyplatinayne-based photocells tend to produce a reasonable Voc, their photocurrent is typically very low.
Recently, conjugated polymers have drawn significant attention as the active materials for organic photovoltaic devices because of their potential as low-cost, large area, lightweight and flexible alternatives to the inorganic semiconductors. The efficiency of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells depends on several fundamental factors, including the light-harvesting efficiency, exciton diffusion to the D–A interface, photoinduced charge separation and the mobilities of charge carriers produced by photoinduced charge separation.48 The introduction of Pt(II) ions as architectural polymeric templates offers many advantages in the solar cell applications. While the interaction between the Pt(II) d-orbitals and the ligand orbitals allows the fine-tuning of the HOMO–LUMO gap in these polymers, the Pt(II) ions may also improve the solar absorption coverage of the polymers and provide redox-active centers to generate active species for charge transportation. Moreover, the efficiency of charge generation in Pt(II)-based photovoltaic materials can be increased by harnessing the triplet excited states in these materials, in which the triplet excitons also have longer lifetimes and thus allow extended exciton diffusion lengths.6a The good solubility of Pt(II)-containing poly(aryleneethynylene)s renders them excellent candidates for BHJ solar cells and the pioneering work was reported using P5a.14b In these polymers, the photoinduced charge separation in the polymer/PCBM (PCBM = phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) blends is believed to occur through their triplet states. However, the best power conversion efficiency (η) was only 0.27%. In the recent development, much effort has been put to extend the absorption wavelength and enhance the intramolecular transfer (ICT) of the Pt(II) polyynes. The narrow-bandgap polymer P43 with 4,7-di-2′-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole as the core component to create unique D–A characteristics with extended absorption features was exploited.49 This polymer is deep purple in color and its absorption is dominated by a strong band peaking at 554 nm. The bandgap of P43 (Eg = 1.85 eV) is significantly lowered by about 0.35–0.70 eV relative to the purely electron-rich bithienyl (Eg = 2.55 eV) (P5b) or electron-deficient benzothiadiazole (2.20 eV) linked counterpart.5 As no emission from the triplet excited state over the measured spectral window was detected, a charge transfer excited state rather than the triplet state was suggested to contribute to the efficient photoinduced charge separation in the energy conversion for this low-bandgap congener, which is different from P5a-based blends where charge separation occurs via the triplet state of the polymer. The BHJ solar cells, containing P43/PCBM blends as the photoactive material, showed an average η of 4.1% with a Voc of 0.82 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.1 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.37%. The superior performance of P43 as compared to the oligothiophene series is mainly attributed to a wider coverage of the visible spectral range and a more balanced electron and hole transport in P43. In line with this, the influences of the number of thienyl rings in the organic spacer on the absorption, charge transportation and solar cell efficiency of Pt(II) polyynes have been demonstrated.6a In the polymer series of P44–P50, a more extended π-electron delocalized system along the rigid chain, through chemical modification by increasing the number of oligothienyl rings along the main chain, effectively lowers the Eg of the polymers. For example, the Eg of P44a is significantly reduced by ca. 0.34 eV relative to P44d.50 Their photovoltaic responses and η also depend to a large extent on the number of thienyl rings (m) in the spacer. A solar cell with a peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 83% and an η of up to 2.7% was measured for polymer P44c; while the fluorene-based polyplatinayne P45d gave an η of up to 2.9%.51 Although the bandgaps of P45a–P45d are not very low (>2.3 eV), their high absorption coefficients (ε) and suitable energy levels for interaction with PCBM make them achieve high efficiency. With a strong blue-absorbing phenothiazine chromophore, high-bandgap polymers P46a–P46c were prepared (Eg > 2.5 eV), which can be used for photosensitization at a shorter wavelength under solar illumination.52 The best η of 1.3% was attained for P46c-based solar cells. Extremely low Eg values of 1.44–1.53 eV which extend towards the near-infrared (NIR) range of the solar spectrum were observed for P47a–P47b functionalized with the electron-deficient 4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophen-4-one spacer.53 By incorporating the D–A side chain tethered phenanthrenyl-imidazole, P48a–P48b possess Eg from 2.28 to 2.34 eV.54 The introduction of additional thiophene fragments into the polymer chain improves the ICT effect in the D–A π-conjugated system, which results in a higher Jsc value and thus improves the performance of the resulting polymer solar cells. The low-bandgap properties of P49a–P49b are attributed to the electron-accepting nature of the benzothiadiazole unit, which causes significant ICT even in the ground state by coupling with the electron-releasing amino groups.55 The absorption band of P49b can cover a wide range of 300–700 nm with a low HOMO–LUMO gap of 1.85 eV, which is comparable to the Eg value of P43. The low Eg nature in P49b favors harvesting of more solar photon energy which leads to an η of 1.61% with a Voc of 0.77 V, a Jsc of 4.9 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.39 in a P49b-based device. By inclusion of the electron-poor anthraquinone organic moiety, the Eg of P50b was narrowed down to 1.88 eV, and this in turn can increase the performance of the resulting solar cells by 0.33%.56 All the above results indicate that the extension of π-electron conjugation is crucial for increasing solar absorption cross-section, light-harvesting ability and solar cell efficiency, and the addition of thiophene rings in the polymeric system is capable of achieving all these aspects.  
On the other hand, by using some strong acceptor units, such as 2,3-diheptylpyrido[3,4-b]pyrazine, thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine, benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]bis([1,2,5]thiadiazole) (BBTD) and [1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-i]dibenzo[a,c]phenazine (TDBDPz) in P51–P54, the ICT strength of the polymers can be modified with the increased absorption coverage in both NIR and visible regions.57–59 For example, P52a–P52b possess extremely low Eg values of 1.47–1.50 eV with broad absorption features in the range of 300–900 nm. A peak Jsc of 3.23 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.51 V and an η of 0.63% were recorded for P52c with alkylated thienyl rings. Besides, P54a–P54b were reported for NIR photovoltaic applications. They possess narrow Eg of 1.54–1.65 eV and a low HOMO level of about 5.50 eV. Since a BBTD unit is known to possess a substantial quinoidal character within a conjugated backbone, it allows for greater electron delocalization. A red-shift of the long-wavelength peak by 29 nm is observed by increasing the acceptor strength of the acceptor unit from P54b to P54a using BBTD. The bands in the NIR region give rise to strong ICT absorption in these polymers. The solar cell device based on P54a gave a peak η of 1%. Although an anticipated red-shift of absorption coverage can be realized by increasing the accepting strength of the acceptor unit, a link between the photovoltaic performance and the nature of the acceptor group in Pt(II)-based polymetallaynes has not been forged yet.  
Polymers with higher dimensionality may lead to better photovoltaic performance due to the improved isotropic charge transport and optical properties. Purely in the proof-of-concept demonstration, Pt(II)-acetylide polymers P55–P57 with multi-dimensional structures have been developed.60 Higher molecular dimension and longer π-conjugation length induced by fluorene in P57 show more favorable absorption and charge-transport features than that for the linear polymer P55. Due to the lack of the D–A structure in these polymers, P55–P57 achieved rather high Eg values of 2.59–2.72 eV. The ε value of the multi-dimensional polymer P56 is almost double that of P55 (ε = 0.45 × 105 cm−1 and 1.05 × 105 cm−1 at 413 nm for P55 and P56, respectively), and an even higher ε is noted for P57. The efficiency of BHJ devices based on these polymers increases as the dimensionality increases. The higher η of P57 at 2.24% is plausibly attributed to the much improved morphological features and pseudo-3D charge-transport properties of the active layer.  
It is envisioned that most of the porphyrin-functionalized polymers would contain an extensively conjugated 2D π-system, high mobility and extended optical absorption in the visible spectrum, which render them suitable for use as photoactive layers for organic solar cell applications.61 Typical absorption profiles for porphyrin-type compounds are observed for all metalloporphyrin-containing polyplatinayne polymers P58a–P58c, which display a sharp and strong Soret band at about 430 nm and a set of weak Q bands between 540 and 635 nm.62 This type of polymers does not exhibit significant π-conjugation because the large aryl-porphyrin dihedral angles, which result from steric interactions with the β-hydrogens, lead to non-planarity. The substituent effect of the thiophene residue onto the π–π* type transitions of the Zn(II) prophyrin unit in P58c results in more red-shifted Soret bands and Q-bands by 10–15 nm as compared to P58a. The Eg values for these polymers vary from 1.93 to 2.02 eV, and the lower Eg in P58b than P58a somehow favors harvesting of more solar photon energy. Because of the stronger absorption features with a broader Soret band and stronger Q-bands in P56c, its solar cell exhibited the highest η of 1.04% with a Voc of 0.77 V, a Jsc of 3.42 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.39. Efforts are still needed to further improve the photon to electricity conversion efficiency by using porphyrin-containing metallopolyynes for practical applications.
 Fig. 12  The EL spectra for the PLED devices based on P14, P38b, P39 and P40. 


2.5.3 Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). 
Solution-processable polymer-based semiconducting materials are of great interest because they permit the use of cost-effective roll-to-roll printing and inkjet printing.63 In particular, metalated acetylenic analogues are attracting growing attention in the field of OFETs due to their good structural modification ability and relatively high charge mobility (Table 1). Jen and co-workers reported a series of amorphous Pt(II) polymers P59a–P59c with thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,1,3-benzothiodiazole as the hybrid spacer which exhibited field-effect hole mobility up to 1.0 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.64 These polymers display absorption maxima within 587–611 nm in the solid state, which are attributed to the ICT between D and A units. In comparison with P43, upon inclusion of a more structurally rigid thieno[3,2-b]thiophene unit in P59a, the hole mobility (μh) significantly improved from 1.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. By adding the alkyl chain on the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene moiety in P59b and P59c, the μh was further improved to 1.0 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1. The relatively high μh of these two polymers may be attributed to the amorphous thin film characteristics due to the steric hindrance between the bulky Pt(PR3)2 groups. These reveal that the more rigid structure facilitates the electron coupling between D and A units along the polymer backbone and results in the strongly enhanced charge-transporting properties of polyplatinaynes. In 2009, Jenekhe et al. have reported the application of low-bandgap Pt(II)-acetylide copolymers for OFETs.58 These polymers showed p-channel field effect charge transport properties but poor average μh values (3.87 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 3.32 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) were detected. The spin-coated polymer thin films of P55–P57 also showed p-channel field-effect charge transport with a μh of 1.9 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 7.86 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an improved charge carrier transport was found for P56 with higher molecular dimensionality than P55. Apart from these, P60 with an oligothienyl-thiazolothiazole backbone exhibited an impressive field-effect charge carrier mobility (Fig. 13).65 The extension of conjugation chain length from the monothienyl to the bithienyl segment on each side of the thiazolothiazole ring can notably increase the μh of the polymers. These polymers with the D–A motif and the rigid structure of the central heteroaromatic ring enhance the electronic coupling along the polymer backbone which make them show absorption features spanning from 320 to 600 nm and Eg values of 2.15 (P60a) and 2.05 (P60b) eV. Air-stable OFETs based on P60a displayed typical p-type semiconductor behavior and afforded the maximum μh of 2.8 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is among the best reported values for related systems. The relatively high μh values of these Pt(II) polyynes provide the promise of such a new class of conjugated materials for all solution-processed OFETs.  
 Fig. 13  (a) Output characteristics at different gate voltages and (b) transfer characteristics in the saturated regime for OFETs fabricated from polymer P60a. 


2.5.4 Cathode-active materials for organic battery applications. 
The unique electronic structures of polyplatinaynes confer them with many new properties, such as good electrochemical properties and electrical conductivity. On the other hand, the good air stability, sensitive electrochemical response and solvent-independent redox activity of ferrocene render its constituted π-conjugated acetylenic polymers suitable for cathode-active materials in organic lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).66 Recently, attention has been paid to the exploitation of Pt(II) polyynes with ferrocenyl pendant ligands (P26a and P61) as cathode-active materials for LIBs.67 Owing to the incorporation of ferrocenyl groups into the macromolecular structures of P26a and P61, these two polymers become electrochemically active. Both polymers displayed reversible redox waves at the half wave potentials of 0.54 and 0.64 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), respectively. The charging/discharging performances of the composite electrodes were also measured. For the P61 electrode, the relatively reasonable charging capacity of 21 mA h g−1 (72% vs. theoretical value) was obtained against the theoretical capacity (29 mA h g−1) while the observed discharging capacity was remarkably low (10 mA h g−1, 35%). The P26a electrode exhibited the similar charging/discharging behavior as P61 (charging capacity: 15 mA h g−1 (58%), discharging capacity: 7 mA h g−1 (28%), theoretical capacity: 27 mA h g−1). The electronic conductivity and durability of the electrode were enhanced by preparing the P26a or P61/carbon composite electrodes, which exhibited a good cycle life of 50 charging/discharging cycles except for the unfavorable attenuations at the first charging/discharging cycles (Fig. 14). No reversible n-type redox abilities are associated with the polymers. This work opens up new opportunities of applying Pt(II) polyynes as electrode-active materials for organic LIBs.  
 Fig. 14  Charging/discharging cycle performance for the P26a or P61/VGCF/PVdF = 1/8/1 (w/w/w) composite electrode at the rate of 10C (VGCF = vapor-grown carbon fiber, PVdF = polyvinylidene fluoride). 


2.5.5 Patternable polymer precursors to metal nanoparticles. 
One of the promising applications of metal-containing polymers involves their use as precursors for the synthesis of metal nanoparticles (NPs). In particular, FePt alloy NPs with L1o phase (face-centered tetragonal, fct, phase) have attracted significant attention due to their remarkable magnetic properties (uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy (Ku) up to 7 × 106 J m−3).68 As the magnitude of information created and stored grows exponentially, a new class of magnetic materials with ultrahigh density for data recording is urgently needed in a modern society. However, direct and rapid patterning of the target ferromagnetic FePt NPs precisely on particular substrates remains a great challenge. Among these, bit patterned media (BPM) made using FePt NPs are promising candidates for the next generation magnetic recording systems. Good solution processability and good film-forming properties of metallopolymers make them readily shaped and patterned using various lithographic techniques, and therefore, they offer the prospect of access to patterned arrays of metal NPs with good control of composition and density per unit area, which are crucial factors for data storage device applications. A new method for the fabrication of arrays of ferromagnetic FePt NP micropatterns from thin films of a bimetallic metallopolyyne precursor P62 was reported. The studies involve a FePt-mixed metal polyyne polymer, in which the Pt(II) ion is coordinated with a bipyridine-type ligand instead of two phosphines in order to avoid the unwanted phases of Fe2P and PtP2 in the resulting nanomaterials after pyrolysis of the polymer. A pure FePt phase was obtained after the pyrolysis of P62 functionalized with ferrocenylfluorene.69 The NPs synthesized has a fct FePt alloy phase and an average size of approximately 4 nm with a narrow size distribution (Fig. 15). The ratio of Fe to Pt is approximately 0.45:0.55 and the slight deviation from a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio is mainly attributed to the faster loss of potentially volatile Fe-containing fragmentation products as compared to the Pt(II)-containing ones during pyrolysis. This polyplatinayne precursor has also been utilized directly as a negative resist to fabricate the array patterns of FePt NPs with high Ku by both electron-beam lithography (EBL) and UV photolithography (UVL). Lines in the pattern showed excellent shape retention and well-defined edges (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 15  TEM bright-field images of (a) 4-nm Fe45Pt55 nanoparticles; (b) HRTEM of a single FePt NP with an octahedral shape. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 16  Optical micrographs of P62: microbars formed by electron-beam lithography (left) and patterns fabricated using UV-photolithography (right) with a chrome contact mask. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH. 
Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) is a powerful technology for high throughput patterning with high resolution and at very low cost for BPM fabrication.70 By using a soluble polymer P63 as a practical single-source binary metal alloy precursor, nanofabrication of line and dot array patterns of L1o phase hard magnetic FePt NPs by the soft NIL technique was successful (Fig. 17).71 Pyrolysis of P63 generated L1o phase FePt NPs with a narrow size distribution at an average size of 4.6 nm. The nanopatterned arrays of FePt NPs produced by NIL of this polymer possess a coercivity as large as 1.4 T, which is comparable to those values of the magnetic recording media currently in use. The prototype BPM by using P63 provides an areal density of 2.58 Gb in−2. As the magnetization directions of the patterned FePt NPs can be manipulated to point “up” or “down” by applying an external magnetic field in alternate magnetic field directions, and therefore, this method can be utilized as the new platform for BPM and next generation nanoscale high-density magnetic data storage devices. Rapid single-step fabrication of large area nanodot arrays with a periodicity of 500 nm of L1o-ordered FePt NPs can also be achieved by employing the metallopolymer blend (i.e. by blending the Pt-containing metallopolymer P64 and Fe-containing metallopolymer P65 with an equiatomic ratio of Pt and Fe) as the precursor through the NIL technique.72 The negative pattern of the stamp was transferred onto the surface of the polymer blend with high shape fidelity and conformity after NIL. The resulting nanopatterned FePt dot arrays were magnetic with a coercivity of 0.38 T, showing great promise for next generation perpendicular magnetic recording. The pyrolysis temperature factor on the size and magnetic properties of the resulting FePt alloy NPs has been investigated by the same research group by using new functional bimetallic polyynes P66 and P67.73 By taking these two metallopolymers as precursors, nearly equiatomic L1o phase FePt NPs were synthesized in a single step without the need for any post-annealing treatment. Pyrolysis of P66 generated L1o FePt NPs with a size distribution of 11.3–14.7 nm while P67 gave rise to L1o FePt NPs with a size range of 6.3–7.78 nm. Both polymers produced FePt NPs with the smallest average size by pyrolyzing them at 800 °C. The resulting FePt NPs are in well-faceted spherical shape within the carbonaceous matrix which could immobilize and protect the FePt NPs. The NPs synthesized from P67 exhibited higher coercivity as compared to NPs generated from P66 owing to the smaller NP size. Hence, the NPs as-prepared at a higher temperature showed smaller average size and larger coercivity in these two polyynes. The current NIL approach offers a simple method for manufacturing BPM without the need for a photoresist, etching or lift off.  
 Fig. 17  SEM images of the nanoimprinted line array pattern (left) and dot array pattern (right) of P63. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH. 
Apart from FePt NPs, the single-step approach can also be applicable to the synthesis of other metal alloy NPs.74 For instance, the one-pot synthesis of ceramic PtGe NPs has also been developed by pyrolyzing a Pt(II)-coordinated poly(germylacetylene) polymer P68.74a Similar to other Ge-containing polyplatinaynes aforementioned, P68 was found to have a high Eg of 3.84 eV. Due to the presence of an sp3-hybridized germyl conjugation interrupter which resulted in very efficient phosphorescence with fast radiative decay. Pt:Ge NPs with a ratio of almost 1:1 have been prepared by pyrolysis of P68 at 500 °C with the domain size in the range of 4–10 nm. Likewise, the method can be encouragingly extended to the hard ferromagnetic CoPt NPs using the bimetallic polymer P69 as the single-source precursor and nice results on fabricating nanopatterns of CoPt NPs via NIL were reported.74b All these results suggest that the metallopolyynes hold great promise as a new simple platform for the generation of bimetallic NPs in a controllable stoichiometric manner.  


2.5.6 Non-linear optical (NLO) materials. 
High performance non-linear optical (NLO) materials are needed to meet the rapid development of optical communication, data processing, optical switching and optical power limiting in the photonic era. To this end, the third-order susceptibility χ(3) increases with the number of atoms in the long-chain molecules. When polarisable low oxidation state metals with occupied d-orbitals are incorporated into the conjugated polymer backbone, the elongated conjugation length would increase the hyperpolarisability and hence, rod-like metal-containing polyyne polymers can be good candidates for NLO materials.  
Metal-containing polyyne polymers P70a and P70b have been shown to exhibit NLO properties, and their non-linear hyperpolarisability values are larger than that of the metal-free counterpart. The hyperpolarisability value of P70a is greater than that of P70b, indicating the importance of a metal atom in the polymer backbone when designing NLO materials. More interestingly, the real component of the optical non-linearity for the metallopolymer is negative, in agreement with an extrapolation from the monomeric systems.75 For the polydiacetylene systems, the real component of the optical non-linearity is positive, which is dominated by the influence of a two-photon resonance and the sign is governed by the positioning of the laser wavelength with respect to this resonance.  
Polymer P71 can be obtained by reaction of the chiral bis(acetylide) ligand derived from 1,1′-bi-2-naphthol with an equimolar amount of M(PR3)2Cl2 in the presence of a CuI catalyst in Et2NH.76P71 showed larger specific optical rotations than that of the acetylene ligand and the dinuclear model compound. This indicates that the chirality of the acetylene ligands is magnified and transferred to the polymer backbone and hence, P71 adopts a one-handed helical conformation and can induce the helical chirality of the polymers.  
Schanze and co-workers synthesized polyplatinayne P72 and investigated the photophysics and non-linear absorption properties of such a carbazole-containing π-conjugated system.77 The Pt(II) units can induce a significant red-shift, indicating greater mixing of the metal d-orbitals with the π-electron system in a carbazole chromophore. Although the overall non-linear optical response of this series of organometallic systems to nanosecond pulses is lower than that detected in other Pt-acetylide chromophores, the excellent visible optical transparency of such a carbazole derivative system makes it promising for NLO applications where the transparency window is at λ < 500 nm.  
Frazier et al. investigated the third-order susceptibility of Pd(II) or Pt(II) polyynes by third-harmonic generation and optical power limiting techniques and established the relationship between the molecular structure and third-order molecular hyperpolarizability of P1a and P73–P76 using a degenerate four-wave mixing technique.78 The hyperpolarizability data of the polymers are shown in Table 2. Obviously, the hyperpolarizability of Pt(II) polyyne is over two-fold larger than that of the Pd(II) congener. By comparing the hyperpolarizability of P1a, P73 and P75 with that of P76, it was shown that the molecular hyperpolarizability can be greatly increased by increasing the molecular conjugation length, and the substituted group is also an important factor in affecting the value.  
Table 2 The non-linear hyperpolarizability values of P1a and P73–P76




 

P1a


P73


P74


P75


P76






γ/10−36 esu
102
856
390
56
181




Because of the electron deficient nature of the oxadiazole ring, it can be applied as an electron acceptor in the molecular design of two-photon absorption (2PA) chromophores. A series of soluble and thermally stable Pt(II) polyyne polymers P77, P78a and P78b linked by oxadiazole units were prepared and their 2PA properties investigated.79 All the polymers showed 2PA excitation and emission spectra in DMSO solutions by a femto-second mode-locked Ti/sapphire laser and the values were found to be higher than that of the counterpart without Pt(II) coordination. The incorporation of fluorene rings can enhance the 2PA cross section as compared to the non-fluorene species, which is in line with those found in common organic 2PA chromophores. These findings demonstrated that a hybrid of fluorene and oxadiazole moieties could serve as a promising building block for the construction of 2PA luminescent materials and the presence of a Pt atom in the polymer backbone can greatly enhance their sensitivity.
Optical power limiting (OPL) materials are an important class of compounds within the scope of NLO materials and are useful for the protection of human eyes and optical sensors from the intense laser beam. They can strongly attenuate optical beams at high intensities while exhibiting higher transmittance at low intensities. Typically, OPL materials are metallophthalocyanines, metalloporphyrins and other metal-containing small molecules, in which the heavy-metal effect increases the SOC and largely magnifies the OPL response by enhancing the ISC from S1 to T1 states.
Compared with small molecular compounds, polymers for OPL materials possess good film-forming characteristics. Reports indicated that some conjugated organic polyynes with good processability can act as good OPL materials with performance comparable to that of C60. It was also shown that some small molecular Pt(II) arylacetylide complexes with terpyridyl and phosphine ligands are active materials for OPL and the triplet manifold is able to play an active role in the photophysics of these Pt(II)-ethynyl compounds. Inspired by these results, a series of Pt(II) polyyne polymers P5b, P12a, P13c, P26b, P27 and P38c with fluorene, carbazole, bithiazole and bithiophene as the aromatic spacers in the polymer backbone were designed and synthesized and their OPL properties investigated under the 10 ns laser pulse at 532 nm.80 These materials are highly transparent at 532 nm with ε < 2 mol dm−3 cm−1, in which the OPL capabilities of P12a, P27 and P38c are comparable to that of a C60 solution, while those of P5b, P13c and P26b are even better than C60. Considering both the OPL performance and optical transparency, P12a achieved optimized optical limiting/optical transparency trade-off. Being induced by the electron-donating or electron-withdrawing group in the aromatic spacer, P27, P38c, P5b, P13c and P26b displayed poorer optical transparency, indicating that the selection of a suitable aromatic spacer is critical in designing promising OPL materials and the classical way of enhancing D–A interaction in the polymer backbone is not sufficient to address the trade-off problem. The Pt(II) polyynes also show a stronger OPL response as compared with the small-molecular counterparts due to the stronger conjugation effect across the backbone of the Pt(II) polyynes induced by the interaction of their Pt d-orbitals with the π-orbitals of the conjugated ligands. Although the purely organic polyynes possess a longer conjugation length and a red-shifted absorption maximum, the input–output fluence curves of Pt(II) polyynes exhibit a noticeably stronger OPL response. To enhance the OPL performance, two strategies can be adopted. One can make use of the heavy-metal atom effect to increase the yield of the triplet states through SOC while the other is to design suitable D–π–A components in the conjugation path of the metallopolyynes to facilitate the formation of ICT states.
Besides, a series of organometallic fluorene-based polyynes with single or dual metal centers P13e and P79–P84 for studying their OPL behaviors was developed (Fig. 18–20).81 For the polyynes with only one type of metal ion in the polymer backbone, their OPL characteristics are substantially affected by the nature of the metal ion. P13e and P79–P81 are fluorene-based polyynes with a single metal center in the polymer backbone. Polymers with different metal ions in the polymer backbone exhibit different merits in the OPL response and optical transparency. For instance, P13e showed the strongest OPL response and P79 exhibited the best optical transparency. Conjugation length is another important factor that affects the OPL performance even though it will become less important when the chain length is increased up to the trimer for both homo- and heterometallic systems. P81 is a cis-configured Pt(II) polyyne which can display outstanding OPL activity analogous to that of P13e and attractive optical transparency, indicating that excellent optical limiting/transparency trade-off optimization can be obtained by tuning the molecular configuration as well. A good balance of these two conflicting issues can also be optimized via introducing two types of metal centers into the polyyne backbone. Heterobimetallic polymers P82, P83 and P84 consisting of Pt/Hg, Pt/Pd and Pd/Hg centers, respectively, were also prepared and characterized. The copolymers P83 and P84 showed lower OPL activity, while the OPL response can still be enhanced in P82 and P83 because of the effects by lowering the fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) and increasing the triplet emission quantum yield (ΦT) as facilitated by the strong SOC ability of the Pt(II) polyyne. The ability of Hg(II) ions for improving the optical transparency is clearly illustrated by the hypsochromic effect for P82 and P84. From the studies, the OPL enhancement follows the order: Pt(II) > Au(I) > Hg(II) > Pd(II).
 Fig. 18  A photograph showing the difference in colors between polymetallaynes and some benchmark OPL materials (CuPc-tBu4 = tert-butyl-substituted copper(II) phthalocyanine, Zn-TPP = zinc(II) tetraphenylporphyrin). 
 Fig. 19  Comparison of the optical transparency window of some polyplatinaynes with three benchmark OPL materials (C60, Zn-TPP and CuPc-tBu4). 
 Fig. 20  Comparison of the OPL responses of P13e, P82 and P81 with some benchmark optical limiters at To = 92%. 
Pertaining to the reverse saturable absorption (RSA) mechanism, these polyplatinaynes essentially follow two different OPL mechanisms, involving the absorption of either the triplet state or the ICT state. For polymers such as P12a, P13c and P13e, it is the triplet excited state absorption that contributes to the OPL performance. For P5b, P26b, P27 and P38c, the OPL effect was induced by the absorption of the ICT state. Evidently, polyynes P81 and P82 show comparable OPL performance relative to P13e, which indicates that the negative effect caused by conjugation interruption to OPL (via addition of the Hg unit or switch of the PtP2(CCAr)2 geometry from trans to cis) can be balanced effectively by the positive contribution of increased ΦP.
The optical-limiting thresholds (Fth) for the polyplatinaynes (both homometallic or heterometallic) range from 0.06 to 0.15 J cm−2 which are suitable for a practical device (Table 3). These thresholds are close to those of the best benchmark InPc and PbPc dyes (To = 84%). However, the values become larger for polymetallaynes involving only Pd and/or Hg ions. The figure of merit factor σex/σo (where σex and σo are the effective excited-state and ground-state absorption cross sections, respectively) can be used as an indicator to evaluate quantitatively the performance of reverse saturable absorbers. RSA occurs when the cross section of the excited state is larger than that of the ground state. It is clear that a number of our optically transparent metallopolyynes (i.e.P13c, P13e, P26b, P79, P81 and P82) are efficient optical limiters with sizable σex/σo values (e.g. 18.16–20.81 at 532 nm), which are better than those of C60 and metal phthalocyanines.  
Table 3 Comparison of the OPL performance of various metal-containing polyynes with some traditional state-of-the-art materials




OPL materials

F
th

/J cm−2

T
o

 (%)

L

/mm

σ
ex/σod





a Optical limiting threshold, defined as the input light fluence at which the output light fluence is 50%.
b Linear transmittance.
c Sample thickness.
d 
σ
ex/σo = lnTsat/lnTo, where σex is the effective excited-state absorption cross section, σo is the ground-state absorption cross section, Tsat is the transmittance at the saturation fluence.
e Not reported.
f (R)-Tetrakis(2-methoxy-1,1′-binaphthalen-2′-oxy)copper phthalocyanine.





PbPc(β-CP)4
0.07
62










CuPc(pentyloxy)8
0.30
68
10
4.18


(R)-TMBO-CuPcf
0.3
76
1
5


CuPc-tBu4
0.10














CuPc-tBu4
0.13
86
1
6.20


C60
0.18
55
2






C60
0.19
84
1
3.89



P12a

0.15
82
1
5.00



P27

0.13
82
1
6.37



P38c

0.12
82
1
7.60



P5b

0.085
82
1
9.27



P13c

0.056
82
1
19.24



P26b

0.063
82
1
18.16



P13e

0.07
92
1
19.07



P79

0.11
92
1
20.81



P80

0.81
92
1
3.20



P81

0.08
92
1
18.62



P82

0.08
92
1
18.32



P83

0.35
92
1
3.90



P84

0.75
92
1
3.40






2.5.7 Sensors for metal ions. 
Chemo/biosensors is a very important research field in organic electronics due to their wide range of applications.82 A chemo/biosensor usually contains two parts, one is the receptor unit and another is the signaling unit. The former is used to bind the analytes selectively, while the latter reports the changes in the optical or other properties induced by the interaction between the receptor unit and the analytes. The two parts can be introduced into the polymer backbone or the metal complex units. Nitrogen, sulfur or oxygen atoms are widely used as receptor groups in the chemo/biosensor field due to the strong binding ability to some transition-metal cations. Phosphorescent transition metal complexes are often used as signaling units due to the advantages of phosphorescent signals in sensing, such as sensitive emission properties in response to the local environment, significant single-photon excitation in the visible range, relatively long emission lifetimes and evident Stokes shifts for easy separation of excitation and emission.
For conjugated polymers with phosphorescent heavy metal complexes in the main chain or the side chain, the efficient energy or electron transfer between the donor (polymer backbone) and the acceptor (metal complexes) can be applied as promising sensing materials. P85 is a Pt(II)-acetylide based conjugated polymer copolymerized between 2,5-bis(nonyloxy)-1,4-diethynylbenzene and the Pt(II)-acetylide based bipyridine derivative, which is quite soluble in common organic solvents and can serve as a chemosensor for metal cations.82b The results show that this polymer is much more efficient in phosphorescence quenching for Cu2+ and Ni2+ than its small molecular model compound, demonstrating the advantage of amplified signal outputs of conjugated polymers in sensing. A semi-quantitative analysis based on the association constants between the metal cations and the bipyridine unit reveals that the difference in quenching efficiency for different metal ions is mainly attributed to the formation of different metal bipyridine complexes.  
A conjugated polyelectrolyte P86, characteristic of their good water solubility, processability and ionic nature, can also be applied in chemo/biosensors because of its amplified fluorescence quenching of the conjugated polymer main chain. We synthesized a water-soluble organometallic conjugated polyelectrolyte and investigated its direct colorimetric detection of Ag+ in aqueous media.82c Due to its fluorescence and phosphorescence dual emissive properties in pure aqueous medium and the presence of the electron-rich amino acid moiety in the side-chain, the addition of Ag+ results in a significant color change from colorless to yellow that can be observed by the naked eye. In addition, the fluorescence behavior experienced a red shift of 40 nm with reduced fluorescence intensity, while the phosphorescent peak red shifts by 30 nm with increased phosphorescence intensity, owing to the facilitated ISC from the singlet to the triplet states.
The membrane of polyplatinayne P87 was investigated to be sensitive to relative humidity, acetone and methanol.83 By means of a surface acoustic wave (SAW) based sensor, the exposure of the polymeric membrane P87 to different chemicals produces a change in the phase velocity of the SAW that is revealed as a phase shift of the output electric signal of the electroacoustic device. The device showed good sensitivity to humidity, even down below 10%. Polymer P87 also showed sensitivity towards acetone and methanol but the sensitivities are lower as compared to relative humidity. This approach was found to show high sensitivity, high reproducibility and fast response.
A novel water-soluble Pt(II) polyelectrolyte P88 was also reported as a pH sensor, in which blue-shifted absorption and quenched phosphorescence was observed as the pH decreased.84 A significant change in its photophysics was suggested in association with a specific change in the conformational state of polymer P88 under the reduced pH conditions. As all the carboxyl groups in P88 could be protonated at low pH, face-to-face stacked chains in the aggregated polymeric structures were produced together with a reduction of the extent of π-conjugation through the Pt acetylide unit.  


2.5.8 Liquid crystalline materials. 
The metal-containing polyynes are also of interest in the molecular design of liquid crystalline polymers due to their anisotropic molecular shape and extended polymer conformation, which are prerequisites for the formation of a liquid crystalline phase. In fact, metallopolyynes were believed to be the first examples of lyotropic liquid crystalline materials involving transition metals. Hagihara et al. synthesized Pt-containing polyynes P1a, P89a and P89b and for the first time observed the formation of liquid crystalline phase in concentrated solutions.85a Since P89 could be easily prepared with high molecular weight and sufficient solubility in a wide range of concentrations, they took P89 as an example and investigated its liquid crystalline behavior in detail. Results showed that P89 can form a typical liquid crystalline phase in different solutions at concentrations exceeding a certain limiting value. Fig. 21a and b shows the liquid crystalline texture of P89 in dichloromethane at a concentration of ∼30% and in trichloroethylene at a concentration of ∼36%, respectively, which showed a typical nematic lyotropic phase. It was shown that the main chain of these metallopolyynes can be aligned in a direction perpendicular or parallel to the applied magnetic field, depending on the magnetic anisotropy of the CC bonds.85b,c  
 Fig. 21  Polarized light microscopy results of P89 at the concentration of (a) ∼30% in dichloromethane and (b) ∼36% in trichloroethylene, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85a. Copyright (1998) American Chemical Society. 
Next, a wide variety of conjugated metal polyyne polymers displaying lyotropic mesogenic properties have been synthesized and investigated.86 Nearly all of them were designed based on ethynyl and phenyl units and contain different transition metals. When the polymer concentration exceeds a certain limit, which depends on the average molecular weight of the polymer, the polymer would form a lyotropic phase, mainly the nematic phase.
Due to the rigid-rod structure, metal-containing polyynes usually formed a lyotropic liquid crystal phase and few thermotropic liquid crystal phases were ever reported. Bunz et al. synthesized P90 and for the first time realized the thermotropic liquid crystalline phase of an organometallic polymer.87 The theromotropic liquid crystalline behavior was confirmed by the observation of the typical schlieren texture (Fig. 22a) and X-ray diffraction data. The results show that the precipitated P90 from solution is almost amorphous, while upon slow evaporation of a solution in dichloromethane, the sample formed a partially crystalline phase. When the temperature was heated to 180 °C, the X-ray reflections of the crystalline phase disappeared to a large extent, indicating the formation of a nematic phase. The same research group also synthesized a series of polymers P91a–P91e, with the phenyl group substituted by the thiophene group.88 All of these polymers showed lyotropic nematic phases upon slowly concentrating their solutions in chlorinated solvents through the observation of the typical schlirene texture (except for P91b). The texture of P91b observed is not the nematic phase, but a fan-like texture typically observed in low molecular weight smectic compounds, as shown in Fig. 22b.  
 Fig. 22  (a) Schlieren textures of P90 and (b) fan-type texture of P91b. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 and 88, respectively. Copyright (1995) Wiley-VCH. 

3. Polymetallaynes of other transition metals in the neighboring groups
Besides the above functional Pt- or Pd-containing polyyne polymers, some other transition metals, such as Ru(II) and Os(II), were also incorporated into the backbone of the polyyne polymers and their corresponding properties were also investigated.8 In fact, new research attention has been paid to the use of other third-row transition metal chromophores including Au(I) and Hg(II) centers in the design of new polymetallaynes.89 However, very few systems with functional roles were reported in the literature. Here, some metallopolyynes derived from octahedral group 8 Ru(II) and Os(II) centres as well as the group 9 metal elements will be provided. We also present some representative examples of metallopolyynes based on transition metal elements (viz. Ag(I), Au(I) and Hg(II)) in the neighboring groups 11 and 12 in the Periodic Table, in which both organometallic groups can maintain the rigid-rod nature of the polymers due to the adoption of a linear two-coordinate configuration.
3.1 Groups 8 and 9 polymetallaynes
Related polymers of group 8 transition metal elements have been less investigated relative to their group 10 counterparts. Lewis and co-workers have incorporated Fe(II), Ru(II) and Os(II) centres into polymetallayne systems (92–94) by the Cu-catalyzed trimethylstannyl metathesis route (Fig. 23).8c These polymers were characterized by spectroscopic and molecular weight data. However, relatively little is known about the functional properties of these group 8 polymetallaynes so far. The first heterobimetallic polyyne P95 was prepared by Dixreuf et al. via the Cu-catalyzed copolymerization of trans-[Ru(dppe)2(CC–p-C6H4–CCH)2] (dppe = bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane) with trans-[Pd(PBu3)2Cl2] and it was shown that the weight-average molecular weight was modest at 14,800.8d A π-conjugated Ru-containing organoboron polymer P96 was similarly made by Chujo et al. using hydroboration polymerization between mesitylborane and trans-[Ru(dppe)2(CC–p-C6H4–CCH)2], in which it showed a remarkable push–pull interaction between the electron-rich Ru group and the electron-deficient organoboron moiety.8e Its absorption spectrum exhibited two bands peaking at 359 and 514 nm, presumably due to π–π* and dπ–pπ* transitions in the polymer chain. The former transition reveals an extended π-conjugation length through the boron atom. The latter is markedly red-shifted by 141 nm relative to that of the Ru-monomer. An electropolymerized polymer P97 was also reported by Wolf et al. and the results suggest that the polymers can be conductive.8f  
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of group 8 polymetallaynes by the metathesis reaction using trimethylstannylalkynyl-modified reagent. 
Polymers containing ferrocenyl groups have also become a topic of much interest. Lewis et al. have developed a σ-acetylide polymer P98 with a trans-orientation of the CC units in the polymer structure by using trimethylstannylalkynyl reagents and diiodoferrocene.8g Two heterometallic Pt–Fe polyyne polymers 99 and 100 were synthesized by Long et al.8h Molecular weight measurements revealed the formation of oligomers of different chain lengths for 99. Polymer 100 only exists as an oligomer with a maximum of 12 repeating units. It was found that there is no clear ferrocene–ferrocene interaction through the Pt-acetylide linkages. Two mixed-metal polymetallaynes of Fe and Ni or Pd, P101, were also isolated and characterized by spectroscopic techniques. However, the authors did not mention about the material properties of these compounds.8d  
On the other hand, examples of polymetallaynes of group 9 transition metal elements are not common in the literature, owing to the instability of the metal centres and the difficulty in characterization. As stabilized by an N4 pseudo-macrocyclic ring, Co(II)-containing polyyne P102 with Co–C σ-acetylide bonds was formed following the trimethylstannyl metathesis route, which indicates π-electron conjugation through the metal centre.90a Attempts to make the Co(II) σ-acetylide polymer from Co(Cp)(PPh3)2 and HCC–(C6H4)2–CCH failed but polymer P103 was isolated instead (Fig. 24).90b Two different approaches to the synthesis of linear σ-acetylide polymers of Rh(III) P104 and P105 were, respectively, reported by Lewis10e and Marder91 at the same time (Fig. 25). In the former case, a trimethylstannyl-substituted dialkynyl species was used and oxidative addition of a second trimethylstannylalkynyl molecule to the monoalkynyl species was believed to occur in the mechanism. For the latter route, direct oxidative addition of terminal alkynes accompanied by the elimination of CH4 was suggested to proceed in the process.
 Fig. 24  Synthesis of polymer P103. 
 Fig. 25  Two different synthetic routes to Rh(III)-containing polymetallaynes P104 and P105. 
3.2 Group 11 polymetallaynes
The organometallic chemistry of groups 11 and 12 d10 metal alkynyls has also aroused considerable interest. It is well-known that both gold(I) and mercury(II) ions adopt a linear geometry with a coordination number of two, which render them suitable for making rigid-rod metal-acetylide polymers. A series of insoluble rod-like gold(I) acetylide polymers P106–P108 bridged by diphosphine or diisocyanide ligands were prepared by Puddephatt and co-workers through the reaction between PPN(Au(acac)2) (PPN+ = bis(triphenylphosphine)iminium, acac = acetylacetonate) and diethynyl arenes.92 Due to the insolubility of these Au(I) σ-acetylide polymers in organic solvents, they can only be studied in the solid state. The polymers were characterized in the solid state to reveal interchain Au⋯Au bonding interactions. Polymers P106 and P107 give a weak, broad featureless emission band near 600 nm in the solid state whereas the P108 series shows weak, broad emissions at 585 nm. Some anionic Au(I) polymetallaynes P109–P112 were also isolated successfully but they possess very low solubility in common organic solvents.93 The role of intermolecular aurophilicity in these polymers was discussed.
Wu and co-workers synthesized a terminal alkyne precursor 2,5-diethynyl-1,4-bis(phenylethynyl)benzene and through which one-dimensional organometallic molecular wires P113 can be prepared by surface reactions of the alkyne precursor on Ag(110) and characterized by the method of ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling microscopy, molecular mechanics simulations, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 26).94 A high selectivity of the organometallic reaction instead of the Glaser coupling reaction on Ag(111) leading to a covalently-bonded diacetylenic polymer chain was achieved and the main product was a highly oriented 1D silver-acetylide organometallic chains with a productivity of 88% on Ag(110). The research work provides the possibility of constructing surface structures by tuning reaction pathways of the precursors with a designed substrate lattice structure.  
 Fig. 26  Reaction pathway on Ag(110) towards the preparation of P113. 
3.3 Group 12 polymetallaynes
On the other hand, the corresponding metal alkynyl polymer chemistry of the isoelectronic Hg(II) congener has been less explored, especially with regard to the photophysical properties. In general, poor solubility of these polymeric materials causes much difficulty in handling them in the solution state for characterization. Since the first report on the insoluble Hg(II) polyyne [–Hg–CC–(p-C6H4)–CC–] in 1964,95 our group has attempted in preparing and studying a family of soluble d10 Hg(II) polyyne polymers with various spacer groups P114–P117.96 Direct base-catalyzed mercuration reaction of diethynylarenes with HgCl at room temperature provides a convenient access to relatively soluble polymetallaynes of Hg(II) in good yields which can be easily isolated by precipitation. In most cases, Hg(II)-triggered (π–π*)3 phosphorescence was detected for these polymers. Similar to Au(I) analogues, the observation of broad emissions in the films of these polymers corroborates with the presence of weak intermolecular Hg⋯Hg short contacts in the solid state. The effects of side-chain substituents of the aromatic ring on the photophysical properties (e.g. absorption, emission and thermal data) have been investigated. The evolution of the spatial extent of the singlet and triplet excited states of these Hg(II) polyynes was carefully elucidated and the results were compared to their dinuclear model compounds as well as their neighboring Pt(II) and Au(I) systems. It was shown that there is a close resemblance of the photophysical traits among these three transition metal elements in such a skeleton. For a theoretical study on the electronic structure and optical properties of a mercury-containing polyyne polymer, Feng et al. performed Hartree–Fock and DFT calculations on diethynylfluorene-based oligomers (n = 1, 2 and 3) of P114d as well as their metal-free congeners.97 The π-conjugation was preserved through the Hg centre due to weak hybridization between the π orbital of the conjugated ligand and the Hg d orbital. A stronger localized Hg–C σ bond was found between the metal and conjugated ligand. The electronic spectrum calculations confirm that the introduction of a metal center into the conjugated segments contributes more to confine the excitions than to delocalize the π electrons. Time-dependent DFT calculations on P114d predicted that the π-conjugation is extended over about four repeating units in singlet absorption process and localized mainly on one unit in the singlet excited state (S1) and triplet excited state (T1) emission after relaxation. The geometrical change in the polymer singlet and triplet excited states was almost confined within one unit relative to the ground state. The heavy metal atom gives some barrier to delocalization, so that the first singlet and triplet excited states of the polymer have the character of molecular excited states and mainly the ligand-dominating excited state. Thus, this kind of rigid-rod organometallic polymer can be used as a good emitting layer in displays due to its potential of achieving full color emission through modifying the electronic structure of the conjugated ligand segment.  
Recently, the Hg-containing metallopolyyne with amino-functionalized side chains P118 was found to be a good cathode interlayer to improve the electron transport and collection properties of inverted polymer solar cells with the configuration of ITO/P118/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al. The metal-based polymer can allow orthogonal solvent processability, good film formation, reduction of the work function of the ITO, low optical absorption in the visible and NIR regions, large bandgap, good electron selectivity, improved electron transport properties and less stringent dependency of device efficiency on the interlayer thickness. It was demonstrated that the presence of mercuriophilic interactions in the solid state in P118 promotes stronger π–π stacking of the metallopolymer chains (vide infra), which facilitates charge transport. With the interlayer, the above device showed a significantly elevated PCE up to 9.11% relative to the value of 3.18% for the unmodified device under optimized conditions. For comparison, the corresponding device using P118 was also fabricated which only gave a moderate PCE of 5.98% due to the ineffectiveness of reducing the work function of the ITO substrate without the amino terminal groups.98
It is also intriguing to see the supramolecular interactions in the solid-state structure of P119 formed via the π-coordination of the alkynyl units of Hg(CCR)2 with AgBF4 in a polymeric network.99  
Very recently, we also synthesized and studied a new covalently linked inorganic–organic hybrid materials by introducing photoactive Hg(II) acetylide to a Dawson-type polyoxometalate (POM) P120.100 Due to the delocalized π-conjugation between the Hg(II) d orbital and the phenylethynyl π orbital, the hybrid shows a significant red-shift of the lowest energy band as compared to the parent POM. The charge transfer between the electron-donating Hg-phenylethynyl and electron-accepting POM caused the luminescence quenching of the covalently-linked hybrid materials. The covalently-bonded polymer also displays semiconducting and photovoltaic properties. The related Pt(II) congener was also reported by the same research group.101  
4. Conclusions
The family of polymetallaynes described herein is presented with particular relevance to their structure–property–activity relationships and potential electronic, optical and magnetic applications. The advances in deliberate chemical synthesis have resulted in a library of application-oriented metallopolyynes that can exhibit diverse photophysics and material properties. The pros and cons on conjugated versus non-conjugated spacers in these polymers have been described. Polymetallayne systems have been widely studied as model systems to explain the aspects of the photophysics of excited states in such conjugated polymers. The triplet excitons are accessible to experiment which is different from typical organic-based polymers. The utility of transition metal centers has been focused on populating the triplet manifolds, extending the absorption profiles of the organic counterparts, inducing electron/energy transfer, and serving as the patternable polymer precursors towards nanomaterial synthesis, etc. A good control over their photophysical and functional properties has been exercised through the judicious choices of metal centers, auxiliary ligands coordinated to the metal centers, and/or organic bridging spacers. Moreover, intrinsic differences in their functional properties have been exploited for the realization of different applications. Given the attractive performance of polymetallaynes aforementioned in different application aspects and their ease of structural modification to suit a particular function, there can be no doubt that polymetallaynes hold great promise in the development of the materials science field. Activation of their multifunctional characteristics by rational molecular design would definitely bring this class of metallopolymers to a higher platform in both academic and industrial research.
Indeed, an unlimited number of polymetallaynes of different chemical structures and topologies can be developed readily from a synthetic viewpoint, leading to their multifunctionality feature. This has been exactly shown for polyplatinaynes which are promising materials for use in optoelectronics and nanoscience. We are optimistic to see more fascinating chemistry, high quality research outputs and advanced applications associated with this class of metal-based polymers.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Areas of Excellence Scheme from University Grants Committee of HKSAR (project number AoE/P-03/08), Hong Kong Research Grants Council (HKBU203313), Hong Kong Baptist University (FRG1/15-16/043 and FRG2/13-14/078), the Science, Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality (JCYJ20140818163041143 and JCYJ20140419130507116) and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University for their financial support. We are grateful to the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (project numbers 21504074 and 51373145).
References

  (a) X. Zhao and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3728–3743 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Wang, H. Dong, H. Dong, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Zhao, Y. Guo and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 25, 5372–5391 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) G. R. Whittell, M. D. Hager, U. S. Schubert and I. Manners, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 176–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. A. Williams, A. J. Boydstona and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 729–744 RSC ; 
  (c) I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1996, 35, 1602–1621 CrossRef .

  (a) C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2469–2502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1614–1649 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. Sheng, S. Singh, A. Gambetta, T. Drori, M. Tong, S. Tretiak and Z. V. Vardeny, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2653 Search PubMed .
W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2627–2690 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1246–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Wild, A. Winter, F. Schlutter and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1459–1511 RSC ; 
  (c) R. Mas-Balleste, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4220–4233 RSC ; 
  (d) W. L. Leong and J. J. Vittal, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 688–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Koepf, F. Cherioux, J. A. Wytko and J. Weiss, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2872–2892 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4457–4482 RSC .

  (a) T. Ren, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 4854–4870 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. A. Green, M. P. Cifuentes, M. Samoc and M. G. Humphrey, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2530–2541 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Atherton, C. W. Faulkner, S. L. Ingham, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis, N. J. Long and P. R. Raithby, J. Organomet. Chem., 1993, 462, 265–270 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) O. Lavastre, M. Even, P. H. Dixneuf, A. Pacreau and J. P. Vairon, Organometallics, 1996, 15, 1530–1531 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. Matsumi, Y. Chujo, O. Lavastre and P. H. Dixneuf, Organometallics, 2001, 20, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Y. Zhu, D. B. Millet, M. O. Wolf and S. J. Rettig, Organometallics, 1999, 18, 1930–1938 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) S. L. Ingham, M. S. Khan, J. Lewis, N. J. Long and P. R. Raithby, J. Organomet. Chem., 1994, 470, 153–159 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) N. J. Long, A. J. Martin, R. Vilar, A. J. P. White, D. J. Williams and M. Younus, Organometallics, 1999, 18, 4261–4269 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Long and C. K. Williams, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2586–2617 CAS ; 
  (b) W.-Y. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2007, 4495–4510 RSC .

  (a) S. Takahashi, E. Murata, K. Sonogashira and N. Hagihara, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 1980, 18, 661–669 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. F. Klein and H. H. Karsch, Chem. Ber., 1975, 108, 944–955 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. B. Marder, D. Zargarian, J. C. Calabrese, T. H. Herskovitz and D. Milstein, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 1484–1485 RSC ; 
  (d) M. S. Khan, S. J. Davies, A. K. Kakkar, D. Schwartz, B. Lin, B. F. G. Johnson and J. Lewis, J. Organomet. Chem., 1992, 424, 87–97 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. J. Davies, B. F. G. Johnson, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, Chem. Commun., 1991, 187–188 RSC ; 
  (f) K. Sonogashira, K. Ohga, S. Takahashi and N. Hagihara, J. Organomet. Chem., 1980, 188, 237–243 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, F. R. Al-Battashi, S. Al-Saadi, B. Ahrens, J. K. Bjernemose, M. F. Mahon, P. R. Raithby, M. Younus, N. Chawdhury, A. Köhler, E. A. Marseglia, E. Tedesco, N. Feeder and S. J. Teat, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2377–2385 RSC .
E. E. Silverman, T. Cardolaccia, X. Zhao, K.-Y. Kim, K. Haskins-Glusac and K. S. Schanze, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1491–1500 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Liu, S.-Y. Poon and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 5036–5048 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. D. Markwell, I. S. Butler, A. K. Kakkar, M. S. Khan, Z. H. Al-Zakwani and J. Lewis, Organometallics, 1996, 15, 2331–2337 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Chawdhury, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend, W.-Y. Wong, J. Lewis, M. Younus, P. R. Raithby, T. C. Corcoran, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary and M. S. Khan, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 4963–4970 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Guo, Y.-G. Kim, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1887–1889 RSC .
J. Lewis, N. J. Long, P. R. Raithby, G. P. Shields, W.-Y. Wong and M. Younus, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1997, 4283–4288 RSC .
M. S. Khan, M. K. Al-Suti, H. H. Shah, S. Al-Humaimi, F. R. Al-Battashi, J. K. Bjernemose, L. Male, P. R. Raithby, N. Zhang, A. Köhler and J. E. Warren, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10174–10183 RSC .
L. S. Devi, M. K. Al-Suti, N. Zhang, S. J. Teat, L. Male, H. A. Sparkes, P. R. Raithby, M. S. Khan and A. Köhler, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1131–1141 CrossRef .

  (a) M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, A. K. Hisahm, P. R. Raithby, B. Ahrens, M. F. Mahon, L. Male, E. A. Marseglia, E. Tedesco, R. H. Friend, A. Köhler, N. Feeder and S. J. Teat, Dalton Trans., 2002, 1358–1368 RSC ; 
  (b) K. A. Bunten and A. K. Kakkar, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 2041–2043 RSC ; 
  (c) K. A. Bunten and A. K. Kakkar, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 2885–2893 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Chawdhury, A. Kolhler, R. H. Friend, M. Younus, N. J. Long, P. R. Raithby and J. Lewis, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 722–727 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Wilson, N. Chawdhury, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. Younus, M. S. Khan, P. R. Raithby, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9412–9417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, C.-K. Wong, G.-L. Lu, A. W.-M. Lee, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 983–990 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W.-Y. Wong, L. Liu, S.-Y. Poon, A. W.-M. Lee, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4496–4504 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 5588–5607 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, J.-X. Shi, K.-W. Cheah, T.-H. Lee and L. M. Leung, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 4028–4041 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, G.-L. Lu, K.-H. Choi and J.-X. Shi, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 3506–3513 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. M. Aly, C.-L. Ho, D. Fortin, W.-Y. Wong, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and P. D. Harvey, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8341–8352 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. M. Aly, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, D. Fortin and P. D. Harvey, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6902–6916 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L. Liu, W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1369–1378 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, C.-K. Wong, G.-L. Lu, K.-W. Cheah, J.-X. Shi and Z. Lin, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 4587–4594 RSC .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 4804–4824 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Yanga, J.-K. Feng, W.-Y. Wong and S.-Y. Poon, Polymer, 2007, 48, 6457–6463 CrossRef .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, A. W.-M. Lee, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2420–2421 RSC .
W.-Y. Wong, S.-Y. Poon, J.-X. Shi and K.-W. Cheah, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2007, 17, 189–200 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Poon, W.-Y. Wong, K.-W. Cheah and J.-X. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2550–2563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Khan, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. K. Al-Suti, B. Ahrens, M. F. Mahon, L. Male, P. R. Raithby, C. E. Boothby and A. Köhler, Dalton Trans., 2003, 74–84 RSC .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, K.-H. Choi, G.-L. Lu and J.-X. Shi, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 461–465 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Lewis, P. R. Raithby and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 556, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and P. R. Raithby, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1998, 2761–2766 RSC .
Y. Yuan and T. Michinobu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 2114–2119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, T. Michinobu, J. Oguma, T. Kato and K. Miyake, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 1465–1472 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. J. Long, C. K. Wong and A. J. P. White, Organometallics, 2006, 25, 2525–2532 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Iucci, G. Infante and G. Polzonetti, Polymer, 2002, 43, 655–663 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. M. Soliman, D. Fortin, E. Zysman-Colman and P. D. Harvey, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 522–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Liu, D. Fortin and P. D. Harvey, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5891–5900 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) F.-L. Jiang, D. Fortin and P. D. Harvey, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2614–2623 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) L. M. T. Frija, A. J. L. Pombeiro and M. N. Kopylovich, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 308, 32–55 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) L. Li, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2012, 703, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Yamamoto, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 583–606 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Moussa and H. Amouri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1372–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Moussa, K. M.-C. Wong, L.-M. Chamoreau, H. Amouri and V. W.-W. Yam, Dalton Trans., 2007, 3526–3530 RSC .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, Solid State Phys., 1995, 49, 1–149 CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Bao, J. Lovinger and A. J. Brown, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 207–222 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. E. Katz, Z. Bao and S. L. Gilat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 359–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS ; 
  (b) C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelem, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Wohrle and D. Meissner, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129–138 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. J. M. Hall, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. S. Morattii and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Möller, C. Perlov, W. Jackson, C. Taussig and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 426, 166–169 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Ouisse and O. Stéphan, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 251–256 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. L. Brédas, Synth. Met., 1987, 17, 115–121 CrossRef .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Sandee, C. K. Williams, N. R. Evans, J. E. Davies, C. E. Boothby, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7041–7048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Ho, C.-H. Chui, W.-Y. Wong, S. M. Aly, D. Fortin, P. D. Harvey, B. Yao, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 1786–1798 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, Z. He, K.-Y. Cheung, A. M.-C. Ng, A. B. Djurišić and W.-K. Chan, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 1319–1332 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Y. He, B. Yao, J. Dang, W.-Y. Wong, Z. Xie, X. Zhao and L. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 2405–2414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, B. Liu, J. Zhao, Y. He, X. Yan, X. Xu, G. Zhou, X. Yang and Z. Wu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36507–36519 RSC .

  (a) A. Köhler, H. F. Wittmann, R. H. Friend, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, Synth. Met., 1994, 67, 245–249 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. Köhler, H. F. Wittmann, R. H. Friend, M. S. Khan and J. Lewis, Synth. Met., 1996, 77, 147–150 CrossRef ; 
  (c) N. Chawdhury, M. Younus, P. R. Raithby, J. Lewis and R. H. Friend, Opt. Mater., 1998, 9, 498–501 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mei, K. Ogawa, Y.-G. Kim, N. C. Heston, D. J. Arenas, Z. Nasrollahi, T. D. McCarley, D. B. Tanner, J. R. Reymolds and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 150–161 CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, X.-Z. Wang, Z. He, A. B. Djurišić, C.-T. Yip, K.-Y. Cheung, H. Wang, C. S. K. Mak and W.-K. Chan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 521–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Wong, X.-Z. Wang, Z. He, K.-K. Chan, A. B. Djurišić, K.-Y. Cheung, C.-T. Yip, A. M.-C. Ng, Y. Y. Xi, C. S. K. Mak and W.-K. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14372–14380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, K.-Y. Cheung, M.-K. Fung, W.-T. Lam, A. B. Djurišić and W.-K. Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2824–2833 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, W.-C. Chow, K.-Y. Cheung, M.-K. Fung, A. B. Djurišić and W.-K. Chan, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2717–2726 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Z. Wang, Q. Wang, L. Yan, W.-Y. Wong, K.-Y. Cheung, A. Ng, A. B. Djurišić and W.-K. Chan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 861–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhan, W.-Y. Wong, A. Ng, A. B. Djurišić and W.-K. Chan, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 4112–4120 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and W.-Y. Wong, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 432–440 RSC .
L. Li, W.-C. Chow, W.-Y. Wong, C.-H. Chui and R. S.-M. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 1189–1197 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Z. Wang, C.-L. Ho, L. Yan, X. Chen, X. Chen, K.-Y. Cheung and W.-Y. Wong, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2010, 20, 478–487 CrossRef CAS .
P.-T. Wu, T. Bull, F. S. Kim, C. K. Luscombe and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 671–681 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, Y. Fu, C.-H. Chui, C.-W. Kan, Z. Xie, L. Wang and W.-Y. Wong, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1472–1477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. He, A. Wild, H. Wu, Y. Cao, U. S. Schubert, C.-H. Chui and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 1766–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Y. Endo and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10974–10975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhan, S. Lamare, A. Ng, T. Kenny, H. Guernon, W.-K. Chan, A. B. Djurišić, P. D. Harvey and W.-Y. Wong, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5155–5167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Park, J. S. Park, T.-D. Kim, K.-S. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. S. Lim and C. Lee, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1028–1031 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Naek, S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, K.-S. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5734–5736 CrossRef .
L. Yan, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, X.-Z. Wang, W.-Y. Wong, Y. Liu, W. Wu, Q. Xiao, G. Wang, X. Zhou, W. Zeng, C. Li, X. Wang and H. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 603–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Morikita and T. Yamamoto, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 637, 809–812 CrossRef .
Z. Meng, K. Sato, T. Sukegawa, K. Oyaizu, C.-L. Ho, J. Xiang, Y.-H. Feng, Y. H. Lo, H. Nishide and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 812, 51–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 393–403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C.-L. Ho, S. Aouba, Y.-Q. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, S. Petrov, N. Coombs, P. Dube, H. E. Ruda, W.-Y. Wong and I. Manners, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1255–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 495–513 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, M. Faisal, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, K. Liu, B.-Z. Tang, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1034–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, G. Li, H. Wang, P. W.-T. Pong, C.-W. Leung, I. Manners, C.-L. Ho, H. Li and W.-Y. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 734–741 RSC .

  (a) C.-L. Ho, S.-Y. Poon, K. Liu, C.-K. Wong, G.-L. Lu, S. Petrov, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2013, 744, 165–171 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Dong, W. Qu, W. Liang, K. Guo, H. Xue, Y. Guo, Z. Meng, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7068–7074 RSC .
W. J. Blau, H. J. Byrne, D. J. Cardin and A. Davey, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 245–249 RSC .
K. Onitsuka, Y. Harada, F. Takei and S. Takahashi, Chem. Commun., 1998, 643–644 RSC .
S. Goswami, G. Wicks, A. Rebane and K. S. Schanze, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 17721–17728 RSC .
H. S. Nalwa, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1991, 5, 349–377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Goudreault, Z. He, Y. H. Guo, C.-L. Ho, H. M. Zhan, Q. W. Wang, K. Y. F. Ho, K.-L. Wong, D. Fortin, B. Yao, Z. Y. Xie, L. X. Wang, W.-M. Kwok, F. D. Harvey and W.-Y. Wong, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7936–7949 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Zhou and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2541–2566 RSC .

  (a) G. J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, C. Ye and Z. Y. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 963–975 CrossRef ; 
  (b) G. J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, Z. Y. Lin and C. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6189–6193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S.-J. Liu, Y. Chen, W.-J. Xu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 461–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Ogawa, F. Q. Guo and K. S. Schanze, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 207, 79–85 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. J. Qin, W.-Y. Wong and L. X. Wang, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
C. Caliendo, I. Fratodd and M. V. Russo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4849–4851 CrossRef CAS .
K. Haskins-Glusac, M. R. Pinto, C. Tan and K. S. Schanze, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14964–14971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Takahashi, E. Murata, M. Kariya, K. Sonogashira and N. Hagihara, Macromolecules, 1979, 12, 1016–1018 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Takahashi, Y. Takai, H. Morimoto, K. Sonogashira and N. Hagihara, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1982, 82, 139–143 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Takahashi, Y. Takai, H. Morimoto and K. Sonogashira, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 3–5 RSC .

  (a) S. A. Hudson and P. M. Maitilis, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 861–885 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Oriol and J. Serrano, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 348–369 CrossRef CAS .
M. Altmann and U. H. F. Bunz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1995, 34, 569–571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Altmann, V. Enkelmann, G. Lieser and U. H. F. Bunz, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 726–728 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2400–2471 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. S. Khan, N. A. Pasha, A. K. Kakkar, P. R. Raithby, J. Lewis, K. Fuhrmann and R. H. Friend, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 759–760 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Ohkubo, K. Aramaki and H. Nishihara, Chem. Lett., 1993, 271–274 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fyfe, M. Mlekuz, D. Zargarian, N. J. Taylor and T. B. Marder, Chem. Commun., 1991, 188–190 RSC .

  (a) M. J. Irwin, J. J. Vittal and R. J. Puddephatt, Organometallics, 1997, 16, 3541–3547 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. J. Irwin, G. Jia, N. C. Payne and R. J. Puddephatt, Organometallics, 1996, 15, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Vicente, M. T. Chicote, M. D. Abrisqueta and M. M. Alvarez-Falćon, J. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 663, 40–45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Vicente, M.-T. Chicote and M. M. Alvarez-Falćon, Organometallics, 2004, 23, 5707–5712 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Vicente, M. T. Chicote and M. M. Alvarez-Falćon, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 2764–2772 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Vicente, M.-T. Chicote and M. M. Alvarez-Falcon, Organometallics, 2002, 22, 4792–4797 CrossRef .
J. Liu, L. H. Xiao, J. Shang, X. Zhou, Y. J. Zhang, Y. F. Wang, X. Shao, J. L. Li, G. Q. Xu, H. Tang, D. H. Zhao and K. Wu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6305–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Hay, J. Polym. Sci., Part A-1: Polym. Chem., 1969, 7, 1625–1634 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Liu, S.-Y. Poon and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 5036–5048 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W.-Y. Wong, L. Liu and J.-X. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4064–4068 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Liu, M.-X. Li and W.-Y. Wong, Aust. J. Chem., 2005, 58, 799–802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. K. Feng, L. Yang, A. M. Ren and H. X. Dieth Rettig, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 385–394 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, K. Zhang, J. Lu, J. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15326–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rais, D. M. P. Mingos, R. Vilar, A. J. P. White and D. J. Williams, Organometallics, 2000, 19, 5209–5217 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Hu, Q. Liu, S.-Z. Liu, F.-B. Li, L. Li, L. Peng, D.-H. Yao, W.-Y. Wong and Z.-L. Du, J. Organomet. Chem., 2015, 792, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Hu, Q. Liu, Z.-L. Du, F.-B. Li, G.-H. Li, X.-J. Zhu, W.-Y. Wong, L. Wang and H. Li, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 306–315 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Cheuk-Lam Ho
	Cheuk-Lam Ho received her BSc (Hons.) and PhD degrees both from Hong Kong Baptist University (HKBU). After her postdoctoral research at HKBU and The University of Hong Kong, she joined the Department of Chemistry at HKBU in 2012 as Research Assistant Professor. Her research mainly focuses on the development of novel molecular functional materials and metallopolymers. The materials developed have a wide range of applications in the areas of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic solar cells (OSCs) and as patternable precursors to magnetic metal alloy nanoparticles. She has contributed to a total of over 80 scientific papers in the field to date.

Zhen-Qiang Yu
	Zhen-Qiang Yu received his PhD degree (with Prof. Er-Qiang Chen) from Peking University in 2007 and in the same year he joined the School of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen University, where he is currently an Associate Professor. Current research interests include phase behaviors of liquid crystalline polymers and functional liquid crystals with aggregation-induced emission characteristics. In 2015, he joined HKBU as a Visiting Research Fellow with Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong.

Wai-Yeung Wong
	Wai-Yeung Wong obtained BSc (Hons.) and PhD degrees from the University of Hong Kong. After postdoctoral studies at Texas A&M University (with Prof. F. Albert Cotton) and the University of Cambridge (with Profs. The Lord Lewis and Paul R. Raithby), he joined HKBU as an Assistant Professor in 1998, advancing to Chair Professor in 2011. He recently moved to work at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University as Chair Professor of Chemical Technology. He is currently the Associate Editor of Journal of Materials Chemistry C, Regional Editor of Journal of Organometallic Chemistry and Editor of Topics in Current Chemistry. His research focuses on metallopolymers and metallophosphors with energy functions and photofunctional properties. He won the RSC Chemistry of the Transition Metals Award, FACS Distinguished Young Chemist Award, Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Prize for Scientific and Technological Innovation, State Natural Science Award from China and JPA Lectureship Award for Asian and Oceanian Photochemist.

 	Fig. 1  Polymetallaynes based on different organometallic building blocks derived from groups 8, 10 and 12 transition metal elements.	 

 	Fig. 2  General skeleton of polyplatinaynes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Formation of polyplatinaynes by copper-catalyzed dehydrohalogenation polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 4  A spectrum of Eg values (in eV) for Pt polyynes with different spacer groups. *Please refer to the relevant structures in the text.	 



P43
	1.85	0.006 (0.01)	
64


P59a
	1.84	0.15 (0.25)	
64


P59b
	1.82	0.57 (0.86)	
64


P59c
	1.81	0.89 (1.00)	
64


P51
	1.97	0.00627	
58


P52a
	1.54	0.000116	
58


P53a
	1.66	0.00332	
58


P55
	2.72	0.0019	
60


P56
	2.68	0.00786	
60


P57
	2.59	0.00277	
60


P60a
	2.15	1.5 (2.1)	
65


P60b
	2.05	2.2 (2.8)	
65


 		 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the number of double bonds within the fused and non-fused oligothiophene spacers.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  The photoluminescence spectra of Pt polyynes P20–P23. PL spectra were taken at both 290 and 20 K.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Charge transfer transitions between the Pt(II) and Ir(III) units in P34.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Energy level diagram of P35a–P35b.	 

 	Fig. 9  Various emerging applications of polyplatinaynes.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Fluorescence spectra of polyplatinaynes at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Different phosphorescent colors from polyplatinaynes at low temperature.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 12  The EL spectra for the PLED devices based on P14, P38b, P39 and P40.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Output characteristics at different gate voltages and (b) transfer characteristics in the saturated regime for OFETs fabricated from polymer P60a.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 14  Charging/discharging cycle performance for the P26a or P61/VGCF/PVdF = 1/8/1 (w/w/w) composite electrode at the rate of 10C (VGCF = vapor-grown carbon fiber, PVdF = polyvinylidene fluoride).	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM bright-field images of (a) 4-nm Fe45Pt55 nanoparticles; (b) HRTEM of a single FePt NP with an octahedral shape. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Optical micrographs of P62: microbars formed by electron-beam lithography (left) and patterns fabricated using UV-photolithography (right) with a chrome contact mask. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright (2008) Wiley-VCH.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of the nanoimprinted line array pattern (left) and dot array pattern (right) of P63. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 


γ/10−36 esu	102	856	390	56	181

 	Fig. 18  A photograph showing the difference in colors between polymetallaynes and some benchmark OPL materials (CuPc-tBu4 = tert-butyl-substituted copper(II) phthalocyanine, Zn-TPP = zinc(II) tetraphenylporphyrin).	 

 	Fig. 19  Comparison of the optical transparency window of some polyplatinaynes with three benchmark OPL materials (C60, Zn-TPP and CuPc-tBu4).	 

 	Fig. 20  Comparison of the OPL responses of P13e, P82 and P81 with some benchmark optical limiters at To = 92%.	 

 		 


PbPc(β-CP)4	0.07	62	


	



CuPc(pentyloxy)8	0.30	68	10	4.18
(R)-TMBO-CuPcf	0.3	76	1	5
CuPc-tBu4	0.10	


	


	



CuPc-tBu4	0.13	86	1	6.20
C60	0.18	55	2	



C60	0.19	84	1	3.89

P12a
	0.15	82	1	5.00

P27
	0.13	82	1	6.37

P38c
	0.12	82	1	7.60

P5b
	0.085	82	1	9.27

P13c
	0.056	82	1	19.24

P26b
	0.063	82	1	18.16

P13e
	0.07	92	1	19.07

P79
	0.11	92	1	20.81

P80
	0.81	92	1	3.20

P81
	0.08	92	1	18.62

P82
	0.08	92	1	18.32

P83
	0.35	92	1	3.90

P84
	0.75	92	1	3.40

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 21  Polarized light microscopy results of P89 at the concentration of (a) ∼30% in dichloromethane and (b) ∼36% in trichloroethylene, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85a. Copyright (1998) American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schlieren textures of P90 and (b) fan-type texture of P91b. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87 and 88, respectively. Copyright (1995) Wiley-VCH.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of group 8 polymetallaynes by the metathesis reaction using trimethylstannylalkynyl-modified reagent.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 24  Synthesis of polymer P103.	 

 	Fig. 25  Two different synthetic routes to Rh(III)-containing polymetallaynes P104 and P105.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 26  Reaction pathway on Ag(110) towards the preparation of P113.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
