Evaluation of the photoinduced electron relaxation dynamics of Cu 1.8 S quantum dots   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B211104G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B211104G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 1091-1095Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEvaluation of the photoinduced electron relaxation dynamics of Cu1.8S quantum dots†

        
          
            Yongbing 
            Lou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anna C. S. 
            Samia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Cowen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kulbinder 
            Banger
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobo 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyunju 
            Lee
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Clemens 
            Burda
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Chemical Dynamics and Nanomaterials Research, Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. E-mail: burda@po.cwru.edu
bOhio Aerospace Institute, 22800 Cedar Point Road, Cleveland, OH 44142, USA
Received 
      11th November 2002
    , Accepted 4th February 2003First published on 13th February 2003AbstractCu1.8S quantum dots were prepared by using a single-source-precursor type method and investigated in the light of opto-electronic applications. With femtosecond time-resolved transient absorption measurements, the electron relaxation as well as their trapping dynamics could be evaluated. The measurements reveal that the largest and the smallest QD samples prepared exhibit the longest mobility lifetimes, and that the electron-hole relaxation dynamics is strongly dependent on the occurrence of trapping sites. Based on the argument of optical response, it appears that the largest prepared Cu1.8S QDs with band gap energy of 2.35 eV are preferred candidates for opto-electronic device fabrication.
Introduction
Quantum-confined materials have received a considerable amount of attention in the last two decades due to their unique optical and electronic properties.1–3 In bulk semiconducting materials, adjustment of the band gap energy can be achieved by varying the atomic ratio or through the addition of dopant materials. On the other hand, in quantum-confined semiconducting materials the adjustment can be further controlled by the size and shape of the quantum dot (QD). This is due to the fact that unlike bulk semiconducting materials, which absorb radiation through a continuum of wavelengths focused about their band gap energy (Eg), the energy absorbed by semiconducting QDs yields an atomic-like discrete spectrum.1 As particle size decreases, the abundant pairs of available electronic states within the bulk material diminish to a finite number. As the size of the semiconductor QD approaches the dimension of the Bohr exciton radius (1–10 nm for most semiconducting materials), quantum confinement properties occur whereby allowable electronic transitions become dependent on particle size and shape.4 With the decrease in diameter of the QDs, the allowable energy levels spread out, thus requiring higher energy photons to promote electrons into the conduction band. Therefore, the electron–hole pair (exciton) energy levels are inversely proportional to the squared radius of the QDs5 with the lowest transition energy derived from eqn. (1), (1)where Eg is the bulk energy band gap, ℏ is Planck's constant divided by 2π, ω is the angular frequency, me is the electron effective mass, and r is the radius of the dot. The ability to control the size of the QDs provides a mechanism in which the absorption band of these materials can be tuned.
The most extensively examined quantum-confined materials belong to the II–VI family of semiconductors, particularly CdS and CdSe nanoparticles.3 The most extensive studies on charge carrier relaxation are also reported CdS and CdSe QDs. The relaxation of excited charge carriers has been found to slow down as electron–phonon coupling decreases compared to the bulk materials. This phenomenon is a result of the reduction in the available states found within quantum-confined materials and is often termed phonon-bottleneck.
Quantum-confined semiconducting materials are not only interesting materials to study, but also very promising candidates for new materials for next-generation photovoltaic devices, where long-lived charge separation is a must. For example, in photovoltaic applications efficient spatial separation of the electron–hole pair is an important requirement. In a nanoparticle-based photovoltaic device, the electron is driven by the internal voltage defined by the barrier height of the junction created between the semiconducting nanomaterials, and then recombines with a hole at the anode. Such a photovoltaic effect was recently demonstrated in a cell consisting of self-assembled CdSe nanoparticles.6 In this cell, CdSe quantum rods were embedded into a poly-3-(hexylthiophene) conducting polymer matrix, whereby a power conversion efficiency of 1.7%
(Air Mass 1.5 solar illumination) was achieved. Although currently device efficiencies from these cell types do not compare to conventional cell performances, calculations predict enhanced device efficiencies for quantum-confined materials.7 Maximum theoretical conversion efficiencies for conventional 1st generation solar cells were calculated to be 31% by Shockley and Queisser in 1961.8 This value can only be exceeded by 2nd generation solar cells such as hot carrier solar cells. Hot carrier solar cells have been modeled to go beyond conventional limits and are predicted to achieve efficiencies of up to 66%.7 The ability for these cells to achieve over double the efficiency of conventional cells is due to the formation of two excitons (electron–hole pairs) per incident absorbed photon.
In order to produce hot carrier solar cells that can achieve such efficiencies, the fundamental relaxation paths of the excited carriers and the corresponding relaxation dynamics have to be controlled. The term hot carrier is used to describe an electron–hole pair, generated by an absorbed photon, which possesses energy greater than the band gap energy of a given material.  ΔEe=(hν−Eg)(1+m*e/m*h)1/2(2) ΔEh=(hν−Eg)−ΔEe(3)
The excess energy of the electron is defined by eqn. (2), where ΔEe is the energy difference between the conduction band edge and the initial energy of the photogenerated electron. m*e and m*h are the effective masses of the electron and hole, respectively. While that of the photogenerated hole is defined by eqn. (3), where ΔEh is the energy difference of the photogenerated hole and the valence band edge.
Initially, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs undergo thermalization, which occurs on the subpicosecond time scale. During thermalization, electrons and holes come to a thermal equilibrium among themselves described by Boltzmann distributions. At this point, they are not yet at thermal equilibrium with the lattice, and possess energies above the valence and conduction band edge. The second relaxation step is called carrier cooling or relaxation, whereby equilibrium of hot carriers is achieved through carrier–phonon interactions. This second step results in the heating of the lattice until a thermal equilibrium between the carriers and the lattice is reached. The last step of the relaxation process involves the recombination of the electron and hole. Recombination can occur radiatively resulting in the luminescence of the QD or nonradiatively; e.g. when luminescence is quenched by trapping of the charge carrier in a potential well on the QD surface or within the lattice.
In quantum-confined materials not only can the band gap be tuned by the adjustment of the dimensions, but also the relaxation dynamics of the hot carriers can be significantly decelerated.9 The ability to slow the rate of the hot carriers then provides a means to enhance photocurrents.
Among the different materials considered for these applications, Cu2S (chalcocite) has been a candidate of choice as a heterojuction cell coupled to the n-type CdS material for photovoltaic devices.10 However, it was found that such devices break down due to the diffusion of Cu+ ions across the cell junction into the CdS layer. This results in the destruction of the potential created by the offset of the band edges in the Cu2S/CdS junction. This phenomenon could potentially be prevented with the use of copper-deficient Cu1.8S QDs as an absorber layer.
We herein report on the first single-source synthesis of copper sulfide QDs. For the copper sulfide system there exists several known solid phases such as Cu2S (chalcocite), Cu1.8S (digenite), Cu1.96S (djurleite), and CuS (covellite). All of these phases have been identified as p-type semiconducting materials due to copper vacancies within the lattice.11 The utilization of single source precursors in the preparation of these compounds offers advantages over multi-source precursors which are often toxic, air sensitive, and pyrophoric.12 Additionally, we have characterized the optical and dynamic properties of the synthesized copper sulfide QDs by femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopy. The carrier dynamics are dominated by trapping processes. A correlation between band gap energy and carrier mobility lifetimes is presented.
Experimental
Synthesis of the Cu(S2CNEt2)2 single source precursor
The preparation of the Cu(S2CNEt2)2 single source precursor was carried out using analytical grade solvents. The dithiocarbamate precursor was prepared by reacting Na(S2CNEt2)
(Fisher) with the copper salt. The preparation of Cu(S2CNEt2)2 involved the addition of NaS2CNEt2·3H2O (31.2 mmol) into an ethanol solution of CuCl2
(Fisher, 14.8 mmol) under constant stirring at room temperature for 15 min. The resulting solution was then concentrated by vacuum evaporation and the dithiocarbamate complex extracted with toluene (Fisher). Subsequent filtration and evaporation of the excess solvent afforded the copper(II) complex as a brownish crystalline material with 95% yield.
Synthesis of Cu1.8S quantum dots with the single source precursor
Cu1.8S quantum dots (QDs) were synthesized by using a single source precursor method, which involved the decomposition of the copper(II) dithiocarbamate complex, described above, in the presence of a high boiling point coordinating solvent. To prepare the QDs, a solution consisting of 1.5 mmol of Cu(S2CNEt2)2 dissolved in 11.0 mmol tri-n-octyl-phosphine (TOP), was injected into 10.0 mmol tri-n-octyl-phosphine oxide (TOPO) set at 250°C. The procedure was later modified with the addition of sulfur, introduced in the form of tri-n-octyl-phosphine sulfide (TOPS), to favor the formation of Cu1.8S nanoparticles. All reactions were carried out under Ar atmosphere.
The progress of the reaction was monitored by extracting approximately 0.15 mL aliquots from the reaction flask and quenching in 5 mL of toluene. Aliquots were drawn at time intervals of 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 40 min and immediately examined by UV-VIS as well as fluorescence spectroscopy. The prepared QDs were found to be stable in toluene over a period of weeks. The isolated nanocrystals were analyzed by X-ray powder diffractometry in order to confirm the presence of the Cu1.8S digenite phase.
Instrumentation
The UV-VIS absorbance and fluorescence spectra were measured on a Varian Cary 50 and a Varian Eclipse Fluorescence spectrophotometer, respectively. The X-ray analysis of the samples was carried out using a Philips PW3710 X-ray Powder Diffractometer. Femtosecond time-resolved transient absorption measurements were recorded on a laser set-up recently built in our group. The new femtosecond laser pump–probe system consists of an amplified erbium-doped fiber laser, which is frequency doubled to 780 nm and amplified in a regenerative amplifier (Clark MXR CPA 2001). This femtosecond laser produces pulses with 120 fs FWHM duration and 800 μJ output energy per pulse at a repetition rate of 1 kHz. A small portion of the fundamental output pulse train is used to generate white light in a 2 mm sapphire crystal while the remaining laser light is used to either frequency-double or -triple the fundamental in order to achieve 390 or 260 nm, respectively. To obtain different excitation wavelengths, an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) is employed to facilitate the sum-frequency mixing and doubling of the signal or idler. Likewise, the probe-wavelength range is extended beyond the white light spectrum by using an OPA, which includes difference-frequency mixing techniques for probing in the mid-IR range.
The pump–probe experiments were all carried out at ambient temperature. For the femtosecond laser spectroscopy measurements, the excitation beam was modulated by a chopper with a 100 Hz frequency. The probe light was used with reflective optics in order to avoid white light dispersion. Measurements are conducted with the excitation beam focused to a spot diameter of about 500 μm and the probe beam to 100 μm. During measurement, the QD solution was placed in a 2 mm path length quartz cuvette and continuously stirred by a cell stirrer to avoid permanent bleaching of the pump–probe volume element in the solution. Labview-assisted data acquisition resulted in 2-dimensional matrixes (wavelength versus delay time) which were then analyzed by the single-value decomposition method.13 This resulted in a global analysis of the spectrum-time matrix as opposed to a kinetic analysis at single wavelengths.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and optical characterization
Previously synthesized particles with CuS and Cu2S stoichiometry14–23 were capped with ligands like cysteine, glutathione, or phytochelatines to render the nanoparticles compatible in polar environments. However, they showed a relatively weak absorption above 400 nm. Recently, the synthesis of a semiconductor nanomaterial, CuSe QD, was reported using an alternative single source precursor (SSP) method. The SSP method leads towards the production of highly crystalline and nearly monodispersed CuSe QDs, but has not yet been utilized for the preparation of the CuxS nanomaterials. In this study, we have succeeded in adapting the SSP route for the preparation of Cu1.8S nanoparticles, which show an optical response in the visible range.
The single source precursor (SSP) method is highly appealing due to the simplicity of the approach. With the use of single source precursors there is no need for organometallic reagents, which are often more toxic and/or pyrophoric. However, with the utilization of this method other factors need to be considered such as the relative stabilities of the precursors. Weaker bonds are indeed a synthetic goal for SSP preparation, so that the leaving group (i.e. ligands surrounding the metal center and the chalcogen) will easily dissociate to allow the formation of the desired QDs. Therefore, for the synthesis of Cu1.8S QDs, it became evident that the ability of the SSP Cu(S2CNEt2)2 to propagate the nucleation of Cu1.8S QDs was difficult due to the stable C–S bond. Hence, the additional TOPS provided a more suitable sulfur source for the formation of Cu1.8S QDs.
Shown in Fig. 1 are the absorption spectra of aliquots taken at different times from the reaction vessel during the synthesis of Cu1.8S quantum dots (QD). The absorption spectra of the aliquots display the formation of the band gap absorption at 480, 495, and 510 nm, for the aliquots taken at 1 min, 10 min and 40 min time intervals, respectively. The red-shift of the absorption band indicates the nucleation and growth of the Cu1.8S QDs. Furthermore, the emission spectra of the Cu1.8S QDs in Fig. 2 reveal a similar dependence of the photoluminescence, showing a bathochromic shift as the QDs grow. These observations are a result of quantum-confinement effects, which have been well documented.4 Furthermore, the changes in the fluorescence spectra are smaller than the changes in the absorption spectra, which indicates emission from trap sites. Similar to what was observed for CdS QDs, one can deduce the existence of trapping sites in the QDs already from the steady-state measurements. This was further investigated with femtosecond time-resolved measurements, as discussed in the following.
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of aliquots drawn at 1 (■), 10 (△), and 40 (○) min reaction time during the synthesis of Cu1.8S quantum dots. The spectra show absorption shoulders around 480, 495, and 510 nm. 
 Fig. 2  Normalized emission spectra of CuxS quantum dot samples drawn at 1 (■), 10 (△), and 40 (○) min reaction time intervals. The emission peaks at 488, 505, and 515 nm indicate band gap transitions around 2.52, 2.44, and 2.39 eV, respectively. 
X-ray powder diffractometry analysis
In Fig. 3 the powder X-ray diffraction pattern of the product generated from the reaction without the addition of TOPS is shown. In the X-ray diffraction pattern (Fig. 3) Cu metal impurity peaks are evident in the presence of some characteristic reflections of the Cu1.8S digenite phase. The failure of the single source method to generate the compound of interest motivated us to search for alternative routes. With the simple modification of adding a sulfur source in the form of TOPS, Cu1.8S QDs free of Cu metal impurities were obtained (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  XRD pattern obtained from the solvothermal pyrolysis of the single source precursor Cu2(S2CNEt2)2 showing a large contamination of Cu particles. 
 Fig. 4  XRD pattern obtained from the reaction with the addition of TOPS, yielding C1.8S quantum dots without Cu metal impurities. 
Femtosecond time-resolved transient absorption measurements
The femtosecond laser spectroscopy measurements presented here were obtained for a Cu1.8S QD sample with a band gap energy of 2.4 eV. The steady-state absorption measurement for this sample (in Fig. 1) shows that the lowest energy (band gap) transition for these nanocrystals is located at 510 nm. Upon femtosecond laser excitation of this Cu1.8S QD sample, a strong excited state absorption (a positive transient signal) from 500 to 750 nm with a weaker absorption shoulder between 420 and 520 nm was monitored (Fig. 5). The formation of the shoulder can be attributed to the superposition of the 510 nm bleach with excited state absorption. The intensity of the transient absorption was strongly pump–power dependent. In addition, a long lifetime of ∼2.5 ns (Fig. 6) was measured for this signal. Both observations suggest that the observed signal is an excited state absorption of photoexcited electrons, which are trapped in defect sites. The trapping of photoinduced electrons is a common event in the photophysics of nanocrystals. Trapped electrons can thereby exhibit excited state absorption. Furthermore, the observed linear pump–power dependence of the transient signal indicates the occurrence of multiple excitations (inset in Fig. 5). Since no saturation of the signal intensity was observed within the applied power range (0.5–10 μJ pulse−1), one can conclude that the number of trapping sites is larger than the number of photoexcited electrons.
 Fig. 5  Transient absorption spectra of a Cu1.8S nanoparticle sample after femtosecond laser excitation at 5 ps delay time measured at different pump powers in mW. 
 Fig. 6  Relaxation dynamics of the transient absorption in Fig. 5 as observed at 600 nm. 
Transient absorption in the spectral range below the band gap energy can be assigned to excited state absorption originating from trap states.24,25 Therefore, at 600 nm (2.05 eV) the dynamics of the trapping processes can be monitored. Fig. 7 shows the rise of the trap state absorption monitored at 600 nm. Therefore, the observed dynamics reflects the electron trapping process.24,25
 Fig. 7  Rise time of the laser pulse induced transient absorption monitored at 600 nm. 
Evaluation of the electron–hole dynamics for Cu1.8S QDs
As one strives to build efficient photovoltaic devices based on nanomaterials, it is important to design nanostructures that show the desired optoelectronic behavior, in particular long electron–hole mobility lifetimes. This poses the question for the best nanoparticle size for photovoltaic applications.
(1) Larger QDs show a decreased surface-to-volume ratio, which is favorable due to a reduced number of surface trapping sites per atom in a QD. Surface traps can be expected to be shallower for larger QD since lattice strain reduces as the particles grow. Argument (1) would lead to longer mobility lifetimes due to less trapping in larger QDs. In addition, shallower trapping sites would lead to shorter lifetimes within a specific trap and allow thermal repopulation of the conduction band.
(2) Smaller QDs will have a reduced electron–phonon coupling due to the decreased density of states.26–28 This translates into longer intrinsic lifetimes and slower internal relaxation for small QDs.
(3) As the reaction progresses and the particles grow the band gap energies shift to lower values, which is a desired property for visible-light activated photovoltaic materials.
Based on the opposite trends given in arguments (1) to (3), one might expect that there could be an intermediate size range in which a compromise between trap concentration, trap depth (argument 1, favoring large QDs), electron–phonon coupling effect (argument 2, favoring small QDs) and low band gap energy (argument 3, favoring again the large QDs) exists. To answer this question, the electron–hole relaxation dynamics of the different aliquots from the synthesis of Cu1.8S QDs were investigated as a function of their band gap energies (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  The mobile carrier lifetimes (■, left y-axis) and trap state lifetimes (○, right y-axis) for Cu1.8S QDs with different band gap energies obtained by means of femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy. 
As seen in Fig. 8, the relaxation times measured with the femtosecond pump–probe system suggest a correlation between particle size and the electron–hole dynamics. The mobile-carrier lifetime (t1, ■) exhibits a U-shaped behavior, indicating that for the Cu1.8S QDs under investigation, the longest lifetimes are achieved with either the largest or smallest particles. On the other hand, the trap state lifetimes (t2, ○) become longer for intermediate-sized QDs. This behavior reflects the arguments (1) and (2) raised above. Small QDs have long mobile carrier lifetimes because of the lesser electron–phonon coupling, while the long mobile carrier lifetimes of large particles can be attributed to lower trap state concentration on the QD surface. As the particle growth progresses, crystal defects seem to increase at first, but eventually become eliminated which leads to shallower traps and therefore to shorter trap state lifetimes.
This observation leads to the first unexpected conclusion that both the smallest or the largest QDs seem favorable for creating long-lived mobile charge carriers for devices that will incorporate Cu1.8S QDs. Hence, the third argument will be the decisive factor in choosing the appropriate material for photovoltaic applications. For visible-light activation narrower band gaps are favorable, therefore favoring the larger QDs.
Conclusion
In conclusion, it has been shown that Cu1.8S quantum dots can be prepared by using a single-source-precursor type method. With femtosecond spectroscopic measurements the electron relaxation as well as their trapping dynamics can be resolved. The measurements reveal that the largest and the smallest QD samples exhibit the longest mobility lifetimes. The electron relaxation dynamics are found to be strongly dependent on the occurrence of trapping sites. Based on the argument of optical response, it appears that the largest prepared Cu1.8S QDs with band gap energy 2.35 eV are favorable candidates for opto-electronic device fabrication.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Dr Sheila Bailey for technical advice. JC acknowledges a NASA Graduate Fellowship. The Ohio Board of Regents is acknowledged for grant # 427891. The college of arts and science at CWRU is acknowledged for start-up funds.
References
L. Brus, Appl. Phys. A, 1991, A53, 465–474 Search PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CAS .
C. A. Leatherdale, C. R. Kagan and N. Y. Morgan et al., Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 2669–2680 Search PubMed .
H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .

          S. V Gaponeko, Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Cambridge University Press,  1998 Search PubMed.
M. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 193–231 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CAS .
V. I. Klimov, D. W. McBranch and C. A. Leatherdale et al., Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 13740–13749 Search PubMed .
L. Reijnen, B. Meester and A. Goosens et al., Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2002, 10, 311–314 Search PubMed .
N. R. D. Tacconi, K. Rajeshwar and R. O. Lenza, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 18234–18239 .
K. K. Banger, J. Cowen and A. F. Hepp, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3827–3829 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bonneau, J. Wirz and A. D. Zuberbuhler, Pure Appl. Chem., 1997, 69, 979–992 CAS .
M. C. Brelle, J. Z. Zhang and L. Nguyen et al., J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 10194–10201 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dameron and D. R. Winge, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 1343–1348 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dameron, R. N. Reese and R. K. Mehra et al., Nature (London), 1989, 338, 596–597 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, L. Katsikas and A. Kornowski et al., Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1996, 100, 1772–1778 CAS .
W. Bae, R. Abdullah and D. Henderson et al., Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1997, 237, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bae, R. Abdullah and R. K. Mehra, Chemosphere, 1998, 37, 363–385 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bae and R. K. Mehra, J. Inorg. Biochem., 1998, 70, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bae and R. K. Mehra, J. Inorg. Biochem., 1998, 69, 33–43 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nguyen, R. Kho and W. Bae et al., Chemosphere, 1998, 38, 155–173 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Torres-Martinez, L. Nguyen and R. Kho et al., Nanotechnology, 1999, 10, 340–354 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda and M. A. El-Sayed, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 165–177 Search PubMed .
M. C. Brelle, C. L. Torres-Martinez and J. C. McNulty et al., Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 101–117 Search PubMed .
V. Klimov, P. H. Bolivar and H. Kurz et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 653–655 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, P. Haring-Bolivar and H. Kurz et al., Superlattices Microstruct., 1996, 20, 395–404 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov and V. A. Karavanskii, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 8087–8094 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor Dr Z. R. Grabowski and Professor Dr J. Wirz on the occasions of their 75th and 60th birthdays.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2003
Table Content:
	(1)
ΔEe=(hν−Eg)(1+m*e/m*h)1/2	(2)
ΔEh=(hν−Eg)−ΔEe	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of aliquots drawn at 1 (■), 10 (△), and 40 (○) min reaction time during the synthesis of Cu1.8S quantum dots. The spectra show absorption shoulders around 480, 495, and 510 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Normalized emission spectra of CuxS quantum dot samples drawn at 1 (■), 10 (△), and 40 (○) min reaction time intervals. The emission peaks at 488, 505, and 515 nm indicate band gap transitions around 2.52, 2.44, and 2.39 eV, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD pattern obtained from the solvothermal pyrolysis of the single source precursor Cu2(S2CNEt2)2 showing a large contamination of Cu particles.	 

 	Fig. 4  XRD pattern obtained from the reaction with the addition of TOPS, yielding C1.8S quantum dots without Cu metal impurities.	 

 	Fig. 5  Transient absorption spectra of a Cu1.8S nanoparticle sample after femtosecond laser excitation at 5 ps delay time measured at different pump powers in mW.	 

 	Fig. 6  Relaxation dynamics of the transient absorption in Fig. 5 as observed at 600 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  Rise time of the laser pulse induced transient absorption monitored at 600 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  The mobile carrier lifetimes (■, left y-axis) and trap state lifetimes (○, right y-axis) for Cu1.8S QDs with different band gap energies obtained by means of femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor Dr Z. R. Grabowski and Professor Dr J. Wirz on the occasions of their 75th and 60th birthdays.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2003
