MALDI-Fourier transform mass spectrometric and theoretical studies of donor–acceptor and donor–bridge–acceptor fullerenes  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B414349C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B414349C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 1036-1042Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMALDI-Fourier transform mass spectrometric and theoretical studies of donor–acceptor and donor–bridge–acceptor fullerenes

        
          
            Vladimir E. 
            Frankevich
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maxim 
            Dashtiev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Renato 
            Zenobi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Toshikazu 
            Kitagawa
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yangsoo 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yasujiro 
            Murata
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tetsuya 
            Yamazaki
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yunyan 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Koichi 
            Komatsu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Josep M. 
            Oliva
          
        
      cd
aDepartment of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zürich, ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093, Zürich, Switzerland. E-mail: zenobi@org.chem.ethz.ch;  Fax: 01-632 12 92
bInstitute of Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, 611-0011, Kyoto, Japan
cInstituto de Química-Física “Rocasolano”, CSIC, E-28006, Madrid, Spain
dSchool of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Cantock’s Close, Bristol, UK BS8 1TS
Received 
      16th September 2004
    , Accepted 12th January 2005First published on 2nd February 2005AbstractFourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR) mass spectrometric studies have been performed on donor–acceptor and donor–bridge–acceptor fullerene-based systems. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) was used for ion production; both the positive and negative ion modes were utilized. In addition, collision-induced dissociation (CID) experiments were carried out to study the movement of the charge (electron or hole) upon fragmentation. The experiments are complemented by ab initio theoretical calculations yielding both molecular orbital energies and electron density distributions. It was found that the theoretical electron density map predicted the experimentally observed fragmentation correctly in every case. Both the calculations and the MS experiments may be useful in studying these and related donor-acceptor systems in view of their use for charge separation and eventually, solar energy production.
1. Introduction
Synthetically prepared donor–acceptor systems are studied extensively as models for short-range electron transfer processes as they occur, for example, in the photosynthetic reaction center.1 The demand for inexpensive renewable energy sources is the driving force behind new approaches in the development of low-cost photovoltaic devices. In the last couple of years, increased effort has been put into the development of solar cells based on organic molecules and conjugated polymers.2–4 In addition, molecular systems that respond precisely to environmental changes occurring at a microscopic level and signal the response at a macroscopic level are of great interest in many other fields, such as chemical sensing and molecular electronics.5 Donor–acceptor (D–A) and donor–bridge–acceptor (D–B–A) systems also play an important role in molecular electronics.6–11
A number of laboratories have synthesized D–A and D–B–A systems based on fullerenes as the electron-accepting group.12–19 The properties of C60 that render it interesting as an acceptor building block are primarily its low reduction potential (E1/2
				=
				−0.44 V vs. SCE20), and further include a sufficiently high singlet excited state energy that enable it to act as a photosensitizer, plus some useful spectroscopic features for identifying the presence of a C60
				π-radical anion. For example, Guldi and co-workers have used a Diels–Alder cycloaddition to prepare C60-based donor–acceptor ensembles that become thermally reversible.14 Padinger et al.15 used a combination of C60 as a typical π-acceptor and polythiophenes as a typical π-donor to improve the power conversion efficiency of polymer solar cells. The work in this paper is based on fullerene based D–A and D–B–A systems synthesized by Komatsu and co-workers,12,13 shown in Fig. 1. Compound 1 was obtained as a product of electron-transfer induced substitution of CCl3–C60–Cl by a proton sponge, a newly developed reaction of C60 that is particularly useful for the synthesis of C60-donor dyads in which both units are directly connected by a single C–C bond. Compound 2 was synthesized as a monomer unit of a new electroactive polymer composed of polythiophene backbone and a C60 branch.
 Fig. 1  Structures of the compounds used in this study. Compound 1 has an elemental composition of C75H17N2Cl3 and a theoretical monoisotopic molecular weight of 1050.045 Da. Compound 2 has an elemental composition of C79H14O4S3, with a calculated monoisotopic molecular weight of 1122.005 Da. 
Mass spectrometry is used routinely to study fullerenes and fullerene derivatives.21–29 The preferred method for ionization of these compounds appears to be matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI), with either standard matrices or matrices that ionize fullerenes particularly well.30,31 Typically, the radical cation is observed in positive ion mode MALDI MS of fullerenes. With few exceptions,22,30 published fullerene MS data have been acquired merely to confirm the identity of synthetic products. However, mass spectra contain much more information than the molecular weight of a putative synthetic product. In particular, the nature and charge distribution of fragments that either appear spontaneously upon ionization or can be produced by a dissociation method such as collision-induced dissociation (CID) contain rich information about the electronic structure and charge transfer processes in the parent ion. While such fragmentation patterns can be extremely difficult to interpret from first principles for complex molecules such as peptides,32 they can be predicted theoretically for simple molecular systems.33,34
Mass spectrometry has not been exploited to study fullerene-based D–A and D–B–A systems. This is potentially very useful because their fragmentation patterns may be particularly simple and relatively straightforward to interpret, despite the relatively large size of these systems. The goal of this paper is thus to present positive and negative ion mode MALDI mass spectra of the donor–acceptor (1) and donor–bridge–acceptor (2) molecules in order to gain an insight into the electronic and charge transport properties of them. FT-ICR was used for exact mass measurement and fragmentation by CID inside the ion trap of the FT-ICR.
2.1. Experimental
Dyad (1) was synthesized by the AlCl3-catalyzed electrophilic addition of carbon tetrachloride to C60 to form 1-CCl3-4-Cl-C6035 and subsequent electron-transfer induced substitution of the 4-chloro substituent with 1,8-bis(dimethylamino)-naphthalene (a proton sponge).12 Dyad (2) was synthesized by the nucleophilic addition of lithium acetylide having a terthiophene moiety, followed by treatment with methyl iodide.13
Ions of (1) and (2) and fragments thereof were produced by MALDI, and mass spectra were recorded on a Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR) mass spectrometer. It consists of a home-built vacuum system, and is operated using a 4.7 T superconducting magnet (Bruker, Fällanden, Switzerland) and a commercial data acquisition system (Odyssey, Finnigan FT/MS, Madison, WI). A home-built cylindrical open cell 6 cm id was used for trapping the MALDI ions.36,37 This open cell geometry avoids laser beam clipping completely.
As a MALDI matrix, 9-nitroanthracene (MW = 223 Da) was used.30 Samples were prepared by mixing equal volumes of a 1.4 × 10−4 M solution of the analyte in toluene with a 0.14 M solution of matrix in acetone. Several layers of sample/matrix mixture were applied to a stainless steel probe tip sequentially in order to have sufficient material for a number of mass spectrometric experiments per sample loaded.
The FTICR instrument has an internal MALDI source located in the low-pressure region 2 cm from the first trapping cylinder. For laser desorption, a Nd:YAG laser (Continuum, Minilite ML-10, USA) with a 5 ns pulse duration at 355 nm was employed. The maximum laser energy is 0.2 mJ pulse−1, corresponding to an irradiance of 4.0 × 106 W cm−2. The laser spot diameter was 1 mm2. A total of 100 shots were typically accumulated in one experiment. For tandem mass spectrometry, collision-induced dissociation (CID) was used, with N2 as a collision gas. A range of peaks was first isolated using a SWIFT waveform,38 followed by admission of a pulse of N2 gas, pumpdown, and recording of the daughter ion spectrum. The pressure and collision energy of the CID experiments were adjusted for optimized fragmentation efficiency.
Marshall’s group has obtained positive ion mode, high-resolution FT-ICR mass spectra of the same materials using field desorption ionisation,39 yielding essentially identical mass spectral data.40 These data not only confirm the molecular weights and spontaneous fragmentation (no CID was performed) but also show that the results are not dependent on the particulars of the ionization method employed.
2.2. Computational methods
All calculations in this work were performed using the program Gaussian98 41 with the (U)B3LYP/6-31G* methodology, which consists of the three-parameter hybrid functional devised by Becke (B3),42 including a mixture of Hartree–Fock exchange with DFT exchange–correlation; the non-local correlation functional is provided by the Lee–Yang–Parr (LYP) expression,43 including both local and non-local terms. The basis set used in the calculations (6-31G*) is of double-ζ quality.44 The calculations on the radical cations and anions of (1) and (2) were performed at the optimised geometry of the corresponding neutral molecules.
3. Results
3.1. Experimental results

Fig. 2a shows the positive mode FTICR spectrum of compound (1). The spectrum is dominated by a group of intense peaks at 1050–1055 Da. These peaks correspond to the isotope distribution of the radical cation (M+˙) of molecule (1), thus following the general trend of MALDI mass spectra of fullerene-based compounds. MALDI usually produces even-electron [M + H]+ ions and, in principle, the dimethylamino groups of (1) could be protonated. However, nonpolar matrices have been shown to promote radical cation formation by an electron transfer process45 if the ionization potential of the analyte is below that of the matrix. The isotope distribution shown in the inserts in Fig. 2a is consistent with an elemental composition of C75H17N2Cl3 that exhibits its most intense peak at M + 2 (1052 Da). The exact mass, previously determined with a 9.4 T instrument was 1050.0434 Da, in excellent agreement with the theoretical mass of (1), 1050.04516.40 Some minor fragments are visible in the spectrum, corresponding to 933 Da (M-CCl3), 918 Da (M-CCl3-CH3), and 212 Da, the latter being most likely derived from the donor moiety, m/z
					= 213 Da. The nominal mass of the donor moiety is 213 Da, thus, there is a loss of an H from the bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene.
 Fig. 2  (a) Positive mode mass spectrum of (1). The upper insert is an expanded view of the molecular ion region, while the lower shows the theoretical isotope pattern. Other peaks that appear in the spectrum are known radiofrequence interferences. (b) Collision-induced dissociation daughter spectrum of the peak group at m/z
						= 1050. 

Fig. 2b shows a positive mode CID spectrum, using the entire isotope distribution around m/z
					= 1052 as the parent. The most intense fragments appear at 212, 435 (212 + matrix), 420 (212–CH3
					+ matrix), 918 and 933 Da. Except for the thrichloromethyl losses that produce the 918 and 933 peaks already seen in Fig. 2a, the major fragments in this CID experiment are thus due exclusively to the donor moiety ion.

Fig. 3 shows the negative mode FTICR spectrum of (1). Under the applied experimental conditions (matrix, laser wavelength, laser pulse energy, …) the molecular anion appears to be unstable, the highest molecular weight peak being 933 Da (M-CCl3). The most prominent peak, however, is C60−, i.e., a signal associated with the acceptor moiety. Occasionally, a weak molecular ion peak was observed. When using this signal as the precursor for CID, the spectrum closely resembled the one shown in Fig. 3
					(data not shown); C60− remained the most prominent signal in negative mode CID spectra. The extent to which decomposition occurs is dramatic and unexpected for compounds of this type, where both ligands are relatively strongly bound to C60 through normal σ bonds. Perhaps different MALDI conditions could lead to a much stronger molecular ion in relation to the C60− signal. An alternative pathway for production of the C60 anion is decomposition of the neutral derivative (through direct LDI mechanisms under non-ideal MALDI conditions) followed by electron attachment.
 Fig. 3  Negative mode mass spectrum of (1). 

Fig. 4a shows the positive mode FTICR mass spectra of (2). The spectrum is dominated by a group of peaks at 1122 Da, with a strong isotope signal at M + 2, consistent with a molecule containing 3 sulfur and 4 oxygen atoms. As in the MALDI mass spectrum of (1), the radical cation, M+˙ is observed, but the M + 1 signal is more intense than expected from the theoretical isotope distribution. This is probably simply a result of MALDI shot-to-shot fluctuation and insufficient ion statistics in the FTICR, which is also suggested by the background noise in this particular spectrum. Many of the low intensity signals in this spectrum are due to known radio interferences. The CID data of (2) in positive mode is shown in Fig. 4b. The main fragment is the signal at 388 Da, which corresponds to a positive ion containing the donor moiety plus the CC linker. The fragment already shows up in the absence of CID and becomes stronger with CID. The mass of this fragment should be 387 Da; we interpret the 388 Da signal to be due to a H atom transfer during the fragmentation step, perhaps through a cyclic rearrangement involving the CH3 group on the fullerene moiety. The key observations are that the charge again resides on the donor moiety after fragmentation, as was the case for compound (1), and that the acetylenic linker stays bound to the donor moiety after fragmentation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Positive mode mass spectra of (2). The peak at 383 is a radiofrequency interference. (b) Collision-induced dissociation daughter spectrum of the peak group at m/z
						= 1122. 

Fig. 5 shows the negative ion mode MALDI FTICR spectrum of compound (2). The parent ion peak is a small signal, because even in the absence of CID, extensive fragmentation occurs, as was the case for compound (1).
 Fig. 5  Negative mode mass spectrum of (2). The insert shows an expanded view of the molecular ion region from a second negative mode spectrum of (2), illustrating the variability in peak ratios for MALDI produced ions. 
The dominant fragment is m/z
					= 720, the bare fullerene that has lost both the donor moiety as well as the methyl group. Other peaks are either minor fragments (e.g., m/z
					= 1107 =
					(M – CH3), radiofrequency interferences, or related to matrix (e.g., m/z
					= 223). The main finding, that the major fragment originates from the acceptor moiety, is perfectly in line with the same observation for compound (1).
3.2. Electronic structure calculations—results

Fig. 6 shows the frontier molecular orbitals (MO) of molecule (1) in neutral form. The highest occupied MO (HOMO) is completely localised on the donor (D) part of the dyad, namely, the naphthalene moiety. In contrast, the lowest unoccupied MO (LUMO) in (1) is localised on the acceptor (A) side of the molecule, the fullerene cage. The HOMO–LUMO gap (Eg) is ca. 1.8 eV. The electronic structure of the radical (1)˙+ is depicted in Fig. 7. At this point, we should emphasize that the calculations for open-shell systems (many-electron systems with unpaired electrons) in this work make use of unrestricted orbitals, unlike closed-shell systems, where α and β electrons occupy different spatial orbitals. Thus, the radical cations and radical anions are described by α occupied and α virtual orbitals (left-hand side of Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9 and Fig. 10) and β occupied and β virtual orbitals (right-hand side of Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). The neutral molecules (Fig. 6 and Fig. 11) have the same spatial orbitals for α and β electrons (closed-shell system).46
					α and β electrons are depicted as up-arrows and down-arrows, respectively, and the energy level of each electron is depicted as a solid horizontal line.
 Fig. 6  Molecular orbital scheme from B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the three lowest unoccupied MOs of compound (1) in neutral form. Frontier orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) are also depicted for (1). 
 Fig. 7  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the first few virtual or unoccupied MOs of the radical cation of compound (1). Depicted in the figure are the highest-occupied MO (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied MO, corresponding to the “hole” or positive charge. 
 Fig. 8  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the four highest occupied and the first few unoccupied MOs of the radical anion of compound (1). Depicted in the figure are the singly occupied MO (SOMO) or “added electron” and the lowest-unoccupied MO (LUMO). 
 Fig. 9  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the first few unoccupied or virtual MOs of the radical cation of compound (2). Depicted in the figure are the highest-occupied MO (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied MO, corresponding to the “hole” or positive charge. 
 Fig. 10  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the four highest occupied and the first few unoccupied or virtual MOs of the radical anion of compound (2). Depicted in the figure are the singly occupied MO (SOMO) and the first two lower unoccupied MOs (LUMO and LUMO + 1). 
 Fig. 11  Molecular orbital scheme from B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the three lowest unoccupied MOs of compound (2) in neutral form. Frontier orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) are also depicted for (2). 
Interestingly, turning now back to Fig. 7, the “hole” or LUMO in the radical cation coincides with the HOMO of the neutral molecule (1); notwithstanding the HOMO in the radical is now localised on the fullerene cage. The radical anion MO picture is shown in Fig. 8, where both SOMO (the orbital corresponding to the “added” electron in (1)) and LUMO are localized on the fullerene acceptor moiety.
We now turn to molecule (2). The frontier MOs of the neutral D–B–A system is depicted in Fig. 11. As for molecule (1), the HOMO and LUMO are localised, respectively, on the D and A sides of the molecule. As shown in Fig. 11, an interesting feature of the HOMO of molecule (2) is the presence of non-negligible orbital amplitudes in the bridge (B) moiety (π*), whereas in the LUMO no such amplitudes appear in B. The electronic structure of the radical cation (2)˙+ is shown in Fig. 9. As with molecule (1), the shape of the “hole” in the radical cation corresponds to the HOMO of the neutral. Interestingly, the HOMO in (2) displays orbital amplitudes both on the D and A sides of the molecule (minor in B). As regards the radical anion (2)˙–
					(Fig. 10), the “added” electron (SOMO) is distributed on the fullerene cage. The LUMO and several further virtual orbitals are very close in energy (almost degenerate), as shown in Fig. 10. Comparison of Figs. 8 and 10 shows that the first few unoccupied orbitals of the radical anions are closer in energy for (2)˙– as compared to (1)˙–.
The calculated electronic structure of (1) and (2) may be used to explain the fragmentation pattern, assuming a homolytic C–C bond cleavage between the acceptor (A) and donor (D) parts of the molecule. For molecule (1) two pathways exist (taking into account that the acceptor moiety contains the CCl3 group, A = C60CCl3), for both the cation and the anion:  In the case of molecule (2), four different possibilities for fragmentation arise, taking into account the presence of the bridge element B (note that the acceptor moiety contains the CH3 group, A = C60CH3): (I) (II)The energetics of the homolytic C–C bond cleavage of the radical cations and anions of (1) and (2) have also been calculated at the same level of theory-(U)B3LYP/6-31G*. In molecule (1) a D˙
					+ A(+,−) fragmentation pattern is favored by both the radical cation (by about 0.8 eV) and anion (by 2.5 eV), i.e. the C60 moiety is expected to be the main fragment in both polarities. For molecule (2), the homolytic C–C bond cleavage (I)
					(see above) from radical cation and anion favours the [D–B](+,−)
					+ A˙ fragmentation pattern, by ≤1 eV. However, as shown by the experimental results, a more favorable path appears to exist, through a rearrangement, probably involving a H from the CH3 group; the energetics of this process differ from the model of a simple homolytic bond cleavage, but were not calculated here. The case of fragmentation (II)
					(see above) in molecule (2) favors the D+
					+
					[B–A]˙
					(by 0.8 eV) and D˙
					+
					[B–A]−
					(by 2 eV) for the radical cation and anion, respectively. Thus, the fragmentation pattern expected from the computed energies at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory—using the homolytic bond breaking scheme above—does not always agree with the experimental observations. Higher levels of theory for computing more accurate energies become computationally prohibitive given the number of basis functions for (1) and (2) with the 6-31G(d) basis set (1246 and 1330 basis functions, respectively).
4. Discussion
Interpretation of MALDI-FT-ICR experiments and comparison to electronic structure calculations
Mass spectrometric fragmentation, especially of more complex molecules is often difficult to rationalize, due to the high excess energy of the parent ion and the large number of possible isomeric structures and rearrangements that can occur. Nevertheless, a set of empirical rules has been developed and is still used to interpret fragmentation, in particular in electron impact (EI) mass spectra.47 The situation in the present work may be slightly different from the case of EI. Although radical cations and anions are produced, the ionization method is MALDI, which is expected to yield much lower energy ions than EI. Still, the excitation in the ionic state appears to be large enough to prevent interpretation of the fragmentation by purely energetic comparisons that would rely on total energy differences of less than 1 eV for the systems considered here. The energetics of the homolytic C–C bond cleavage were computed at the same level of theory (B3LYP/6-31G(d)) using the scheme shown above for (1) and (2). In the case of radical systems with an unpaired electron the calculations were performed using the unrestricted method (UB3LYP/6-31G(d)). For instance, for the homolytic bond cleavage[D–A]˙(+)
						→ D˙
						+ A(+)we computed the energies of [D–A]˙(+), D˙
					(with the unpaired electron) and A(+), and then subtracted {E(D˙)
					+ E(A(+))}
					– E([D-A]˙(+)).
Higher levels of theory, such as second-order perturbation theory (MP2), coupled cluster methods or CASSCF (complete active space self-consistent field methods) are computationally prohibitive given the size of the system. Only density functional theory (DFT) approaches—or hybrid Hartree–Fock plus DFT—like the one used in this work (B3LYP) is feasible. A geometry optimization (nuclear relaxation) of (1) and (2) took several weeks at the level of theory used in this work. Alternatively, it is possible to estimate the behavior based on much simpler estimations: For example, for (1) in the positive-ion mode, the IP of the tetramethyldiaminenaphthalene (“proton sponge”) moiety is calculated to be 7.04 eV (vertical IP; geometry optimization at the AM1 level and single point energy calculation at Hartree–Fock/6-31G(d) level; the adiabatic ionization potential is even smaller, by 0.5–1 eV) compared to 7.6 eV for C60 and 9–11 eV for RCCl3
					(depending on R).48 Tetramethyldiaminenaphthalene can thus be expected to carry the charge and would therefore represent the main fragment ion. In negative-ion mode, C60 has a much higher electron affinity than both RCCl3 and tetramethyldiaminenaphthalene. Both these predictions are confirmed by the experiments.
We found that the localization of the HOMO, SOMO and LUMO in the ionic state presents an excellent guide to predict and rationalize the fragmentation. In all cases presented above, the “hole” density of the radical cation is situated on the part of the molecule that will preferentially appear as a fragment cation in the CID spectra, while the (“added”) electron density in the anion correctly predicts which part will show up as a fragment in the negative mode MALDI mass spectra. This even applies to the case of the A–B–D system: Take, for example, the LUMO (charge) of the radical cation of compound (2). Fig. 9 clearly suggests that there is some “hole” density located on the acetylene linker arm. Indeed, the experiment (Fig. 4b) shows that the strongest fragment in positive mode CID contains both the donor and the bridge moiety. In negative mode (Fig. 10), virtually no electron density of the SOMO extends to the acetylenic bridge, and indeed, the strongest fragment in negative mode is the C60 moiety itself.
5. Conclusions
In compounds (1) and (2), the C60 moiety is connected via a single C–C bond to the rest of the molecule. Thus, unlike most other reported fullerene-based dyads, these molecules can be fragmented by a simple cleavage of the C60–C bond. The calculated electron density rather than the energetics of the fragmentation predicts the outcome of the mass spectrometric CID experiments perfectly in every case. This work thus clarifies the properties of such dyads as both positive and negative ions, and confirms the adequacy of the computational methods for describing the electronic structure and charge transfer properties of these systems. The fragmentation patterns obtained by the CID studies can serve as a guideline for designing dyads with different functionalities in the future.
Acknowledgements
JMO acknowledges Prof. Alan Marshall and his group for their hospitality and discussions of this work during a visit to NHMFL in March 2003, and Mark Emmett and Tanner Schaub (NHMFL) for the mass spectra measured with the 9.4 T apparatus. NHMFL is supported by an NSF grant, CHE-99-09502. This work was supported by computing resources at the University of Bristol available through a JREI (HEFCE) grant (Bristol) and project DGICYT BQU2003-05827 (Spain). Discussions on this work with Carlo Thilgen (ETH Zurich) are also gratefully acknowledged.
References
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2000, 321–327 RSC .

          N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, in Handbook of Organic Conductive Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, vol. 1, Wiley, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granström, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257 CrossRef CAS .

Nanoelectronics and Information Technology: Advanced Electronic Materials and Novel Devices, ed. Rainer Waser, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. Xie, G. W. Bryant, J. Zhao, V. H. Smith, Jr., A. Di Carlo and A. Pecchia, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 206602 CrossRef .
M. R. Manaa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 382, 194 CrossRef .
E. A. Weiss, M. J. Ahrens, L. E. Sinks, A. V. Gusev, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5577 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Liu, M. W. Holman, L. Zang and D. M. Adams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6522 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Lewis, J. Q. Liu, W. Weigel, W. Rettig, I. V. Kurnikov and D. N. Beratan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 12536 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Burrows, A. T. Amos and S. G. Davison, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1999, 72, 207 CAS .
Y. Lee, T. Kitagawa and K. Komatsu, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Murata, M. Suzuki, T. Yamazaki and K. Komatsu, Fullerenes, 2003, 13, 316–322 Search PubMed .
M. A. Herranz, N. Martin, J. Ramey and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2968–2969 RSC .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Thomas, V. Biju, P. V. Kamat, M. V. George and D. M. Guldi, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 1299 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. van der Veen, B. de Boer, U. Stalmach, K. I. van de wetering and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3673–3684 CrossRef CAS .
G. Possamai, M. Maggini, E. Menna, G. Scorrano, L. Franco, M. Ruzzi, C. Corvaja, G. Ridolfi, P. Samori, A. Geri and N. Camaioni, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79, 51–58 CrossRef .
A. Cravino, G. Zerza, M. Maggini, S. Bucella, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Commun., 2000, 24, 2487 RSC .
L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 593 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Streletskiy, I. V. Goldt, I. V. Kuvychko, I. N. Ioffe, L. N. Sidorov, T. Drewello, S. H. Strauss and O. V. Boltalina, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 8, 360 CrossRef .
D. Fati, Y. V. Vasil’ev, N. K. Wachter, R. Taylor and T. Drewello, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 229, 3 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Boltalina, A. A. Goryunkov, V. Y. Markov, I. N. Ioffe and L. N. Sidorov, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228, 807 CrossRef CAS .
B. Manil, L. Maunoury, B. A. Huber, J. Jensen, H. T. Schmidt, H. Zettergren, H. Cederquist, S. Tomita and P. Hvelplund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 215504 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fati, V. Leeman, Y. V. Vasil’ev, T. Drewello, B. Leyh and H. Hungerbuhler, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 13, 1448 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hampe, M. Neumaier, M. N. Blom and M. M. Kappes, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 354, 303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brown, N. L. Clipston, N. Simjee, H. Luftmann, H. Hungerbuhler and T. Drewello, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2001, 210, 249 CrossRef .
U. Boesl and W. J. Knott, Mass Spectr. Rev., 1998, 17, 275 Search PubMed .
O. V. Boltalina, D. B. Ponomarev and L. N. Sidorov, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 1997, 16, 333 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ulmer, J. Mattay, H. G. Torres-Garcia and H. Luftmann, Eur. J. Mass Spctrom., 2000, 6, 49–52 Search PubMed .
T. Brown, N. L. Clipston, N. Simjee, H. Luftmann, H. Hungerbühler and T. Drewello, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2001, 210/211, 249 CrossRef .
J. Laskin and J. H. Futrell, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2003, 22, 158 CrossRef CAS .

Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry, ed. P. V. R. Schleyer, Wiley,  1998 Search PubMed .
M. Alcamí, O. Mo and M. Yañez, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2001, 20, 195 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kitagawa, Y. Lee, M. Hanamura, H. Sakamoto, H. Konno, K. Takeuchi and K. Komatsu, Chem. Commun., 2002, 3062 RSC .
V. Frankevich and R. Zenobi, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2001, 15, 979 CrossRef CAS .
V. Frankevich and R. Zenobi, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2001, 207, 57 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Guan and A. G. Marshall, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1996, 158, 5 CrossRef .
T. M. Schaub, C. L. Hendrickson, K. Qian, J. P. Quinn and A. G. Marshall, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 2172–2176 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Schaub
          M. Emmett
          A. G. Marshall, unpublished results. These measurements were carried out using a field desorption source39 and a 9.4 T magnet based FTICR instrument at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Tallahassee, Florida, USA.

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. A. Montgomery Jr, R. E. Stratmann, J. C. Burant, S. Dapprich, J. M. Millam, A. D. Daniels, K. N. Kudin, M. C. Strain, Ö. Farkas, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, M. Cossi, R. Cammi, B. Mennucci, C. Pomelli, C. Adamo, S. Clifford, J. Ochterski, G. A. Petersson, P. Y. Ayala, Q. Cui, K. Morokuma, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari, J. B. Foresman, J. Cioslowski, J. V. Ortiz, A. G. Baboul, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko, P. Piskorz, I. Komáromi, R. Gomperts, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng, A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, J. L. Andres, C. Gonzalez, M. Head-Gordon, E. S. Replogle and J. A. Pople, GAUSSIAN 98, Gaussian Inc, Pittsburgh, PA,  1998 Search PubMed .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Lee, W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B, 1988, 37, 785 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Miehlich, A. Savin, H. Stoll and H. Preuss, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989, 157, 200 CrossRef CAS .
One set of six gaussian functions for core orbitals plus two sets of (three and one, respectively) gaussian functions for each valence orbital; hence the notation 6-31G. The star * denotes that a polarization (e.g. 3d function for carbon) function is added on each non-hydrogen atom.
T. Donovan McCarley, R. L. McCarley and P. A. Limbach, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 4376 CrossRef CAS .
In order to calculate the electronic structure of open-shell systems with unpaired electrons one may use a restricted or an unrestricted method. Unrestricted methods use different orbitals for α and β electrons, obtaining occupied α and β orbitals and virtual (unoccupied)
					α and β orbitals. For restricted methods, a given pair of α and β electrons occupy the same spatial orbital. From the variational-principle point of view, an unrestricted method has more degrees of freedom. The reader is referred to ref. 33 above for clarification on different approaches to the electronic structure of open-shell systems. For restricted approaches, see: B. N. Plakhutin, in Reviews of Modern Quantum Chemistry, ed. K. D. Sen, World Scientific,  2002, pp. 16–42 Search PubMed .

          F. W. McLafferty, Interpretation of Mass Spectra , Univ. Science Books, Mil Valley,  1980 Search PubMed .
Experimental data available online, NIST Chemistry webbook, http://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2005
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structures of the compounds used in this study. Compound 1 has an elemental composition of C75H17N2Cl3 and a theoretical monoisotopic molecular weight of 1050.045 Da. Compound 2 has an elemental composition of C79H14O4S3, with a calculated monoisotopic molecular weight of 1122.005 Da.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Positive mode mass spectrum of (1). The upper insert is an expanded view of the molecular ion region, while the lower shows the theoretical isotope pattern. Other peaks that appear in the spectrum are known radiofrequence interferences. (b) Collision-induced dissociation daughter spectrum of the peak group at m/z
						= 1050.	 

 	Fig. 3  Negative mode mass spectrum of (1).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Positive mode mass spectra of (2). The peak at 383 is a radiofrequency interference. (b) Collision-induced dissociation daughter spectrum of the peak group at m/z
						= 1122.	 

 	Fig. 5  Negative mode mass spectrum of (2). The insert shows an expanded view of the molecular ion region from a second negative mode spectrum of (2), illustrating the variability in peak ratios for MALDI produced ions.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular orbital scheme from B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the three lowest unoccupied MOs of compound (1) in neutral form. Frontier orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) are also depicted for (1).	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the first few virtual or unoccupied MOs of the radical cation of compound (1). Depicted in the figure are the highest-occupied MO (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied MO, corresponding to the “hole” or positive charge.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the four highest occupied and the first few unoccupied MOs of the radical anion of compound (1). Depicted in the figure are the singly occupied MO (SOMO) or “added electron” and the lowest-unoccupied MO (LUMO).	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the first few unoccupied or virtual MOs of the radical cation of compound (2). Depicted in the figure are the highest-occupied MO (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied MO, corresponding to the “hole” or positive charge.	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular orbital scheme from unrestricted (U)B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the four highest occupied and the first few unoccupied or virtual MOs of the radical anion of compound (2). Depicted in the figure are the singly occupied MO (SOMO) and the first two lower unoccupied MOs (LUMO and LUMO + 1).	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular orbital scheme from B3LYP/6-31G* calculations for the three highest occupied and the three lowest unoccupied MOs of compound (2) in neutral form. Frontier orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) are also depicted for (2).	 

 		 
	(I)
	(II)
[D–A]˙(+)
						→ D˙
						+ A(+)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2005
