Photo-responsive Schottky diode behavior of a donor–acceptor co-crystal with violet blue light emission   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CE00020A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CE00020A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 3510-3523Photo-responsive Schottky diode behavior of a donor–acceptor co-crystal with violet blue light emission†

        
          
            Soumen 
            Singha
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rajkumar 
            Jana
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rituparna 
            Mondal
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Partha Pratim 
            Ray
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Partha Pratim 
            Bag
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Kajal 
            Gupta
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Nandan 
            Pakhira
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Corrado 
            Rizzoli
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Arabinda 
            Mallick
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Sanjay 
            Kumar
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Rajat 
            Saha
          
        
      *ae
aDepartment of Physics, Jadavpur University, Jadavpur, Kolkata-700032, WB, India. E-mail: kumars@phys.jdvu.ac.in; rajatinorg1@gmail.com
bDepartment of Physics, Techno India University, EM-4, Sector-V, Salt lake, Kolkata-700091, India
cDepartment of Electronics, Barrackpore Rastraguru Surendranath College, Barrackpore, West Bengal 700120, India
dDumka Engineering College, Dumka, Jharkhand-814101, India
eDepartment of Chemistry, Kazi Nazrul University, Asansol-713340, WB, India
fDipartimento SCVSA, Università di Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 17/A, Parma, Italy
Received 
      5th January 2021
    , Accepted 2nd March 2021First published on 10th March 2021AbstractHerein, we report the crystal structure, supramolecular structure, electronic transport properties and optoelectronic behaviour of a co-crystal made of tetrabromoterephthalic acid (TBTA) and quinoxaline (QUIN) (1:1). The sample has been characterized using thermogravimetric analysis and spectral techniques. Moreover, theoretical analyses of noncovalent interactions, optical properties and the band structure of the co-crystal have been performed. The co-crystal has been crystallized in an orthorhombic system with the Pnma space group and the constituent molecules assemble in the solid state by using O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding, π⋯π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions. The ground state geometry optimization over the hydrogen bonded dimer by DFT method indicates that TBTA acts as the donor and QUIN as the acceptor within the self-assembled co-crystal. According to UV-vis spectroscopic study the bandgap of the co-crystal is ∼3.18 eV. In the solid state it exhibits a broad emission band with a maximum at 405 nm while in aqueous medium its photoluminescence emission peaks are obtained at 350 and 403 nm. The values of the average fluorescence lifetime of the sample in aqueous medium are 3.38 ns at 352 nm and 4.94 ns at 403 nm. Under UV-irradiation, the co-crystal emits violet-blue light. The emission spectrum in solution phase shows a relative quantum yield of 0.018. Band structure calculation indicates that the co-crystal is a p-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.835 eV. Due to its semiconducting character, the ITO/co-crystal/Al sandwiched structured device acts as a Schottky barrier diode with rectification ratio, ideality factor, barrier height and series resistance of 41, 1.36, 0.70 eV, and 26.97 kΩ, respectively. The current through the device increases substantially under visible light exposure. Upon visible light illumination the values of electrical conductivity, mobility and carrier concentration increase by 35 (±0.5), 54 (±0.5) and 6 (±0.5)%, respectively, with respect to dark conditions. It has been shown that π⋯π and hydrogen bonding interactions can play a crucial role in producing the donor–acceptor (D–A) type co-crystal, semiconducting behaviour can be incorporated in the organic co-crystal utilizing π⋯π and hydrogen bonding interactions and weak intermolecular π⋯π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions can act as the pathway for electrical conduction.
Introduction
In recent times, photo-responsive organic semiconductors1 have attracted enormous attention because of their significant application potential in photodetectors,2 optical switches,3 LED4 and photovoltaic cells.5 In this context, donor–acceptor molecular co-crystals connected by charge transfer and weak intermolecular interactions like hydrogen bonding6 and π-interactions7 which also have success in crystal engineering have emerged as the most promising material of this category.8–11 The physicochemical properties of co-crystals are poles apart from the sum of their components. These properties can be tuned rationally by altering intermolecular interactions through judicious selection of the constituents. Recently, study of the semiconducting and optoelectronic behaviour of organic co-crystals/salts has attracted paramount attention due to their enormous application possibilities in next generation environment friendly electronic and optoelectronic devices in place of the Si-based devices used nowadays.12–36 However, very few co-crystals exhibit photo-responsive properties.15–36 Thorough investigation of the electronic and optoelectronic properties of a number of organic co-crystal based devices fabricated in laboratory conditions yielded very promising results in respect to their application possibilities in the area of light emitting diodes,17 light emitting transistors,18,19 lasers,20 photoconductors,21,22 and photovoltaic cells.23
Tsutsumi et al., have reported the photovoltaic behaviour of a device fabricated by using DBTTF–TCNQ (dibenzotetrathiofulvalene–tetracyanoquinodimethane) co-crystal with narrow bandgap (0.7 eV).24 The thin film solar cell made of tetracene-doped anthracene co-crystal exhibits an optical efficiency of 23.72%.25 The highest power conversion efficiency achieved in fullerene and squarine co-crystal based heterojunction solar cells is 10%.26 The organic p–n junction photovoltaic cell made from contorted hexabenzocoronene (donor) and spherical fullerene (acceptor) exhibits a good response but large scale production of the device has not yet been taken up due to lack of proper structural characterization of the co-crystal used.27 W. Hu and co-workers have assessed the optoelectronic performance of several D–A type charge transfer co-crystals.28–32 They have examined morphology dependant photo-responsive behaviour of two different co-crystals of perylene (P) and TCNQ (T) and shown that the on–off photocurrent ratios of the devices made of 1:1 and 3:1 P–T co-crystals under visible light illumination are 5.4 and 4.4, respectively.30 In another article, they have shown that the bipyridylethylene (BPE)–1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene (TCNB) co-crystal can be used as an optical waveguide.31 They have also designed photonic logic gate properties of an organic co-crystal composed of 4-(1-naphthylvinyl)pyridine and 1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene.32 The field effect transistor (FET) fabricated by using the co-crystal of C60 and 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)porphyrin (3,5-TPP) responds to NIR radiation.33 The heterojunction device made from the acridine–trimesic acid co-crystal exhibits an ultrahigh on–off photocurrent ratio of the order of 104.34 The electrical conductivity of co-crystal of 1,3,6,8-pyrenetetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt as donor and 1,1′-bibutyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dibromide as acceptor increases upon illumination with laser beam of wavelength 405 nm.35 However, this co-crystal has low conductivity.35
Earlier we have reported the role of weak intermolecular interactions (like hydrogen bonding, π–π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions) in the electrical response of tetrabromoterephthalic acid (TBTA) based multi-component semiconducting co-crystals through formation of Schottky barriers.36 Recently, we have reported the photo-responsive behaviour of some organic co-crystal/salts based Schottky barrier diodes.15 It is noteworthy that the weak intermolecular interactions between the donor and acceptor molecules of co-crystals can be utilized for generation of photocarriers.1,5,15–23 Thus, from a fundamental view point of crystal engineering it appears that the possibility of forming a co-crystal utilizing charge transfer/π⋯π stacking between TBTA and quinoxaline (QUIN) molecules and having the supramolecular network formed by weak hydrogen bonding, π–π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions can be explored in order to examine the role of such weak noncovalent interactions in the electronic transport properties and optoelectronic behaviour through a comprehensive study of the photo-responsive properties of a TBTA–QUIN based Schottky barrier diode.
Herein, we have designed a semiconducting-luminescent co-crystal of the poly-bromo organic molecule TBTA as donor and QUIN as acceptor (Fig. S1†) using the solvent evaporation method, characterized it using single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD), UV-vis, luminescence lifetime measurements and fluorescence microscopic imaging techniques. Its photo-responsive properties have also been examined. Structural study reveals that this TBTA–QUIN co-crystal has been formed by the self-assembly of its constituents TBTA and QUIN through hydrogen bonding and π–π interactions and it has assembled in the solid state through supramolecular O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding, Br⋯O, Br⋯π and π–π interactions. Theoretical inspection of the energy levels of frontier molecular orbitals of the hydrogen bonded dimer shows that TBTA acts as donor while QUIN acts as acceptor. Band structure calculations show that the bandgap of the co-crystal is 2.835 eV and this value agrees well with the optical bandgap (3.18 eV) obtained from solid state UV-vis spectra. Under UV-irradiation the co-crystal emits violet-blue light. To examine the electrical response, thin film of the co-crystal is fabricated on an ITO surface and the ITO/co-crystal/Al sandwich structure exhibits “Schottky diode” behaviour with a rectification ratio of 45 in dark conditions. The conductivity of the co-crystal made device increases by 35 (±0.5)% upon visible light exposure and it exhibits “Schottky diode” behaviour with a rectification ratio of ∼56.
Experimental section
This study includes the solvent evaporation synthesis of TBTA–QUIN co-crystal, X-ray single crystal structural characterization, density functional theory (DFT) based calculation of the binding energy and non-covalent interactions within the components, Hirshfeld surface analysis, spectroscopic study and its theoretical verification by DFT and periodic DFT calculations (details are provided in the ESI†). The I–V measurements in dark and under visible light illumination have been performed on an Al/co-crystal/ITO sandwich structure fabricated by using an SCU 2700 spin coating system. Aluminium (Al) electrode is deposited on the active thin film by a vacuum coating unit (12A4D of HINDHIVAC) using a shadow mask. The I–V characteristics, in dark and under visible light irradiation, of the co-crystal have been recorded using the two probe method using a Keithley 2400 sourcemeter interfaced with a PC at applied bias voltage in the range of −2 to +2 V. The I–V measurements have been carried out in a dark box. The photo-responsive behaviour of the device has been investigated under AM 1.5 G photo-irradiation. Details of the I–V measurements are provided in the ESI.†
Results and discussion
Molecular and supramolecular structure of the co-crystal
Upon mixing equimolar ethanolic solutions of TBTA and QUIN (Fig. 1) the co-crystal was grown via the solvent evaporation method. Rhombohedral shaped (Fig. S1†) colourless single crystals were collected and characterized using the single crystal X-ray crystallographic technique (ESI†). Structural analysis reveals that the co-crystal crystallizes in the orthorhombic system with Pnma space group (Tables 1 and S1†). The asymmetric unit of the co-crystal contains half of each of the TBTA and QUIN molecules (Fig. S2†). In the molecule of TBTA, the carboxylic groups are almost perpendicular (angle between the plane of the phenyl ring and the plane of carboxylic acid group is 87.23°, Fig. S3†) to the plane of the phenyl ring. The C–O bond lengths (O1–C5 = 1.302(3) Å, O2–C5 = 1.192(3) Å) confirm the presence of the carboxylic acid group. The QUIN moiety is completely planar and is co-planar to the phenyl ring of the TBTA moiety.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of co-crystallizing components. 
Table 1 Crystallographic data of the TBTA–QUIN co-crystal




Structure
Crystal form




System
Orthorhombic


Space group

Pnma




a (Å)
9.4972(18)



b (Å)
14.745(3)



c (Å)
13.181(2)



α (°)
90



V (Å3)
1845.8(6)



Z, density
4, 2.202


CCDC no.

1841621





Interestingly, the TBTA and QUIN molecules are connected by O–H⋯N hydrogen bonds to form the 1D supramolecular chains along the b-axis (Fig. 2, S4 and Table S2†). Two parallel 1D chains are connected by π⋯π interactions (Fig. S5 and Table S3†) between the TBTA and QUIN molecules to form a double layer which is further connected by Br⋯O interactions (Fig. S6 and Table S4†) to form a 2D supramolecular structure within the ab-plane (Fig. 2). These 2D sheets are further bridged by Br⋯π interactions (Table S5†) to form a 3D supramolecular network (Fig. S7†).
 Fig. 2  2D supramolecular structure formed by hydrogen bonds (green), halogen bonds (cyan) and π⋯π interactions (magenta). 
PXRD, thermal and IR analyses
The phase purity of the bulk material was characterized by PXRD analysis (Fig. S8†). Thermal analysis reveals two-step degradation of the co-crystal. The sample is stable up to 140 °C, and then for the 1st step of decomposition within the temperature range 140–220 °C the weight loss of the sample is nearly 24.5% indicating the removal of the QUIN moiety from the structure. In the next step the remaining part of the sample gets completely degraded in the temperature interval of 270–360 °C (Fig. S9†). The vibrational spectra recorded in ATR mode (Fig. S10†) show shifts in the frequency band positions corresponding to CO and O–H vibrations in the co-crystal with respect to TBTA towards lower frequencies. This may be attributed to the weakening of CO and O–H vibrations due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions between TBTA and QUIN in the co-crystal.
Inspection of noncovalent interactions within the co-crystal
Hirshfeld surface analysis
The Hirshfeld surface analysis provides more detailed information regarding the intermolecular interactions and the 2D fingerprint plot quantifies these interactions within the crystal structure (details are provided in the ESI†). The Hirshfeld surfaces were calculated over TBTA molecules (Fig. 3) and the 2D fingerprint plots (Fig. S11†) were analysed accordingly. The dnorm surface of TBTA was mapped over the fixed colour scale of −0.751 to 1.417 Å. It displays some bright circular red spots, which correspond to the short intermolecular O⋯H and N⋯H interactions. The light red spots correspond to the long intermolecular Br⋯O, Br⋯π, C⋯H and H⋯H interactions. The 2D fingerprint plots reveal that the O⋯H interactions comprise 17.0% of the total Hirshfeld surface and appear as a blunt spike with the lowest contact distance di ≈ 1.5 Å and de ≈ 1.3 Å. The N⋯H interactions cover 4.3% of the total surface and emerge as a sharp spike with contact distance di ≈ 0.6 Å and de ≈ 1.0 Å. The Br⋯C interaction corresponding to Br⋯π comprises 13.5% of the surface and appears as two spikes with average contact distance de + di ≈ 3.4 Å. The C⋯H, Br⋯O, H⋯H and Br⋯H interactions are found in the 2D fingerprint plot with relative surface areas 2.3%, 18.4%, 7.1% and 27.4%, respectively as shown in Fig. S10.†
 Fig. 3  Hirshfeld dnorm, shape index and curvedness surfaces of TBTA–QUIN around TBTA. 
Intermolecular interaction energies
The quantitative view of the topology of the distribution of overall interaction energies sustaining the molecular components within the crystal structure have been calculated by two ways. Firstly on the basis of pair-wise interaction energies by summing up four energy components viz., electrostatic (Eel), polarization (Epol), dispersion (Edis) and exchange repulsion (Erep) on a structure-cluster mapped within 6 Å in the neighbourhood of each component (TBTA and QUIN) of the co-crystal to include long-range interactions. Secondly the binding energies of the four kinds of self-assembled dimeric model geometries focussing different kinds of intermolecular interactions (Fig. 4) were calculated from the difference of the energy of the system and the sum of individual components in the framework of DFT with counterpoise correction.
 Fig. 4  Theoretical model geometries with the synthon energies describing (a) O−H⋯N hydrogen bonding interaction, (b) π⋯π interaction for the TBTA-QUIN hetero-dimer model structures, (c) Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions within the TBTA homo-dimer and (d) C–H⋯π interactions between the QUIN homo-dimer model structure. 
For a cluster of molecules within the 2 × 2 × 2 unit cell, graphical representation of the individual energy components has been simulated in the energy framework and is depicted in Fig. S12.† The interactions for different kinds of orientations of the component molecules within the crystals have been explored in the energy framework and are presented in Fig. S13–S15.† The electrostatic and dispersion energies coexisting together provide the total interaction energy for the self-assembly of the co-crystal. Signatures of electrostatic force due to the strong O–H⋯N hydrogen bonded arrays and dispersion force due to π-stacking interactions, Br⋯O halogen bonding with Br⋯π and C–H⋯π interactions within the constituents of the heterodimers have been detected in the interaction energy plots (Fig. S13 and S14†). The Br⋯O halogen bonding interactions between the TBTA homodimer have been detected to form a 2D-planar geometry made of a R22(10) network between the TBTA molecules (Fig. S15†).
On the other hand Fig. 4(a) describes the binding energy of the first model dimer considering only the O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding interactions, the second model (Fig. 4(b)) gives the binding energy of the weakly interacting π stacked dimer, the third and fourth models diagnose the intermolecular interactions between the homo-dimers, Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions between two TBTA moieties (Fig. 4(c)) and C–H⋯π interactions between two QUIN moieties (Fig. 4(d)). The calculated values of these interactions as listed in Table 2 show comparable results.
Table 2 Comparison between interaction energies calculated from the energy framework and binding energies from DFT computation




Pair
Interaction
Interaction energy
Binding energy




TBTA–QUIN heterodimer
O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding interactions
−50.5 kJ mol−1
−9.52 kcal mol−1


π⋯ stacking interactions
−36.5 kJ mol−1
−4.71 kcal mol−1


TBTA homodimer
Br⋯O halogen bonding with Br⋯π
−31.4 kJ mol−1
−8.40 kcal mol−1


QUIN homodimer
C–H⋯π interactions
−11.6 kJ mol−1
−3.44 kcal mol−1


TBTA homodimers with R22(10) network forming a 2D-planar geometry
Br⋯O halogen bonding interaction between the TBTA homodimers
−19.0 kJ mol−1






QTAIM and NCI plot analysis
A qualitative analysis of the topological properties of the noncovalent interactions prevailing within the dimer geometries based on the electron density has been performed using the quantum theory of atoms in molecules (QTAIM). In the QTAIM distribution of critical points (CPs) and bond paths each noncovalent interaction is characterized by a bond CP (yellow sphere) and bond path interconnecting the atoms of two different molecular units and to visualize the nature of the non-covalent interactions (NCI), the reduced density gradient (RDG) has been represented by iso-density surfaces over the interacting dimers (Fig. 5). The nature of the interaction between the molecules within the dimer can be traced through a red–blue–green colour scheme on the calculated iso-surface where blue colour usually highlights strong attractive interaction whereas red points towards strong repulsive interaction. Weak interactions (attractive) are indicated by green colour.
 Fig. 5  AIM distribution of bond and ring critical points (yellow and tan spheres respectively), bond paths (magenta lines) and the nature of non-covalent interactions for the model dimeric geometries revealing (a) O–H⋯N strong H-bonding interaction, (b) π-stacking interaction, (c) Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions and (d) C–H⋯π short contacts. 

Fig. 5(a) shows the QTAIM representation of the heterodimer, where the O–H⋯N hydrogen bond is portrayed by the bond critical point (BCP) represented by a yellow sphere and the bond path shown by a pink line interconnecting the H and N atoms. The small blue iso-surface located between the H and N atoms shows the NCI plot representation which confirms the presence of strong O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding interactions. Fig. 5(b) displays several BCPs connecting the π-systems of both the QUIN rings and the TBTA molecule, characterizing the π-stacking interaction. The extended green iso-surface between the π-stacked hetero-dimers indicates the weakly attractive nature of the interactions between the participating residues.
It can be observed that for the self-assembled homo-dimer (Fig. 5(c)) the distribution of bond critical points (CPs) and bond paths reveals two different types of interaction, one corresponds to the XB, where the Br and O atoms are interconnected by a bond CP and bond path and the other contact can be defined as a Br⋯π interaction that is characterized by a bond CP and bond path connecting the Br atom to one C-atom of the π-aromatic ring. The natures of weakly interacting Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions are characterized by three separate green iso-surfaces between them. On the other hand Fig. 5(d) presents the similar distribution of bond critical points (CPs) and bond paths, revealing the C–H⋯π short contacts by a bond CP and bond path interconnecting the H atom to one C-atom of the π ring of QUIN. The strength of the interaction can be observed by four discrete green iso-surfaces between the QUIN homo-dimer and was found to be weak in nature.
Optical, electronic and electrical transport properties
Spectroscopic and light emitting behaviour
The optical properties of the co-crystal have been examined in both solid state and aqueous medium (Fig. 6). The solid state absorption spectrum of the co-crystal shows a broad band in the UV region while in the aqueous medium multiple peaks appear (Fig. 6(a)). The peaks obtained at lower wavelength can be attributed to π–π* transition while higher wavelength peaks are due to inter-ligand charge transfer (ILCT) between different moieties of the co-crystal. Usually, in the UV-vis reflectance spectra the band for the co-crystal formed by the charge transfer (CT) interaction appears at lower energy with respect to its individual components.12 However, in the present case no such shifting of the band for the co-crystal has been observed, which discards the possibility of the presence of CT interaction between TBTA and QUIN moieties in the co-crystal (Fig. S16(a)†). The absorption spectra of the co-crystal in both solid state and solution phase show two major bands. The solution phase spectrum is blue shifted with respect to the solid state spectrum. The peaks in solution phase absorption spectrum are clearly resolved whereas for the solid state spectrum the band nature can be observed, which mainly arises due to the aggregation effect. Fig. S16(b)† depicts the absorption behaviour of the sample and its components in solution phase. By correlating the experimental and simulated absorption spectra of the sample in solution phase it has been shown that the co-crystal retains its supramolecular assembly in the aqueous medium (see ESI†).
 Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of the sample in both solid state and aqueous medium, (b) steady state emission spectra of the sample in both solid state and aqueous medium (λex = 313 nm, conc. = 10−4 mol l−1), (c) lifetime profile of the sample in solution phase and (d) fluorescence image of the co-crystal. The spectra of the sample in solid state and in solution phase as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b) are normalized to illustrate their differences. 
The solid state emission spectrum of the co-crystal shows a broad band with a maximum at 405 nm while in aqueous medium it has two peaks with maxima at 350 nm and 403 nm (Fig. 6(b)). Such behaviour is due to the solid state aggregation effect within the multi-component material. Concentration dependent absorption and emission spectra of the sample have also been studied in solution phase (Fig. S17(a) and (b)†). With increasing concentration, the intensity of the peaks in the absorption spectra increases continuously; while in the emission spectra, the intensity of the peak at 350 nm decreases and it increases for the peak at 403 nm. Most probably self-assembled aggregation is responsible for the decrement and the incessant increase in the propensity of the inter-ligand charge transfer interaction with increasing concentration causes the significant enhancement in the intensity of the second peak.
Fluorescence lifetime is a very effective tool for probing the local environment around a fluorescent molecule and excited state interactions. The decay profiles of the sample recorded in aqueous environment have been fitted with a double-exponent (Fig. 6(c)) and the respective lifetime values τ1 and τ2 are provided in Table 3. The average lifetime values of the material in aqueous medium for those emission maxima were determined from the results of the time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy using the equation: 〈τav〉 = (a1τ12 + a2τ22)/(a1τ1 + a2τ2), where a1, a2 are the percentage contributions for these two lifetime values and are presented in Table 3.
Table 3 Lifetime values of the sample in aqueous environment




Monitoring wavelength (λem)

a
1


τ
1 (ns)

a
2


τ
2 (ns)
〈τav〉 (ns)






a
1, a2: percentage contributions for lifetime values; τ1, τ2: lifetime; and 〈τav〉: average lifetime.





352
0.17
0.04
0.83
3.39
3.38


403
0.59
0.75
0.41
5.73
4.94




The relative quantum yield (ΦF) calculation from the luminescence measurement carried out in solution phase (considering only the area under the emission spectrum with maximum at 403 nm) using quinine sulfate (QS) in 0.1 M H2SO4 as the standard reference shows that the sample is minimally radiative with ΦF = 0.018. The consequential radiative and non-radiative transition rate constants for this emission peak were extracted from the relations kr = φF/τav and kir = (1 − φF)/τav, respectively, and these values are found to be kr = 3.64 × 106 s−1 and kir = 9.96 × 108 s−1. The fluorescence microscopic image of the co-crystal under UV irradiation has been recorded (Fig. 6(d)). The co-crystal shows violet-blue emission from its edges as expected from the coordinate (0.151, 0.056) of the CIE chromaticity diagram ((Fig. S18(c)†) drawn from the solid state PL spectra.
Ground state structural and electronic properties
The molecular structure of the co-crystal has been optimized in the electronic ground state (S0) in both the gaseous phase and in water medium employing the DFT method with the 6-311++G(d,p) basis set. The gas phase and solution phase optimized geometries of the co-crystal are presented in Fig. S18† and the coordinates are reported in Tables S6 and S7.† As the present sample is not a CT type co-crystal and the hydrogen bonding interaction is the strongest interaction between the components of the co-crystal, the hydrogen bonded heterodimer was chosen as the molecular unit of the co-crystal for all molecular level calculations. In the starting solid state geometry derived from the crystal structure a molecular unit of the co-crystal contains a TBTA and a QUIN moiety where the carboxylic groups of TBTA are perpendicular to the aromatic ring of TBTA and the aromatic ring of TBTA is coplanar with the QUIN ring. The relative orientations of the different fragments of the optimized geometry in the aqueous phase is almost the same as the solid state molecular structure. The slight difference between these conformations is because of the presence of solvent interactions in the aqueous phase. On the other hand, for the optimized geometry in the gaseous phase the aromatic ring of the TBTA molecule becomes perpendicular with respect to the QUIN moiety and the carboxylic groups turn coplanar with the QUIN moiety. Due to the absence of crystalline packing force the optimized geometry of the molecule in the gaseous phase exhibits such a substantially different conformation from the solid state molecular geometry. Except for the bonds with H atoms all the optimized bond lengths are within the appreciable limit of ∼0.02 Å. In the solution phase optimized geometry the increment of the O–H bond dimension is more than the gaseous phase optimized geometry. Some of the selected bond lengths of the co-crystal are listed in Table S8.†
The isodensity surface plots (isodensity = 0.02 e Bohr−3) of some of the selected frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) of both the optimized structures of the co-crystal along with their orbital energies are depicted in Fig. 7. For the FMOs the contributions coming from different parts of the co-crystal in terms of atomic contribution are obtained by the fragment analysis method, and energies of the FMOs along with the HOMO–LUMO energy differences are provided in Table S9.† It can be clearly seen that the FMOs for the geometries optimized in the gaseous phase and in water medium have different energies and the electron density distributions of the FMOs (Fig. 7) show different distribution of the isodensities over different parts of the molecules.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representations of the selective FMOs of the co-crystal (a) in gaseous phase and (b) water medium. 
In the hydrogen bonded dimer the HOMO e-density is found over TBTA and the LUMO e-density is on QUIN for both the phases. Therefore for the ground state of the TBTA–QUIN self-assembly, TBTA will act as donor, whereas QUIN will act as acceptor. This observation is further supported by the calculation of the Mulliken charges over the atoms of the hydrogen bonded dimer geometry (Tables S10 and S11†). It may be noted that for both the phases all virtual orbitals subsequent to the LUMO are composed of contributions from a single entity. For both the phases, LUMO+1 to LUMO+3 are composed of the contribution from the TBTA moiety and LUMO+4 is composed of the sole contribution from the QUIN moiety. The HOMO−2 and HOMO−4 orbitals in the gaseous phase optimized structure and the HOMO−1 orbital in the aqueous medium optimized geometry are composed of sole contributions from the QUIN moiety. For all other occupied orbitals both the TBTA and QUIN moieties contribute in different ratios. All the % contributions are listed in Table S9.†
Singlet excited states and calculated absorption spectra
We have computed the theoretical UV-vis spectra of the co-crystal in both the gaseous state and aqueous medium using the ground state optimized geometries in the respective phases, with the help of the non-equilibrium approach of the time dependent density functional (TD-DFT) method. The energy of each excited state (Sn) represents the vertical excitation energy in electron volts (eV) from the ground state (S0).
The theoretically (both in the gaseous and solution phases) and experimentally obtained UV-vis spectra of the co-crystal in aqueous medium are presented in Fig. 8. The absorption spectra of the co-crystal show multiple transitions and these excitations are primarily attributed to charge transfer transition between different moieties within the molecular unit of the co-crystals. The peaks in the experimental spectrum have been assigned by visual inspection. The values of theoretically calculated excitation wavelengths matching with experimental result, excitation energies, oscillator strengths and CI coefficients along with the corresponding most relevant transitions involved are presented in Tables S12 and S13.† Both the experimental and calculated spectral features of the co-crystal are more or less similar and lie in the UV region of the spectrum, except the fact that in the theoretical spectra there is a slight bathochromic shift relative to the experimental spectrum in the lower wavelength region.
 Fig. 8  Experimental absorption spectrum in aqueous medium along with the calculated absorption spectra in gaseous phase and water medium for the co-crystal at room temperature. 
The natural transition orbital (NTO) analysis based on the calculated transition density matrices allows us to identify and visualize the electronic transitions in terms of excitation from hole to electron of the singlet excitons. Further, the transition orbitals provide a graphical real-space representation of the transition densities associated with the molecular electronic excitations computed within the framework of TD-DFT. The NTOs of the co-crystal for the gaseous phase and water medium excitations are depicted in Fig. S19 and S20.† The experimental transition wavelength, most appropriate theoretical transitions and corresponding hole and electron NTOs involved along with the weights of the respective configuration λ (λ ≤ 1, where the parameter λ actually refers to the fraction of the NTO pair contribution to a given electronic excitation) have been pictorially provided in Fig. S19 and S20.† These calculated NTOs corresponding to the main absorption band clearly indicate the π–π* character of these transitions. Both the hole and electron orbitals are spread over the different parts of the co-crystal, establishing a generalised characteristic π (for holes) and π* (for electrons) nature of orbitals.
In Fig. S19† the lowest energy transition observed around 315 nm is found at ca. 308.49 nm (4.02 eV, f = 0.0349), which can be described by one set of NTOs (each with λ = 0.98) and is exclusively attributed to the π (QUIN) → π* (QUIN) ILCT transition. The next UV transition observed near 294 nm is computed at 282.18 nm (4.39 eV, f = 0.0861) and can be ascribed to π (QUIN) → π* (QUIN) ILCT transition. The most intense transition obtained ∼237 nm is calculated at 232.75 nm (5.33 eV, f = 0.2717). This transition is due to n(N-QUIN) + π (TBTA) → π* (TBTA) ILCT transition in association with a slight LLCT nature. The most appropriate calculated transition near the experimentally observed transition at 225 nm is found at 218.82 nm (5.67 eV, f = 0.2295). This transition has both LLCT and ILCT characters and can be represented by π (TBTA + QUIN) → π* (TBTA) LLCT/ILCT transition. The experimentally observed UV-vis transitions of the co-crystal in water medium are theoretically interpreted in a similar manner and the results are summarized in Fig. S20.† So, the TD-DFT with NTO analysis establishes the excitations occurring due to inter/intra-molecular charge transfer interactions between TBTA and QUIN.
Electronic band structure and comparison with optical bandgap
The calculated band structure of the co-crystal along the high symmetry points of the 1st Brillouin zone is represented in Fig. 9(a) (and S21†). It shows that the bandgap of the co-crystal is 2.835 eV, which is close to the value of the optical bandgap (∼3.179 eV) calculated from the absorption band edge of the solid state UV-vis spectra (Fig. 9(b)). The dispersions in the valence and conduction bands are clearly described in Fig. 9(a). The parameters corresponding to the band structure are given in Table S14.† The lowest energy (2.835 eV) of the CBs is located at the G point (CBM), whereas, the highest energy (0.000 eV) of the VBs is localized at the Z point (VBM). This indicates that this co-crystal is an indirect bandgap semiconductor. The calculated band gap shows a slightly smaller value compared to the experimental optical bandgap which is again a general flaw of DFT calculations with the GGA functional. So it can be said without ambiguity that the co-crystal is an indirect band p-type semiconductor with a wide bandgap.
 Fig. 9  (a) Calculated band structure zoomed in over the top of the VBs and bottom of CBs and (b) solid state UV-DRS spectrum of the co-crystal in the wavelength range 200 to 420 nm. 
Now, the bands can be assigned according to total and partial densities of states (DOS) as depicted in Fig. S22.† The resonance of C-2s, O-2s, N-2s and Br-4s states in conjunction with a partial amount of H-1s, C-2p, N-2p and O-2p states construct the VB located in the range −24.2 eV to −10.5 eV. The bottom portion of the VB is mainly dominated by the contribution from O-2p (21.4 electrons per eV) and N-2p (7.8 electrons per eV) orbitals. The next region above it is formed by C-2s (18.27 electrons per eV) and Br-4s (12.5 electrons per eV) orbitals. The top of the VB just below the Fermi level between the energy range −10.2 eV to the Fermi level (0.0 eV) are formed by the superposition of C-2p (35.8 electrons per eV) and Br-4p (30.70 electrons per eV) states in association with a considerable amount of contribution from N-2p (8.90 electrons per eV), O-2p (24.90 electrons per eV) and H-1s states. The topmost level of the VB (VBM ∼ −1.02 eV ∼ 0 eV) is formed due to the resonance of C-2p, N-2p and Br-4p orbitals. The conduction band (CB) just above the Fermi level ranging from 2.83 eV to 5.7 eV is formed due to the superposition of C-2p, N-2p and Br-4p orbitals mixing with a slight amount of O-2p orbitals where the states C-2p (8.35 electrons per eV) and N-2p (6.87 electrons per eV) dominate the bottom of the CB. The states C-2p and Br-4s mixing with a small amount of C-2s and H-1s have created the region ranging from 5.8 eV to 18.9 eV in the CB.
The partial density of state (PDOS) contribution of the two molecular units TBTA and QUIN in the total density of states for the co-crystal is depicted in Fig. S23.† In the PDOS, some peaks appearing at the same energy level (hybridization) for different atomic orbitals (Fig. S22†) and for different molecular fragments (Fig. S23†) clearly show the evidence of strong intermolecular interactions between the moieties of the co-crystal and intramolecular interactions within the moieties. The N-2p orbits hybridize with H-1s due to the resonance in peak positions from −13.5 eV to 0 eV implying partial charge transfer from H atoms to N atoms. So, the presence of strong H bonds between H atoms and N atoms is ensured. Again, a strong resonance is observed between the O-2p and Br-4p peaks within the range −7.9 eV to 0.0 eV. This can be argued to be the evidence of the presence of strong Br⋯O halogen interaction between the non-bonded atoms.
Optical properties from the electronic band structure
The electronic band structure calculation can provide insight regarding the optical response. The salient features of the parameters: real (ε′(ω)) and imaginary (ε′′(ω)) parts of dielectric permittivity, reflectivity (R(ω)), refractive index (n(ω)), extinction coefficient (k(ω)), optical conductivity (σ(ω)), absorption coefficient (α(ω)) and energy-loss function (L(ω)) as a function of frequency of the incident photon are displayed in Fig. 10 in the energy range 0–45 eV.
 Fig. 10  The plot for (a) dielectric permittivity ε(ω); (b) reflectivity R(ω); (c) refractive index n(ω) and extinction coefficient k(ω); (d) optical conductivity σ(ω); (e) energy loss function L(ω) and (f) absorption coefficient α(ω) of the co-crystal as a function of photon energy. 
The plots of ε′′(ω) and ε′(ω) against photon energy are shown in Fig. 10(a). The characteristic spectra for the ε′′(ω) of the co-crystal comprise mainly four sharp peaks at 2.97, 7.12, 11.61 and 14.26 eV together with some shoulder peaks near 17.40 eV and beyond. At low frequency, the imaginary part ε′′(ω) is zero and the threshold energy for the ε′′(ω) is consistent with the bandgap of the material at equilibrium. At higher frequency (>35 eV), the ε′′(ω) approaches to zero. The value of the static dielectric constant (εs = ε′(0)) is 2.98. The ε′(ω) fluctuates with increasing frequency and shows four peaks at 2.37, 6.11, 10.76 and 13.16 eV and afterward it starts decreasing, becoming negative in the energy range 19.20–24.32 eV which may be due to the metallic character of the sample in this energy range. At higher energy, the value of ε′(ω) again turns positive and is almost independent of energy (ε′(∞) ∼ 0.80).
The reflectivity spectrum of the sample as displayed in Fig. 10(b) shows two distinct peaks: one sharp and strong peak at 6.92 eV and another weak peak at 2.46 eV. A broad band appears in the energy range 9 to 29 eV due to the superposition of several peaks located at 11.66, 14.78, 19.74 and 23.42 eV (accompanied by a shoulder). The reflectivity of the material approaches to zero when the frequency reaches near 45 eV. The zero energy value of reflectivity (i.e., R(0)) is 7% and up to 4.83 eV the value of the reflectivity remains within 8.8%. Due to such a low value of reflectivity, the compound is nearly transparent in the infrared and visible energy range. Now, materials with a low refractive index are suitable for application in optoelectronic devices such as LEDs and solar cells. In the entire frequency range, the calculated value of the reflectivity of the co-crystal is lower than that in inorganic compounds like the metal oxides and thus it can be used for fabricating optoelectronic devices. The highest value of reflectivity (21.08%) is observed at 23.42 eV. It has been observed that the reflectivity value attains maximum when the value of ε′(ω) becomes negative (Fig. 10(a) and (b)).
The co-crystal shows a non-zero value of refractive index n(ω) up to 45 eV (Fig. 10(c)). The value of ε′(ω) at zero energy (ε′(0) = 2.98) could be used to estimate the refractive index n(ω) at zero energy using the relationship n(0) = [ε′(0)]1/2 and the estimated value of the static refractive index n(0) for the co-crystal is found to be 1.73. From its zero energy value, the refractive index increases with frequency, reaching the maximum value of 2.17 at 6.23 eV. A value for the refractive index of more than one signifies that when the photons traverse through the material they get slowed down due to their interactions with the electrons. The extinction coefficient k(ω) (the imaginary part of the complex refractive index) shows two sharp peaks at 3.02 and 7.42 eV and satellite peaks at 11.84, 14.76, 17.94 and 19.13 eV to form a broad band. The ε′′(ω) and k(ω) spectra display similar trends (Fig. 10(a) and (c)). The optical conductivity σ(ω) spectrum of the co-crystal is shown in Fig. 10(d). The real part of the complex conductivity exhibits peaks at 3.06, 7.24, 11.70 and 14.46 eV along with shallow shoulders located in the high energy region (∼17.60 eV). The maximum value of the conductivity of the co-crystal was achieved at 14.46 eV with a magnitude of 4.32 1/fs.
The energy-loss function L(ω) (Fig. 10(e)) is an important optical parameter describing the energy loss of a fast moving photon traversing through a material. The peaks in the L(ω) spectrum represent the characteristics associated with the plasma resonance and the corresponding frequency is called the plasma frequency above which the material is a dielectric insulator [ε′(ω) > 0] and below which the material behaves as a metal [ε′(ω) < 0]. For this material the resonant energy loss is manifested by a strong band situated in the energy region 22 to 28 eV composed of peaks located at 20.84 (low intensity), 25.86 (intense peak) and 26.83 eV (shoulder). This region of plasma resonance corresponds to the region in which ε′(ω) is negative. Again, the peak for the plasma resonance associated with the L(ω) spectrum coincides with the trailing edges in the reflectivity spectra. The α(ω) and R(ω) spectra are similar in the energy range 2.84 to 45 eV (Fig. 10(f)). In the low energy region distinct sharp peaks are observed at 3.10 and 7.55 eV followed by a strong broad band in the high energy region consisting of peaks located at 11.93 and 15.07 eV with the largest peak at 19.38 eV accompanied by two shoulder peaks at about 18.16 and 21.94 eV.
Electrical transport properties
According to UV-vis spectroscopic study and band structure calculation the co-crystal is a p-type semiconductor. So, to assess the electrical transport properties of the sample we have measured the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of a device made of an ITO/co-crystal/Al sandwich structure (Fig. 11(a)) at room temperature. The I–V measurements have been performed in the applied bias voltage range from −2 to +2 V using the two-probe technique with the help of a Keithley 2400 source meter. The SEM micrograph of the active thin film of the co-crystal cast on the ITO surface is shown in Fig. 11(b). The I–V characteristic curves of the device in the dark and under visible light illumination are presented in Fig. 11(c). The forward current of the device rises rapidly in a nonlinear fashion while it is very low and remains almost constant in the reversed bias region. The device is displaying rectifying behaviour with on/off ratios of 41 and 56 at ±2 V in the dark and under visible light exposure, respectively. Thus, it is acting like a Schottky barrier diode due to the presence of the semiconducting co-crystal between the electrodes. Further, in the voltage range 0 to 0.8 V (region I) the I–V curves of the device under dark conditions and visible light illumination obey the equation I = C1exp(−C2)[exp(C3V) − 1], where C1, C2 and C3 are constants that depend on different parameters of the device, portraying the thermionic emission behaviour of a Schottky barrier diode whereas in the voltage range 0.8 to 2 V (region II) they follow the power law behaviour (I ∝ Vn, with n = 2), manifesting that the space charge limited current (SCLC) controls the electrical transport mechanism of the device in this region (Fig. S25†). This clearly indicates that the device is a Schottky barrier diode.36 Accordingly, we have analyzed region I using thermionic emission theory to determine the different parameters of the device while in region II, SCLC theory has been employed to estimate the electrical transport parameters of the device.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of the device, (b) SEM micrograph of the semiconducting layer, (c) photoconductive behaviour of the co-crystal, (d) on–off characteristics of the device. 
The values of the ideality factor (η), series resistance (Rs) and barrier height (ϕb) of the device have been calculated by analyzing the I–V curve of the device in region I in the framework of the model proposed by S. K. Cheung and N. W. Cheung37 following the methodology reported earlier (details are provided in the ESI†). The effective charge carrier mobility (μeff), transit time (τ) and carrier concentration (n) of the device have been estimated using the Mott–Gurney law in the SCLC region (region II) following the standard approach described in the literature (details are provided in the ESI†) and utilizing the capacitance versus frequency plot of the device (Fig. S26†).38–40 The values of all the parameters of the device are listed in Table 4. The value of η deviates from its ideal value of unity due to the presence of the series resistance, existence of the interface states and the barrier inhomogeneities.41,42 Under light exposure, the values of μeff and n are increased by 54 (±0.5)% and 6 (±0.5)%, respectively, compared to those under dark conditions.
Table 4 Important electrical and charge transport parameters of the Al/co-crystal/ITO device




Condition
On/off

S


η


R
s (kΩ)

Φ
b (eV)

σ × 10−5 (s m−1)

μ
eff × 10−7 (m2 V−1 S−1)

τ × 10−7 (S)

n × 1020 (eV m−3)


dV/dlnI vs. I

H(I) vs. I






S: photosensitivity, η: ideality factor, Rs: series resistance, Φb: barrier height, σ: conductivity, μeff: mobility, τ: transit time, n: carrier concentration.





Dark
41
0.45
1.36
26.97
26.50
0.70
0.56
4.44
3.9
3.57


Light
56
1.19
19.72
18.77
0.65
0.76
6.86
2.7
3.79




In dark conditions the value of electrical conductivity of the device is found to be 0.56 × 10−5 S m−1 and it increases to 0.76 × 10−5 S m−1 under light illumination (Table 4). The photo-responsive behaviour of the device has been verified by measuring the transient photocurrent of the device at 2 V under an illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 11(d) represents the photocurrent (dark currents subtracted) versus time graph of the device. The device shows fast and reproducible photo-switching behaviour with light on and off (Fig. 11(d)). Photosensitivity (S) is an important parameter of photosensitive electronic devices and it is calculated with the help of the relationship, S = (IL − ID)/ID (ref. 43) where ID and IL are the dark current and photocurrent at +2 V, respectively. The value of S is calculated as 0.45.
To the best of our knowledge, this is a unique report of a donor–acceptor co-crystal based photo-responsive Schottky barrier diode. The co-crystal acts as a semiconductor because of the presence of weak intermolecular interactions, more specifically π–π interactions, between the donor and acceptor molecules of the co-crystal, which helps in generation of carriers. It may be noted that the conductivity, mobility and carrier concentration of the device increase substantially under visible light illumination compared to the dark condition. This indicates that the co-crystal responds toward the visible light by generating photo carriers.
Theoretical investigation of the ground state energy levels of the frontier molecular orbitals of the hydrogen bonded dimer geometry of the co-crystal reveals that in the self-assembled co-crystal TBTA acts as donor whereas QUIN acts as acceptor when they interact through hydrogen bonding interactions. The Mulliken charge distribution analysis of the hydrogen bonded dimer (Table S11†) clearly indicates that an appreciable amount of charge has been transferred from donor TBTA to acceptor QUIN. Moreover, the MEP analysis has revealed that in the co-crystal the aromatic ring of the QUIN molecule is electron rich (π-e) while the aromatic ring of TBTA is positively charged and acts as an electron deficient π-hole (π-h) (Fig. S24†). Thus, in the solid state, holes are created in the VB and the co-crystal acts as a p-type semiconductor as the concentration of holes in the VB is greater than the concentration of electrons in the CB. It may therefore be concluded that the π⋯π and hydrogen bonding interactions together play the key role in assembling the co-crystal and introducing the semiconducting behaviour in it. The weak intermolecular π–π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions provide the pathway for electrical conduction.
Optoelectronic behaviour of a material can be understood by correlating the results of optical property analysis and the study of the electrical transport properties under light illumination. The absorption coefficient versus photon energy plot indicates the wavelengths prone to photon absorption whereas the optical conductivity versus photon energy plot provides the information regarding the change in conductivity due to photon absorption. From the theoretical calculations it has been found that when the co-crystal is exposed to a photon beam, the real part of the complex conductivity exhibits a peak at 3.06 eV and an absorption peak has been observed at 3.10 eV. Further the optical bandgap of the co-crystal is 3.17 eV and the calculated electronic bandgap is 2.835 eV. All these results together indicate that when the co-crystal is exposed to visible light it absorbs photons with energy ∼3 eV (the blue-violet region of visible light) and its conductivity increases in consequence of the photon absorption. It may be inferred that the bandgap energy is appropriate for transferring the electrons from the valence band to conduction band by absorbing the photons in the blue-violet region of the visible beam of light. Thus, holes are generated in the valence band and electron concentration in the conduction band increases. Therefore while performing the I–V measurements under visible light illumination, carriers have been generated due to the photo-responsive behaviour of the co-crystal. This leads to an increase in carrier concentration and subsequently the conductivity of the sample. Further NTO analysis reveals the presence of excitons in the sample. Thus there is another possibility that under visible light illumination the excitons in the co-crystal absorb energy from the incident photon beam and it breaks into electrons and holes and as a result the carrier concentration increases.
Conclusion
We have thoroughly examined the crystal structure, supramolecular structure, noncovalent interactions, band structure, optical properties, electronic transport mechanism and photo-responsive behaviour of a donor–acceptor co-crystal assembled by mainly π⋯π stacking and hydrogen bonding interactions along with minute contribution from halogen interactions. In conclusion, it has been shown that (i) apart from CT interaction, π⋯π and hydrogen bonding interactions can play a crucial role in formation of D–A type co-crystals, (ii) the co-crystal emits blue light under UV irradiation, (iii) a device fabricated with the co-crystal exhibits Schottky barrier diode behaviour and photo-responsive properties, (iv) the conductivity, mobility and carrier concentration of the co-crystal increase significantly upon visible light illumination, (v) π⋯π and hydrogen bonding interactions together can incorporate semiconducting behaviour, (vi) weak intermolecular π⋯π, Br⋯π and Br⋯O interactions provide the pathway for electrical conduction and (vii) in this sample carriers have been generated by transfer of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band or formation of electron/hole pairs by disintegration of excitons upon photon absorption.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
SS gratefully acknowledges DST, Govt. of India for providing a fellowship under the DST INSPIRE program. The PURSE and FIST programs of DST, Govt. of India are also acknowledged. Financial support from the UGC, New Delhi, DST, Govt. of India, through DRS (SAP-I) and FIST programs to Department of Physics, Jadavpur University are also acknowledged. RS also acknowledges SERB, Government of India for SERB-TARE project (File No: TAR/2018/000744).
References
C. Wang, H. Dong, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 422–500 RSC .
D. Yang and D. Ma, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800522 CrossRef .
E. Orgiu, N. Crivillers, M. Herder, L. Grubert, M. Patzel, J. Frisch, E. Pavlica, D. C. Duong, G. Bratina, A. Salleo, N. Koch, S. Hecht and P. Samori, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 675–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chaudhry, K. Muhieddine, R. Wawrzinek, J. Li, S. Lo and E. Namdas, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2137–2144 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, G. Zhang, W. Jin, T. Fukushima, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, T. Minari, K. Tsukagoshi and T. Aida, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21051–21056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, Crystallogr. Rev., 2020, 26, 64–65 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thakuria, N. K. Nath and B. K. Saha, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Zeng, B. Zou, Y. Liu, B. Xu and W. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15670–15674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Wang, Z. Z. Li, M. P. Zhuo, Y. Wu, S. Chen, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703470 CrossRef .
M. Zhuo, Y. Tao, X. Wang, Y. Wu, S. Chen, L. Liao and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 11470–11474 CrossRef .
S. J. Kang, S. Ahn, J. B. Kim, C. Schenck, A. M. Hiszpanski, S. Oh, T. Schiros, Y. Loo and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2207–2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mandal, A. Choudhury, P. K. Iyer and P. Mal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18198–18206 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yee, A. Dadvand and D. F. Perepichka, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3669–3677 RSC .
K. K. Ray, G. Campillo-Alvarado, H. Morales-Rojas, H. Höpfl, L. R. MacGillivray and A. V. Tivanski, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20, 3–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singha, S. Goswami, S. K. Dey, R. Jana, P. P. Ray, I. Saha, C. Rizzoli, P. Bag, S. Kumar and R. Saha, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 8197–8207 RSC .
Z. Wang, F. Yu, J. Xie, J. Zhao, Y. Zou, Z. Wang and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 3578–3585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Park, J. H. Kim, T. Ohto, R. Yamada, A. O. F. Jones, D. R. Whang, I. Cho, S. Oh, S. H. Hong, J. E. Kwon, J. H. Kim, Y. Olivier, R. Fischer, R. Resel, J. Gierschner, H. Tada and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701346 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cicoira and C. Santato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3421 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. De, H. Gao, S. Ma, Q. Ou, S. Li, Z. Qin, H. Dong, Q. Liao, B. Xu, Q. Peng, Z. Shuai, W. Tian, H. Fu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhen and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6332–6339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Wang, Z. Z. Li, M. P. Zhuo, Y. Wu, S. Chen, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703470 CrossRef .
W. Yu, X. Wang, J. Li, Z. Li, Y. Yan, W. Wang and J. Pei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 54–56 RSC .
C.-H. Liu, M. R. Niazi and D. F. Perepichka, Am. Ethnol., 2019, 131, 2–11 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Jiang, Y. Zhen, J. Zhang, G. Han, X. Zhang, X. Fu, Y. Yi, W. Xu, H. Dong, W. Chen, W. Hu and D. Zhu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500423 CrossRef .
J. Tsutsumi, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, S. Haas and T. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 226601 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Griffini, L. Brambilla, M. Levi, C. Castiglioni, M. Del Zoppo and S. Turri, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9893–9897 RSC .
T. Goh, J.-S. Huang, K. G. Yager, M. Y. Sfeir, C.-Y. Nam, X. Tong, L. M. Guard, P. R. Melvin, F. Antonio, B. G. Bartolome, M. L. Lee, N. Hazari and A. D. Taylor, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600660 CrossRef .
S. J. Kang, S. Ahn, J. B. Kim, C. Schenck, A. M. Hiszpanski, S. Oh, T. Schiros, Y. Loo and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, W. Zhu, F. Yang, B. Li, X. Ren, X. Zhang and W. Hu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6009–6023 RSC .
W. Zhu, X. Zhang and W. Hu, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 512–520 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, Y. Yi, Y. Zhen and W. Hu, Small, 2015, 11, 2150–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Zheng, X. Fu, H. Fu, Q. Shi, Y. Zhen, H. Dong and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6785–6789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, L. Zhu, Y. Zou, Y. Wu, Y. Zhen, H. Dong, H. Fu, Z. Wei, Q. Shi and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5954–5962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wakahara, K. Nagaoka, A. Nakagawa, C. Hirata, Y. Matsushita, K. Miyazawa, O. Ito, Y. Wada, M. Takagi, T. Ishimoto, M. Tachikawac and K. Tsukagoshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(2), 2878–2883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Yang, Z.-M. Zhai, X.-M. Lu, L.-F. Ma and D. Yan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1169–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, X. Wang, J. Li, Z. Li, Y. Yan, W. Wang and J. Pei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 54 RSC .
S. K. Dey, R. Saha, S. Biswas, A. Layek, S. Middya, I. M. Steele, M. Fleck, P. P. Ray and S. Kumar, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 207–221 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cheung and N. W. Cheung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 85–87 CrossRef CAS .

          N. F. Mott and R. W. Gurney, Electronic Processes in Ionic Crystals, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  1940 Search PubMed .
J. A. Röhr, D. Moia, S. A. Haque, T. Kirchartz and J. Nelson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2018, 30, 105901 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dey, A. Layek, A. Roychowdhury, M. Das, J. Datta, S. Middya, D. Das and P. P. Ray, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36560–36567 RSC .
R. K. Gupta and F. Yakuphanoglu, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Das, J. Datta, A. Dey, R. Jana, A. Layek, S. Middya and P. P. Ray, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 101582–101592 RSC .
R. Jana, A. Dey, M. Das, J. Datta, P. Das and P. P. Ray, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 452, 155–164 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, tables, relevant figures and other related documents. CCDC 1841621. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d1ce00020aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of co-crystallizing components.	 

System	Orthorhombic
Space group	
Pnma


a (Å)	9.4972(18)

b (Å)	14.745(3)

c (Å)	13.181(2)

α (°)	90

V (Å3)	1845.8(6)

Z, density	4, 2.202
CCDC no.	
1841621


 	Fig. 2  2D supramolecular structure formed by hydrogen bonds (green), halogen bonds (cyan) and π⋯π interactions (magenta).	 

 	Fig. 3  Hirshfeld dnorm, shape index and curvedness surfaces of TBTA–QUIN around TBTA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Theoretical model geometries with the synthon energies describing (a) O−H⋯N hydrogen bonding interaction, (b) π⋯π interaction for the TBTA-QUIN hetero-dimer model structures, (c) Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions within the TBTA homo-dimer and (d) C–H⋯π interactions between the QUIN homo-dimer model structure.	 

TBTA–QUIN heterodimer	O–H⋯N hydrogen bonding interactions	−50.5 kJ mol−1	−9.52 kcal mol−1
π⋯ stacking interactions	−36.5 kJ mol−1	−4.71 kcal mol−1
TBTA homodimer	Br⋯O halogen bonding with Br⋯π	−31.4 kJ mol−1	−8.40 kcal mol−1
QUIN homodimer	C–H⋯π interactions	−11.6 kJ mol−1	−3.44 kcal mol−1
TBTA homodimers with R22(10) network forming a 2D-planar geometry	Br⋯O halogen bonding interaction between the TBTA homodimers	−19.0 kJ mol−1	


 	Fig. 5  AIM distribution of bond and ring critical points (yellow and tan spheres respectively), bond paths (magenta lines) and the nature of non-covalent interactions for the model dimeric geometries revealing (a) O–H⋯N strong H-bonding interaction, (b) π-stacking interaction, (c) Br⋯O and Br⋯π interactions and (d) C–H⋯π short contacts.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of the sample in both solid state and aqueous medium, (b) steady state emission spectra of the sample in both solid state and aqueous medium (λex = 313 nm, conc. = 10−4 mol l−1), (c) lifetime profile of the sample in solution phase and (d) fluorescence image of the co-crystal. The spectra of the sample in solid state and in solution phase as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b) are normalized to illustrate their differences.	 


352	0.17	0.04	0.83	3.39	3.38
403	0.59	0.75	0.41	5.73	4.94

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representations of the selective FMOs of the co-crystal (a) in gaseous phase and (b) water medium.	 

 	Fig. 8  Experimental absorption spectrum in aqueous medium along with the calculated absorption spectra in gaseous phase and water medium for the co-crystal at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Calculated band structure zoomed in over the top of the VBs and bottom of CBs and (b) solid state UV-DRS spectrum of the co-crystal in the wavelength range 200 to 420 nm.	 

 	Fig. 10  The plot for (a) dielectric permittivity ε(ω); (b) reflectivity R(ω); (c) refractive index n(ω) and extinction coefficient k(ω); (d) optical conductivity σ(ω); (e) energy loss function L(ω) and (f) absorption coefficient α(ω) of the co-crystal as a function of photon energy.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of the device, (b) SEM micrograph of the semiconducting layer, (c) photoconductive behaviour of the co-crystal, (d) on–off characteristics of the device.	 



Dark	41	0.45	1.36	26.97	26.50	0.70	0.56	4.44	3.9	3.57
Light	56	1.19	19.72	18.77	0.65	0.76	6.86	2.7	3.79
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures, tables, relevant figures and other related documents. CCDC 1841621. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d1ce00020a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
