Recent advancements in synthesis and property control of graphene quantum dots for biomedical and optoelectronic applications  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00550A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00550A
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 627-658Recent advancements in synthesis and property control of graphene quantum dots for biomedical and optoelectronic applications

        
          
            Sachin 
            Kadian
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Sushanta K. 
            Sethi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gaurav 
            Manik
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Polymer and Process Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India. E-mail: manikfpt@iitr.ac.in; gauravmanik3m@gmail.com; sachinkadian68@gmail.com
Received 
      28th July 2020
    , Accepted 7th September 2020First published on 11th September 2020AbstractBeing a novel and interesting zero-dimensional material of the carbon family, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have been studied extensively in the last few years due to their exceptional and desirable optical, chemical, physical, electrical and biological characteristics. Such unique size-dependent properties exhibited by them are a reflection of combined structural characteristics of small graphene sheets, furnished with quantum confinement and edge effects, and help them to demonstrate versatile applications in biomedical and optoelectronic domains. In this review, we summarize various top-down and bottom-up synthetic procedures to prepare GQDs with ease. Following this, several strategies adopted by researchers such as heteroatom doping, functionalization and controlling the reaction parameters to regulate their structure and chemical behavior are also discussed. A concise summary of several recent advances in the areas of biomedical (bio-sensing, bio-imaging, drug delivery, anti-bacterial activity and photo-thermal/dynamic therapy) and optoelectronic (light emitting diodes and solar cells) applications of GQDs has also been presented. Finally, a brief discussion on existing challenges and future prospective of this exciting material has also been included.
Sachin Kadian
Mr Sachin Kadian is currently pursuing his PhD in Polymer and Process Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, from December 2016. He received his MTech in Biomedical Engineering from the National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra, in 2016 and BTech in Electronics and Communication Engineering from the University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Kurukshetra, India, in 2014. His current research interest includes synthesis and characterization of quantum dots (graphene, sulfur, carbon, zinc oxide etc.), nanomaterials, nanocomposite and their applications in biosensors, energy storage devices, photovoltaics, chemo-sensors, bioimaging and antibacterial agents.
Sushanta K. Sethi
Mr Sushanta received his MTech in Rubber Technology from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (IIT Kgp), India, and is currently pursuing his PhD in Polymer and Process Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT Roorkee), India. His current research interest includes molecular dynamics simulations of environment-friendly easy-clean coatings. His research takes inspiration from nature to design and fabricate a self-clean coating material. He is an expert in atomistic and coarse-grain simulations.
Gaurav Manik
Dr Gaurav Manik is currently serving as an Associate Professor in the Department of Polymer and Process Engineering at IIT Roorkee. He holds a PhD (IIT Bombay), MTech (IIT Kanpur) and BTech (HBTI Kanpur) in Chemical Engineering. Prior to joining IITR, he has served extensively in industry (3M, Indo Gulf Fertilizers & Chem. Ltd, Classic Stripes Pvt. Ltd) and academia (BITS Pilani, BIET Jhansi) totaling up his rich experience to 17+ years. His research interests include molecular modeling and simulations of polymer materials, chemical process modeling and simulations, and development of novel polymer composites and nanocomposites, coatings, sealants, adhesives, quantum dots and nanomaterials. He has ∼100 research publications in international peer-reviewed SCI journals, patent applications, conferences and book chapters.
1. Introduction
Graphene, a sheet made of several sp2–sp2 carbon bonds, has a unique set of properties including high electronic conductivity, high mechanical stiffness, large surface area, high thermal stability and strong elasticity.1–5 Owing to these exceptional properties, application of graphene in several domains has extensively increased in the last decade. However, since graphene is a zero-bandgap material with low solubility in aqueous media, this could be tailored by controlling its size, surface functional groups and also by introducing heteroatoms as defects into the graphene lattice. Therefore, in order to bridge this gap, a new quasi zero-dimensional nanomaterial of the graphene family (i.e. Graphene Quantum Dots, GQDs) has gained more attention in recent years. In comparison to graphene, GQDs exhibit some additional virtues including tunable bandgap, excellent aqueous solubility, good biocompatibility, high fluorescence quantum yield and presence of several active functional groups, thus offering unprecedented opportunities in the field of nanodevices. For instance, owing to their size dependent properties, GQDs can be used in light emitting diodes, molecular switches, single-electron transistors, and photoelectric detector devices.6,7 The multiple carrier collection phenomena of GQDs used in silicon-based solar cells have been proven to enhance the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit.8 Moreover, the ability to tailor the desired physical and chemical properties of GQDs with ease during the synthetic process makes them more attractive and versatile as compared to other allotropes of carbon such as fullerene, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) etc. Among the several attractive properties GQDs possess, photoluminescence (PL) has fascinated the researchers worldwide in the last few years. Although GQDs retain several attractive characteristics, their comparatively low quantum yield limits their commercial application in various fields. To address this issue, heteroatom doping has appeared as a more appropriate strategy to tailor the optical and electronic properties of GQDs.9–11 For example, Chen et al. investigated the influence of nitrogen (N) functionalities present in N doped GQDs on the transition of photogenerated electrons and their quantum yield.12
The synthesis of GQDs can be accomplished by various top-down and bottom-up synthetic processes.8,13 GQDs obtained using bottom-up techniques including microwave,14 hydrothermal,15 and pyrolysis16,17 methods have been found to be superior to bare and doped GQDs. As the modification of GQDs plays a key role in altering their properties, several metal and non-metal dopants have been studied earlier by different groups.16,18 Due to toxic effects caused by metal atom dopants, non-metal or heteroatom dopants have been preferred to tailor their physical and chemical properties. Among various heteroatoms including N, boron (B), phosphorus (P) and sulfur (S), N and S dopants have been found to be very advantageous not only to enhance their optical and electrical properties with concomitant benefits for device application but also due to the ease of doping, even at room temperature using special strategies.19 In comparison to the size and shape-dependent optical and other properties of other traditional semiconductor QDs, heteroatom doped GQDs exhibit superior optoelectronic properties mainly as a function of the layer numbers.16,20 Since the desired optimal wavelength light may be harnessed by selective doping of GQDs during synthesis, these doped GQDs with tunable PL have huge potential to be used in bio-imaging and bio-sensing applications. Moreover, the existing functional groups (i.e. carboxyl and hydroxyl groups etc.) on GQD edges grown during synthesis endow them with excellent aqueous solubility and support biological applications via improved cyto-compatibility, stability, etc.21 Additionally, these functionalized edges enable them for the easy external surface modification of required biomolecules including cancer targeting receptors or chemotherapeutic agents for use in targeted drug delivery.22,23 Unlike other core–shell nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems where the covering of the core restricts several binding sites available to conjugate the drugs, GQDs provide a large surface area to volume ratio and free π-orbitals to load a large amount of drug through π-stacking for enhanced drug delivery applications.24 In the last few years, several studies have been reported on novel synthetic strategies of GQDs using widely available precursors with enhanced PL properties. These reports have brought GQDs to the next level in the world of nanoparticle research with enticing advancements. However, several gaps exist ranging from variability issues during large-scale synthesis, accurate layer and size control, structural and electronic properties, and regulation of the ratio of arm-chair to zig-zag state edges to more reproducible in vivo toxicity investigations.
This review fills many such missing gaps systematically in various sections to provide the readers with a comprehensive knowledge about several aspects of doped and undoped GQDs spanning many interesting applications, as shown in Scheme 1. The first section focuses on various latest and classic top-down and bottom-up synthetic procedures to prepare GQDs with ease in keeping size (i.e. number of layers) as the primary control parameter. The next section will concentrate the spotlight on several strategies including heteroatom doping, functionalization and controlling the reaction parameters to regulate the structure and chemical behavior of GQDs so as to enhance their optical, electronic and biological properties. In addition, the versatility and ability of graphene-like structures to accommodate different types of defects in their framework are also highlighted in the same section. Subsequent sections will provide a concise summary of emerging advances in the areas of biomedical and optoelectronic applications of GQDs. Critical insights into the existing challenges and future scope related to GQDs are also discussed in the last section. Hence, this comprehensive review is expected to help readers in quickly understanding the recent advances in the field of GQDs that make these quantum dots indispensable future materials.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of main topics (related to GQD research) discussed in this article. 
2. Synthesis of GQDs
The synthetic procedures of GQDs mainly rely on either break down of large graphite pieces or even graphene sheets (top-down) or fusion of small molecules (bottom-up). Many of the synthetic strategies under these two divisions are simple and inexpensive and could use easily available precursor materials. It has been reported that the properties of GQDs depend on both the synthetic procedure as well as the raw materials used.25,26 The procedures include physical grinding, reductive cutting, oxidative cutting, elevated temperature conditions, solvothermal and hydrothermal processes, pyrolysis and incomplete carbonization. Top-down approaches use inexpensive bulk carbon or graphitic material as a precursor but comparatively take a longer reaction time and have low production yields, whereas bottom-up approaches offer the convenience of doping heteroatoms during preparation and exhibit relatively higher yields.27,28 We describe the research and application progress in these two approaches in forthcoming sub-sections.
2.1 Top-down methods
Top-down methods use bulk precursors including carbon black,29 graphene,30,31 graphite,32 carbon fiber,33 CNTs34,35 and graphene oxide36 to cleave them into nano-size graphitic sheets via physical or chemical oxidation processes using strong acids. For instance, Dong et al. prepared single- and multi-layered GQDs through chemical oxidation of CX-72 carbon black (Fig. 1a).29 Next, Ye et al. reported that it is relatively easier to synthesize GQDs from coal, as it contains weakly connected nano-size graphitic domains which can be easily cleaved via an oxidation process.37 Further, Luo et al. have synthesized white fluorescent GQDs by cleaving graphite through sonication in acidic medium (Fig. 1b).32 Although the precursor used in the above methods is abundant, the removal of strong oxidants used in the synthesis makes them expensive. In continuation, Shin et al. reported an acid-free, eco-friendly ozone oxidant-assisted solvothermal preparation of GQDs by using multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), graphite, charcoal and carbon fiber as raw precursors (Fig. 1c).38 Similarly, Liu et al. developed a new acid-free approach to synthesize GQDs with high yield (more than 80 wt%) from coal tar pitch using hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as the only oxidant under mild conditions (Fig. 1d).39 Further, Zhu et al. also synthesized GQDs by cutting graphene oxide through acid-free hydroxyl radical oxidants attained by decomposition of H2O2 (Fig. 1e).40 On the other hand, Arundithi et al. have reported electrochemically exfoliated GQDs (Fig. 1f) using graphene sheets (grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD)) as a raw material and claimed that this method is advantageous to produce size and shape controlled GQDs.31 Subsequently, many efforts have been made by different groups to prepare size and shape controlled GQDs with different precursors. For example, Zhou et al. introduced the photo-Fenton reaction of GO under UV radiation for the mass production of carboxylic group enriched GQDs by simply controlling the Fenton reaction parameters.41 The DNA cleavage experiment of as-prepared GQDs revealed their promising potential to be used in several biological and medical applications. Next, Lin and Zhang developed a potent strategy to disintegrate and exfoliate MWCNTs and graphite flakes for the preparation of highly fluorescent GQDs with an average diameter of ∼20 nm and desirably high quantum yield.42 Parallelly, Yan et al. synthesized uniform-sized black GQDs through a solution-processed synthetic method and used them for solar cells.43 In line with this, the same group used an oxidative condensation reaction introduced by Mullen and colleagues along with their own solubilization strategy for the preparation of stable colloidal GQDs with tunable size (1–3 nm).44 Apart from these, Shinde and Pillai synthesized size controlled GQDs via electrochemical oxidation of MWCNTs by using LiClO4 in propylene carbonate.45 Hung et al. prepared 3 to 8 nm size GQDs from graphene paper by using a weak electrolyte-based electrochemical approach (Fig. 1g).46 However, CNTs offer high efficiency and yield despite high cost. Parallelly, Zhang et al. used graphite rods (relatively low-cost precursors) as an alternative to synthesize highly fluorescent size controlled GQDs via an electrochemical approach.47
 Fig. 1  Top-down approach to synthesize GQDs through (a) chemical oxidation of CX-72 carbon black (reproduced with permission,29 copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment of graphite (reproduced with permission,32 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (c) Oxidant-assisted solvo-thermal treatment of MWCNTs, graphite, charcoal and carbon fiber (reproduced with permission,38 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Coal tar pitch reflux under mild conditions (reproduced with permission,39 copyright 2018 MDPI). (e) Cutting of graphene oxide in the presence of hydroxyl radical oxidants (reproduced with permission,40 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Electrochemical cutting of graphene sheets (reproduced with permission,31 copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). (g) Electrochemical cutting of graphene paper in the presence of a weak electrolyte (reproduced with permission,46 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (h) Pulsed laser ablation of carboxyl-functionalized MWCNTs (reproduced with permission,48 copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Similar to oxidative cleavage of carbonaceous materials, reductive agents have also been used to cut the C–O bond in epoxy groups of oxidized carbon precursors. For example, Gone and Giri reported the formation mechanism of GQDs synthesized using oxidized graphene oxide as a precursor via a hydrothermal process.49 Next, Tayyebi et al. prepared tunable-sized and water-dispersible GQDs by reducing and fragmenting graphene oxide through supercritical water.50 Further, Tetsuka et al. prepared bright color fluorescent amino-functionalized GQDs from oxidized graphene sheets with tunable optical properties.51 Similarly, many efforts have been devoted by different groups but various constraints, such as low production yields, high-cost equipment and precursors, complicated synthetic protocols, extreme conditions and high cost, preclude their large-scale industrial applications. In this regard, Santiago et al. introduced pulsed laser ablation (PLA) to successfully prepare a series of GQDs from carboxyl-functionalized MWCNTs by controlling the PLA time (Fig. 1h).48
2.2 Bottom-up methods
The bottom-up approaches refer to gradual enlargement or fusion of small carbon containing molecules (preferably aromatic) or atoms including citric acid, aspartic acid, glucose, folic acid, etc. These methods mainly include hydrothermal processes, cage opening, thermal pyrolysis, incomplete carbonization and microwave techniques. For instance, Dong et al. have synthesized photoluminescent GQDs by tuning the carbonization degree of citric acid (Fig. 2a).17 Lu et al. reported the transformation of C60 (raw precursor) into fluorescent GQDs through a ruthenium-catalyzed cage-opening technique.52 Chua et al. showed that size controlled GQDs can be synthesized through the treatment of C60 with a mixture of oxidants and acids.53 The authors further reported that tunable optical properties can be achieved by changing the oxidants or acids. Zhang et al. synthesized blue fluorescent GQDs through one-step pyrolysis of an aspartic acid and NH4HCO3 mixture and employed them for bio-imaging and ion sensing applications.54 Qu et al. prepared N-GQDs and S, N co-doped GQDs via a hydrothermal route using citric acid and urea (or thiourea) as precursors.55 The as-prepared GQDs exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity and multi-color emission (Fig. 2b). Jeon et al. reported a new approach for the synthesis of N-GQDs and N, S co-doped GQDs through a solvothermal reaction of a single precursor (norepinephrine) by simply varying the solvents under microwave irradiation (Fig. 2c).56
 Fig. 2  Bottom-up approach to prepare GQDs through (a) tuning the carbonization degree of citric acid (reproduced with permission,17 copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Hydrothermal route using citric acid and urea or thiourea as precursors (reproduced with permission,55 copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Solvothermal reaction of norepinephrine (reproduced with permission,56 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (d) Hydrothermal pyrolysis of citric acid and urea (reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Free-radical polymerization of salicylic acid under ultraviolet irradiation (reproduced with permission,58 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (f) Microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment of glucose (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (g) Microwave-assisted synthesis using ethanolic extract of mango (Mangifera indica) leaves (reproduced with permission,59 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
Zhang et al. reported a one-pot pyrolysis method for the preparation of N, S co-doped GQDs using L-cystine and citric acid as precursors.60 Khodadadei et al. developed blue fluorescent N-GQDs through hydrothermal pyrolysis of two precursors (citric acid and urea) and used them as nanocarriers to deliver an anticancer drug (Fig. 2d).57 Kadian et al. synthesized bright blue fluorescent S-GQDs by simply pyrolyzing citric acid and 3-mercaptopropionic acid.16 Zhu et al. utilized salicylic acid as a precursor to synthesize GQDs through a free-radical polymerization technique and irradiation using ultraviolet (UV) rays (Fig. 2e).58 The thermal pyrolysis and hydro/solvothermal methods discussed above generally require hot plates, heating mantles and hot air ovens. These methods certainly result in some sort of thermal gradient within the reactor which leads to discrepancies in size and structure of the synthesized product. In this regard, a microwave-assisted synthetic process has been reported as a substitute to traditional methods.
In this process, the heat generated by microwave irradiation can be evenly distributed throughout the reactor, which results in a more precise and uniform synthesis of GQDs. Moreover, this process helps in the preparation of functionalized GQDs by pre-mixing various functional groups contributing precursors. In an initial attempt to employ a microwave-assisted method, Tang et al. irradiated an aqueous solution of glucose in a simple microwave oven in the presence of ammonia (Fig. 2f).21 It was also reported that the microwave power and reaction time led to changes in the optical characteristics of synthesized GQDs. Next, Kumawat et al. synthesized size-controlled red-fluorescent GQDs through one-step microwave-assisted synthesis using the ethanolic extract of mango (Mangifera indica) leaves as a raw precursor (Fig. 2g).59 Further, Hasan et al. used glucosamine and thiourea as raw materials to synthesize N-GQDs and N, S co-doped GQDs through a facile microwave-assisted synthetic method. The as-prepared GQDs exhibited varying optical properties in both NIR and visible range.61
Conclusively, both the top-down and bottom-up approaches have been extensively used for the preparation of GQDs. As each coin has two sides, the above discussed methods also have some advantages and disadvantages as listed in Table 1. The key advantages of the top-down procedure are the sufficient accessibility to the raw material used, simplicity of the process and economics of scale, while a longer reaction time, use of strong acids during synthesis and low production yield limit large-scale production in industrial applications. Comparatively, the solvothermal and hydrothermal methods have been widely used among several top-down approaches. Next, the bottom-up techniques require selective carbon containing precursors such as aromatic structural molecules but are helpful in synthesizing size controlled, doped and functionalized GQDs with precision in a shorter duration of time. Among the above discussed bottom-up approaches, microwave-assisted synthesis is reported to be a simple, easy, rapid and environmentally friendly method of GQD preparation.
Table 1 Summary of the top-down and bottom-up strategies of GQD synthesis with different properties, advantages and disadvantages




Method
Subcategory
Precursors
Lateral Size (nm)
PLQY (%)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Top-down
Acidic oxidation
GO
13.3
7.4
Low-cost starting materials
Wider size distribution, hard to remove acid oxidizing agent

100



Coal
2.96
51

37



CX-72
15
4.04

29



Solvothermal
GO
3–5
9.9
Narrow size distribution
Lengthy process

203



Hydrothermal
Graphene sheets
5–13
6.9
Narrow size distribution
Lengthy and acidic

204



GO sheets
5–10
—
Oxidation process

205



Electrochemical
Graphite
5–10
14
Facile method and high PLQY
Multiple type

47



Graphene
3–5
—
Precursors required

176



Ultrasonic shearing
GO sheets
7.31
33
Improved PLQY and narrow size distribution
Lengthy process to obtain precursors

206



Microwave-assisted hydrothermal
Glucosamine
6
32
Improved PLQY, shortened reaction time and narrow size distribution
Sophisticated equipment

207



Bottom-up
Pyrolysis or carbonization
CA
∼15
9
High PLQY, easy to dope, cost-effective method, size control, shortened reaction time and environmentally friendly process
Selected carbon containing precursors such as aromatic structural molecules are required

17



CA + MPA
∼4
57

16



Step-wise organic synthesis
Salicylic acid
1–5
86

58



Hydrothermal
CA + diethylenetriamine
∼3
76.8

208



CA + ethylenediamine
5–10
75.2

209



Microwave-assisted hydrothermal
Glucosamine–HCl and thiourea
5.50
60

61



Intermolecular condensation
CA + L-cystine
2.8
84

60



Soft-template
CA + ethylenediamine
2
83

210



Cage opening
Fullerene (C60)
2–10
—

52





3. Regulation, property control and structural defects of GQDs
In recent years, GQDs have fascinated and garnered marvelous attention of researchers because of their exceptionally good physical, chemical, electrical, biological and optical properties.62–64 Moreover, the ease of regulation or modification of these properties according to the chosen field of application makes them more attractive and indispensable materials. In this section, we will discuss the strategies used for the regulation and property control of GQDs during and post-synthesis.
3.1 Size and intrinsic property control
It has been reported by many research groups that the size of GQDs may be changed by just varying the reaction temperature, time, stabilizing agent and concentration of reactants, as demonstrated in Table 2.31,45,50,65–67 For example, Kwon et al. synthesized size controlled (varying from 2 to 10 nm) GQDs via amidative cutting of tattered graphite by simply regulating the concentration of amine (Fig. 3a).67 Next, during an investigation of the quantum confinement effect of GQDs, Yeh et al. have also synthesized different sized GQDs by using ultrafiltration through varying pore size membranes.66 It has been observed that the luminescence of the as-prepared GQDs varies from orange to blue as the size is reduced from 8 nm to 1 nm, which leads to a change in the sp2-domain size and hence in the π*–π gap. This confirms that the bandgap of GQDs depends on their size and emission (Fig. 3b). Parallelly, Ye et al. also arrived at the same conclusion and introduced size-controlled GQDs from anthracite coal by varying the temperature of the reaction, and hence, tailored its level of functionality and bandgaps.68 Kim and Suh synthesized GQDs through a low-cost thermal plasma jet process with controlled size distribution by varying the length of CNTs.69 Recently, Gan et al. reported that the top-down approaches usually give rise to GQDs with varying size distributions which leads to the occurrence of excitation-dependent emission spectra.70
Table 2 Summary of structural, functional and property control of various types of GQDs




Materials
Method
GQDs type
Structural, functional and property control
Ref.




Tattered graphite
Amidative cutting
GQDs
Size control by varying the concentration of amine

67



Graphene oxide
Mild oxidation
GOQDs
Size and luminescence control by varying the pore size of polyethersulfone membrane centrifuge tubes

66



Coal
Chemical oxidation
GQDs
Bandgap control by monitoring the reaction time

68



Ethylene gas
Thermal plasma jet
GQDs
Size control by varying the length of the carbon tube

69



Few layer graphene
Ultrasonication
aGQDs
Edge-enrichment by chemical activation using KOH

71



Graphene oxide
Microwave assisted
pGQDs
Enhancement of photoluminescence through a photochemical reduction process

74



Graphene & NaHSe
Acidic oxidation
Se-GQDs
Reversible fluorescent switch by changing the oxidative and reductive agents

138



Citric acid & MPA
Pyrolysis
S-GQDs
Quantum yield control by varying the concentration of the S dopant

62



Multiwalled CNTs
Microwave heating
N,F,S-GQDs
Product yield control by enhancing the kinetics

19





 Fig. 3  Intrinsic property control of GQDs: (a) size (2 to 10 nm) controlled GQDs by varying the concentration of amine (reproduced with permission,67 copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Size (8 to 1 nm) dependent PL emission (orange–red to blue) and band gap structure (reproduced with permission,66 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (c) Role of KOH in producing activated GQDs with enhanced electrochemical capacitance and photoluminescence intensity (reproduced with permission,71 copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Dependence of photo-induced ROS generation and cytotoxicity capability of GQDs on the presence/absence of ketonic carbonyl, carboxylic and hydroxyl groups (reproduced with permission,72 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Apart from size control, modification of other intrinsic properties such as number of layers, shape and edge states has also been studied. For instance, Hassan et al. prepared activated GQDs embellished with both bound and free edges via an ultrasonic method in the presence of KOH (Fig. 3c).71 It has been observed that the as-synthesized activated GQDs exhibited enhanced electrochemical capacitance and photoluminescence intensity as compared to bare GQDs and graphene sheets. Further, the richness of oxygenated groups could be controlled by varying the strength of the oxidant, reductant and time of oxidative cutting, while the functionalization of oxygen containing groups depends on the specificity of the oxidant and reductant used in the synthesis.73,74 Recently, Zhou et al. discussed the dependence of photo-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and cytotoxicity capability of GQDs on the presence/absence of ketonic carbonyl, carboxylic and hydroxyl groups and reported that the ROS generation ability of GQDs is highly dependent on the existing ketonic carbonyl groups (and pH) as shown in (Fig. 3d).72 Also, the removal of oxygen containing groups from GQDs could desirably reduce the photo-induced cytotoxicity.
3.2 Structural defects
The characteristics of graphitic materials are vastly dependent on the structural defects present in their structure.75 In this section, we focus on the versatility and ability of graphene-like structures to accommodate different types of defects in their framework. These defects mainly change the physical, chemical and structural properties of graphitic moieties. For example, a graphitic cluster of twelve pentagons can construct a fullerene, and hence, such a spherical assembly shows an electronegative surface with excellent chemistry.75,76 Similarly, Pedersen et al. discussed the role of vacancies or defects in the graphene-like structure by preparing an antidot graphitic lattice.77 Generally, there are five different types of structural defects which can arise in graphitic materials as discussed below.

Structural defects. 
These defects mainly appear due to significant distortion in the structure caused by the occurrence of heptagons, pentagons and octagons within the hexagonal rings. However, the reactivity of such non-hexagonal rings with acceptor or donor atoms has not yet been systematically (theoretically and experimentally) investigated.75


Grain boundaries, bond rotation or topological defects. 
These defects can be Stone–Thrower–Wales type or 5-7-7-5 pairs rooted in the hexagonal network of the graphene-like structure that can be generated by a 90° rotation of CC bonds, hence resulting in the transformation of two heptagons and two pentagons.78


High-strain folding defects. 
These defects mainly deal with the existing non-hexagonal rings and are induced due to the high temperature annealing of the graphitic structure creating localized strain in the structure.79 However, their effects on the electronic and chemical properties of graphitic materials have not yet been explored systematically.


Non-sp2 carbon defects. 
These defects arise due to the occurrence of highly reactive carbon including carbon chains, vacancies, edges, adatoms, interstitials, etc. The establishment of these defects can encourage the formation of nanotube junctions.80


Doping-induced defects. 
These defects appear due to substitutional heteroatoms embedded in the framework of graphene sheets. These defects could tailor the electronic, chemical and physical characteristics of graphene-like structures,81 as discussed in the next section (Section 3.3).

3.3 Heteroatom doping
Since the first attempt of N doped GQDs reported by Li et al. in 2012, doping of heteroatoms has become an efficacious approach for regulating the characteristics of GQDs and other nanomaterials.82 Through this doping process, some of the C atoms in the GQD framework are substituted with other elements (but not limited to) such as B, N, S, F, P, Cl, Se, Si etc. which plays a crucial role in enhancing the fluorescence quantum yield, catalytic properties and conductivity of GQDs.36,55,60,83–85 The introduction of heteroatoms could be realized through in situ (during synthesis) and ex situ (after synthesis) procedures. For example, Yeh et al. synthesized intact N doped graphene oxide QDs (iNGO-QDs) through a thermal treatment of graphene oxide QDs in the presence of ammonia (Fig. 4a).86 The in situ doping of N repaired the vacancy-type defects and introduced n-type conductivity to balance the charge on p-type GO, and hence the coexistence of p- and n-type domains avoided the leakages of photogenerated charges and helped in charge separation. Similarly, Chen et al. also prepared N doped graphene oxide QDs by thermally treating the graphene oxide sheet in the presence of ammonia followed by ultrasonic exfoliation of the sheet in nitric acid.12 Further, the as-prepared N-GQDs were subjected to a hydrothermal treatment in the presence of ammonia to convert pyridinic/pyrrolic-N into amino/amide groups (Fig. 4b). It has been observed that the N functionalities of amino/amide groups influenced the transition of photogenerated electrons due to the non-planarity of N atoms. Next, Kundu et al. synthesized N, F and S co-doped GQDs by a simple microwave treatment of MWCNTs (Fig. 4c) in ionic liquid medium, and they exhibited excellent PL quantum yield (70%).19
 Fig. 4  Regulation of GQDs through heteroatom doping. (a) Introduction of N dopant through thermal treatment of iGO-QDs in the presence of ammonia to repair the vacancy-type defects (reproduced with permission,86 copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Hydrothermal treatment of N-GQDs in the presence of ammonia to convert pyridinic/pyrrolic-N into amino/amide groups (reproduced with permission,12 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (c) Formation of N, F and S co-doped GQDs (Reproduced with permission,19 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Formation of B-GQDs through hydrothermal treatment of glucose and boric acid (reproduced with permission,85 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Synthesis of F-GQDs through gradient fluorine-sacrificing strategy defects (reproduced with permission,90 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (f) Preparation of P-GQDs via an electrochemical approach (reproduced with permission,91 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Formation of S-GQDs for Fe3+ ion sensing (reproduced with permission,92 copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (h) Synthesis of S-GQDs with varying fluorescence (reproduced with permission,16 copyright 2019 IOP Publishing). 
Among several heteroatoms, nitrogen is the most widely used element of the periodic table in heteroatom doping of GQDs. This is not only due to the higher electronegativity of N atoms (3.04) as compared to C atoms (2.55) but because of the size compatibility (lower lattice strain) also.87,88 Various methods have been used to synthesize N-GQDs that include microwave-assisted hydrothermal, pyrolysis, solvothermal, electrochemical and other methods. For instance, Hou et al. synthesized strong green-fluorescent multi-layer N-GQDs through a microwave-assisted hydrothermal process using urea and glucose as precursors.89 Li et al. used citric acid and urea to produce “on–off” switchable fluorescent N-GQDs via a hydrothermal approach.82 Recently, Fu et al. synthesized multicolor (red, green and blue) fluorescent N-GQDs with an average diameter of 20 nm through electrochemical exfoliation of graphite rods and used them for ferric ion sensing and bioimaging applications.93 Further, since B and C atoms have similar atomic radius, the scientific community is quite devotedly interested in investigating the characteristics of B-GQDs. In this direction, Zhang et al. prepared B-GQDs by cutting boron-doped graphene via a hydrothermal approach and observed that the B atom introduced a new kind of surface state, which increased the optical PL properties after treatment with glucose.94 In 2017, Tam et al. used glucose and boric acid as raw precursors to develop B-GQDs through a hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 4d) and reported that the presence of the B dopant enhanced the electrocatalytic activity of GQDs by generating multiple active sites.85
In addition to N and B atoms, some other dopants, such as S, P, F etc., have also been studied for modulating the properties of GQDs. In line with this, Gong et al. synthesized fluorinated GQDs (F-GQDs) by using a gradient fluorine-sacrificing strategy (Fig. 4e) with tunable F content and controlled size from bulk fluorinated graphite.90 The as-prepared F-GQDs exhibited stable fluorescence in both alkali and acidic conditions with increased paramagnetic properties in addition to regulating surface hydrophobicity. Li et al. fabricated P-GQDs via an electrochemical approach by using sodium phytate as an electrolyte for availing both an electrolysis environment and a source of P-dopants (Fig. 4f).91 The obtained P-GQDs showed excellent free radical scavenging activity. Next, Li et al. synthesized blue-green fluorescence emitting S-GQDs with enhanced electronic and surface chemical properties through simple electrolysis of graphite in sodium p-toluenesulfonate solution and used them for Fe3+ ion sensing (Fig. 4g).92 Kharangarh et al. investigated the influence of several S atom containing compounds in improving the quantum yield of S-GQDs.95 Recently, Kadian et al. systematically investigated the effect of S dopants (by varying the amount of dopant, time and temperature of reaction) on the fluorescence and quantum yield of GQDs, and reported that the presence of S atoms significantly enhances their PL and quantum yield (Fig. 4h).16 These reports proved that the properties of GQDs depend on the type of dopant (especially the size and charge) used and these dopants can regulate the surface properties and energy band gap of GQDs, resulting in their improved quantum yield and photoelectric properties.92
3.4 Surface or edge functionalization
The surface functionalization technique has also played a key role in modulating the optical, electrical, biological and catalytic properties through facilitating electron-accepting/donating, carboxy, amine, hydroxyl and other biological receptor target groups on their surface as well as on the edge, and thus, expanded the area of research of GQDs. Functionalization may occur during the preparation of GQDs by using selected raw precursors (containing desired functional groups) or post-synthesis through molecular attachment. In an experimental and theoretical investigation of surface chemistry of functionalized GQDs (Fig. 5a) with a series of small organic molecules, Qian et al. reported that diamines have the strongest capability to regulate the optical properties or quantum yield of GQDs, owing to their exceptional protonation phenomenon.96 Functionalization of primary amines also influences the electronic and optical properties of graphene. Tetsuka et al. prepared amino-functionalized GQDs (AF-GQDs) through a hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 5b) of a mixture of graphene oxide and ammonia solution.51 The primary amine moieties on the edge of AF-GQDs modified the electronic structure, and thereby, tailored the optical properties of GQDs. In some cases, functionalization with alkylamine (e.g. polyethylene glycol-amine (PEG-amine) and poly-ethylenimine (PEI)) and amino groups leads to a red and blue-shift in the PL of GQDs, respectively. For instance, Jin et al. investigated experimentally as well as theoretically that the charge transfer from the surface functional group (PEG-amine) to GQDs narrows the band gap of GQDs due to increased electron density and results in red-shifted PL (Fig. 5c).97 Sun et al. reported that green-yellow fluorescent GQDs with low quantum yield (2.5%) could be converted into blue fluorescent amino-functionalized GQDs with high quantum yield (16.4%) through a facile hydrothermal treatment in the presence of ammonia.98 The change in the PL emission could be attributed to the abundant sp2 domain carbon atoms after amination and may also be due to the strong electron donating capability of amino groups in comparison to hydroxyl groups.
 Fig. 5  Surface or edge functionalization of GQDs. (a) Surface functionalization of GQDs with small organic molecules including diamines, glycols and dithioglycols (reproduced with permission,96 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Preparation of amino-functionalized GQDs (AF-GQDs) through hydrothermal treatment (reproduced with permission,51 copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (c) Synthesis of alkyl amine-functionalized GQDs using PEG-diamine (reproduced with permission,97 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (d) Preparation of drug loaded green-fluorescent PEG-GQDs (reproduced with permission,99 copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Synthesis of PEG-GQDs (reproduced with permission,100 copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Functionalization of GQDs with aryl groups through a Gomberg–Bachmann reaction (reproduced with permission,101 copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Synthesis of sulfonated GQDs and their catalytic activity (reproduced with permission,102 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (h) Formation of folic acid functionalized GQDs (FA-GQDs) (reproduced with permission,103 copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Apart from this, PEG and PEI have been proved to be beneficial passivating agents, which not only regulate the PL of GQDs but also avail several binding sites for other modifications. For instance, Wang et al. synthesized green fluorescent PEG-GQDs (Fig. 5d) with high PL quantum yield and used them as drug carriers by loading the drug via binding sites facilitated by PEG on the GQDs.99 Likewise, Shen et al. prepared PEG-GQDs (Fig. 5e) by reducing PEG passivated GO through hydrazine hydrate.100 The as-synthesized PEG-GQDs showed blue fluorescence (originated from band-gap transition) and green up-conversion fluorescence (due to anti-Stokes PL) under excitation of 980 nm.100 Later, the same group improved the quantum yield from 7.4 to 28.0% through cutting of GO sheets into GQDs and simultaneously passivating the obtained GQDs.104 A systematic (theoretical and experimental) investigation by Tetsuka et al. demonstrated that N-functionalized GQDs can regulate the PL and energy levels of GQDs (by narrowing the energy gap), and hence, improve the performance of optoelectronic devices due to regulated optical and electronic properties of GQDs.105
Apart from amine, PEG and PEI, aryl has also been used as a passivating agent to tailor the chemical and optical properties of GQDs. Luo et al. reported a versatile diazonium process to implant aryl groups 5-sulfonaphthyl, phenyl, 4-sulfophenyl and 4-carboxyphenyl through the Gomberg–Bachmann reaction as shown in Fig. 5f.101 The quantum yield of aryl grafted GQDs was enhanced up to 6 times and PL bands were tuned between 418 nm and 447 nm. Next, Li et al. prepared sulfonated GQDs by reacting GQDs and chloro-sulfonic acid in a nitrogen environment at 70 °C for 24 hours.102 The obtained S-GQDs exhibited excellent catalytic activity and were capable of degrading carbohydrates (such as cellulose, glucose and fructose) into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, as shown in Fig. 5g. Additionally, functionalization of targeting groups has been used to increase the internalization of GQDs loaded with anti-cancerous drugs through an endocytosis process. Bioreceptor functionalized GQDs can target the tumor cells that are overexpressed with a specific receptor. For example, Li et al. have synthesized folic acid functionalized GQDs (FA-GQDs) via thermal pyrolysis of folic acid and maleic acid with tunable fluorescence and used for cancer cell imaging (Fig. 5h).103 Abdullah-Al-Nahain et al. prepared hyaluronic acid functionalized GQDs (HA-GQDs) through hydrothermal cutting of carbon fiber followed by conjugation of HA on GQDs. The obtained HA-GQDs were used for targeted drug delivery and cancer cell imaging.23 Further, Zheng et al. synthesized insulin-conjugated GQDs for dynamic tracking of insulin receptors in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.106
4. Applications of GQDs
Due to exceptional features including large surface area, favorable biocompatibility, capability to facilitate charge transfer, ease of functionalization, abundance of active sites, tunable bandgap and other desirable optical properties, GQDs have shown great potential for several applications. A massive number of reports published on the synthesis and application of GQDs show that GQDs may become highly desired and essential materials for the upcoming advanced technologies. GQDs have already been used in a variety of applications including biosensing, bioimaging, drug delivery, photodynamic therapy, antibacterial action, photovoltaics, light emitting diodes, photodetectors, photocatalysis, supercapacitors, thermoelectric devices, rechargeable batteries and electrocatalysis. This section will discuss the ongoing and possible future applications of GQDs with focus on biomedical and optoelectronics fields.
4.1 Biomedical applications
Owing to the good biocompatibility, availability of multiple binding sites, ease of surface functionalization and desirable low cytotoxicity, GQDs have been deployed widely for several biomedical applications. In many cases GQDs have indeed shown some outstanding performances, which allow them to replace the traditional nanomaterials used in this area. Due to exciting and promising outcomes, researchers and scientists are continuously exploring the potential of GQDs for other novel medical applications. This section mainly focuses on the recent advancements in the development and application of GQDs in the field of bio-sensing, bio-imaging, drug delivery, antibacterial and photodynamic therapy, as shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of precursor material types, synthetic methods, PL emission and biomedical applications of various types of GQDs




Materials
Method
GQD type
PL emission (nm)
Applications
Ref.




Citric acid & ammonia
Hydrothermal
N-GQDs
350–550
Fe3+ ion detection

108




p-Coumaric acid & p-phenylenediamine
Hydrothermal
N-GQDs
400–600
Cu2+ ion detection

111



GO, boric acid & ammonia
Hydrothermal
B,N-GQDs
350–550
Hg2+ ion detection

113



GO, H2SO4 & HNO3
Ultrasonication
GQDs
350–550
Sulfide ion detection

120



GO, ammonia & maleimide
Hydrothermal
M-GQDs
350–600
Bio-thiol detection

126



Graphite rods
Electrochemical
GQDs
440–480
Tumor detection

211



Fluorographene
Liquid exfoliation
F-GQDs
—
MRI contrast agent

212



Graphite power
Hydrothermal
GQDs
400–600
DNA nano-sensor

132



Carbon fiber
Acidic exfoliation
GQDs
490–515

In vivo biodistribution

141



Graphite & K2S2O8
Electrochemical
RF-GQDs
500–700
Cellular imaging

146



4-Vinylphenylboronic acid & boric acid
Polymerization
B-GQDs
350–500
MRI contrast agent

152



Citric acid
Pyrolysis
GQDs
400–600
Drug delivery system

157



C60 cage
Acidic oxidation
C60-GQDs
400–600
Antibacterial activity

164



Citric acid & folic acid
Pyrolysis
FA-GQDs
750–850
Photothermal therapy

167






4.1.1 Biosensing. 
Due to beneficial aspects of an intrinsic defect-induced structure, tunable PL properties, ease of functionalization, high quantum yield, abundance of active sites, excellent electrochemical and optical properties, GQDs have evolved as innovative nanomaterials for the development of next-generation biosensing kits and point-of-care devices. The interaction between GQDs and several inorganic ions and small organic and biomolecular substances via π–π conjugation, electrostatic interactions or electron transfer can quench their fluorescent intensity.31,107–112 Following this mechanism, several chemo- and bio-sensors have been designed with enhanced sensitivity and selectivity.7,113,114 Several inorganic cations and anions present in the environment are essential for living species and play a key role in their biological activity. Nevertheless, the unnecessary aggregation of these inorganic ions will cause a serious health issue to living species. Therefore, a precise detection of these ions with high selectivity and sensitivity is one of the most crucial challenges for biosensing devices.
To address this issue, several investigators have explored various strategies of functionalization and doping during the last few years, making use of the subtle changes in the band gap effecting tunable changes in structural, optical, and opto-electronic properties. For example, Tam et al. used N-GQDs as a fluorescent probe for the detection of Fe3+ ions, with a detection limit of 1 mM.108 It has been reported that N-GQDs were more selective and sensitive to Fe3+ ions as compared to other metal ions. The interaction among hydroxyl groups of N-GQDs and Fe3+ ions culminated in metal hydroxide formation and initiated charge transfer and restrained exciton recombination which encouraged the fluorescence quenching process of GQDs.108 Similarly, Wang et al. also used graphene oxide derived luminescent GQDs as a nanoprobe for Fe3+ ion detection.115 Following the same aggregation induced PL quenching mechanism, Shen et al. used highly fluorescent N, S co-doped GQDs for the simultaneous detection of Ag+, Fe3+ and Cu2+ ions (Fig. 6a) with high sensitivity and a low limit of detection of 50 nM, 250 nM and 8 nM, respectively.116 Ananthanarayanan et al. demonstrated the interaction of Fe3+ ions and the imidazole ring present on the surface of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate functionalized GQDs for the detection of Fe3+ ions. The fluorescent probe showed sensitivity and selectivity towards ferric ions with a limit of detection of 7.22 μM.31
 Fig. 6  GQDs as a biosensing probe. (a) N, S co-doped GQD based parallel detection of Ag+, Fe3+ and Cu2+ ions (reproduced with permission,116 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Amine and phosphate group modified GQD (PiNGQD) based optical sensing of multiple cations (reproduced with permission,117 copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) N, P co-doped GQDs as nano-sensors for detection of nitrite in living cells (reproduced with permission,122 copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.). (d) S-GQD based detection of a most common bioflavonoid (quercetin) (reproduced with permission,129 copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Amine functionalized GQDs as an optical sensing probe for the detection of antigen Troponin I (cTnI) (reproduced with permission,130 copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.). 
In addition to Fe3+, Sun et al. reported a new amino functionalized GQD (AF-GQD) based highly luminescent nanoprobe for the determination of Cu2+ ions in living cells through high binding affinity and fast chelating kinetics with existing O and N on the surface of AF-GQDs.98 Chen et al. prepared amine and phosphate group modified GQDs (PiNGQDs) for the parallel detection of various heavy metal ions including Cu2+, Zn2+, Fe3+ and Cr3+ (Fig. 6b) via a PL turn-on and turn-off mechanism caused by the interaction of ions and existing amine and phosphate groups on the surface of PiNGQDs.117 Qian et al. developed an optical turn-on nanoprobe for the detection of Pb2+ using an aptamer-GQD and graphene oxide based biocompatible platform with the lowest detection limit of 0.6 nM.118 It has been reported that graphene oxide easily quenches the fluorescence of aptamer-GQDs through efficient photo induced electron transfer while the subsequent turn-on process of PL was noticed with the addition of lead(II) ions ascribed to the formation of a G-quadraplex aptamer–Pb2+ complex.118 More recently, Wang et al. reported yellow light emitting N-GQDs for rapid and selective detection of Fe3+ ion in natural water samples.119 After favorable performance obtained for heavy metal cation sensing, GQDs have also been used for the detection of non-metallic anions including sulfides (S2−),120,121 nitrites (NO2−),122 pyrophosphates (P2O74−)123 and chloride ions (Cl−).124 Liu et al. demonstrated that nitrites can effectively quench the fluorescence of N, P co-doped GQDs (N,P-GQDs) (Fig. 6c), due to the electron transfer of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital levels of N,P-GQDs to NO2− and strong binding affinity among existing –NH2 groups of N,P-GQDs and NO2−.122 The developed biocompatible fluorescent probe exhibited high sensitivity in the living cells with a detection limit of 2.4 nM. Yu et al. developed an on–off–on system for the detection of S2− ions using GQDs as a fluorescent probe and copper(II) ions as a quencher.120 It has been reported that Cu2+ ions can interact with the oxygen-containing groups of GQDs, and thus, quench the fluorescence of GQDs via an electron or energy transfer process from the GQDs to copper(II) ions. However, S2− ions have a higher binding affinity for the copper(II) ions than oxygen-containing groups, leading to the turn-on process of fluorescence of GQDs through separation of the aggregated GQDs.
Similar to inorganic ions, various small organic biomolecules including vitamins, amino acids, bioflavonoids, carbohydrates, bio-thiols and other metabolites also participate in several physiological activities; hence an accurate detection of these organic molecules is of great importance. In this direction, many research groups have used the PL down- and up-conversion phenomena of GQDs to detect these molecules with high sensitivity and selectivity.125–128 For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated the PL down- and up-conversion phenomena of GQDs by using Eu3+ as a trigger to quench the fluorescence of GQDs that could be recovered through introduction of two amino acids, aspartic acid (Asp) and glutamic acid (Glu).127 The sensitive and specific quantification of amino acids (Asp and Glu) can be achieved by monitoring the changes in PL of GQDs. Achadu and Nyokong reported a maleimide-derivatized GQD (M-GQD) and zinc phthalocyanine (2) based fluorescent sensing platform for the detection of bio-thiols (homocysteine, glutathione and cysteine) via a rapid Michael addition reaction between the maleimide-derivatized probe and bio-thiols.125 Recently, Kadian and Manik designed a highly sensitive and selective fluorescent probe (SGQDs) for the detection of quercetin (the most common bioflavonoid) through an inner filter effect mechanism as shown in Fig. 6d.129 It has been reported that the fluorescence of SGQDs was significantly quenched with the addition of quercetin due to the formation of a non-fluorescent ground state complex between the quencher and fluorophore. This probe has been used to monitor the quercetin content in real-time red wine samples with satisfactory recovery results. Further, Liu et al. developed a fluorescence on–off–on system for the fast detection of H2O2 and ascorbic acid using GQDs, horseradish peroxidase, catechol and H2O2.131 In this, catechol gets oxidized in the presence of H2O2 and converts into o-benzoquinone, and thus, quenches the PL of present GQDs whereas ascorbic acid opposes the formation of o-benzoquinone, and hence, leads to the fluorescence recovery of GQDs. A satisfactory fluorescence recovery was obtained when this developed probe was applied to detect ascorbic acid in human serum samples.
Similar to inorganic ions and organic molecules, several biomarkers and bio-macromolecules have also been quantified through an optical and electrochemical bio-sensing platform using GQDs.130,132–134 For instance, Qian et al. developed an ultrasensitive nanoprobe for DNA quantification through fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between GQDs and CNTs.132 In this, the single-strand DNA functionalized GQDs (ssDNA-GQDs) when allowed to interact with CNTs resulted in their PL quenching due to the occurrence of FRET between ssDNA-GQDs and CNTs while the addition of target DNA recovers the PL by liberating double-stranded DNA-GQDs. The nanoprobe displayed a lower detection limit of 0.4 nM. Likewise, Bhatnagar et al. developed an immunosensor for the early detection of cardiac arrest or heart attack by monitoring the antigen Troponin I (cTnI) through the FRET mechanism (Fig. 6e) between amine functionalized GQDs conjugated with antibody anti-cardiac Troponin I (anti-cTnI) and graphene.130 The immunosensor exhibited a detection limit of 0.192 pg mL−1. Further, Tran and Doong demonstrated the selective and sensitive detection of hemoglobin (Hb) using S-GQDs as a fluorescent sensing probe.135 They reported that the fluorescence of S-GQDs could be significantly quenched by Hb due to strong hydrophobic interactions among S-GQDs and Hb. In addition to use as optical probes, GQDs have also been used to develop electrochemical biosensors for the detection of dopamine,136,137 glutathione,138 pesticides,139 metal ions,137 alkaline phosphatase140etc., owing to their excellent charge transfer and catalytic activity. For example, Lu et al. used nanochannel-confined GQDs as a signal amplifier and recognition element to develop an electrochemical biosensing probe for ultrasensitive detection of Cd2+, Hg2+, Cu2+ and dopamine with detection limits of 4.3 nM, 9.8 pM, 8.3 pM, and 120 nM, respectively.137


4.1.2 Bioimaging. 
Bioimaging is a considerably advanced technique in the field of biomedical research that uses several parts of electromagnetic spectra to monitor biological events such as cellular uptake, targeted delivery, cell tracking and bio-distribution of therapeutics in a detailed manner.23,141 Due to photobleaching issues, traditional organic dyes or fluorophores have limited use in long-term imaging applications. To address this problem, semiconductor QDs have been extensively used as an alternative to organic dyes. Nevertheless, due to their large size in comparison to a biomolecule, these QDs may change the functions or process of the target and can create an artificial cluster of multiple targets. Moreover, semiconductor QDs have high possibilities of being toxic due to the use of heavy metal ions in their synthetic process. In contrast, owing to an exceptional combination of numerous key virtues of GQDs, including controlled molecular size, good photo-stability, tunable PL properties, biocompatibility, good aqueous solubility, ease of functionalization, and chemical stability, they have emerged as a potent substitute for bio-imaging applications.142–145
Since the initial utilization of single-layered GQDs by Dong et al. for cell nucleus imaging of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7),29 there are numerous reports worthy to be spotlighted. For example, Zheng et al. utilized insulin-conjugated GQDs for dynamic tracking and targeted imaging of insulin receptors in 3T3-L1 adipocytes (shown in Fig. 7a).106 In this study, the internalization, distribution, and recycling of insulin receptors were monitored through trafficking and it was reported that the dynamics of insulin receptors in adipocytes were eased by apelin and opposed by a pro-inflammatory factor. Further, Zhang et al. used uniform size yellow fluorescence GQDs for stem cell imaging in three different types of cells including cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs), neuro sphere cells (NSCs) and pancreas progenitor cells (PPCs).47 The results illustrated that the GQDs are promising fluorophores for biological imaging. However, the trivial cytotoxic effect of GQDs was recorded at a concentration of 100 mg mL−1 after 3 days of incubation time. Peng et al. used green luminescent GQDs prepared from carbon fibers for application of cell imaging of nucleus stained human breast cancer cell lines T47D (Fig. 7b).33 The results clearly demonstrated that the cell's nucleus indicated a blue color as stained by DAPI and agglomerated high-contrast green due to the presence of GQDs around the nucleus. Tan et al. utilized uniform size (3 nm) red fluorescent GQDs (RF-GQDs) derived from graphite through electrochemical exfoliation by using K2S2O8 solution for cellular imaging of HeLa cells (Fig. 7c).146 In this report, the imaging results showed red fluorescence under 488 nm excitation in the cell membrane as well as cytoplasm of the model cell. The cytotoxicity assay of RF-GQDs demonstrated favorable biocompatibility with HeLa cells and proved that they can be used for biological labeling. Next, Li et al. developed a redox-sensitive fluorescence on–off–on probe (Fig. 7d) using desferrioxamine-functionalized GQDs (DFOB-GQDs) to monitor dynamic cellular redox homeostasis.147 Later, the same group developed a (2,4-dinitrophenoxy)tyrosine-functionalized GQD (DNPTYR-GQD) based fluorescent probe for real-time monitoring of intracellular H2S level in MCF-7 cells.142 In this work, DNPTYR contains electron withdrawing groups (dinitrophenoxyl) that reduce the fluorescence of GQDs through PET while later H2S potentially cleaved the dinitrophenoxyl group leading to the recovery of GQD fluorescence. Inspired by these reports, Chen et al. synthesized, for the first time, sweet GQDs by functionalizing them with two sugar moieties (galactose (Gal-GQDs) and mannose (Mal-GQDs)) for real-time trafficking dynamics of carbohydrate receptors in live cells.148
 Fig. 7  GQDs as a bioimaging agent. (a) Live trafficking of insulin receptor in 3T3-L1 adipocytes using insulin-conjugated GQDs as an imaging probe (reproduced with permission,106 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of human breast cancer cells incubated with green fluorescent GQDs (reproduced with permission,33 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (c) Red fluorescent GQDs as a bioimaging probe for HeLa cells (reproduced with permission,146 copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Illustration of a desferrioxamine-functionalized GQD (DFOB-GQD) based redox-sensitive fluorescent on–off–on probe (reproduced with permission,147 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (e) Bright-field and red-fluorescence image after subcutaneous injection of GQDs (reproduced with permission,151 copyright 2014 Springer Nature). (f) In vivo NIR imaging with B-GQDs (reproduced with permission,152 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (g) Live intracellular temperature sensing using mGQDs through NIR imaging of L929 cells (reproduced with permission,59 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
Recently, Li et al. demonstrated folic acid-functionalized GQDs (FA-GQDs) as a turn-on fluorescence probe for the targeted bioimaging of folate receptor (FR)-positive cancer cells through a FA–FR endocytosis process.103 Similarly, Soleymani et al. proposed an FA-N-GQDs based fluorescent nanoprobe for the detection of MKN-45, HT-29 and MCF-7 cancer cell lines through targeted bio-imaging.149 More recently, Feng et al. prepared an FA conjugated N-GQDs diagnostic material for specific recognition of FR overexpressed cancer cells.150 Similarly, Wang et al. demonstrated the feasibility of yellow fluorescent N-GQDs for bioimaging applications in fibroblast cells.119 Furthermore, red fluorescence GQDs or GQDs that emit long wavelength in ranges of 650–950 and 1000–1350 nm (biological transparent windows) are mainly used for in vivo imaging. For instance, Ge et al. synthesized deep red-emission GQDs and used for in vitro (HeLa cells) as well as in vivo (mice) imaging (Fig. 7e).151 Further, Qu et al. prepared three-color (red, green and blue) fluorescence S, N co-doped GQDs using CA and thiourea for bio-imaging applications in live A549 cell lines.153 In this, the as-prepared S, N-GQDs emitted three-color luminescence at 650, 550 and 440 nm independently in three excitation wavelength ranges of 560–620 nm, 460–540 nm and 340–420 nm, respectively, and exhibited excellent performance in bio-imaging applications. Next, Wang et al. demonstrated metal-free boron-doped GQDs that exhibit two-photon up-conversion properties beneficial for in vivo NIR imaging and exceptional paramagnetic properties advantageous for MRI imaging applications (Fig. 7f).152 Recently, Kumawat et al. developed a mGQD (prepared from extract of mango (Mangifera indica) leaves) based excitation-independent red florescent probe for near-infrared (NIR) bio-imaging application.59 As shown in Fig. 7g, the as-prepared NIR imaging probe was used to monitor the live intracellular temperature variations in an L929 cell.59 More recently, Kadian et al. developed a folic acid conjugated sulfur-doped GQD (FA-SGQD) based fluorescence probe for the targeted bioimaging of MCF-7 cancer cells through an FA–FR endocytosis process.154


4.1.3 Drug delivery. 
Due to exciting biological and physicochemical properties, GQDs have gained enormous attention for drug delivery applications.63 The presence of several functional groups on the edge of GQDs offers active binding sites to conjugate the drugs, therapeutics and targeting ligands. Moreover, the occurrence of sp2 carbon in the structure of GQDs allows chemotherapeutic drug molecules, which usually carry aromatic rings, to be attached onto the surface of GQDs leading to an increase in drug loading capacity. For example, chemotherapeutic drugs such as methotrexate (MTX) and doxorubicin (DOX) are effective for cancer treatment but cannot be delivered proficiently to a specific tissue in the body due to their poor aqueous solubility. The large surface area-to-volume ratio of GQDs offers them several binding sites for attachment via π-stacking onto the basal plane and the drugs are delivered through a hydrophilic carrier. Initially, Abdullah et al. demonstrated an efficient targeted delivery of DOX through HA-functionalized GQD (HA-GQD) as a drug carrier, as shown in Fig. 8a.23 In this, the as-prepared conjugate was applied to CD44 receptor overexpressed A549 cell lines and the loading and release kinetics of DOX (hydrophobic drug) under mild acidic conditions were monitored. Next, Wang et al. reported that GQDs can efficiently deliver DOX to nuclei without any pre-modification in their structure as shown in Fig. 8b.155 Also, the as-prepared GQD/DOX conjugate could significantly improve nuclear uptake and the DNA cleavage activity of DOX. Further, Wang et al. demonstrated the suitability of green fluorescent polyethylene glycol (PEG) passivated GQDs (PEG-GQDs) as a nano drug carrier.99 It has been reported that the presence of PEG on the surface of GQDs not only enhanced the PL but also improved the drug loading capacity by offering free hydrogen binding sites. Lv et al. developed a highly fluorescent GQDs–chitosan (CS) hybrid (CS–GQDs) xerogel for in vivo bioimaging and a pH-dependent drug delivery system through a protonation/deprotonation process of the –NH2 groups of CS chains.156 Further, Iannazzo et al. reported a biotin (BTN) conjugated GQD (GQD–BTN) based cell traceable drug delivery system (Fig. 8c).24 In this, DOX was simply mixed with the as-prepared nanoconjugate and the drug loading and release kinetics were tested on (A549) human lung epithelial cancer cell lines. Similarly, Khodadadei et al. developed MTX loaded nitrogen-doped GQD (MTX-(N-GQD)) nanocarriers as a potent drug delivery system as shown in Fig. 8d.57 The release of MTX was assessed through dialysis of MTX-(N-GQDs) in PBS buffer of pH 7.4. It was observed that only 60% MTX was released in the initial 9 h and a slow liberation of drug was continued up to 48 h ensuring a controlled prolonged release of drug. Recently, Javanbakht et al. designed a hydrogel nanocomposite thin film with chemotherapeutic properties via incorporating GQDs and DOX into a carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) hydrogel.157 The hydrogel nanocomposite exhibited low cytotoxicity, high loading and prolonged pH-dependent release for DOX as compared to bare CMC. More recently, Nasrollahi et al. developed a novel nanocarrier through the incorporation of GQDs, iron, and DOX into ferritin nanocages for bimodal imaging and drug delivery.158
 Fig. 8  GQDs as a drug carrier. (a) Targeted delivery of DOX through HA-functionalized GQDs (HA-GQDs) as a drug carrier (reproduced with permission,23 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (b) Illustration of the mechanism of DOX delivery using DOX/GQD conjugates (reproduced with permission,155 copyright 2013 Springer Nature). (c) Illustration of a cell traceable drug delivery system using biotin-conjugated GQDs (reproduced with permission,24 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (d) Demonstration of an MTX-(N-GQDs) nanocarrier based drug delivery system (reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). 
In addition to chemotherapeutic drugs, GQDs have been used for gene therapy applications to deliver RNA or DNA that can replace a mutated gene, express new gene products or knockout an inappropriately functioning gene to combat disease.159,160 In this way, Ghafary et al. designed a new nanoconjugate composed of GQDs, MPG-2H1 chimeric peptide and plasmid DNA (pDNA) with dual functionalities of real-time tracking and gene delivery.161 The nanoconjugate was designed via noncovalent interactions of all components. The obtained transfection efficiency of the optimized complex was nearly eightfold as compared to that of the control peptide–pDNA complex. The results obtained in this study suggest that GQDs could be a potent transfection vector for gene delivery application. Owing to the presence of excessive sp2 domain in the framework and possible π-stacking, GQDs provide higher drug loading as compared to other nanoparticle-based drug carrier systems. However, the active sites on the edge of GQDs for conjugation of a cationic polymer for DNA loading appear to be restricted to functional groups, which leads to a low possibility of their use in gene delivery application, as these biomolecules need to be covalently bound onto the edge groups. Though the ability to track gene delivery through fluorescence of GQDs is beneficial, state-of-the-art investigations on using the basal plane for gene delivery application would propel GQDs as a feasible transfection vector for gene therapy in future.


4.1.4 Antimicrobial/antibacterial agents. 
GQDs are innovative multipurpose biocompatible nanomaterials of the carbon family, which offer several binding sites to bind other biological moieties and can easily form conjugates with other nanomaterials, and hence, can be used in several potential biomedical applications. In this section, we will discuss the antibacterial or antimicrobial properties of GQDs and their nanocomposites. For any antibacterial agent it is quite essential that it should have selective toxicity towards only bacterial or microbial cells without harming the healthy cells.162 After the confirmation of their low cytotoxicity towards healthy cells, various research groups devotedly started the investigation of antibacterial properties of GQDs. For instance, Habiba et al. synthesized biocompatible nanocomposites of PEGylated silver nanoparticles and graphene quantum dots (Ag–GQDs) through a pulsed laser method and examined their antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) (Fig. 9a).163 The results exhibited significant improvement in the antibacterial activity of as-prepared nanocomposite Ag–GQDs as compared to bare AgNPs and GQDs, due to the existing synergy between AgNPs and GQDs. Further, Hui et al. examined the antibacterial activity of GQDs prepared by rupturing the C60 cage (C60-GQD) and found that these GQDs could effectively kill S. aureus, but were unable to kill Escherichia coli (E. coli), Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis) or P. aeruginosa (Fig. 9b).164 Inspired by this study, Biswas et al. used MWCNTs as raw precursors to prepare GQDs and investigated their antimicrobial activity against E. coli (NCIM 2931), B. subtilis (NCIM 2063), P. aeruginosa (NCIM 5029), and S. aureus (NCIM 5021) through microtiter plate assay.162 The results showed that the as-prepared GQDs have selective toxicity towards microbial cells with a minimum inhibitory concentration of ∼512 μg mL−1 for P. aeruginosa and S. aureus and ∼256 μg mL−1 for E. coli and B. subtilis.
 Fig. 9  GQDs as an antibacterial agent. (a) Synthesis of PEGylated Ag–GQDs and SEM images of treated and untreated P. aeruginosa bacterial cells (reproduced with permission,163 copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Antibacterial activity of GO-GQDs and C60-GQD against different kinds of bacteria (reproduced with permission,164 copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (c) E. coli and M. luteus colonies in PBS before and after irradiation and their percentage irradiation of MB-GQD with 660nm light (reproduced with permission,165 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (d) Synthesis of Ag@S-GQD nanocomposites and SEM images of treated and untreated P. aeruginosa bacteria (reproduced with permission,166 copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Recently, Kholikov et al. prepared S-GQDs from nickel oxide, sulphur and benzene using nanosecond laser pulses and then later conjugated them with methylene blue (MB).165 The as-prepared MB-GQD compound showed excellent antibacterial activity against E. coli and Micrococcus luteus (M. luteus) after irradiating with 600 nm light, as shown in Fig. 9c. More recently, Kadian et al. developed a novel nanocomposite composed of sulfur-doped graphene quantum dot (S-GQD) decorated silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) (Fig. 9d) and investigated their antibacterial activity against Gram-positive (S. aureus) and Gram-negative (P. aeruginosa) bacteria using agar well diffusion and macrodilution methods.166 Similar to Habiba et al., they also concluded that the Ag@S-GQDs nanocomposite has superior cell viability and antibacterial activity as compared to AgNPs and S-GQDs, separately.163,166 These reports jointly suggest that GQDs could be potent next-generation antibacterial agents, and thus, more in-depth investigations may be performed to elucidate the exact mechanism behind selective bacterial toxicity of GQDs. However, many of these studies need independent validation protocols before commercial applications.


4.1.5 Photodynamic and photothermal therapy. 
Early diagnosis and therapy of cancer or tumor cells are of great significance. Owing to their several unique merits including broad light absorption, excellent dispersibility, good photostability, favorable biocompatibility, ease of degradation by enzymes, fast body clearance, and ability to generate radicals, GQDs have also been used as a therapeutic agent in photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT) for cancer treatment. In PDT, tumor cells are destroyed using ROS generated by photosensitizing chemical substances under irradiation. The ROS generation capability of GQDs under irradiation offers an opportunity to use them as a PDT agent to kill cancer cells. In contrast to traditional therapies, such as radio- and chemo-therapy, PDT is a non-invasive technique to destroy tumor cells with fewer side effects. Initially, Ge et al. introduced GQDs as a potential PDT and imaging agent with an excellent 1O2 quantum yield of ∼1.3.151 In the investigations, GQDs exhibited superior photostability and low toxicity as compared to CdTe (a semiconducting QD) and Ppix (a clinically approved PDT agent). The activity of GQDs as a PDT agent was examined in vivo by using female BALB/nu mice with subcutaneous breast cancer. Fig. 10a shows that the tumor starts to decompose after 9th day and was killed after 17 days.
 Fig. 10  GQDs as a threptic agent in PDT and PTT. (a) Macroscopic images of mice captured on the 1st, 9th, 17th and 25th day after treating with PDT (GQDs + light irradiation), C1 (GQDs only), C2 (light irradiation only) (reproduced with permission,151 copyright 2014 Springer Nature). (b) Illustration of the synthesis of IR780/GQDs-FA and their application for targeted PTT (reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) In vivo (tumor-bearing mice) and ex vivo (dissected organs) NIR imaging with free IR780 and IR780/GQDs-FA and their mean intensity histogram (reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (d) Structure and functional pathway of a photodynamic GQD-SS-Ce6 nano-system with GSH regulated photoactivity (reproduced with permission,168 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
Next, as reported previously, IR780 iodide is a well-known NIR photo-thermal agent but insolubility issues caused by the chlorocyclohexenyl ring present in the structure limit its use in real-time medical applications.169 To address this issue, Li et al. used FA-GQDs to load IR780 via strong π–π interactions (Fig. 10b) for PTT application and reported that the resultant complex IR780/GQDs-FA has excellent aqueous solubility with a high photothermal conversion efficiency of 87.9%.167 The results indicated that the IR780/GQDs-FA complex was capable of completely destroying the tumor under 808 nm laser irradiation as shown in Fig. 10c. Further, Kuo et al. developed GQDs using graphite as a raw precursor with impressive two-photon properties such as two-photon absorption in the NIR region, excellent two-photon emission, large cross section of two-photon excitation, two-photon stability and ability to produce ROS, which empowered GQDs to act as a potent PDT agent even at ultralow energy levels.170 Furthermore, Du et al. introduced a novel redox-responsive photodynamic (GQD-SS-Ce6) nano-system shown in Fig. 10d.168 This nano-system exhibited minimal photo-toxicity when irradiated with a laser and in vivo results revealed that the GQD-SS-Ce6 system has effectively suppressed tumor cells in the presence of a reducing agent by breaking the disulfide linker. These investigations suggest that GQDs have played a critical role in PDT and PTT application by reducing the size of cancer cells as well as by destroying the tumor. Moreover, traditional PDT agents need UV-Vis region light to irradiate them, which limits their tissue penetration. In contrast to this, GQDs could be irradiated with NIR light, and thus, they open a new window for cancer treatment as more efficient PDT agents.

4.2 Optoelectronic applications
Since the discovery of graphene by Novoselov et al.,2 its high electric conductivity, linear dispersion band structure and good thermal stability have made it a potential candidate for optoelectronic applications.171 Nevertheless, due to its zero band gap and poor aqueous solubility, graphene will have several restrictions in future applications. In contrast, due to the exceptional optical and electronic properties of zero-dimensional GQDs, including tunable PL, good photostability and aqueous solubility, large surface area, abundant active sites, ability to integrate with other nanomaterials, and capability to tailor the band gap and to facilitate charge transfer caused by quantum confinement and edge effects, they have attracted considerable attention for optoelectronic applications such as in light-emitting diodes (LEDs),67,172 photodetection,173,174 solar cells or photovoltaics,175–179 plasmonics,180,181 supercapacitors,182,183 and rechargeable batteries,184,185 as shown in Table 4. Several research groups have devotedly engaged in investigating the potential of GQDs for technology transfer and to deliver next-generation low-cost optoelectronics devices. In this section, we will highlight the efforts made by these groups for the development of economic light emitting diodes and efficient solar cells or photovoltaic devices by using GQDs.
Table 4 Summary of precursor material types, synthetic methods, PL emission and optoelectronic applications of various types of GQDs




Materials
Method
GQDs type
PL emission (nm)
Applications
Ref.




Tattered graphite
Amidative cutting
GQDs
450–700
Light-emitting diodes

67



Graphite powder & sodium potassium tartrate
Intercalation & solvothermal
GQDs
300–600
Light-emitting diodes

172



Graphene oxide
Acidic oxidation
GQDs
350–600
Photodetector

173



Graphene sheets
Hydrothermal
GQDs
350–550
Organic PV devices

175



Glucose
Microwave-assisted
GQDs
375–600
Si-Hybrid solar cells

179



Graphene oxide
Acidic oxidation
GQDs
—
Supercapacitors

182



Graphene oxide
Acidic oxidation
GOQDs
—
Lithium-ion batteries

184






4.2.1 Light emitting diodes. 
The luminescence of GQDs basically relies on the phenomenon “where an external energy excites the carriers followed by emission of light due to immediate recombination”.186 In the development of LEDs, GQDs can play several roles including that of a gap tuner, dopant, electroluminescent phosphor, and color converter. For example, initially Gupta et al. prepared a mixture of different concentrations of methylene blue functionalized GQDs (MB-GQDs) and poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) and used it as a light emitting layer for the development of organic LEDs (OLEDs).175 The obtained results showed that the MB-GQDs dispersed in MEH-PPV provided easy electrical transport pathways that enhanced the charge injection and the carrier density, and hence, offered an enhanced performance. Further, Tang et al. reported another exciting application of GQDs as a white light converter through their coating on commercially available blue color LEDs with a significant shift in the Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) coordinates (Fig. 11a) from (0.242, 0.156) to (0.282, 0.373).21 Sekiya et al. explored the white light emission feature of edge functionalized GQDs to be used for the fabrication of LEDs and other optoelectronic devices.187 Further, Kim and Kim developed solution-processed and highly-efficient LEDs using octadecylamine (ODA)-GQDs (Fig. 11b).188 It was observed that the occurrence of nucleophilic substitution among epoxy and amine functional groups reduced the amount of oxygen in ODA-GQDs as compared to bare GQDs. The current efficiency (6.51 cd A−1) of ODA-GQDs was measured to be the highest among previously reported (3.47 cd A−1 by Kwon et al.189 and 0.65 cd A−1 Song et al.172) GQD based LEDs. Later on, the same group developed ultrahigh-luminosity white LEDs (WLEDs) using edge functionalized GQDs (EF-GQDs) synthesized from a simple solution approach.190 The CIE coordinates and maximum luminance for the WLEDs prepared from EF-GQDs were found to be (0.27, 0.29) and 464 cd m−2, respectively (Fig. 11c), which was superior to those of other GQD based WLEDs (10 cd m−2 by Kwon et al.67 and 200 cd m−2 by Luo et al.32).
 Fig. 11  GQDs for light-emitting diode applications. (a) PL spectra and CIE chromaticity coordinates of a blue LED with and without a GQD coating (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic of the device structure and energy diagram (reproduced with permission,188 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (c) Schematic of the device structure and energy diagram, current density–voltage, luminance–voltage curves, electroluminance spectra and CIE coordinates for the WLEDs with PVK:EF-GQDs at different luminance values (reproduced with permission,190 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (d) CIE chromaticity coordinates of W-GQDs (reproduced with permission,192 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Synthesis of luminescent composite films using GQDs and D-GQDs (reproduced with permission,193 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society). 
Further, Kumar et al. developed WLEDs using single-crystalline zinc oxide (ZnO) film/graphene quantum dots (GQDs) as phosphors.191 The outcomes displayed that UV excited ZnO/GQD based WLEDs are more optically suitable for lighting as compared to the traditional yellow phosphor LEDs. Recently, Dong et al. explored the effect of chemical modification of GQDs by using a reduction protocol.192 The results demonstrated that the reduction of carboxyl, epoxy or five- and six-membered-ring lactol group containing GQDs into aromatic carboxylic acid and hydroxyl group enriched GQDs effectively affected the solid-state PL of GQDs and resulted in white-light emitting GQDs (W-GQDs) having the CIE coordinates (x = 0.30, 0.36), as shown in Fig. 11d. Furthermore, Lin et al. investigated the impact of GQDs on optical and electrical properties of GaN-based UV LEDs.194 The obtained results displaced that incorporation of GQDs enhanced the electroluminescence and decreased the series resistance of LEDs, due to photon recycling and the carrier transfer between the active layer and GQDs. Recently, Kim et al. produced white-light emitting polymer films from blue-luminescent GQDs by incorporating a europium(III) complex, due to resonance energy transfer between GQDs and the europium(III) complex.195 More recently, Chen et al. prepared a transparent photo-luminescent film composed of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), highly efficient blue-green emission GQDs and orange color emission GQDs (D-GQDs) obtained from fullerene with preferable white light emission as shown in Fig. 11e.193


4.2.2 Solar cells. 
Photovoltaic (PV) solar cells are an essential source of energy, which can convert sunlight into electricity, and thus, provide clean and renewable energy to the society which has a shortage of resources to produce electricity through traditional methods. Due to their unique optoelectronic characteristics and band gap tunability, incorporation of GQDs with traditional charge carriers for the development of solar cells exhibits superior efficiency. Because of the large specific surface area, photon down-conversion ability and high electron mobility characteristics, GQDs are extensively used as an electron/hole transport layer, a sensitizer, or an active layer additive for several PV solar cell devices including dye-sensitized solar cells, organic and inorganic hybrid solar cells and perovskite solar cells.196,197 For example, Gupta et al. demonstrated that dispersion of GQDs in conjugated polymers can significantly enhance the performance of organic PV devices due to their excellent optical and electronic characteristics.175 Dutta et al. investigated the effect of GQDs on the solid-state solar cell device by preparing a composite of ZnO nanowires and GQDs.198 Such a GQD incorporated solid-state solar cell device displayed a high open circuit voltage of 0.8 V. Further, Kundu et al. introduced an exciting approach by modifying the photoanode of dye-sensitized solar cells through NFS-GQDs into the TiO2 meso-porous network to increase the light harvesting efficiency with an appealing power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of 11.7%.199
Next, He et al. employed GQDs as a photon down-conversion material into n-type silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells (Fig. 12a) and achieved a high efficiency of 16.55%.200 Through photon down-conversion phenomena, GQDs absorb photons in UV regions and emit photons in visible regions. At an optimal amount of GQDs (0.3%), a significant increase in the fill factor (from 70.29% to 72.51%) and short circuit current (from 35.31 to 37.47 mA cm−2) was recorded. At the same time, He et al. incorporated GQDs with PEDOT:PSS and developed Si/PEDOT:PSS hybrid solar cells with 13.22% efficiency.179 When the amount of GQDs was 0.5%, the fill factor and short circuit current were increased from 62.85% to 63.87% and 32.11 to 36.26 mA cm−2, respectively. On the basis of these results, they concluded that incorporation of GQDs into commercially available PV devices holds great promise for fabricating next-generation PV devices with ultra-high efficiency. Further, Ryu et al. explored the effect of incorporation of GQDs on the performance of planar-type perovskite solar cells.201 In this, GQDs were introduced into a blocking TiO2 layer (Fig. 12b) through an O2 plasma treatment process which reduced the contact resistance at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, and hence, the series resistance reduced and the compound resistance increased which enhanced the fill factor and open circuit voltage of the device. The obtained results demonstrated that the appropriately sized GQDs displayed an average of 10% improvement as compared to cells without GQDs and attained 19.11% as the best PCE. Recently, Bian et al. deposited highly stable N-GQDs on the top of γ-CsPbI3 as a photon down-converter material (Fig. 12c) to harvest light from the UV region of <350 nm.202 The results obtained from final inorganic perovskite solar cells having GQDs on the top displayed a significant increment in the PCE from 15.53% to 16.02%. Further, Xie et al. introduced a small amount of GQDs into thin films of SnO2 to improve the electronic properties and PCE of SnO2 based perovskite solar cells as shown in Fig. 12d.196 In this, GQDs fill the electron traps of SnO2 through high electron transport ability, and hence, enhance the conductivity of SnO2, which is advantageous for improving the electron extraction efficiency and plummeting the recombination at the SnO2:GQDs/perovskite interface. The device developed with SnO2:GQDs exhibited very little hysteresis and the highest steady-state PCE of 20.23%. In summary, the incorporation of GQDs into dye-sensitized solar cells, organic and inorganic hybrid solar cells, perovskite solar cells and perovskite thin films not only effectively removes electron traps and reduces charge recombination but also encourages electron transfer across the layers.
 Fig. 12  GQDs for solar cell applications. (a) Schematic of a silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell (reproduced with permission,200 copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic of GQD introduced planar-type perovskite solar cells and their energy band diagram (reproduced with permission,201 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Schematic diagram of N-GQD EDS layer coated perovskite solar cells, I–V curves, PCE distribution histograms and J–V curves of the optimized perovskite solar cells (reproduced with permission,202 copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device, energy band diagram before and after illumination, J–V curves measured at reverse and forward scans and stabilized PCEs measured as a function of time (reproduced with permission,196 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 

5. Summary and future prospects
In this review, we summarized the recent progress in the synthesis and property tuning of GQDs through different approaches with focus on their applications in the biomedical and optoelectronic fields. We have discussed both the top-down and bottom-up strategies of GQD synthesis and conclude that both approaches have their own advantages and disadvantages. It can also be mentioned that heterogeneity in size, composition, and shape of GQDs cause several changes in their physical, chemical, biological, optical and electrical properties. Hence, the GQDs synthesized for a particular application may not efficiently work in another field of application. Consequently, a simple and universal method to prepare GQDs with well-defined characteristics or to precisely tailor GQD properties is highly desired so that a more systematic understanding and characterization of GQDs with real-time applications can be attained. Further, several methods developed for property control and regulation of GQDs through heteroatom doping, functionalization and controlling the reaction parameters have been discussed. The tremendous progress in the synthesis and property modification approaches have inspired researchers to investigate several applications of doped and functionalized GQDs. More accuracy and precision in the synthesis of size and shape controlled GQDs with high quantum yield and active edge functional groups is required to achieve new milestones in several real-world biomedical and optoelectronic applications.
The initial research and the revealed exceptional characteristics of GQDs have instigated great interest in various applications, including biosensors, bioimaging, drug delivery, antimicrobial/antibacterial agents, photodynamic therapy, photovoltaic solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors, photocatalysis, supercapacitors, thermoelectric devices, rechargeable batteries and electrocatalysis. Some of the current applications have been discussed in this review article. For example, the incidence of a specific biomarker or molecule can be monitored in real samples through quenching or recovery of fluorescence of GQDs, based on the design of the sensing platform, and thus, can act as a suitable biosensing probe. Similarly, GQDs have been used as a potent fluorophore to explore the in vitro and in vivo targeted bioimaging and real-time trafficking of cellular dynamics. The presence of several edge functional groups and excessive sp2 domains in the framework enables them for high drug loading, and hence, helps in drug delivery application. Next, the ability to produce ROS through irradiation allows them to serve as photosensitizers for PDT and PTT applications. Good biocompatibility and ability to strongly interact with other antibacterial nanomaterials make them potential candidates for antibacterial applications. Beyond this, the capability of band gap tuner and color converter characteristics enables them to work as an effective material for LED development. Further, the photon downconversion phenomenon and good electron transport facility allow them to serve in the fabrication of PV solar cells. Therefore, this review suggests that GQDs have made great progress in several domains in the last few years, but still there are some issues to be addressed and milestones to be achieved in the near future. In general, the lack of size definition and control hampers their use in a wide range of real-time applications due to significant dependence of chemical and physical properties on their size. Ensuring a low-cost, green and large-scale synthesis of GQDs is another serious problem, which also influences their practical applications. Although the green synthesis of GQDs with low toxicity has gained more attention, still there is scope for further advancements in these approaches using interconnected GQDs. Next, a detailed explanation of the PL mechanism of GQDs is also lacking, and hence, more theoretical and experimental investigations are required for a better understanding of their PL mechanism. This is particularly important since some of the GQDs reveal excitation independent PL while similar sized GQDs prepared using different methods display excitation-dependent PL thus necessitating the need for understanding the role of surface states and traps. Further, though most of the reported GQDs exhibit green and blue color fluorescence, red or NIR emission is needed for in vivo bio-imaging application posing a challenge to the synthesis of GQDs with red color emission. Additionally, a limited number of reports are available regarding the interplay between existing electron donating and withdrawing chemical groups as well as between coexistence of multiple heteroatom dopants. Therefore, more detailed investigations on these aspects will definitely help to successfully understand the electronic properties of GQDs which may bring more opportunities in optoelectronic applications. Conclusively, GQD research is still at an infant stage and has great potential to become the most attractive material of the graphene family if current issues can be resolved and the exceptional combination of several virtues of GQDs can be properly operated.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to sincerely thank Prof. Vijayamohanan K Pillai, Dean (R&D) and Professor & Chair, Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER)-Tirupati, Former Director, CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi, and Adjunct Professor, Dept. of Chemistry, IIT-Madras, for valuable discussions, kindly sharing his insights, and suggestions to improve the quality of this review. The first and second authors would like to thank the Ministry of Education, Government of India, for providing a doctoral fellowship. The authors thankfully acknowledge the Director, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, for providing the research facilities.
References
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Superior thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Electric field in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306 Search PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Z. Yanwu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Graphene-Based ultracapacitors, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, Y. Cai, C. Liu, J. Liu and J. Qiao, Heteroatom (B, N and P) doped porous graphene foams for efficient oxygen reduction reaction electrocatalysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 12661–12670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, J. Kumar and S. N. Sharma, Investigation of charge transfer properties in MEHPVV and rGO-AA nanocomposites for Green organic photovoltaic application, Optik, 2020, 208, 164540 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Shinde and V. K. Pillai, Electrochemical resolution of multiple redox events for graphene quantum Dots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2482–2485 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Glowing graphene quantum dots and carbon dots: Properties, syntheses, and biological applications, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, G. Wu, G. Yang, J. Peng, J. Zhao and J. J. Zhu, Focusing on luminescent graphene quantum dots: Current status and future perspectives, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015–4039 RSC .
S. Zhu, J. Shao, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Du, L. Wang, H. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Investigating the surface state of graphene quantum dots, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7927–7933 RSC .
Y. Park, J. Yoo, B. Lim, W. Kwon and S. W. Rhee, Improving the functionality of carbon nanodots: Doping and surface functionalization, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11582–11603 RSC .
H. Lei, H. Diao, W. Liu, J. Xie, Z. Wang and L. Feng, A facile Al(III)-specific fluorescence probe and its application in biological systems, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77291–77296 RSC .
L. C. Chen, C. Y. Teng, C. Y. Lin, H. Y. Chang, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Architecting Nitrogen Functionalities on Graphene Oxide Photocatalysts for Boosting Hydrogen Production in Water Decomposition Process, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600719 CrossRef .
K. Li, W. Liu, Y. Ni, D. Li, D. Lin, Z. Su and G. Wei, Technical synthesis and biomedical applications of graphene quantum dots, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4811–4826 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Qu, B. Xu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Microwave assisted one-step green synthesis of cell-permeable multicolor photoluminescent carbon dots without surface passivation reagents, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2445–2450 RSC .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Gao, J. Wei, H. Zhou, Y. Chen, C. Dong, T. S. Sreeprasad, N. Li and Z. Xia, Synthesis, mechanistic investigation, and application of photoluminescent sulfur and nitrogen co-doped carbon dots, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9885–9893 RSC .
S. Kadian, G. Manik, A. Kalkal, M. Singh and R. P. Chauhan, Effect of sulfur doping on fluorescence and quantum yield of graphene quantum dots:
An experimental and theoretical investigation, Nanotechnology, 2019, 43, 435704 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, J. Shao, C. Chen, H. Li, R. Wang, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Blue luminescent graphene quantum dots and graphene oxide prepared by tuning the carbonization degree of citric acid, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4738–4743 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Kharangarh, V. Singh and G. Singh, Synthesis and optical properties of Zn(II) doped graphene quantum dots: Blue to purple emission, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2142, 060007 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, R. M. Yadav, T. N. Narayanan, M. V. Shelke, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and V. K. Pillai, Synthesis of N, F and S co-doped graphene quantum dots, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11515–11519 RSC .
S. Kim, D. Hee Shin, C. Oh Kim, S. Seok Kang, S. Sin Joo, S. H. Choi, S. Won Hwang and C. Sone, Size-dependence of Raman scattering from graphene quantum dots: Interplay between shape and thickness, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 053108 CrossRef .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng, J. Hao and S. P. Lau, Deep ultraviolet photoluminescence of water-soluble self-passivated graphene quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nasrollahi, Y. R. Koh, P. Chen, J. Varshosaz, A. A. Khodadadi and S. Lim, Targeting graphene quantum dots to epidermal growth factor receptor for delivery of cisplatin and cellular imaging, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 94, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Nahain, J. E. Lee, I. In, H. Lee, K. D. Lee, J. H. Jeong and S. Y. Park, Target delivery and cell imaging using hyaluronic acid-functionalized graphene quantum dots, Mol. Pharm., 2013, 10, 3736–3744 CrossRef .
D. Iannazzo, A. Pistone, M. Salamò, S. Galvagno, R. Romeo, S. V. Giofré, C. Branca, G. Visalli and A. Di Pietro, Graphene quantum dots for cancer targeted drug delivery, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 518, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wang and S. Y. Lu, Carbon black-derived graphene quantum dots composited with carbon aerogel as a highly efficient and stable reduction catalyst for the iodide/tri-iodide couple, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1209–1215 RSC .
J. Gu, M. J. Hu, Q. Q. Guo, Z. F. Ding, X. L. Sun and J. Yang, High-yield synthesis of graphene quantum dots with strong green photoluminescence, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 50141–50144 RSC .
Y. Yan, J. Gong, J. Chen, Z. Zeng, W. Huang, K. Pu, J. Liu and P. Chen, Recent Advances on Graphene Quantum Dots: From Chemistry and Physics to Applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808283 CrossRef .
S. Chung, R. A. Revia and M. Zhang, Graphene Quantum Dots and Their Applications in Bioimaging, Biosensing, and Therapy, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904362,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201904362 .
Y. Dong, C. Chen, X. Zheng, L. Gao, Z. Cui, H. Yang, C. Guo, Y. Chi and C. M. Li, One-step and high yield simultaneous preparation of single- and multi-layer graphene quantum dots from CX-72 carbon black, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8764–8766 RSC .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S. T. Lee, Upconversion and downconversion fluorescent graphene quantum dots: Ultrasonic preparation and photocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ananthanarayanan, X. Wang, P. Routh, B. Sana, S. Lim, D. H. Kim, K. H. Lim, J. Li and P. Chen, Facile synthesis of graphene quantum dots from 3D graphene and their application for Fe3+ sensing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3021–3026 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, G. Qi, K. Chen, M. Zou, L. Yuwen, X. Zhang, W. Huang and L. Wang, Microwave-Assisted Preparation of White Fluorescent Graphene Quantum Dots as a Novel Phosphor for Enhanced White-Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2739–2744 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Graphene quantum dots derived from carbon fibers, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, S. Ghosh, M. Fralaide, T. N. Narayanan, V. K. Pillai and S. Talapatra, Fractional photo-current dependence of graphene quantum dots prepared from carbon nanotubes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24566–24569 RSC .
D. B. Shinde, V. M. Dhavale, S. Kurungot and V. K. Pillai, Electrochemical preparation of nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots and their size-dependent electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2015, 38, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. Guo, Z. Rao, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Strong two-photon-induced fluorescence from photostable, biocompatible nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for cellular and deep-tissue imaging, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, C. Xiang, J. Lin, Z. Peng, K. Huang, Z. Yan, N. P. Cook, E. L. G. Samuel, C. C. Hwang, G. Ruan, G. Ceriotti, A. R. O. Raji, A. A. Martí and J. M. Tour, Coal as an abundant source of graphene quantum dots, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Shin, J. Park, D. Hyun, J. Yang, J. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and H. Lee, Acid-free and oxone oxidant-assisted solvothermal synthesis of graphene quantum dots using various natural carbon materials as resources, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5633–5637 RSC .
Q. Liu, J. Zhang, H. He, G. Huang, B. Xing, J. Jia and C. Zhang, Green preparation of high yield fluorescent graphene quantum dots from coal-tar-pitch by mild oxidation, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 844 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, S. Yang, G. Wang, R. Mo, P. He, J. Sun, Z. Di, Z. Kang, N. Yuan, J. Ding, G. Ding and X. Xie, A new mild, clean and highly efficient method for the preparation of graphene quantum dots without by-products, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6871–6876 RSC .
X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Yang, B. Zheng, H. Wu, S. Guo and J. Zhang, Photo-Fenton reaction of graphene oxide: A new strategy to prepare graphene quantum dots for DNA cleavage, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6592–6599 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin and S. Zhang, Creating high yield water soluble luminescent graphene quantum dots via exfoliating and disintegrating carbon nanotubes and graphite flakes, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10177–10179 RSC .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. S. Li, Large, solution-processable graphene quantum dots as light absorbers for photovoltaics, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, Synthesis of large, stable colloidal graphene quantum dots with tunable size, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Shinde and V. K. Pillai, Electrochemical preparation of luminescent graphene quantum dots from multiwalled carbon nanotubes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12522–12528 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, S. Yang, Q. Li, Y. Yang, G. Wang, X. You, B. Mao, H. Wang, Y. Ma, P. He, Z. Liu, G. Ding and X. Xie, Electrochemical Cutting in Weak Aqueous Electrolytes: The Strategy for Efficient and Controllable Preparation of Graphene Quantum Dots, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Bai, W. Shang, W. Xie, H. Ma, Y. Fu, D. Fang, H. Sun, L. Fan, M. Han, C. Liu and S. Yang, Facile synthesis of water-soluble, highly fluorescent graphene quantum dots as a robust biological label for stem cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7461–7466 RSC .
S. R. M. Santiago, T. N. Lin, C. T. Yuan, J. L. Shen, H. Y. Huang and C. A. J. Lin, Origin of tunable photoluminescence from graphene quantum dots synthesized: Via pulsed laser ablation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 22599–22609 RSC .
G. Rajender and P. K. Giri, Formation mechanism of graphene quantum dots and their edge state conversion probed by photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10852–10865 RSC .
A. Tayyebi, O. Akhavan, B. K. Lee and M. Outokesh, Supercritical water in top-down formation of tunable-sized graphene quantum dots applicable in effective photothermal treatments of tissues, Carbon, 2018, 130, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Optically tunable amino-functionalized graphene quantum dots, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, P. S. E. Yeo, C. K. Gan, P. Wu and K. P. Loh, Transforming C 60 molecules into graphene quantum dots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chua, Z. Sofer, P. Šimek, O. Jankovský, K. Klímová, S. Bakardjieva, Š. Hrdličková Kučková and M. Pumera, Synthesis of strongly fluorescent graphene quantum dots by cage-opening buckminsterfullerene, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Cui, L. Song, X. Liu and Z. Hu, Microwave assisted one-pot synthesis of graphene quantum dots as highly sensitive fluorescent probes for detection of iron ions and pH value, Talanta, 2016, 150, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, P. Du, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, D. Li, H. Tan, Z. Zhao, Z. Xie and Z. Sun, Highly luminescent S, N co-doped graphene quantum dots with broad visible absorption bands for visible light photocatalysts, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12272–12277 RSC .
S. J. Jeon, T. W. Kang, J. M. Ju, M. J. Kim, J. H. Park, F. Raza, J. Han, H. R. Lee and J. H. Kim, Modulating the Photocatalytic Activity of Graphene Quantum Dots via Atomic Tailoring for Highly Enhanced Photocatalysis under Visible Light, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8211–8219 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khodadadei, S. Safarian and N. Ghanbari, Methotrexate-loaded nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots nanocarriers as an efficient anticancer drug delivery system, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 79, 280–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Tang, G. Wang, J. Mao, Z. Liu, T. Sun, M. Wang, D. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Li, Y. Deng and S. Yang, Green, Rapid, and Universal Preparation Approach of Graphene Quantum Dots under Ultraviolet Irradiation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14470–14477 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kumawat, R. Srivastava, M. Thakur and R. B. Gurung, Graphene quantum dots from mangifera indica: Application in near-infrared bioimaging and intracellular nanothermometry, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1382–1391 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, J. R. Adsetts, Y. Nie, X. Sun and Z. Ding, Electrochemiluminescence of nitrogen- and sulfur-doped graphene quantum dots, Carbon, 2018, 129, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hasan, R. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, C. Ryan, N. Faerber, J. L. Coffer and A. V. Naumov, Photo-and Electroluminescence from Nitrogen-Doped and Nitrogen–Sulfur Codoped Graphene Quantum Dots, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804337 CrossRef .
S. Kadian, G. Manik, A. Kalkal, M. Singh and R. P. Chauhan, Effect of sulfur doping on fluorescence and quantum yield of graphene quantum dots: An experimental and theoretical investigation, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 435704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chandra, S. Deshpande, D. B. Shinde, V. K. Pillai and N. Singh, Mitigating the cytotoxicity of graphene quantum dots and enhancing their applications in bioimaging and drug delivery, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1064–1068 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kalita, V. Harikrishnan, D. B. Shinde, V. K. Pillai and M. Aslam, Hysteresis and charge trapping in graphene quantum dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 143104 CrossRef .
B. P. Biswal, D. B. Shinde, V. K. Pillai and R. Banerjee, Stabilization of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) by encapsulation inside zeolitic imidazolate framework nanocrystals for photoluminescence tuning, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10556–10561 RSC .
T. F. Yeh, W. L. Huang, C. J. Chung, I. T. Chiang, L. C. Chen, H. Y. Chang, W. C. Su, C. Cheng, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Elucidating Quantum Confinement in Graphene Oxide Dots Based on Excitation-Wavelength-Independent Photoluminescence, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kwon, Y. H. Kim, C. L. Lee, M. Lee, H. C. Choi, T. W. Lee and S. W. Rhee, Electroluminescence from graphene quantum dots prepared by amidative cutting of tattered graphite, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1306–1311 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, Z. Peng, A. Metzger, J. Lin, J. A. Mann, K. Huang, C. Xiang, X. Fan, E. L. G. Samuel, L. B. Alemany, A. A. Martí and J. M. Tour, Bandgap engineering of coal-derived graphene quantum dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7041–7048 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and J. S. Suh, Size-controllable and low-cost fabrication of graphene quantum dots using thermal plasma jet, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4190–4196 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gan, H. Xu and Y. Hao, Mechanism for excitation-dependent photoluminescence from graphene quantum dots and other graphene oxide derivates: Consensus, debates and challenges, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7794–7807 RSC .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chen and V. G. Gomes, Edge-enriched graphene quantum dots for enhanced photo-luminescence and supercapacitance, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988–11994 RSC .
Y. Zhou, H. Sun, F. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, How functional groups influence the ROS generation and cytotoxicity of graphene quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10588–10591 RSC .
H. Yoon, Y. H. Chang, S. H. Song, E. S. Lee, S. H. Jin, C. Park, J. Lee, B. H. Kim, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Kim and S. Jeon, Intrinsic Photoluminescence Emission from Subdomained Graphene Quantum Dots, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5255–5261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Wu, N. Gao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Improvement of photoluminescence of graphene quantum dots with a biocompatible photochemical reduction pathway and its bioimaging application, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1174–1179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, A. R. Botello-Méndez, J. Campos-Delgado, F. López-Urías, Y. I. Vega-Cantú, F. J. Rodríguez-Macías, A. L. Elías, E. Muñoz-Sandoval, A. G. Cano-Márquez, J. C. Charlier and H. Terrones, Graphene and graphite nanoribbons: Morphology, properties, synthesis, defects and applications, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 351–372 CrossRef .
W. E. Billups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005 DOI:10.1021/ja059725z .
T. G. Pedersen, C. Flindt, J. Pedersen, N. A. Mortensen, A. P. Jauho and K. Pedersen, Graphene antidot lattices: Designed defects and spin qubits, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 136804 CrossRef .
M. Terrones, G. Terrones and H. Terrones, Structure, chirality, and formation of giant icosahedral fullerenes and spherical graphitic onions, Struct. Chem., 2002, 13, 373–384 CrossRef CAS .
J. Campos-Delgado, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, A. Morelos-Gómez, M. Hofmann, H. Muramatsu, M. Endo, H. Terrones, R. D. Shull, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. Terrones, Thermal stability studies of CVD-grown graphene nanoribbons: Defect annealing and loop formation, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 469, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, F. Banhart, N. Grobert, J. C. Charlier, H. Terrones and P. M. Ajayan, Molecular Junctions by Joining Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 075505 CrossRef CAS .
I. O. MacIel, N. Anderson, M. A. Pimenta, A. Hartschuh, H. Qian, M. Terrones, H. Terrones, J. Campos-Delgado, A. M. Rao, L. Novotny and A. Jorio, Electron and phonon renormalization near charged defects in carbon nanotubes, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 878–883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots with oxygen-rich functional groups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Sun, P. He, X. Deng, Z. Wang, C. Hu, G. Ding and X. Xie, Selenium doped graphene quantum dots as an ultrasensitive redox fluorescent switch, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2004–2011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang and Q. Liu, B, N, S, Cl doped graphene quantum dots and their effects on gas-sensing properties of Ag-LaFeO3, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 364–374 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Tam, S. G. Kang, K. F. Babu, E. S. Oh, S. G. Lee and W. M. Choi, Synthesis of B-doped graphene quantum dots as a metal-free electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10537–10543 RSC .
T. F. Yeh, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Synergistic effect of oxygen and nitrogen functionalities for graphene-based quantum dots used in photocatalytic H2 production from water decomposition, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 476–485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, Nitrogen-doped graphene and its application in electrochemical
biosensing, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Microscopic effects of the bonding configuration of nitrogen-doped graphene on its reactivity toward hydrogen peroxide reduction reaction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6920–6928 RSC .
X. Hou, Y. Li and C. Zhao, Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Nitrogen-Doped Multi-Layer Graphene Quantum Dots with Oxygen-Rich Functional Groups, Aust. J. Chem., 2016, 69, 357–360 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gong, J. Wang, K. Hou, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Han and S. Yang, Small but strong: The influence of fluorine atoms on formation and performance of graphene quantum dots using a gradient F-sacrifice strategy, Carbon, 2017, 112, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, X. Liu, L. Wang, X. Liu, W. Xue and N. Ma, Electrochemical synthesis of phosphorus-doped graphene quantum dots for free radical scavenging, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11631–11638 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Li, J. Cao, J. Zhu, L. Fan and X. Li, Sulfur-doped graphene quantum dots as a novel fluorescent probe for highly selective and sensitive detection of Fe3+, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10201–10207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, G. Gao and J. Zhi, Electrochemical synthesis of multicolor fluorescent N-doped graphene quantum dots as a ferric ion sensor and their application in bioimaging, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1494–1502 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhang, R. P. Liang, Y. H. Li and J. D. Qiu, Boron-doped graphene quantum dots for selective glucose sensing based on the “abnormal” aggregation-induced photoluminescence enhancement, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4423–4430 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Kharangarh, S. Umapathy and G. Singh, Investigation of sulfur related defects in graphene quantum dots for tuning photoluminescence and high quantum yield, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qian, J. Ma, X. Shan, L. Shao, J. Zhou, J. Chen and H. Feng, Surface functionalization of graphene quantum dots with small organic molecules from photoluminescence modulation to bioimaging applications: An experimental and theoretical investigation, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14571–14579 RSC .
S. H. Jin, D. H. Kim, G. H. Jun, S. H. Hong and S. Jeon, Tuning the photoluminescence of graphene quantum dots through the charge transfer effect of functional groups, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1239–1245 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, N. Gao, L. Wu, J. Ren, W. Wei and X. Qu, Highly photoluminescent amino-functionalized graphene quantum dots used for sensing copper ions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 13362–13368 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Xia, C. Zhou, B. Via, Y. Xia, F. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Xia and J. Tang, Synthesis of strongly green-photoluminescent graphene quantum dots for drug carrier, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 112, 192–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, X. Yang and C. Li, Facile preparation and upconversion luminescence of graphene quantum dots, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580–2582 RSC .
P. Luo, Z. Ji, C. Li, G. Shi, A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Aryl-modified graphene quantum dots with enhanced photoluminescence and improved pH tolerance, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7361–7367 RSC .
K. Li, J. Chen, Y. Yan, Y. Min, H. Li, F. Xi, J. Liu and P. Chen, Quasi-homogeneous carbocatalysis for one-pot selective conversion of carbohydrates to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural using sulfonated graphene quantum dots, Carbon, 2018, 136, 224–233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Wang, Z. Li, H. Zhu and J. Liu, Folic acid-functionalized graphene quantum dots with tunable fluorescence emission for cancer cell imaging and optical detection of Hg2+, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4352–4360 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Zong, J. Zhang and C. Li, One-pot hydrothermal synthesis of graphene quantum dots surface-passivated by polyethylene glycol and their photoelectric conversion under near-infrared light, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 97–101 RSC .
H. Tetsuka, A. Nagoya, T. Fukusumi and T. Matsui, Molecularly Designed, Nitrogen-Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots for Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4632–4638 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Zheng, A. Than, A. Ananthanaraya, D. H. Kim and P. Chen, Graphene quantum dots as universal fluorophores and their use in revealing regulated trafficking of insulin receptors in adipocytes, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6278–6286 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, F. Yang, Y. Tang, W. Yang, H. Zhong, C. Yu, R. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Li and L. Mao, Graphene quantum dots nanosensor derived from 3D nanomesh graphene frameworks and its application for fluorescent sensing of Cu2+ in rat brain, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 672–681 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Tam, N. B. Trung, H. R. Kim, J. S. Chung and W. M. Choi, One-pot synthesis of N-doped graphene quantum dots as a fluorescent sensing platform for Fe3+ ions detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 202, 568–573 CrossRef .
N. Li, A. Than, X. Wang, S. Xu, L. Sun, H. Duan, C. Xu and P. Chen, Ultrasensitive profiling of metabolites using tyramine-functionalized graphene quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3622–3629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta Chowdhury and R. A. Doong, Highly sensitive and selective detection of nanomolar ferric ions using dopamine functionalized graphene quantum dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21002–21010 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, D. Chen, B. Gu, T. Wang, Z. Wang, F. xie, Y. Yang, Q. Guo and G. Wang, Facile and highly effective synthesis of nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots as a fluorescent sensing probe for Cu2+ detection, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20, 538–544 CrossRef .
C. Qu, D. Zhang, R. Yang, J. Hu and L. Qu, Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped graphene quantum dots for the highly sensitive and selective detection of mercury ion in living cells, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 206, 588–596 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Mo, X. Niu, X. Yang, Y. Jiang, P. Zhao, N. Liu and R. Guo, Highly sensitive fluorescence sensor for mercury(II) based on boron-and nitrogen-co-doped graphene quantum dots, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 566, 357–368 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, G. Xia, W. Zhong, L. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Min and K. Li, Direct transformation of lignin into fluorescence-switchable graphene quantum dots and their application in ultrasensitive profiling of a physiological oxidant, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3343–3352 RSC .
D. Wang, L. Wang, X. Dong, Z. Shi and J. Jin, Chemically tailoring graphene oxides into fluorescent nanosheets for Fe3+ ion detection, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2147–2154 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, S. Ge, Y. Pang, F. Xi, J. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Facile and scalable preparation of highly luminescent N, S co-doped graphene quantum dots and
their application for parallel detection of multiple metal ions, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 6593–6600 RSC .
Y. F. Chen, C. L. Kao, P. C. Huang, C. Y. Hsu and C. H. Kuei, Facile synthesis of multi-responsive functional graphene quantum dots for sensing metal cations, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103006–103011 RSC .
Z. S. Qian, X. Y. Shan, L. J. Chai, J. R. Chen and H. Feng, A fluorescent nanosensor based on graphene quantum dots–aptamer probe and graphene oxide platform for detection of lead(II) ion, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Chen, B. Gu, B. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. Yang, Q. Guo, X. Zheng and G. Wang, Yellow emissive nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots as a label-free fluorescent probe for Fe3+ sensing and bioimaging, Diam. Relat. Mater., 2020, 104, 107749 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yu, H. Peng, H. Xiong, X. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Li and L. Chen, Graphene quantum dots combined with copper(II) ions as a fluorescent probe for turn-on detection of sulfide ions, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 2139–2146 CrossRef CAS .
W. Na, Z. Qu, X. Chen and X. Su, A turn-on fluorescent probe for sensitive detection of sulfide anions and ascorbic acid by using sulfanilic acid and glutathione functionalized graphene quantum dots, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 256, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Huang, L. Zhang, M. Zou, B. Shi and S. Zhao, Nitrogen and phosphorus co-doped graphene quantum dots as a nano-sensor for highly sensitive and selective imaging detection of nitrite in live cell, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, X. Song, Y. Chen, M. Rong, T. Zhao, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang and X. Chen, One-pot synthesis of highly greenish-yellow fluorescent nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for pyrophosphate sensing via competitive coordination with Eu 3+ ions, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15427–15433 RSC .
Y. Dong, G. Li, N. Zhou, R. Wang, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Graphene quantum dot as a green and facile sensor for free chlorine in drinking water, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8378–8382 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Achadu and T. Nyokong, Graphene quantum dots decorated with maleimide and zinc tetramaleimido-phthalocyanine: Application in the design of “OFF–ON” fluorescence sensors for biothiols, Talanta, 2017, 166, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xue, S. Yu, Z. Qiang, L. Xiuying, T. Lijun and L. Jiangrong, Application of maleimide modified graphene quantum dots and porphyrin fluorescence resonance energy transfer in the design of “turn-on” fluorescence sensors for biothiols, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1108, 46–53 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Song, T. Zhao, H. W. Fu, H. Z. Wang, Y. J. Wang and D. M. Kong, Photoluminescent sensing for acidic amino acids based on the disruption of graphene quantum dots/europium ions aggregates, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, B. Tian, Y. Xue, R. Li, T. Zhai and L. Tan, Determination of aminophylline based on fluorescence quenching of amino-functionalized graphene quantum dots induced by photoilluminated riboflavin-aminophylline system, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 235, 118306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kadian and G. Manik, Sulfur doped graphene quantum dots as a potential sensitive fluorescent probe for the detection of quercetin, Food Chem., 2020, 317, 126457 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bhatnagar, V. Kumar, A. Kumar and I. Kaur, Graphene quantum dots FRET based sensor for early detection of heart attack in human, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 495–499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, W. Na, Z. Liu, X. Chen and X. Su, A novel turn-on fluorescent strategy for sensing ascorbic acid using graphene quantum dots as fluorescent probe, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 229–233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Qian, X. Y. Shan, L. J. Chai, J. J. Ma, J. R. Chen and H. Feng, DNA nanosensor based on biocompatible graphene quantum dots and carbon nanotubes, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 60, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qian, X. Shan, L. Chai, J. Chen and H. Feng, Simultaneous Detection of Multiple DNA Targets by Integrating Dual-Color Graphene Quantum Dot Nanoprobes and Carbon Nanotubes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16065–16069 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bhatnagar, I. Kaur and A. Kumar, Ultrasensitive cardiac troponin I antibody based nanohybrid sensor for rapid detection of human heart attack, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 95, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tran and R. A. Doong, Sustainable fabrication of green luminescent sulfur-doped graphene quantum dots for rapid visual detection of hemoglobin, Anal. Methods, 2019, 11, 4421–4430 RSC .
P. Pang, F. Yan, H. Li, H. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Wu and W. Yang, Graphene quantum dots and Nafion composite as an ultrasensitive electrochemical sensor for the detection of dopamine, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 4912–4918 RSC .
L. Lu, L. Zhou, J. Chen, F. Yan, J. Liu, X. Dong, F. Xi and P. Chen, Nanochannel-confined graphene quantum dots for ultrasensitive electrochemical analysis of complex samples, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12673–12681 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Sun, P. He, X. Deng, Z. Wang, C. Hu, G. Ding and X. Xie, Selenium doped graphene quantum dots as an ultrasensitive redox fluorescent switch, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2004–2011 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zor, E. Morales-Narváez, A. Zamora-Gálvez, H. Bingol, M. Ersoz and A. Merkoçi, Graphene quantum dots-based photoluminescent sensor: a multifunctional composite for pesticide detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20272–20279 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liu, D. Tang, Z. Chen, X. Yan, Z. Zhong, L. Kang and J. Yao, Chemical redox modulated fluorescence of nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for probing the activity of alkaline phosphatase, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nurunnabi, Z. Khatun, K. M. Huh, S. Y. Park, D. Y. Lee, K. J. Cho and Y. K. Lee, 
            In vivo biodistribution and toxicology of carboxylated graphene quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6858–6867 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, A. Than, J. Chen, F. Xi, J. Liu and P. Chen, Graphene quantum dots based fluorescence turn-on nanoprobe for highly sensitive and selective imaging of hydrogen sulfide in living cells, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 779–784 RSC .
X. Yan, Y. Song, C. Zhu, J. Song, D. Du, X. Su and Y. Lin, Graphene quantum dot-MnO2 nanosheet based optical sensing platform: a sensitive fluorescence “turn off–on” nanosensor for glutathione detection and intracellular imaging, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21990–21996 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, H. Li, H. Li, Q. Qiao, C. Cao and Z. Xu, A turn-on fluorescent probe for hydrogen sulfide and its application in living cells, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 86355–86358 RSC .
P. Wang, S. Xue and X. Yang, Highly selective and sensitive detection of hydrogen sulfide in aqueous medium and live cells using peptide-based bioprobe to mimic the binding sites of the ceruloplasmin for Cu(II) ions, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 163, 112283 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Zhou, L. Fan and S. Yang, Electrochemical synthesis of small-sized red fluorescent graphene
quantum dots as a bioimaging platform, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2544–2546 RSC .
N. Li, A. Than, C. Sun, J. Tian, J. Chen, K. Pu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Monitoring dynamic cellular redox homeostasis using fluorescence-switchable graphene quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11475–11482 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, A. Than, N. Li, A. Ananthanarayanan, X. Zheng, F. Xi, J. Liu, J. Tian and P. Chen, Sweet graphene quantum dots for imaging carbohydrate receptors in live cells, FlatChem, 2017, 5, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Soleymani, M. Hasanzadeh, M. H. Somi, S. A. Ozkan and A. Jouyban, Targeting and sensing of some cancer cells using folate bioreceptor functionalized nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 118, 1021–1034 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, J. Pan, C. Li and Y. Zheng, Folic acid-conjugated nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots as a fluorescent diagnostic material for MCF-7 cells, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 135701 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, M. Lan, B. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Guo, H. Wang, Q. Jia, G. Niu, X. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Meng, P. Wang, C. S. Lee, W. Zhang and X. Han, A graphene quantum dot photodynamic therapy agent with high singlet oxygen generation, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, R. Revia, K. Wang, R. J. Kant, Q. Mu, Z. Gai, K. Hong and M. Zhang, Paramagnetic properties of metal-free boron-doped graphene quantum dots and their application for safe magnetic resonance imaging, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605416 CrossRef .
D. Qu, Z. Sun, M. Zheng, J. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. Liu and Z. Xie, Three Colors Emission from S, N Co-doped Graphene Quantum Dots for Visible Light H2 Production and Bioimaging, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kadian, G. Manik, N. Das and P. Roy, Targeted bioimaging and sensing of folate receptor-positive cancer cells using folic acid-conjugated sulfur-doped graphene quantum dots, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 1–10 CrossRef .
C. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhou, T. Han, X. Xin, J. Wu, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Enhancing cell nucleus accumulation and DNA cleavage activity of anti-cancer drug via graphene quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2852 CrossRef .
O. Lv, Y. Tao, Y. Qin, C. Chen, Y. Pan, L. Deng, L. Liu and Y. Kong, Highly fluorescent and morphology-controllable graphene quantum dots-chitosan hybrid xerogels for in vivo imaging and pH-sensitive drug carrier, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 67, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Javanbakht and H. Namazi, Doxorubicin loaded carboxymethyl cellulose/graphene quantum dot nanocomposite hydrogel films as a potential anticancer drug delivery system, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 87, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nasrollahi, B. Sana, D. Paramelle, S. Ahadian, A. Khademhosseini and S. Lim, Incorporation of Graphene Quantum Dots, Iron, and Doxorubicin in/on Ferritin Nanocages for Bimodal Imaging and Drug Delivery, Adv. Ther., 2020, 3, 1900183 CrossRef .
F. Yin, K. Hu, Y. Chen, M. Yu, D. Wang, Q. Wang, K. T. Yong, F. Lu, Y. Liang and Z. Li, SiRNA delivery with PEGylated graphene oxide nanosheets for combined photothermal and genetherapy for pancreatic cancer, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 1133 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Dunbar, K. A. High, J. K. Joung, D. B. Kohn, K. Ozawa and M. Sadelain, Gene therapy comes of age, Science, 2018, 359, 1–10 CrossRef .
S. M. Ghafary, M. Nikkhah, S. Hatamie and S. Hosseinkhani, Imultaneous gene delivery and tracking through preparation of photo-luminescent nanoparticles based on graphene quantum dots and chimeric peptides, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biswas, P. Khandelwal, R. Das, G. Salunke, A. Alam, S. Ghorai, S. Chattopadhyay and P. Poddar, Oxidant mediated one-step complete conversion of multi-walled carbon nanotubes to graphene quantum dots and their bioactivity against mammalian and bacterial cells, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 785–796 RSC .
K. Habiba, D. P. Bracho-Rincon, J. A. Gonzalez-Feliciano, J. C. Villalobos-Santos, V. I. Makarov, D. Ortiz, J. A. Avalos, C. I. Gonzalez, B. R. Weiner and G. Morell, Synergistic antibacterial activity of PEGylated silver–graphene quantum dots nanocomposites, Appl. Mater. Today, 2015, 1, 80–87 CrossRef .
L. Hui, J. Huang, G. Chen, Y. Zhu and L. Yang, Antibacterial property of graphene quantum dots (both source material and bacterial shape matter), ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kholikov, S. Ilhom, M. Sajjad, M. E. Smith, J. D. Monroe, O. San and A. O. Er, Improved singlet oxygen generation and antimicrobial activity of sulphur-doped graphene quantum dots coupled with methylene blue for photodynamic therapy applications, Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther., 2018, 24, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kadian, G. Manik, N. Das, P. Nehra, R. P. Chauhan and P. Roy, Synthesis, characterization and investigation of synergistic antibacterial activity and cell viability of silver–sulfur doped graphene quantum dot (Ag@ S-GQDs) nanocomposites, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3028–3037 RSC .
S. Li, S. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Li, J. Zhu, L. Fan and S. Yang, Exceptionally high payload of the IR780 iodide on folic acid-functionalized graphene quantum dots for targeted photothermal therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22332–22341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Du, K. Wang, Y. Wen, Y. Li and Y. Y. Li, Photodynamic graphene quantum dot: reduction condition regulated photoactivity and size dependent efficacy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3287–3294 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Tan, Y. Zhu, Y. Su, T. Cheng and C. Shi, Sentinel lymph node mapping by a near-infrared fluorescent heptamethine dye, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 1911–1917 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Kuo, C. Y. Chang, H. H. Chen, C. L. L. Hsu, J. Y. Wang, H. F. Kao, L. C. S. Chou, Y. C. Chen, S. J. Chen, W. T. Chang, S. W. Tseng, P. C. Wu and Y. C. Pu, Two-photon photoexcited photodynamic therapy and contrast agent with antimicrobial graphene quantum dots, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30467–30474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, J. Kumar, S. Narayan Sharma and S. Srivastava, rGO integrated MEHPPV and P3HT polymer blends for bulk hetero junction solar cells: A comparative insight, Optik, 2019, 178, 411–421 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Song, M. H. Jang, J. Chung, S. H. Jin, B. H. Kim, S. H. Hur, S. Yoo, Y. H. Cho and S. Jeon, Highly efficient light-emitting diode of graphene quantum dots fabricated from graphite intercalation compounds, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Kim, S. W. Hwang, S. Kim, D. H. Shin, S. S. Kang, J. M. Kim, C. W. Jang, J. H. Kim, K. W. Lee, S. H. Choi and E. Hwang, High-performance graphene-quantum-dot photodetectors, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5603 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. De Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors with ultrahigh gain, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, Luminscent graphene quantum dots for organic photovoltaic devices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, An electrochemical avenue to green-luminescent graphene quantum dots as potential electron-acceptors for photovoltaics, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, S. N. Sharma and J. Kumar, Comparative charge transport study of MEHPPV–TiO2 and P3HT–TiO2 nanocomposites for hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3408–3419 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, S. J. Kim, M. J. Park, S. Bae, S. P. Cho, Q. G. Du, D. H. Wang, J. H. Park and B. H. Hong, Surface-engineered graphene quantum dots incorporated into polymer layers for high performance organic photovoltaics, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14276 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Tsai, W. R. Wei, L. Tang, H. C. Chang, S. H. Tai, P. K. Yang, S. P. Lau, L. J. Chen and J. H. He, Si hybrid solar cells with 13% efficiency via concurrent improvement in optical and electrical properties by employing graphene quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 815–821 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alonso-González, A. Y. Nikitin, F. Golmar, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, S. Vélez, J. Chen, G. Navickaite, F. Koppens, A. Zurutuza, F. Casanova, L. E. Hueso and R. Hillenbrand, Controlling graphene plasmons with resonant metal antennas and spatial conductivity patterns, Science, 2014, 344, 1369–1373 CrossRef .
H. Yan, X. Li, B. Chandra, G. Tulevski, Y. Wu, M. Freitag, W. Zhu, P. Avouris and F. Xia, Tunable infrared plasmonic devices using graphene/insulator stacks, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 330–334 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, Y. Cai, J. Lin, H. Liang, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Feng and W. D. Fei, Heterostructural graphene quantum dot/MnO2 nanosheets toward high-potential window electrodes for high-performance supercapacitors, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700887 CrossRef .
W. W. Liu, Y. Q. Feng, X. Bin Yan, J. T. Chen and Q. J. Xue, Superior micro-supercapacitors based on graphene quantum dots, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Chen, S. T. Hsu, Y. H. Tseng, T. F. Yeh, S. S. Hou, J. S. Jan, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, Minimization of Ion–Solvent Clusters in Gel Electrolytes Containing Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Small, 2018, 14, 1703571 CrossRef .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Graphene quantum dots coated VO2 arrays for highly durable electrodes for Li and Na ion batteries, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bai, M. K. Tsang and J. Hao, Luminescent ions in advanced composite materials for multifunctional applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6330–6350 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sekiya, Y. Uemura, H. Murakami and T. Haino, White-Light-Emitting Edge-Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 5725–5729 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim and T. W. Kim, Ultrahigh current efficiency of light-emitting devices based on octadecylamine-graphene quantum dots, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kwon, Y. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, T. Lee, S. Do, Y. Park, M. S. Jeong, T. W. Lee and S. W. Rhee, High color-purity green, orange, and red light-emitting diodes based on chemically functionalized graphene quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim and T. W. Kim, Ultrahigh-luminosity white-light-emitting devices based on edge functionalized graphene quantum dots, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, A. Kumar, Sunny, K. S. Seong and S. H. Park, Single-crystalline ZnO/graphene quantum dots phosphors-converted white light-emitting diodes, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2018, 31, 203–205 Search PubMed .
P. Dong, B. P. Jiang, W. Q. Liang, Y. Huang, Z. Shi and X. C. Shen, Synthesis of white-light-emitting graphene quantum dots via a one-step reduction and their interfacial characteristics-dependent luminescence properties, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 712–718 RSC .
Y. X. Chen, D. Lu, G. G. Wang, J. Huangfu, Q. B. Wu, X. F. Wang, L. F. Liu, D. M. Ye, B. Yan and J. Han, Highly Efficient Orange Emissive Graphene Quantum Dots Prepared by Acid-Free Method for White LEDs, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6657–6666 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lin, S. R. M. Santiago, C. T. Yuan, K. P. Chiu, J. L. Shen, T. C. Wang, H. C. Kuo, C. H. Chiu, Y. C. Yao and Y. J. Lee, Enhanced performance of GaN-based ultraviolet light emitting diodes by photon recycling using graphene quantum dots, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. K. Seo, J. H. Park, Y. Song, Y. S. Meng and M. J. Heller, White-light emission of blue-luminescent graphene quantum dots by europium(III) complex incorporation, Carbon, 2017, 124, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, K. Huang, X. Yu, Z. Yang, K. Xiao, Y. Qiang, X. Zhu, L. Xu, P. Wang, C. Cui and D. Yang, Enhanced electronic properties of SnO2via electron transfer from graphene quantum dots for efficient perovskite solar cells, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9176–9182 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Moon, K. S. Lee, J. Shim, S. Park, S. H. Kim, S. Bae, M. Park, C. L. Lee, W. K. Choi, Y. Yi, J. Y. Hwang and D. I. Son, Enhanced photovoltaic performance of inverted polymer solar cells utilizing versatile chemically functionalized ZnO@graphene quantum dot monolayer, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, ZnO/graphene quantum dot solid-state solar cell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127–20131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu, P. Sarojinijeeva, R. Karthick, G. Anantharaj, G. Saritha, R. Bera, S. Anandan, A. Patra, P. Ragupathy, M. Selvaraj, D. Jeyakumar and K. V. Pillai, Enhancing the Efficiency of DSSCs by the Modification of TiO2 Photoanodes using
N, F and S, co-doped Graphene Quantum Dots, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 337–343 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Tsai, W. C. Tu, L. Tang, T. C. Wei, W. R. Wei, S. P. Lau, L. J. Chen and J. H. He, Efficiency enhancement of silicon heterojunction solar cells via photon management using graphene quantum dot as downconverters, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, J. W. Lee, H. Yu, J. Yun, K. Lee, J. Lee, D. Hwang, J. Kang, S. K. Kim and J. Jang, Size effects of a graphene quantum dot modified-blocking TiO2 layer for efficient planar perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16834–16842 RSC .
H. Bian, Q. Wang, S. Yang, C. Yan, H. Wang, L. Liang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and S. Liu, Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for 80% photoluminescence quantum yield for inorganic γ-CsPbI 3 perovskite solar cells with efficiency beyond 16%, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5740–5747 RSC .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Li, X. Wang, S. Tang, Q. Meng, Y. Li, C. Shi, R. Hu and B. Yang, Graphene quantum dots with controllable surface oxidation, tunable fluorescence and up-conversion emission, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2717–2720 RSC .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Hydrothermal route for cutting graphene sheets into blue-luminescent graphene quantum dots, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 CrossRef CAS .
R. Riaz, M. Ali, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Arbab, T. Maiyalagan, A. S. Anjum, M. J. Ko and S. H. Jeong, Self-assembled nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQDs) over graphene sheets for superb electro-photocatalytic activity, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 1035–1046 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Kuo, Y. T. Shao, K. S. Huang, T. M. Chou and C. H. Yang, Antimicrobial amino-functionalized nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots for eliminating multidrug-resistant species in dual-modality photodynamic therapy and bioimaging under two-photon excitation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14438–14446 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hasan, R. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, C. Ryan, K. Pota, K. Green, J. L. Coffer and A. V. Naumov, Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots: Optical properties modification and photovoltaic applications, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1041–1047 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kalkal, R. Pradhan, S. Kadian, G. Manik and P. Gopinath, Biofunctionalized graphene quantum dots based fluorescent biosensor towards efficient detection of small cell lung cancer, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 4922–4932 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, X. Zhang, A. Pang and J. Yang, Facile synthesis and photoluminescence characteristics of blue-emitting nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 165704 CrossRef .
S. Do, W. Kwon and S. W. Rhee, Soft-template synthesis of nitrogen-doped carbon nanodots: tunable visible-light photoluminescence and phosphor-based light-emitting diodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4221–4226 RSC .
Z. Fan, S. Zhou, C. Garcia, L. Fan and J. Zhou, pH-Responsive fluorescent graphene quantum dots for fluorescence-guided cancer surgery and diagnosis, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4928–4933 RSC .
S. Radhakrishnan, A. Samanta, P. M. Sudeep, K. L. Maldonado, S. A. Mani, G. Acharya, C. S. Tiwary, A. K. Singh and P. M. Ajayan, Metal-Free Dual Modal Contrast Agents Based on Fluorographene Quantum Dots, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1600221 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

Sachin Kadian
	Mr Sachin Kadian is currently pursuing his PhD in Polymer and Process Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, from December 2016. He received his MTech in Biomedical Engineering from the National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra, in 2016 and BTech in Electronics and Communication Engineering from the University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Kurukshetra, India, in 2014. His current research interest includes synthesis and characterization of quantum dots (graphene, sulfur, carbon, zinc oxide etc.), nanomaterials, nanocomposite and their applications in biosensors, energy storage devices, photovoltaics, chemo-sensors, bioimaging and antibacterial agents.

Sushanta K. Sethi
	Mr Sushanta received his MTech in Rubber Technology from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (IIT Kgp), India, and is currently pursuing his PhD in Polymer and Process Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT Roorkee), India. His current research interest includes molecular dynamics simulations of environment-friendly easy-clean coatings. His research takes inspiration from nature to design and fabricate a self-clean coating material. He is an expert in atomistic and coarse-grain simulations.

Gaurav Manik
	Dr Gaurav Manik is currently serving as an Associate Professor in the Department of Polymer and Process Engineering at IIT Roorkee. He holds a PhD (IIT Bombay), MTech (IIT Kanpur) and BTech (HBTI Kanpur) in Chemical Engineering. Prior to joining IITR, he has served extensively in industry (3M, Indo Gulf Fertilizers & Chem. Ltd, Classic Stripes Pvt. Ltd) and academia (BITS Pilani, BIET Jhansi) totaling up his rich experience to 17+ years. His research interests include molecular modeling and simulations of polymer materials, chemical process modeling and simulations, and development of novel polymer composites and nanocomposites, coatings, sealants, adhesives, quantum dots and nanomaterials. He has ∼100 research publications in international peer-reviewed SCI journals, patent applications, conferences and book chapters.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of main topics (related to GQD research) discussed in this article.	 

 	Fig. 1  Top-down approach to synthesize GQDs through (a) chemical oxidation of CX-72 carbon black (reproduced with permission,29 copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment of graphite (reproduced with permission,32 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (c) Oxidant-assisted solvo-thermal treatment of MWCNTs, graphite, charcoal and carbon fiber (reproduced with permission,38 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Coal tar pitch reflux under mild conditions (reproduced with permission,39 copyright 2018 MDPI). (e) Cutting of graphene oxide in the presence of hydroxyl radical oxidants (reproduced with permission,40 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Electrochemical cutting of graphene sheets (reproduced with permission,31 copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). (g) Electrochemical cutting of graphene paper in the presence of a weak electrolyte (reproduced with permission,46 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (h) Pulsed laser ablation of carboxyl-functionalized MWCNTs (reproduced with permission,48 copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 2  Bottom-up approach to prepare GQDs through (a) tuning the carbonization degree of citric acid (reproduced with permission,17 copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Hydrothermal route using citric acid and urea or thiourea as precursors (reproduced with permission,55 copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Solvothermal reaction of norepinephrine (reproduced with permission,56 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (d) Hydrothermal pyrolysis of citric acid and urea (reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Free-radical polymerization of salicylic acid under ultraviolet irradiation (reproduced with permission,58 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (f) Microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment of glucose (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (g) Microwave-assisted synthesis using ethanolic extract of mango (Mangifera indica) leaves (reproduced with permission,59 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

Top-down	Acidic oxidation	GO	13.3	7.4	Low-cost starting materials	Wider size distribution, hard to remove acid oxidizing agent	
100

Coal	2.96	51	
37

CX-72	15	4.04	
29

Solvothermal	GO	3–5	9.9	Narrow size distribution	Lengthy process	
203

Hydrothermal	Graphene sheets	5–13	6.9	Narrow size distribution	Lengthy and acidic	
204

GO sheets	5–10	—	Oxidation process	
205

Electrochemical	Graphite	5–10	14	Facile method and high PLQY	Multiple type	
47

Graphene	3–5	—	Precursors required	
176

Ultrasonic shearing	GO sheets	7.31	33	Improved PLQY and narrow size distribution	Lengthy process to obtain precursors	
206

Microwave-assisted hydrothermal	Glucosamine	6	32	Improved PLQY, shortened reaction time and narrow size distribution	Sophisticated equipment	
207

Bottom-up	Pyrolysis or carbonization	CA	∼15	9	High PLQY, easy to dope, cost-effective method, size control, shortened reaction time and environmentally friendly process	Selected carbon containing precursors such as aromatic structural molecules are required	
17

CA + MPA	∼4	57	
16

Step-wise organic synthesis	Salicylic acid	1–5	86	
58

Hydrothermal	CA + diethylenetriamine	∼3	76.8	
208

CA + ethylenediamine	5–10	75.2	
209

Microwave-assisted hydrothermal	Glucosamine–HCl and thiourea	5.50	60	
61

Intermolecular condensation	CA + L-cystine	2.8	84	
60

Soft-template	CA + ethylenediamine	2	83	
210

Cage opening	Fullerene (C60)	2–10	—	
52


Tattered graphite	Amidative cutting	GQDs	Size control by varying the concentration of amine	
67

Graphene oxide	Mild oxidation	GOQDs	Size and luminescence control by varying the pore size of polyethersulfone membrane centrifuge tubes	
66

Coal	Chemical oxidation	GQDs	Bandgap control by monitoring the reaction time	
68

Ethylene gas	Thermal plasma jet	GQDs	Size control by varying the length of the carbon tube	
69

Few layer graphene	Ultrasonication	aGQDs	Edge-enrichment by chemical activation using KOH	
71

Graphene oxide	Microwave assisted	pGQDs	Enhancement of photoluminescence through a photochemical reduction process	
74

Graphene & NaHSe	Acidic oxidation	Se-GQDs	Reversible fluorescent switch by changing the oxidative and reductive agents	
138

Citric acid & MPA	Pyrolysis	S-GQDs	Quantum yield control by varying the concentration of the S dopant	
62

Multiwalled CNTs	Microwave heating	N,F,S-GQDs	Product yield control by enhancing the kinetics	
19


 	Fig. 3  Intrinsic property control of GQDs: (a) size (2 to 10 nm) controlled GQDs by varying the concentration of amine (reproduced with permission,67 copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Size (8 to 1 nm) dependent PL emission (orange–red to blue) and band gap structure (reproduced with permission,66 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (c) Role of KOH in producing activated GQDs with enhanced electrochemical capacitance and photoluminescence intensity (reproduced with permission,71 copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Dependence of photo-induced ROS generation and cytotoxicity capability of GQDs on the presence/absence of ketonic carbonyl, carboxylic and hydroxyl groups (reproduced with permission,72 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  Regulation of GQDs through heteroatom doping. (a) Introduction of N dopant through thermal treatment of iGO-QDs in the presence of ammonia to repair the vacancy-type defects (reproduced with permission,86 copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Hydrothermal treatment of N-GQDs in the presence of ammonia to convert pyridinic/pyrrolic-N into amino/amide groups (reproduced with permission,12 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (c) Formation of N, F and S co-doped GQDs (Reproduced with permission,19 copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Formation of B-GQDs through hydrothermal treatment of glucose and boric acid (reproduced with permission,85 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Synthesis of F-GQDs through gradient fluorine-sacrificing strategy defects (reproduced with permission,90 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (f) Preparation of P-GQDs via an electrochemical approach (reproduced with permission,91 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Formation of S-GQDs for Fe3+ ion sensing (reproduced with permission,92 copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (h) Synthesis of S-GQDs with varying fluorescence (reproduced with permission,16 copyright 2019 IOP Publishing).	 

 	Fig. 5  Surface or edge functionalization of GQDs. (a) Surface functionalization of GQDs with small organic molecules including diamines, glycols and dithioglycols (reproduced with permission,96 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Preparation of amino-functionalized GQDs (AF-GQDs) through hydrothermal treatment (reproduced with permission,51 copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (c) Synthesis of alkyl amine-functionalized GQDs using PEG-diamine (reproduced with permission,97 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (d) Preparation of drug loaded green-fluorescent PEG-GQDs (reproduced with permission,99 copyright 2013 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Synthesis of PEG-GQDs (reproduced with permission,100 copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry). (f) Functionalization of GQDs with aryl groups through a Gomberg–Bachmann reaction (reproduced with permission,101 copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Synthesis of sulfonated GQDs and their catalytic activity (reproduced with permission,102 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (h) Formation of folic acid functionalized GQDs (FA-GQDs) (reproduced with permission,103 copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

Citric acid & ammonia	Hydrothermal	N-GQDs	350–550	Fe3+ ion detection	
108


p-Coumaric acid & p-phenylenediamine	Hydrothermal	N-GQDs	400–600	Cu2+ ion detection	
111

GO, boric acid & ammonia	Hydrothermal	B,N-GQDs	350–550	Hg2+ ion detection	
113

GO, H2SO4 & HNO3	Ultrasonication	GQDs	350–550	Sulfide ion detection	
120

GO, ammonia & maleimide	Hydrothermal	M-GQDs	350–600	Bio-thiol detection	
126

Graphite rods	Electrochemical	GQDs	440–480	Tumor detection	
211

Fluorographene	Liquid exfoliation	F-GQDs	—	MRI contrast agent	
212

Graphite power	Hydrothermal	GQDs	400–600	DNA nano-sensor	
132

Carbon fiber	Acidic exfoliation	GQDs	490–515	
In vivo biodistribution	
141

Graphite & K2S2O8	Electrochemical	RF-GQDs	500–700	Cellular imaging	
146

4-Vinylphenylboronic acid & boric acid	Polymerization	B-GQDs	350–500	MRI contrast agent	
152

Citric acid	Pyrolysis	GQDs	400–600	Drug delivery system	
157

C60 cage	Acidic oxidation	C60-GQDs	400–600	Antibacterial activity	
164

Citric acid & folic acid	Pyrolysis	FA-GQDs	750–850	Photothermal therapy	
167


 	Fig. 6  GQDs as a biosensing probe. (a) N, S co-doped GQD based parallel detection of Ag+, Fe3+ and Cu2+ ions (reproduced with permission,116 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Amine and phosphate group modified GQD (PiNGQD) based optical sensing of multiple cations (reproduced with permission,117 copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) N, P co-doped GQDs as nano-sensors for detection of nitrite in living cells (reproduced with permission,122 copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.). (d) S-GQD based detection of a most common bioflavonoid (quercetin) (reproduced with permission,129 copyright 2020 Elsevier B.V.). (e) Amine functionalized GQDs as an optical sensing probe for the detection of antigen Troponin I (cTnI) (reproduced with permission,130 copyright 2016 Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 7  GQDs as a bioimaging agent. (a) Live trafficking of insulin receptor in 3T3-L1 adipocytes using insulin-conjugated GQDs as an imaging probe (reproduced with permission,106 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of human breast cancer cells incubated with green fluorescent GQDs (reproduced with permission,33 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (c) Red fluorescent GQDs as a bioimaging probe for HeLa cells (reproduced with permission,146 copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Illustration of a desferrioxamine-functionalized GQD (DFOB-GQD) based redox-sensitive fluorescent on–off–on probe (reproduced with permission,147 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (e) Bright-field and red-fluorescence image after subcutaneous injection of GQDs (reproduced with permission,151 copyright 2014 Springer Nature). (f) In vivo NIR imaging with B-GQDs (reproduced with permission,152 copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). (g) Live intracellular temperature sensing using mGQDs through NIR imaging of L929 cells (reproduced with permission,59 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  GQDs as a drug carrier. (a) Targeted delivery of DOX through HA-functionalized GQDs (HA-GQDs) as a drug carrier (reproduced with permission,23 copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (b) Illustration of the mechanism of DOX delivery using DOX/GQD conjugates (reproduced with permission,155 copyright 2013 Springer Nature). (c) Illustration of a cell traceable drug delivery system using biotin-conjugated GQDs (reproduced with permission,24 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (d) Demonstration of an MTX-(N-GQDs) nanocarrier based drug delivery system (reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 9  GQDs as an antibacterial agent. (a) Synthesis of PEGylated Ag–GQDs and SEM images of treated and untreated P. aeruginosa bacterial cells (reproduced with permission,163 copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V.). (b) Antibacterial activity of GO-GQDs and C60-GQD against different kinds of bacteria (reproduced with permission,164 copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (c) E. coli and M. luteus colonies in PBS before and after irradiation and their percentage irradiation of MB-GQD with 660nm light (reproduced with permission,165 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (d) Synthesis of Ag@S-GQD nanocomposites and SEM images of treated and untreated P. aeruginosa bacteria (reproduced with permission,166 copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  GQDs as a threptic agent in PDT and PTT. (a) Macroscopic images of mice captured on the 1st, 9th, 17th and 25th day after treating with PDT (GQDs + light irradiation), C1 (GQDs only), C2 (light irradiation only) (reproduced with permission,151 copyright 2014 Springer Nature). (b) Illustration of the synthesis of IR780/GQDs-FA and their application for targeted PTT (reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (c) In vivo (tumor-bearing mice) and ex vivo (dissected organs) NIR imaging with free IR780 and IR780/GQDs-FA and their mean intensity histogram (reproduced with permission,167 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (d) Structure and functional pathway of a photodynamic GQD-SS-Ce6 nano-system with GSH regulated photoactivity (reproduced with permission,168 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

Tattered graphite	Amidative cutting	GQDs	450–700	Light-emitting diodes	
67

Graphite powder & sodium potassium tartrate	Intercalation & solvothermal	GQDs	300–600	Light-emitting diodes	
172

Graphene oxide	Acidic oxidation	GQDs	350–600	Photodetector	
173

Graphene sheets	Hydrothermal	GQDs	350–550	Organic PV devices	
175

Glucose	Microwave-assisted	GQDs	375–600	Si-Hybrid solar cells	
179

Graphene oxide	Acidic oxidation	GQDs	—	Supercapacitors	
182

Graphene oxide	Acidic oxidation	GOQDs	—	Lithium-ion batteries	
184


 	Fig. 11  GQDs for light-emitting diode applications. (a) PL spectra and CIE chromaticity coordinates of a blue LED with and without a GQD coating (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic of the device structure and energy diagram (reproduced with permission,188 copyright 2017 Elsevier B.V.). (c) Schematic of the device structure and energy diagram, current density–voltage, luminance–voltage curves, electroluminance spectra and CIE coordinates for the WLEDs with PVK:EF-GQDs at different luminance values (reproduced with permission,190 copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V.). (d) CIE chromaticity coordinates of W-GQDs (reproduced with permission,192 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Synthesis of luminescent composite films using GQDs and D-GQDs (reproduced with permission,193 copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  GQDs for solar cell applications. (a) Schematic of a silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell (reproduced with permission,200 copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic of GQD introduced planar-type perovskite solar cells and their energy band diagram (reproduced with permission,201 copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Schematic diagram of N-GQD EDS layer coated perovskite solar cells, I–V curves, PCE distribution histograms and J–V curves of the optimized perovskite solar cells (reproduced with permission,202 copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device, energy band diagram before and after illumination, J–V curves measured at reverse and forward scans and stabilized PCEs measured as a function of time (reproduced with permission,196 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
