Simultaneous energy harvesting and storage via solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cycles   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE01930H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE01930H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3370-3379Simultaneous energy harvesting and storage via solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cycles†

        
          
            Yu 
            Ding‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xuelin 
            Guo‡
, 
      
        
          
            Katrina 
            Ramirez-Meyers
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yangen 
            Zhou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Leyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Zhao
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Guihua 
            Yu
          
        
      *
      Materials Science and Engineering Program and Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. E-mail: ghyu@austin.utexas.edu
Received 
      17th June 2019
    , Accepted 30th September 2019First published on 30th September 2019AbstractSolar energy is regarded as the most promising source of electricity considering its large magnitude on earth every day. The effective use of such an intermittent energy source relies on development of affordable, inexhaustible and clean solar energy conversion and storage technologies. Here, we design a novel solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system for simultaneous photoelectric energy harvesting and storage. With rational screening of redox species and comprehensive electrochemical study, a high Seebeck coefficient of −1.8 mV K−1 is achieved by solely exploiting earth-abundant materials based on the thermogalvanic effect. A high energy conversion efficiency (1.23%, and 11.9% versus the Carnot efficiency) is achieved under a low temperature gradient of 35 °C. Moreover, the durability of the proof-of-concept device has been examined under solar irradiation employing the bifunctional current collector/solar absorber with good electrical conductivity, efficient solar absorption and photothermal transduction. This innovative cell design integrating simultaneous energy conversion and storage represents an alternative approach towards cost-effective harnessing of solar energy and even more broad thermal energy in ambient environments.

Broader context
Developing cost-effective devices based on earth-abundant materials for large-scale solar energy conversion and storage is crucial to alleviate the potential energy crisis in modern society. Here we report a novel electrochemical system for simultaneous energy harvesting and storage based on the thermogalvanic effect of rationally selected redox species. A regenerative electrochemical cell is demonstrated, employing the bifunctional current collector/solar absorber fabricated by a scalable process, for simultaneous energy harvesting and storage under solar irradiation without optical concentrators or accessory batteries. This neoteric device provides a roadmap for the development of innovative systems to harvest and store solar energy and more broad thermal energy by using inexpensive, simple and stable materials.

Introduction
Solar energy as a renewable source of energy is the most important energy source for all life forms in the world.1 The vast amounts of solar energy available on earth make it a highly appealing source of electricity for human beings. Since the first solar cell built in the 1880s, a range of ever-evolving technologies have been developed for efficient utilization of solar energy.2–5 Currently solar power generation is dominated by photovoltaic systems harnessing solar energy directly and concentrated solar power plants based on solar thermal energy.6,7 Given the intermittent nature of solar energy, simultaneous conversion and storage of the electricity generated is important to deliver dispatchable power on demand, especially in remote sites.8
Here we report a novel cost-effective solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system for simultaneous photoelectric energy harvesting and delivery based on the principle of the thermogalvanic effect.9,10 Thermogalvanic cells represent a promising type of heat-powered devices, but the energy conversion efficiency, ranging from 0.004% to 0.2%, is far less competitive than other power generation systems, limiting the applications for solar energy utilization.9,11 Distinguished from conventional nonisothermal thermoelectric generators and thermogalvanic cells, here we build an isothermal heat engine-based electrochemical cell by rational selection of two redox species with similar redox potentials but opposite Seebeck coefficients. The designated positive and negative electroactive species at high temperature are the negative and positive electroactive species at low temperature, respectively (Fig. 1A). The direction of current flow generated by thermal energy is reversed without any assistive electricity. The working principle of such a solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell is analogous to a seesaw, in which two objects with similar weights sit on the two ends, and the seesaw rocks back and forth forever as long as a torque difference can be maintained alternately all the time. Likewise, temperature functions as the driving force to keep the alternating potential difference of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell, thus leading to simultenous energy harvesting, storage, and delivery, and the energy output in one electrochemical cycle is the area of the loop in Fig. 1B.
 Fig. 1  The working principle and cell design for the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system. (A) Schematic showing the criteria to design the electrochemical cell for simultaneous energy harvesting and delivery. At room temperature, the cathode redox species with a higher potential possesses a negative Seebeck coefficient (α), and the anode redox species with a lower potential possesses a positive α. Meanwhile, the potential shift of the full cell due to the temperature change under solar irradiation needs to be large enough to offset the potential difference between the cathode and anode redox species at room temperature. (B) Temperature–entropy diagram of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cycle, in which the energy output in one cycle is the area of the loop (ΔSΔT). 
Moreover, by localizing the solar thermal energy on the current collector where the redox reaction takes place instead of heating the bulk electrolyte solution, heat loss can be minimized, thus contributing to enhanced energy conversion efficiency. Meanwhile, the graphene-modified current collector, with high electrical conductivity, good light absorption and photothermal transduction, works as a solar absorber simultaneously, which not only facilitates the reaction kinetics but also enables broadband and efficient solar absorption. This neoteric energy system is solely based on cost-effective electrode materials without stringent manufacturing processes or costly solar concentrators.12Via rational design of both the redox species and the bifunctional current collector/solar absorber, an innovative solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system is demonstrated for integrated energy harvesting and storage under solar irradiation without concentrators or auxiliary batteries.
Results and discussion
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the Seebeck coefficients of the two redox species in our proposed design should be opposite and of high magnitude to maximize the output voltage. A series of redox molecules are studied for rational screening of electroactive molecules. For a given electrochemical reaction of the form: A + ne− ↔ B(1)the relationship between the Gibbs free energy change, ΔG, and redox potential, E, is defined as ΔG = −nEF(2)where n is the number of electrons transferred in this reaction, and F is the Faraday constant. Meanwhile, the differential form of the Gibbs free energy (dG) is related to two natural variables: temperature (T) and pressure (P), dG = −SdT + VdP(3)where S is the entropy, and V is the volume. Therefore, the Seebeck coefficient, α, of the electrochemical reaction at constant pressure equals: (4)where SB and SA are the partial molar entropies of products B and reactants A, respectively; SB* and SA* are the Eastman entropies of the transport of the respective ions that accompanies heat transfer; and Se is the transported entropy of electrons in metallic electrodes.13 In most cases, Se contributes only 1% of the total entropy, and the Eastman entropy caused by the Soret effect is negligible on a short timescale. Therefore, the Seebeck coefficient equation can be simplified to: (5)where α solely depends on the entropy change in the redox reaction. Similar to a Carnot heat engine, in which the thermal energy available for harvesting is proportional to the entropy change and temperature difference, a large entropy change is preferred in the regenerative electrochemical system. Thermodynamically, entropy indicates the amount of disorder in a system and ΔS dictates the voltage delivered by the cell. Fig. 2A, E, and Fig. S1–S3 (ESI†) show the dependence of the open circuit voltage on temperature of various types of redox species, including inorganic, organic, and organometallic molecules, namely, K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6, KI3/KI, CuSO4/Cu, 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ)/hydroquinone (H2BQ), 4-OH-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy+ (4-OH-TEMPO+)/4-OH-TEMPO, and (ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium+ chloride (FcN+Cl)/FcNCl. The calculated Seebeck coefficients, summarized in Table S1 (ESI†), are typically smaller for the organic and organometallic molecules compared to the inorganic alternatives. The TEMPO and ferrocene derivatives show especially low α-values, possibly due to the negligible variation of the molecular structures during the electron transfer processes.14 Given the design criteria illustrated in Fig. 1, K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 and KI3/KI are selected as the electroactive species for the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell due to their similar redox potentials and competitive Seebeck coefficients. Despite a larger α of CuSO4/Cu compared to KI3/KI, the parasitic reaction between Cu2+ and Fe(CN)63− prevents the employment of Cu-based species.15
 Fig. 2  Seebeck coefficient measurements and RDE test of the selected redox species. (A–D) The Seebeck coefficient measurement, RDE test at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, Levich plot, and Koutecky–Levich plot derived from different overpotentials of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 solution, respectively. (E–H) The Seebeck coefficient measurement, RDE test at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, Levich plot, and Koutecky–Levich plot derived from different overpotentials of KI3/KI solution, respectively. 
In addition to the thermodynamic properties, the electrochemical features of the redox species also play a pivotal role in regulating the output performance of the electrochemical system. Large diffusion coefficients and fast reaction kinetics are prerequisites to overcome the hindrance of mass-transport and reaction activation.16 Herein a rotating disk electrode (RDE) test was conducted to evaluate the two selected redox species. Fig. 2B and F show the respective voltammograms of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 and KI3/KI solutions. The limiting currents at different rotation rates indicate a mass-transport-controlled process. The diffusion coefficient, D, was calculated using the Levich equation, ilim = 0.62 × nFAD2/3ω1/2ν−1/6C(6)where ilim is the limiting current controlled by diffusion, A is the electrode area, ω is the angular rotation rate, ν is the kinetic viscosity, and C is the concentration of redox species.17,18 By curve fitting (Fig. 2C and G), the derived D reaches 6.9 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, 7.6 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, 5.4 × 10−5 cm2 s−1, and 7.0 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 for K4Fe(CN)6, K3Fe(CN)6, KI, and KI3 respectively. These D-values are comparable to or higher than those of typical redox species in energy storage systems.19,20 Moreover, the kinetic current ik, controlled solely by the reaction kinetics without diffusion limitation, can be determined by extrapolating the rotation rate to infinity according to the Koutecky–Levich equation, (7)as presented in Fig. 2D and H. The exchange current (i0) is then determined by fitting the Tafel plot to an overpotential of zero (Fig. S4, ESI†), and the reaction rate constant (k0) can be extracted from the equation shown below: i0 = nFACk0(8)The determined k0 of K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 (7.4 × 10−4 cm s−1) and KI/KI3 (6.7 × 10−3 cm s−1) can also rival those of reported redox species on carbon electrodes.21–23 Typically slow mass transport will lead to a concentration gradient of redox species across the cell and thus the shift of the formal potential from its equilibrium value. Moreover, an electrochemical reaction is generally controlled by the slowest reaction step, and an energy barrier must be overcome to proceed with the process, which further gives rise to a change of the redox potential as a voltage loss. Given the high diffusion and kinetic parameters demonstrated above, the voltage loss due to mass transport and activation polarization can be mitigated considerably by employing K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 and KI/KI3 as electroactive materials for the regenerative electrochemical cell.
Based on the results above, a regenerative electrochemical cell was constructed with K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 (negative α) as the positive species and KI/KI3 (positive α) as the negative species at room temperature. The standard electrode potential of K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 is 0.17 V lower than that of KI/KI3, resulting in a negative output voltage of the full cell.17 For the half reaction in eqn (1), the redox potential is regulated by the activity of the redox species (activity coefficient times concentration) using the Nernst equation at room temperature: (9)where E is the reduction potential, E0 is the standard reduction potential, γ is the activity coefficient, and C is the concentration.17 Therefore, the potential of the full cell at room temperature can be adjusted by tuning the species ratio to maintain a positive output voltage at room temperature, in accordance with the design principle in Fig. 1. A home-made cell device, as shown in Fig. 3A and Fig. S5 (ESI†), with a membrane separator sandwiched between two quartz shells was adopted for the electrochemical test. Fig. 3B shows the typical charge–discharge voltage profiles of the cell with 0.5 M K3Fe(CN)6/0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6 as the catholyte and 0.1 M I2/2 M KI as the anolyte. Considering the high equilibrium constant (∼723) of the reaction,24 I2 + I− ↔ I3−(10)0.1 M I3− is estimated to form when combining 0.1 M I2 and 0.1 M iodide salt. The charge and discharge curves intersect almost exactly at 0 V, which satisfies the design criteria in Fig. 1. At a high current density of 6 mA cm−2, the cell can deliver a volumetric capacity of 13.2 A h L−1, indicating 82% capacity utilization of the active species. The high utilization efficiency is attributed to fast diffusion dynamics and large reaction rate constants in view of the electrochemistry elucidated by RDE. The cycling stability of the cell is demonstrated in Fig. 3C, with capacity retention as high as 98% after 500 cycles. The capacity stability of 99.996% per cycle accompanied by a coulombic efficiency of ∼100% rivals all reported energy storage systems, showing promise for the practicality of such systems.25–27 The crossover of redox species depends on the selectivity of membranes and the size/charge of the redox species. Thanks to the cation-exchange membrane employed here, the crossover of negatively charged species of Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64− and I3−/I− can be restricted greatly. The temperature-dependent operating voltage of the electrochemical system is presented in Fig. 3D, in which the cell voltage is stabilized at 30 mV at 30 °C and −32 mV at 65 °C, leading to a total Seebeck coefficient up to −1.8 mV K−1. Almost no voltage variations can be observed at different temperatures over 10 cycles, exhibiting the stability of the cell system. Considering the negative Seebeck coefficient of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 (Fig. 2A) and the positive Seebeck coefficient of KI3/KI (Fig. 2E), the cell voltage will be larger when the temperature is lower than 30 °C or higher than 65 °C. In comparison, the overall potential difference is only 20 mV when CuSO4/Cu and Ag/AgCl were employed as the cathode and the anode, respectively, indicating a total Seebeck coefficient of 0.57 mV K−1 (Fig. S6, ESI†). The much lower potential difference further confirms the great impact of the Seebeck coefficient on the cell performance. Several systems based on the thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle were reported previously,10,28,29 however, the Seebeck coefficients of the reported full cells are far from satisfactory and the solid-state electrode materials restricted the scalability of such devices. Hammond et al. reported a conceptual electrochemical cell for potential solar energy conversion, with no experimental performance demo except for the temperature dependence of the open circuit voltage (due to the large internal resistance and serious side reaction between reactants).30 Besides, this prior system belongs to the type of nonisothermal electrochemical cells with a temperature gradient maintained between two electrodes, in sharp contrast to the isothermal cell developed in this work. Attributed to the opposite Seebeck coefficients of the positive and negative species in this work, this demonstrated |α| is one of the highest compared with reported aqueous thermogalvanic cells (Table S2, ESI†). Therefore the demonstrated potential difference under such a temperature gradient is more prominent than that of most reported thermoelectric devices. In a typical galvanostatic discharge test (Fig. 3E and F), the cell was cycled between 30 °C and 65 °C, showing round-the-clock energy delivery. It was discharged to 0 mV at 30 °C, and a further heating process led to a negative voltage shift at 65 °C, and thus the cell can be discharged in the opposite direction until the voltage approaches 0 mV again. Finally the cell was cooled to 30 °C and the cell voltage returned to the initial value, completing the loop for extracting energy from low-grade heat sources. Fig. 3E and F show the voltage–capacity profiles at different current densities, and the energy conversion efficiency (η) is calculated according to the equation: (11)in which W is the total energy extracted from the cell at two different temperatures, QH is the energy absorbed at a high temperature TH, QHR is the energy needed to heat the whole cell device, Qc is the cell capacity delivered at TH, ηHR is the heat recuperation efficiency (70% has been demonstrated as a reasonable value), Cp is the heat capacity of the cell, and ΔT is the temperature difference.28,29 The specific heat capacities of the electrolytes have been tested using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Fig. S7, ESI†), and the calculated efficiencies are provided in Table S3 (ESI†). The higher η at a lower current density is likely due to lower polarization and energy loss. Fig. S8 (ESI†) compares the energy conversion efficiencies of reported thermogalvanic cells based on redox species dissolved in solvents, which are more scalable for energy applications in contrast to solid state electrodes. It is noteworthy that the high conversion efficiency is achieved in this work thanks to the innovative cell structure and well-designed redox species, making such a novel electrochemical cell promising for efficient solar energy harvesting.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical characteristics of the cell. (A) Schematic of the cell design. (B) The galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of the cell (0.5 M K3Fe(CN)6/0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6versus 0.1 M I2/2 M KI) at 6 mA cm−2 at room temperature. (C) The corresponding cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the cell. (D) The open circuit voltage profile of the cell at different temperatures. (E) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the cell at 100 μA cm−2. (F) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the cell at 200 μA cm−2. 

Fig. 4A illustrates the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell design, which is capable of converting solar energy into electrical energy based on the novel electrochemical system demonstrated above. Since the redox reactions occur at the current collector, heat localization around the current collector can minimize parasitic thermal loss to the bulk water and improve the energy conversion efficiency.31 Efficient broadband solar absorption is essential for designing such an electrochemical cell.32 Meanwhile, the solar absorber must also be highly conductive to facilitate electron transport during the redox reactions. Carbon felt (CF) with fibrous structures (Fig. S9, ESI†) has been widely used as low-cost, highly porous electrode backings in redox flow batteries. Graphene-based materials, with good light absorption and photothermal transduction, and high stability, are also considered promising for solar thermal applications.33 In this study, we adopted reduced graphene oxide (rGO) wrapped CF, functioning as both the solar absorber and current collector, for solar energy harvesting and storage. The rGO layers uniformly wrap the highly porous skeletons of the CF substrate, endowing it with optimized solar absorption and conductivity. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images shown in Fig. 4B clearly reveal the tightly intertwined carbon nanofibers with graphene layers. Raman spectra of CF and rGO are shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). The spectra display the characteristic D band around 1350 cm−1 corresponding to disorder caused by a finite crystallite size and the G band around 1580 cm−1 associated with the E2g phonons at the Brillouin zone center.34 The closely correlated curves of rGO and CF-rGO indicate that the surface of CF is almost entirely covered by the graphene layers. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is employed to study the functional groups on carbon (Fig. S11, ESI†), and the more intense O 1s signal of CF-rGO indicates better hydrophilicity and thus improved reaction kinetics. The transmittance and reflectance of CF and CF-rGO were studied using a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer to evaluate the optical absorption ability (Fig. 4C and D). Although both of the two samples show negligible optical transmittance in the wavelength range between 200 and 1500 nm, the reflectance of CF-rGO is remarkably reduced, suggesting better solar absorption than that of CF. It is noted that a fluctuation can be observed between 800 nm and 900 nm in the spectrum, which is due to the change of detectors accompanied by a grating change at 800 nm of the spectrophotometer. The large optical extinction of CF-rGO is attributed to light absorption of the rGO layers wrapping the carbon nanofibers and light scattering inside.35 An IR camera was used to monitor the temperature distribution on the solar absorbers under one sun. In light of the better solar absorption and photothermal activity, the temperature of CF-rGO can reach 60.9 °C (Fig. 4F), exceeding that of the CF-based absorber (52.9 °C in Fig. 4E). All of this characterization evidences CF-rGO as an excellent absorber for the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell.
 Fig. 4  The solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell design and characterization of absorbers. (A) Schematic of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell design with the graphene-modified current collector as a solar absorber simultaneously, and the heat is localized around the current collector where the redox reaction takes place to minimize the heat loss to the bulk electrolyte solution. (B) SEM image of the graphene-modified carbon felt. (C) Transmittance spectra of different samples. (D) Reflectance spectra of different samples. (E) IR image of the carbon felt-based absorber under solar illumination of 1 sun after 30 minutes. (F) IR image of the graphene-modified absorber under solar illumination of 1 sun after 30 minutes. (G) The electrochemical cell in the discharged state at room temperature. (H) The open circuit voltage of the regenerative electrochemical cell under solar illumination on the roof of the Engineering Teaching Center building at the University of Texas after 10 minutes, and the insets show the sunlight intensity measured using an optical power meter and the zoomed-in image of the display of the multimeter. 
In the open circuit voltage test with or without solar irradiation, two cuvettes containing different electrolytes were sandwiched together with a membrane separator (inset in Fig. 5A). The cuvette was drilled with a rectangular hole to enable the transport of charge carriers (Fig. S12, ESI†). Despite the outstanding photothermal capability of CF-rGO, the direct contact between the absorber and bulk water will inevitably dissipate the thermal energy considering the high thermal conductivity of water (∼0.5 W K−1 m−1).36 To better manage the localized heat and restrain the parasitic heat loss, the CF-rGO solar absorber was physically separated from the bulk water by a poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)-based thermal insulator. The PVDF coating on CF-rGO (CF-rGO-PVDF) was fabricated using a simple phase inversion method. SEM images show that the pore size is between 0.5 and 1.5 μm (Fig. S13A, ESI†) and the thickness is ∼400 μm (Fig. S13B, ESI†).37 Presented in Fig. S14 (ESI†), the diameter of the circular CF-rGO absorber is 8 mm, and it is anchored in the 10 mm × 10 mm square PVDF insulator, which just fits the top section of the cuvettes. The cuvette-based cell was sealed hermetically with two pieces of titanium foil extended outward as cell tabs (inset in Fig. 5A). The open circuit voltage test shows that the potential difference can reach 44 mV under one-sun illumination and improves to 55 mV under two-sun illumination (Fig. 5A). In consideration of the cell's Seebeck coefficient of −1.8 mV K−1, the estimated temperature difference can reach ∼24 K and ∼31 K under one-sun and two-suns respectively. It is recognized that the equipment of a glass vacuum enclosure could further suppress heat loss and increase the temperature and potential difference, but would increase the system cost as well.12
 Fig. 5  The solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell performance. (A) The open circuit voltage profile of the cell under solar illumination of 1 sun and 2 suns. (B) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell with or without solar illumination of 1 sun. (C) The polarization curve of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell at a simulated open circuit voltage the same as that in Fig. 4H (∼39.6 mV). (D) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell with or without solar illumination of 1 sun in an expedited testing process (1/8 the amount of the electrolyte in (B). (E) The cycling stability of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell in (D). 
In addition to monitoring the open circuit voltage under solar irradiation, a galvanostatic discharge measurement was conducted on the proof-of-concept cell. An alternative cell structure demonstrated in Fig. 3A was adopted to test the cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the system. The cell was discharged to 1.984 mV at room temperature (Fig. 4G), and then placed on the roof of the University of Texas Engineering Teaching Center building. The sunlight intensity on the rooftop was recorded at 52.47 mW cm−2 using an optical power meter (top-right inset in Fig. 4H). After 10 minutes, the open circuit voltage of the solar cell decreased to −39.585 mV (Fig. 4H). This amounts to a potential drop of ∼41.6 mV contributed by both solar irradiation and the temperature increase of the environment. We then simulated a comparable potential difference using artificial sunlight in the lab and extracted the battery's discharge profiles (Fig. S15, ESI†). When regarding the sunlight intensity recorded by the optical power meter as the only power source, the estimated energy conversion efficiency (the energy output divided by the irradiation time multiplied by the sunlight intensity) can reach 0.1% even without considering any heat recuperation efficiency. Higher energy conversion efficiencies are achievable with better heat management considering that a thermal energy conversion efficiency of 1.23% has been demonstrated above. The polarization curve at an open circuit voltage of −39.6 mV was also obtained (Fig. 5C). The peak power density reaches 332 mW m−2, which can be improved by optimizing the cell structure or circulating the electrolytes in flow mode to minimize the polarization.8Fig. 5B illustrates the stability of such a solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell, with negligible degradation detected after 700 minutes of battery cycling. Fig. 5D and E show the cycling stability in an expedited testing process. The cell exhibits a stabilized coulombic efficiency of ∼99%, and the output energy variation may be due to temperature changes in the environment. Considering the high coulombic efficiency, this regenerative electrochemical cell can be stored just like conventional redox flow batteries. After being fully discharged under solar illumination (Fig. 5D), the cell can just rest in the open circuit state at room temperature and output the energy harvested whenever needed. The UV-vis spectra of both the catholyte and the anolyte before and after operation at 65 °C are shown in Fig. S16 (ESI†), and no variations can be observed, indicating the high stability of the electrolytes. Meanwhile, an SEM image and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental mapping of the current collector before and after cell operation were taken (Fig. S17 and S18, ESI†), and the unaltered morphology and composition also prove the robustness of the whole system.
It is noted that this novel energy device combines advantageous features from typical energy conversion systems, such as solar cells and thermoelectric generators, and energy storage systems, such as redox flow batteries. Table S4 (ESI†) compares the bulk prices of related materials in this solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell to those of solar cells, thermoelectrics, and redox flow batteries. Notably, compared with a representative photo-rechargeable energy system integrating a solar cell and a redox flow battery, this solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell is much more cost-effective considering the low cost of carbon-based solar absorbers and electroactive materials.8,38 Currently the major cost in this energy device is ascribed to the Nafion-based separator, which is a widely used membrane for redox flow batteries. Therefore, developing low-cost membranes with high conductivity, selectivity, and stability will contribute to the wider implementation of both redox flow batteries and the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cells in this work.39,40
Conclusions
Heat is regarded as one of the most ubiquitous sources of energy in the world. Of the available solar energy reaching the earth's surface, the majority manifests itself as heat. Meanwhile, the vast majority of global energy consumption involves thermal energy in the form of heating, cooling or waste heat. Nevertheless, efficient and cost-effective thermal energy harvesting for electricity generation and storage remains a grand challenge considering the low temperature differential (<100 °C). With systematic study and rational screening of various redox species, we demonstrate a useful solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system that exploits the thermogalvanic effect for simultaneous energy harvesting and delivery. This novel energy device is based on low-cost, earth-abundant materials and can be easily assembled in scalable production processes. As a type of galvanic cell, a capacity retention of 98% can be achieved after 500 cycles with a stabilized coulombic efficiency of ∼100%.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated a high Seebeck coefficient up to −1.8 mV K−1, one of the highest values in all thermoelectric devices.13,41 Even under a low temperature gradient of 35 °C, a potential differential of 62 mW can be achieved. This enables energy conversion efficiencies of 1.23% and 11.9% (versus the Carnot efficiency), which are record-high for liquid thermogalvanic cells. In the proof-of-concept test under solar irradiation, the broadband and efficient solar absorption of the graphene-modified absorber in conjunction with the heat localization design can lead to a reasonable temperature difference without expensive light-concentration accessories. Stable cycling performance of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell has been demonstrated. The potential future applications of this cell include harvesting both thermal energy and solar energy in remote areas, deserts for example, as a stand-alone power system. Given the much higher Seebeck coefficient demonstrated in this work than those of conventional thermoelectric generators, the low output voltage is mainly due to the small temperature difference.42 A higher working potential can be achieved by connecting the cells in series, and a higher efficiency of energy conversion can be expected by further improving the thermal insulation and heat recuperation. The proposed solar-driven regenerative electrochemical device provides an attractive means for in situ harvesting and storage of intermittent solar energy and ubiquitous thermal energy.43 It is anticipated that even better performance can be achieved by employing redox species with higher Seebeck coefficients.44
Experimental section
Preparation of absorbers
GO was prepared by a modified Hummers’ method,45 and CF-rGO was fabricated in a dip coating and reduction process. The CF was first treated with ozone to improve the hydrophilicity, and then it was immersed in the GO solution (8.1 mg mL−1) until it was fully wetted. Hydrazine hydrate solution was added into the GO solution containing CF, and the mixture was heated at 80 °C for 10 hours under reflux to fully reduce GO. The obtained CF-rGO was rinsed with water and finally dried in a vacuum oven at 90 °C overnight. To coat the CF-rGO with a 400 μm thick PVDF layer, a typical phase inversion method was adopted. The PVDF powder was mixed with NMP under a mass ratio of 18%, and the mixture was kept at 60 °C under stirring for 24 h, followed by degassing in a vacuum oven overnight to make a dilute solution without bubbles. The PVDF solution was cast on a glass plate with Kapton tape to control the thickness. Then the CF-rGO was put on top of the PVDF solution, and the glass plate was immediately immersed in water to achieve phase inversion. Because the thickness of CF-rGO is higher than the depth of the PVDF solution, only one side of CF-rGO in contact with the solution will be coated with PVDF. The prepared CF-rGO-PVDF absorber was immersed in water for two days, and the water was changed twice to make sure the residual solvent inside was removed. Finally the absorber was rinsed with ethanol and dried at room temperature for use. The CF-rGO-PVDF absorber will be immersed in the electrolyte when the cell is working.
Device assembly
The cell components for the device in Fig. 3A are shown in Fig. S5A (ESI†). First, a Nafion membrane was sandwiched between two cylindrical quartz shells (inner diameter: 8 mm) by heating Surlyn resin sealant at 120 °C for 5 hours. Second, a mixture of super P carbon black with PVDF (a mass ratio of 9:1) was dispersed in NMP solvent to form a slurry, and Ti foil was coated with the slurry using a doctor blade to make the current collector. The Ti foil was drilled with a hole in advance for the injection of electrolytes. Third, the Ti-based current collectors were adhered to the quartz shells using Surlyn resin sealant as well. Photographs of the assembled cell device are shown in Fig. S5B and C (ESI†). The solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell was built similarly except for using an ITO-based current collector and inserting the CF-rGO inside the quartz shell to absorb solar irradiation. A cuvette-based device was also assembled to test the open circuit voltage, and Nafion was sandwiched between two cuvettes with predrilled holes (Fig. S11, ESI†) sealed with Surlyn resin sealant as well.
Characterization
All of the electrochemical characterization was conducted on a BioLogic VMP3 potentiostat system. The Seebeck coefficient of most redox species was tested using a three-electrode setup with Ag/AgCl/4 M KCl as the reference electrode, platinum wire as the counter electrode, and glassy carbon as the working electrode. For the Seebeck coefficient test of CuSO4/Cu solution, the working electrode is Cu foil instead of the glassy carbon. The open circuit voltage was monitored at different temperatures controlled by a water bath.
The RDE measurements were conducted on a BioLogic RRDE-3A rotating ring disk electrode using Ag/AgCl/4 M KCl as the reference electrode, platinum wire as the counter electrode, and glassy carbon as the working electrode. The Raman spectra were measured on a micro-Raman spectrometer (Witec, Alpha 300) under irradiation at 488 nm. SEM (scanning electron microscope) images were taken on a Hitachi S-5500. The DSC test was conducted on a TGA/DSC 1 thermogravimetric analyzer from Mettler Toledo. The transmittance and reflectance of CF and CF-rGO were studied using a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Cary 5000) with an integrating sphere unit. The UV-vis spectra of the samples were recorded using a UV-vis spectrometer (Evolution 300, Thermo Scientific). The thermal images were taken using an infrared camera (Fluke). A solar simulator (AbetTech, M-LS Rev B) was adopted for the cell test. The solar flux was calibrated with a thermopile (Newport, 818SL) connected to a power meter (Newport, 1916-R).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
G. Y. acknowledges the financial support from the National Science Foundation award (NSF-CMMI-1537894), Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, and Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award.
References
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 RSC .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 70, 330–340 CrossRef .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Li, S. Wu, K. Liao, K. Zhu, J. Yi and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2664–2667 RSC .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9271–9274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, B. Bhatia, D. M. Bierman, E. N. Wang and G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12797–12838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Kurosawa, W. Ma, Y. Guo, L. Fang, K. Vandewal, Y. Diao, C. Wang, Q. Yan, J. Reinspach, J. Mei, A. L. Appleton, G. I. Koleilat, Y. Gao, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, A. Salleo, H. Ade, D. Zhao and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3767–3772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, W. Fan, Y. He, P. Ma, S. Vanka, S. Fan, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700312 CrossRef PubMed .
T. I. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3985–3994 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, Y. Yang, H.-W. Lee, H. Ghasemi, D. Kraemer, G. Chen and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, S. W. Lee and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2326–2334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kraemer, Q. Jie, K. McEnaney, F. Cao, W. Liu, L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gunawan, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2013, 17, 304–323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 491–497 RSC .
C. D. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 550 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4108–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, Hoboken, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
Y. Ding and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4772–4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, Z. Niu, J. Ye, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604299 CrossRef .
X. Wei, L. Cosimbescu, W. Xu, J. Z. Hu, M. Vijayakumar, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, X. Deng, J. Xiao, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400678 CrossRef .
M. Park, J. Ryu, W. Wang and J. Cho, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 16080 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Q. Lai, P. Xu, D. Zheng, X. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605815 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 69–103 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Wang and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1896 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1552–1558 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 770–779 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. P. Lemmon, C. Imhoff, G. L. Graff, L. Li, J. Hu, C. Wang, J. Xiao, G. Xia, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Baskaran, V. Sprenkle, X. Li, Y. Shao and B. Schwenzer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 929–946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Loomis, H. Ghasemi, S. W. Lee, Y. J. Wang, Y. Cui and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6578–6583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. W. Lee, H. Ghasemi, J. Loomis, X. Li, D. Kraemer, G. Zheng, Y. Cui and G. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 17011–17016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Hammond and W. M. Risen, Sol. Energy, 1979, 23, 443–449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dong, G. He, H. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Han and Y. Deng, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 387–388, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Yan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7012–7015 RSC .
W. Lu, Z. Yuan, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Zhang and X. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2199–2236 RSC .
X. Yan, C. Zhang, Y. Dai, W. Zheng, X. Ruan and G. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 544, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yan, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 42–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zebarjadi, K. Esfarjani, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5147–5162 RSC .
D. Li, G. S. Wu, W. Wang, Y. D. Wang, D. Liu, D. C. Zhang, Y. F. Chen, G. P. Peterson and R. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1424–1428 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01930h‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Developing cost-effective devices based on earth-abundant materials for large-scale solar energy conversion and storage is crucial to alleviate the potential energy crisis in modern society. Here we report a novel electrochemical system for simultaneous energy harvesting and storage based on the thermogalvanic effect of rationally selected redox species. A regenerative electrochemical cell is demonstrated, employing the bifunctional current collector/solar absorber fabricated by a scalable process, for simultaneous energy harvesting and storage under solar irradiation without optical concentrators or accessory batteries. This neoteric device provides a roadmap for the development of innovative systems to harvest and store solar energy and more broad thermal energy by using inexpensive, simple and stable materials.


 	Fig. 1  The working principle and cell design for the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical system. (A) Schematic showing the criteria to design the electrochemical cell for simultaneous energy harvesting and delivery. At room temperature, the cathode redox species with a higher potential possesses a negative Seebeck coefficient (α), and the anode redox species with a lower potential possesses a positive α. Meanwhile, the potential shift of the full cell due to the temperature change under solar irradiation needs to be large enough to offset the potential difference between the cathode and anode redox species at room temperature. (B) Temperature–entropy diagram of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cycle, in which the energy output in one cycle is the area of the loop (ΔSΔT).	 
A + ne− ↔ B	(1)
ΔG = −nEF	(2)
dG = −SdT + VdP	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Seebeck coefficient measurements and RDE test of the selected redox species. (A–D) The Seebeck coefficient measurement, RDE test at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, Levich plot, and Koutecky–Levich plot derived from different overpotentials of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 solution, respectively. (E–H) The Seebeck coefficient measurement, RDE test at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, Levich plot, and Koutecky–Levich plot derived from different overpotentials of KI3/KI solution, respectively.	 
ilim = 0.62 × nFAD2/3ω1/2ν−1/6C	(6)
	(7)
i0 = nFACk0	(8)
	(9)
I2 + I− ↔ I3−	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical characteristics of the cell. (A) Schematic of the cell design. (B) The galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of the cell (0.5 M K3Fe(CN)6/0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6versus 0.1 M I2/2 M KI) at 6 mA cm−2 at room temperature. (C) The corresponding cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the cell. (D) The open circuit voltage profile of the cell at different temperatures. (E) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the cell at 100 μA cm−2. (F) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the cell at 200 μA cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  The solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell design and characterization of absorbers. (A) Schematic of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell design with the graphene-modified current collector as a solar absorber simultaneously, and the heat is localized around the current collector where the redox reaction takes place to minimize the heat loss to the bulk electrolyte solution. (B) SEM image of the graphene-modified carbon felt. (C) Transmittance spectra of different samples. (D) Reflectance spectra of different samples. (E) IR image of the carbon felt-based absorber under solar illumination of 1 sun after 30 minutes. (F) IR image of the graphene-modified absorber under solar illumination of 1 sun after 30 minutes. (G) The electrochemical cell in the discharged state at room temperature. (H) The open circuit voltage of the regenerative electrochemical cell under solar illumination on the roof of the Engineering Teaching Center building at the University of Texas after 10 minutes, and the insets show the sunlight intensity measured using an optical power meter and the zoomed-in image of the display of the multimeter.	 

 	Fig. 5  The solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell performance. (A) The open circuit voltage profile of the cell under solar illumination of 1 sun and 2 suns. (B) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell with or without solar illumination of 1 sun. (C) The polarization curve of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell at a simulated open circuit voltage the same as that in Fig. 4H (∼39.6 mV). (D) The galvanostatic discharge voltage profiles of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell with or without solar illumination of 1 sun in an expedited testing process (1/8 the amount of the electrolyte in (B). (E) The cycling stability of the solar-driven regenerative electrochemical cell in (D).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee01930h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
