Growth and optimization of hybrid perovskite single crystals for optoelectronics/electronics and sensing  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC00473A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC00473A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13918-13952Growth and optimization of hybrid perovskite single crystals for optoelectronics/electronics and sensing

        
          
            Xingmo 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Rongkun 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      *
      School of Physics, Australian Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, Nano Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. E-mail: feng.li2@sydney.edu.au; rongkun.zheng@sydney.edu.au
Received 
      28th January 2020
    , Accepted 16th August 2020First published on 27th August 2020AbstractOrganic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, which combine the advantages of superior optical and electronic properties and solution-processed manufacturing, have emerged as a new class of revolutionary optoelectronic devices with the potential for various practical applications. Encouraged by the advantages of longer carrier diffusion length, higher carrier mobility and potential for better optoelectronic properties than their polycrystalline counterparts, increasing research attention has focused on the preparation and optimization of single crystal candidates, using various solution synthesis techniques to control the morphology, for the development of a wide range of optoelectronic applications. This paper presents a comprehensive review of recent advances in the field of optoelectronic and sensing technologies based on different forms of single crystals, including bulk crystals and thin samples, with an emphasis placed on the optimization of the crystals and the relationship among the charge-carrier transport, operation mechanism, device architecture, and device performance. First, we present the main methods used to prepare bulk and thin single crystals and analyze several aspects of their properties. Thereafter, the applications of single crystals in solar cells, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, lasers, as well as sensors and transistors, are discussed in depth. Finally, we summarize the merits and demerits of perovskite single crystals and propose further improvements in the synthesis approaches and device applications.
Xingmo Zhang
Xingmo Zhang is currently an MPhil student at the School of Physics, University of Sydney (Australia). She received her bachelor's degree from Tianjin University (Tianjin, China) in 2018. Her current research interests include the synthesis, characterization and application of hybrid perovskite single crystals.
Feng Li
Feng Li received his PhD degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He is currently a Lecturer and also a discovery early career researcher award (DECRA) fellow at the School of Physics in the University of Sydney. His main research is centered on the characterization and investigation of physical properties of novel materials, particularly hybrid perovskites and organic semiconductors, as well as diverse electronic, data storage and energy applications, including photodetectors, field-effect transistors, spintronic devices and solar cells.
Rongkun Zheng
Rongkun Zheng obtained his BSc in Physics from Shandong University in China in 1999 and his PhD in Physics from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2004. He joined the University of Sydney in late 2004, and currently is an Associate Professor at the School of Physics. His research interest spans from condensed matter and materials physics to microscopy and microanalysis, with focus on the growth–structure–property relationships in functional materials and devices.
1. Introduction
Perovskite materials, which were first discovered in the 1830s and were named after Russian mineralogist L. A. Perovski, have received increasing attention from researchers because of their special structure and rich physical properties.1 As shown in Fig. 1,2 the general chemical formula for perovskite compounds is ABX3, where A and B are two cations with different atomic sizes, and X is an anion that bonds to both the A and B cations. Perovskite materials exhibit a series of interesting and attractive properties,3 which include colossal magnetoresistance,4,5 ferroelectricity,6,7 superconductivity,8,9 charge ordering,10,11 spin-dependent transport,12,13 high thermopower,14,15 and an interplay of structural, magnetic and transport properties.16 Moreover, from an application point of view, this materials family is also widely used as sensors and catalyst electrodes in certain types of fuel cells,17–20 and the members are candidates for memory devices and spintronic applications,21–23 as well as microelectronics and telecommunication.24,25
 Fig. 1  Crystal structure of perovskites: A (blue) can be organic or inorganic cations and B (grey) represents metal cations; X (purple) is often occupied by halide ions.2 Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Owing to the flexibility of the bond angles inherent in the perovskite structure, there are many different types of distortions that can occur from the ideal structure. More importantly, A can be methylammonium (MA+) or formamidinium (FA+),26–30 B can be metal ions, such as Pb2+ and Sn2+,31–34 and X is usually halide ions,35 and such a class of materials is known as organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs). In 2009, Kojima et al. made the first attempt to employ halide-based perovskite films as active sensitizers into photovoltaic devices using a volatile liquid electrolyte.36 From then on, OIHP polycrystalline films have been widely applied to solar cells with various structures such as planar heterojunctions,37–40 mesoscopic heterojunctions,41 bilayer architectures,42 and meso-superstructured single-junctions.43 Hybrid perovskite solar cells have continued to set new efficiency benchmarks, and their relatively high power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been increased to as high as 25.2%.44 Leveraging the excellent fabrication and photo-physical properties, such as cost effectiveness, ease of processing, tunable optical band gaps,45,46 long charge carrier diffusion length,47 and low trap density,48 as well as large light-absorption coefficients and high photoluminescence (PL) quantum efficiency,49,50 hybrid perovskites also have the potential for employment in other optoelectronic applications, which include photodetectors,51 transistors,52 water photolysis,53 phototransistors,54 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),55 and lasers.56
However, a vast array of prior research on hybrid perovskite optoelectronic devices has been centered on polycrystalline thin films. The perovskite polycrystalline samples usually suffer from grain boundaries, relatively higher trap density and defects, and low stability, which would obviously affect their potential performance in optoelectronic applications.57–59 More recently, researchers have paid more attention to hybrid perovskite single crystals, which possess the promising features of no grain boundaries,48 relatively low trap density,60 large charge carrier mobility, and long carrier diffusion length.61,62 Intensive studies on perovskite single crystals have also revealed dramatically enhanced carrier recombination lifetimes and carrier mobilities, as well as extremely low defects.63 In this regard, extensive efforts are being devoted to developing effective methods to improve the perovskite crystal quality and optimize the device performance. Existing in the form of bulk or thin crystals, OIHP single crystal samples have been widely applied in various applications, like optoelectronics and sensors,61,64 and have made rapid and great strides in research progress. There already are excellent review papers that consider a wide range from bulk crystals to various nanocrystals and cover the fundamental physical properties and a range of device applications.65–68 Each of these review papers has a different line of narrative, focus, and depth. However, reviews centered on optimized perovskite crystals and their new optoelectronic/electronic and sensing applications are limited.
In this review, we aim to summarize the recent achievements, ongoing progress, and the challenges to date in the area of methylammonium lead trihalide perovskite (CH3NH3PbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) single crystals from the perspective of both materials and devices, with an emphasis placed on the photovoltaic, photo-detection, emitting, and sensing properties, and provide an outlook on the opportunities offered by this emerging family of optoelectronic materials in the field of optoelectronics and sensing applications. An overview is first provided on the growth approaches of bulk and thin perovskite single crystals with a particular focus on the space-controlled strategies. The subsequent section comprehensively reviews the structure characterizations and the intrinsic physical properties of these materials. We particularly address their optoelectronic properties related to the requirements for detection and sensing applications. Their exploitation and progress in a variety of device applications are then highlighted starting with a description of the optoelectronic devices followed by the recent developments in sensors as well as transistors and logic circuits. The challenges for developing large-scaled and stable optoelectronic/electronic applications and sensing devices based on perovskite crystals with high-performance are discussed in detail. Finally, a brief outlook on these issues and challenges is presented and the future perspectives are also proposed to design new device architectures for special applications in the future.
2. Growth of hybrid perovskite single crystals
Recently, various growth techniques have been adopted to grow halide-based perovskite single crystals, which include organic–inorganic and all-inorganic perovskite single crystals. However, as for the MA-based OIHP single crystals, there are usually three classical growth methods, which are very simple and attractive strategies to synthesize the perovskite single crystals. These methods are the solution temperature-lowering (STL) method, inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) method, and temperature-independent anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC) method. Furthermore, the main approaches that are employed to grow thin perovskite single crystals are also highlighted in this section.
2.1. Bulk single crystals

2.1.1. STL method. 
According to the lower solubility of MAPbX3 in HX (X = Cl, Br, and I) solution as the temperature decreases, Tao's group introduced the STL method to synthesize a MAPbI3 bulk single crystal (see Fig. 2a).69 After the reaction between methylamine (CH3NH2) and hydroiodic acid (HI) in a cold atmosphere, the obtained white microcrystal methyl-ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) was reacted with Pb(CH3COOH)2·3H2O in aqueous HI, and the solution was then cooled from 65 to 40 °C. A 10 mm × 10 mm × 8 mm black CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal was grown in about one month, as shown in Fig. 2b. For a reaction with a shorter time, a 12 mm × 12 mm × 7 mm MAPbI3 single crystal was fabricated by Sun's group within 15 days after lowering the temperature of the prepared solution with seed crystals from 100 °C to 53 °C, as shown in Fig. 2c.70 Moreover, Lin's group discovered a more efficient way, and synthesized CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals with a size of 5 mm in around 10 days, as shown in Fig. 2d.71 This growth method enabled easy growth of seed crystals, which were 2–3 mm in size, but not the easy growth of bulk crystals with larger sizes. Encouragingly, minimizing the number of nuclei was shown to be useful to overcome this problem, so they selected seeds with high quality and dropped them back into solution, and single crystals sized up to 1 cm were obtained, as shown in Fig. 2e and f. Furthermore, the X component in the perovskite ABX3 structure can also be a mixed halide. MAPbBr3−xClx and MAPbI3−xBrx mixed-halide perovskite single crystals were studied using this method by Huang's group.72 According to the reaction: CH3NH2 + HX + PbX2 → CH3NH3PbX3 (X can be Cl, Br, or I), they mixed hydrobromic acid with hydrochloric acid or hydroiodic acid in different molar ratios and added methylamine and lead(II) acetate solution to fabricate single-halide and mixed-halide perovskite single crystals, as shown in Fig. 2g. The supersaturated precursor solution was gradually cooled to synthesize single crystals in several days. The time-consumption factor is the biggest drawback of this method, which has led to the domination of other crystallization methods.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of solution temperature-lowering (STL) method to synthesize bulk single crystals.69 (b) Image of CH3NH3PbI3 with its natural facets {100} and {112}.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photograph of a MAPbI3 bulk single crystal with its natural facets.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Single crystals of CH3NH3PbI3 obtained by spontaneous nucleation.71 (e), CH3NH3PbI3 large crystals obtained using seeds.71 (f), CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals obtained by the STL method.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Elsevier. (g) Photographs of halide perovskite single crystals with different halide ratios.72 Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature. 


2.1.2. ITC method. 
As a radically faster OIHP single crystal synthesis approach, the ITC method has widely been applied in recent years. Using this method, a vast array of perovskite single crystals has been reported owing to the inverse solubility of the material at a high temperature and faster growth rate of the crystals. Moreover, it was observed that the reported crystals can be shape-controlled and obtained more quickly and are of higher quality compared with the other growth techniques. Three kinds of solvent were introduced in the crystallization technique: γ-butyrolactone (GBL), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). Additionally, the solubility of MAPbI3 in GBL and MAPbBr3 in DMF was changed with the variation of temperature, as shown in Fig. 3a.73 Generally, a high temperature can help to precipitate MAPbBr3 in DMF, MAPbCl3 in DMSO, and MAPbI3 in GBL.74 Bakr and his group introduced this method to rapidly grow high-quality bulk single crystals based on the different solubility of MAPbX3 perovskites in various solutions at different temperatures.75 To grow MAPbBr3, they added PbBr2 and MABr in DMF at room temperature and heated it in an oil bath to 80 °C. The iodide solution was prepared at 60 °C and heated to 110 °C. As shown in Fig. 3b, an orange crystal of MAPbBr3 and a black crystal of MAPbI3 were grown within 3 hours and the crystals were moved carefully to fresh precursors.
 Fig. 3  (a) Solubility of MAPbI3 in GBL and MAPbBr3 in DMF at different temperatures.73 Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 crystal growth at different time intervals.75 Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) The pictures of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals with different MAX:PbX2 molar ratios.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier. (d and e) The schematic illustration of the preparation of MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 single crystals and the photos of MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 (x = 0–1) crystals.77 Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For this method, the effect of the molar ratio of MAX and PbX2 in the precursor solutions on the crystal quality was also studied by Chen's group.76 Using a similar ITC method, they investigated a MAX:PbX2 from 1:1 to 2:1, and perovskite single crystals with different sizes and shapes were obtained after a 6-hour crystallization process, as shown in Fig. 3c. They also found that the increase of organic content can inhibit the size of MAPbBr3 crystals and influence both the size and shape of MAPbI3 crystals. Moreover, when the molar ratio reached over 1.8:1, the MAPbI3 changed to be polycrystals, which showed defects resulting from the organic content during the crystallization process.
With the aim of growing a large-sized bulk single crystal of perovskite, the ITC method was further modified. Under this technique, the strategy of the incorporation of seed crystal growth has been proven to be favorable for organic–inorganic perovskite single crystals as large as convenient. Liu's group reported various large sized single crystals of organic–inorganic perovskites using the modified ITC method. The large sized and high-quality single crystals were grown by the following stepwise process: in the first step, a number of seed crystals were prepared through repeating and carefully controlling the ITC process several times. Upon choosing some good quality seed crystals and placing them into the freshly prepared precursor solution, the original small-sized seed can be grown into a larger (7 mm) size; using this larger seed crystal as a new seed, the process can be repeated and much larger single crystals are obtained. Moreover, Liu's group also successfully grew CH3NH3Pb(BrxI1−x)3 single crystals with a finely-tuned bandgap.77 To overcome the difficulty of preparing dual-halide perovskite single crystals with different precursors using a single solvent, they optimized both precursors, as shown in Fig. 3d. They mixed a MAPbBr3 (0.7 M) solution with MAPbI3 (1.3 M) in different volume ratios and slowly heated the solution from ∼50 °C to ∼90 °C, and the grown single crystals are shown in Fig. 3e. The application of the different solubilities of different OIHP single crystals at varying temperatures contributes to the time-saving feature of the ITC method.


2.1.3. AVC method. 
Another main method to grow OIHP single crystals is the AVC method, which was first introduced to grow hybrid perovskite crystals by Bakr's group, as shown in Fig. 4a.48 In this method, the solvent plays a significant role because two or more solvents have to be selected; one should be a good solvent, which is less volatile, and the other is a bad solvent, which is more volatile. The precursors of the halide perovskite will be dissolved in a small vial of the good solvent. This vial will be placed in a large vial containing the bad solvent and then sealed. The principle of this method can be described as follows: when the bad solvent slowly diffuses into the precursor solution, the proficiency of the crystal formation increases at the bottom of the sample vial owing to the insolubility of the material in the bad solvent. According to the poor ability to form hydrogen bonds of dichloromethane (DCM) and insolubility of MAX and PbX2 in the anti-solvent DCM, they evaporated DCM slowly into DMF with PbBr2 and MABr (1:1 by mole) or GBL with PbI2 and MAI (1:3 by mole). Single crystals can be obtained within about one week, as shown in Fig. 4b and c. Other groups, like Loi's group and Cao's group, also applied this method. They put DMF or GBL in a vial, which was sealed with foil but with a small hole, and the vial was placed in an atmosphere of DCM.60,78 Although the AVC method takes more time than the ITC method, its temperature-irrelevant characteristic is appealing to its widespread use.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the AVC method.48,66 (b) Photograph of MAPbBr3 single crystals grown by the AVC method.48,66 (c) Picture of MAPbI3 single crystals obtained within one week.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
These three different kinds of growing techniques have their own features, which are summarized in Table 1. Generally, the STL method is a more time-consuming process; however, the size of single crystals prepared by this method can be larger than those made by the other two methods. The ITC method can be regarded as the most efficient method, as it takes less than 3 hours. The most prominent feature for the AVC method is that it can be operated at room temperature.
Table 1 Summary of OIHP single crystal growth methods




Method
Single crystals
Process time
Size
Temperature




Solution temperature-lowering (STL) method
CH3NH3PbI369
A few days
10 × 10 × 8 mm3
65 to 40 °C


MAPbI370
15 days
12 × 12 × 7 mm3
373 K to 330 K


CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr371
More than 10 days
5 mm




Inverse temperature crystallization (ITC)
MAPbBr375
Within 3 hours


Room temperature to 80 °C


MAPbI375
Within 3 hours


60 °C to 110 °C


CH3NH3Pb(BrxI1−x)377




50 °C to 90 °C


Anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC)
CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr348
About one week


Room temperature





2.2. Thin single crystals
As shown above, there are many simple methods to grow and synthesize bulk single crystals; however, their thick active layer may cause an increase of charge recombination, which will lead to the degradation of their device performance. Moreover, the bulk form of perovskite single crystals also impedes the practical device applications. In this regard, growing thin perovskite single crystals with a large area represents an effective approach to overcome the above obstacles and thus advances further practical applications. Thin perovskite crystals first appeared in the form of polycrystalline films, which have been synthesized into a monocrystal film through several ways in recent years. Thin single crystal films are hard to deposit in solution on account of their volatile fragile organic component and brittle inorganic framework. Although changes in geometries occur, these methods still refer to the methods that grow bulk single crystals. Bakr's group introduced a cavitation-triggered asymmetrical crystallization (CTAC) strategy, in which a very short ultrasonic pulse (≈1 s) was applied in the solution to reach a low supersaturation level with antisolvent vapor diffusion and a thin film of several micrometer thickness grew on the surface of the substrates within hours.79 The picture of a thin single crystal and a schematic illustration of such a method are shown in Fig. 5a. In this method, ultrasound can incite nucleation without the help of seed crystals under the condition of low supersaturation, but in a deep supersaturation stage, numerous tiny crystals would form. The rate and time of the ultrasonic pulse can be further regulated to control the thickness of the thin single crystals.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the CTAC method on a microscopic scale, with ultrasonic pulse inducing cavitation in the perovskite solution, collapsing the cavitation bubble and resulting in a high-speed jet toward the substrate, leading to lateral crystallization at the initial stage.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of the ultrathin single crystal wafer preparation.80 (c) Optical image and cross-sectional image of a thin single crystal with different thicknesses.80 Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation of laminar CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal films with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membranes to limit their thickness. The picture of the CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal film with a thickness of 0.4 mm and an area around 120 cm2.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic for the growth of perovskite single crystal thin films.82 Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the GC-LCG method to grow CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal thin films.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Springer Nature. (g) Schematic of the scalable growth of perovskite single crystal films using an inkjet printing method.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Springer Nature. 
With the aim to develop perovskite single crystals with a much thinner thickness, Liu's group synthesized thickness-controlled perovskite single crystal wafers using a dynamic flow microreactor (DFM) system.80 They put two thin glass slides in parallel with two spacers into a container with a predefined separation to grow single crystal wafers within the slit channel. Based on the ITC method, a constant peristaltic pump of GBL through the glass slides was used to promote the growth of crystal wafers with a fresh solution. Several hundred-of-micrometer-thick wafers were grown by this method and the thicknesses are shown in Fig. 5b and c. Su's group further optimized the growth strategy and grew a 120 cm2-sized MAPbBr3 single crystal film on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass using a space-limited ITC (SLITC) method.81 A size- and thickness-controlled thin single crystal was realized by limiting the lateral growth of the single crystal with a narrow space. The operation and the 0.4 mm-thin single crystal film are shown in Fig. 5d.
Meanwhile, Wan and co-workers reported a space-confined solution-processed method to grow submillimeter-sized MAPbBr3 single-crystalline thin films (SCTFs) with adjustable thickness from nanometers to micrometers, as shown in Fig. 5e.82 Benefitting from the capillary pressure, the perovskite precursor solution filled the whole space between two clean flat substrates, which were clipped together and dipped in the solution. They also applied the top-seeded solution-growth (TSSG) method to the thin film growing process by heating the bottom saturated precursor solution, and thus, the cooler condition at the top of the substrates promoted the crystallization of perovskites and the temperature gradient supplied materials for continuous growth owing to their convection from bottom to top. The characteristic optical colors of MAPbBr3 SCTFs with different thicknesses were attributed to the effect of thin-film interference, which is related to the SCTF thickness and light wavelength.
Recently, more promising approaches have been employed to grow thin single crystals with large scale and high quality. A one-step printing geometrically-confined lateral crystal growth (GC-LCG) method was introduced by Sung's group to obtain a large-scaled single crystal film.83 They wrapped a cylindrical metal roller with a flexible poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) mold and then they rolled it on a preheated SiO2 substrate (180 °C) with an ink supplier filled with the MAPbI3 precursor solution. The ink solution evaporated instantly at the open end of the substrate and crystallization proceeded. The operation steps are shown in Fig. 5f. Alternatively, millimeter-sized single crystal films were synthesized by Song's group by a facile seed inkjet printing approach, which is shown in Fig. 5g.84 They injected the perovskite precursor solution onto a fluorosilane-functionalized silicon wafer, and then ordered perovskite seeds formed on the substrate with the evaporation of the droplets. They then covered the substrate with a saturated perovskite solution and the single crystal films grew as the solvent dried at room temperature. Seeds were used to inhibit the random nucleation and trigger the growth of single crystal films.
As discussed above, some optimized space-limited approaches, as shown in Table 2, have been introduced and developed to synthesize OIHP thin single crystals in recent years. Especially, size- and thickness-controlled thin single crystals have also been widely used in various optoelectronic devices. With the aim to grow large-scaled and thickness-controlled thin single crystals with longer carrier diffusion lengths, fewer defects, and higher efficiency, more promising strategies will be rewarding in the future.
Table 2 Summary of OIHP thin single crystal growth methods




Method
Based on
Thickness and size




Cavitation-triggered Asymmetrical Crystallization (CTAC) strategy79
AVC method
Several μm thick


Dynamic Flow Microreactor (DFM) system80
ITC method and Space-limited method
Several hundreds of μm thick


Space-limited ITC (SLITC) method81
ITC method and Space-limited method
120 cm2 and 0.4 mm thick


Space-confined Solution-Processed method82
Space-limited method and Top-seeded Solution-growth (TSSG) method
13.1 nm to 289.6 nm


Geometrically Confined Lateral Crystal Growth (GC-LCG) method83


Large scale


Facile Seed Inkjet Printing approach84


Millimeter-sized




3. Structural characterizations and intrinsic properties of perovskite single crystals
Understanding the basic properties of a functional material, such as the structural features, as well as the optical and electrical properties, is a primary step before designing and developing suitable device applications. As for the hybrid perovskite single crystals, it would also be necessary to determine their basic characteristics, with the aim to optimize the device performance. Herein, we will provide the developments in physical property investigations for hybrid perovskite single crystals.
3.1. Structural characterizations
As shown in Fig. 1, the hybrid perovskite single crystals have the typical perovskite structure, of which the Pb2+ and halide ions form a 3D octahedral structure that is arranged by sharing the octahedral corners, with the MA+ ions filling the interstitial space between the units. The relative sizes of the ions are found to affect the formability of the perovskite structure. Two structural factors, namely, the tolerance factor (t.f.) and the octahedral factor (o.f.), which are calculated from the ionic radii of the ions, have been empirically used to gauge the stability of a perovskite structure. The reports showed that a stable perovskite structure of halide-based perovskite compounds can form where 0.81 < t.f. < 1.1 and 0.44 < o.f. < 0.90.85
Several approaches have been used to characterize the structural properties of hybrid perovskite single crystals, as shown in Table 3. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is the most widely used method to characterize the structure of OIHP single crystals. Bakr's group performed XRD measurements on MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals and compared the powder XRD patterns with the calculated XRD patterns, as shown in Fig. 6a.48 The purity phase can be clearly found owing to the matching of the experimental powder XRD diffraction intensity with the calculated powder XRD pattern.
Table 3 Functions of structure characterization methods




Measurement method
Function




X-ray diffraction (XRD)
Regular arrays of atoms scatter X-rays, producing a regular array of spherical waves, which is determined by Bragg's law: 2dsinθ = nλ. Here d is the spacing between diffracting planes, θ is the incident angle, n is any integer, and λ is the wavelength of the beam.


Raman spectroscopy
The laser light interacts with molecular vibrations and phonons, resulting in the shift of laser photon energy, which can give information about the vibrational modes in the system.


High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
The interaction between electrons and a sample forms images of the sample's atomic structure, which is magnified and focused onto an imaging device.




 Fig. 6  (a) Experimental and calculated powder XRD pattern of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) Raman spectra of cubic-phase CH3NH3PbI3.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Raman spectra of cubic phase single crystal (Br/I = 3:0).90 (d) Pseudo-cubic phase of single crystal (Br/I = 5:1).90 Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the Korean Vacuum Society. (e) CTF-corrected denoised HRTEM image.91 (f and g) Normal and parallel configurations off-centered CH3NH3 cations, indicating in-plane and out-of-plane electric dipoles, respectively.91 Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the AAAS. 
Apart from the XRD measurements, Raman spectroscopy is another effective way to investigate the structural characteristics of perovskite single crystals. Due to the atomic mass difference, the phonon modes associated with inorganic atoms are located below 200 cm−1 and modes associated with organic atoms are observed at above 200 cm−1.86 Liu's group obtained a cubic CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal and acquired the Raman spectra using a 532 nm diode laser with the range of 50–500 cm−1, as shown in Fig. 6b.87 The shoulder peaks at 55 and 71 cm−1 represent Pb–I bending, the peak at 94 cm−1 stands for Pb–I stretching, and the peaks at 108, 138, 162, and 208 cm−1 are assigned to the vibration of the CH3NH3 cations. The relative peaks for tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals are at 71, 94, 108, 135 and 145 cm−1.88 As the 532 nm laser can excite fluorescence and thus reduce the signal-to-noise ratio and can also cause the degradation of the perovskite into PbX2, so the Raman spectra of the MA+ have been in the focus.89 Jeong's group used a 633 nm laser as the excitation source for Raman scattering measurements and a 405 nm laser as the excitation source for laser irradiation, which were performed at 24 °C in the dark with 42% humidity.90 The Raman scattering analysis result showed a C–N stretching vibration mode around 980 cm−1 and an NH3 symmetric bending mode around 1500 cm−1. As shown in Fig. 6c, the Raman spectra of pure phase perovskite single crystals were almost unchanged, but the spectra of pseudo-cubic phase perovskite single crystals gradually disappeared as the laser irradiated the sample and reoccurred under dark conditions after a period of time. In Fig. 6d, they found that after 20 min of laser irradiation, the laser-excited PL overwhelmed the Raman signals, resulting in the disappearance of Raman scattering signals.
Furthermore, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements can provide a more intuitive picture of the fundamental structural characteristics of materials. Han's group overcame the difficulties for TEM characterizations of OIHP single crystals arising from their electron beam-sensitive property and successfully acquired a high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image using the contrast transfer function (CTF) corrected method.91 As shown in Fig. 6e–g, different orientations of the off-centered CH3NH3 cations in MAPbBr3 crystals were found in their images, which indicated the normal and parallel projection directions of the CH3NH3 cations, which led to in-plane and out-of-plane electric dipoles.
3.2. Optical properties
There are two normal ways to study the optical properties of OIHP single crystals: steady-state absorption measurements and PL measurements. Bakr's group characterized the steady-state absorption and PL properties for MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals, as shown in Fig. 7a and b.75 Sharp band edges were observed in the absorption plots and the band gap values were determined to be 2.18 eV for MAPbBr3 crystals and 1.51 eV for MAPbI3 crystals. The PL intensity peaks are located at 574 nm for MAPbBr3 and 820 nm for MAPbI3. While for the MAPbCl3 single crystal, as shown in Fig. 7c, absorption and PL spectra measurement results revealed an absorption edge at 435 nm and determined the optical band gap to be 2.88 eV (inset).92 As shown in Fig. 7a–c, the optical absorption of a perovskite crystal exhibited a clear-cut sharp band edge with negligible excitonic signature compared with that of thin film polycrystalline perovskite materials.48 Therefore, this indicated that the single crystals are predominantly free from grain boundaries and have relatively low structural defects and trap densities. Moreover, the PL properties of perovskite single crystal materials range from the visible region to the near-IR region with a sharp, narrower band edge. The red-shifted PL peaks and narrower band gap of perovskite single crystals than their thin film counterparts indicate a significantly lower trap density, due to the tighter higher dimensional structurally coherent units in single crystals.92
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Steady-state absorption and PL spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystal and MAPbI3 single crystal, respectively.75 Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) Steady-state absorption and PL spectra of MAPbCl3 single crystal. Insets: Absorbance versus photon energy and the determined band gap Eg for the above single crystals.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Normalized PL decays for MAPbBr3 thin film (red) and single crystal (blue) samples, which were excited at 447nm. The inset shows the zoom on the shorter time scale.93 Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Contour plot of PL spectra of I-based perovskite single crystals at different temperatures under weak excitation density (0.42 μJ cm−2) and integrated PL intensity as a function of temperature.94 (f) Time-resolved PL emission at different measurement temperatures of 295 K, 50 K, and 5 K, respectively. At all three temperatures, the data were taken in single-sweep mode and the laser excitation density was 1.4 μJ cm−2. For each temperature, the normalized PL decays integrated over all wavelengths are shown next to the original data, and fitting curves are indicated by red lines on top of the experimental data.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (g) The two-dimensional data set of the differential reflectance amplitude.100 (h) The vertical lines in (g) at 12 meV and 20 meV correspond to exciton and free charges, respectively.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the above-mentioned outstanding optical properties of hybrid perovskite single crystals, the initial reports also indicated that the particular optical features of hybrid perovskite single crystals with the absorption edges located more than 0.1 eV lower in energy than their polycrystalline film counterparts. However, other groups also reported identical light emission and absorption properties of hybrid perovskite single crystals as their thin films.93 More recently, there have been more broad publications on such an apparent disparity in optical properties (i.e., absorption and photoluminescence) between perovskite single crystals and thin films, which can be attributed to the incorrect measurements as a result of reabsorption effects. Snaith's group performed a detailed investigation of the optical properties of MAPbBr3 single crystals as compared with those of the polycrystalline thin films by employing light transmission spectroscopy, ellipsometry, and spatially resolved and time-resolved PL spectroscopy.93 They showed that the optical properties of the perovskite single crystals were almost identical to the optical properties of polycrystalline thin films, and their observations indicated that the polycrystalline perovskite thin films were much closer to possessing ‘single-crystal-like’ optoelectronic properties than previously thought, and also highlighted the discrepancies in the estimation of trap densities from the electronic and optical methods (Fig. 7d).
For further development of hybrid perovskite single crystal optoelectronic applications with improved device performance and stability, much deeper investigations, and a more thorough understanding of the intrinsic photophysical properties are required. Fang and co-workers systematically measured the temperature- and power-dependent PL spectra and time-resolved spectra of MAPbI3 single crystals.94 Then, a contour map of the PL spectra was obtained at different temperatures, as shown in Fig. 7e, which showed a continuous red shift from room temperature to 160 K, and a sudden inversion of the PL trend at the phase transfer temperature of 163–164 K, as well as the appearance of a new band as a shoulder at approximately 850 nm at around 100 K. This indicated an agreement of PL with a band-edge transition, which has a similar temperature-dependent shift to the absorption spectra above the transition temperature.94 To further observe the PL below 100 K, they investigated the PL spectra by varying the laser power density. Three different emission peaks appeared below the phase transition temperature, with Peak I attributed to a free-exciton (FE) transition and low energy Peak II and Peak III attributed to bound excitons (BE). Furthermore, they also employed time-resolved spectroscopy to measure the PL emission at different temperatures (Fig. 7f), which demonstrated a bi-exponential decay with a 6 ns fast component and an 83 ns slower component. This indicated a bimolecular recombination of free carriers and electron and hole trapping. The explanation involves a singlet to triplet splitting (80 meV) for the splitting in energy of peak I from peaks II and III, and the BE with a saturation phenomenon at high pump intensity and a triplet-state nature contributes to the long lifetime.94
From then on, more detailed experimental investigations combined with theoretical calculations were focused on the optical features of hybrid perovskite single crystals, especially the excitation dynamics and the role of excitons.95–98 Generally, the excitons can be electrons and holes, or coulombically bound electron–hole states, and the band-edge electronic excitations mainly affect the properties of light emission, charge transport, and nonlinear optics for the semiconductors. The light absorption of excitons can lead to the step-like absorption onset in MAPbI3 transforming into a line-shape resonance in perovskites with a larger energy gap, and the exciton oscillator strength and binding energy increase with the tighter bound electron–hole states and the decrease of electron polarizability, which result from the increase of the semiconductor energy gap.98 Because the emission spectra of hybrid perovskites reach their peak at the energy of the exciton, which is almost irrelevant to band-to-band transitions, and also the faster radiative decay rate of excitons compensates for their lower population than free carriers, most of the luminescence is thus mainly attributed to the recombination of excitons.96,98 As the induced mobile charges can screen the excitons,99 Cook's group used a multi-THz measurement method to excite the MAPbI3 single crystal and acquired a differential reflectance amplitude data with higher carrier densities at a fluence of 810 μJ cm−2, as shown in Fig. 7g.100 Below the main reflection peak of free charges at 20 meV, the presence of a transient low energy peak of exciton at 12 meV proved the existence of exciton. And the decay of 12 meV peak concomitant with the 1 ps rise time of free charge density represents the dynamics of exciton dissociation, as shown in Fig. 7h. Further experimental and theoretical research and an in-depth understanding of the optical properties and the excitonic dynamics would assist in the preparation of high-quality perovskite single crystals with various forms and develop high-performance device applications.
3.3. Charge transport properties
Regarding the semiconductor materials, the basic electrical properties, such as carrier mobility and carrier lifetime, as well as carrier diffusion length and trap density, are the essential parameters, which are positively related to the performance of relevant optoelectronic devices and are summarized in Table 4. As for the hybrid perovskite single crystals, in addition to the remarkable optical properties, their promising electrical properties have caught the attention from scientists in recent years. Particularly, charge mobility is positively related to the charge extraction and transportation. Therefore, obtaining a larger carrier mobility is important to understand the intrinsic properties of perovskite single crystals and to enhance the performance of the relevant optoelectronic devices. In general, there are five common methods that can be used to measure the carrier mobility of electrons and holes in OIHP single crystals, which include the space charge limited current (SCLC), time-of-flight (TOF), Hall effect measurement, THz pulse measurement and field-effect transistor (FET) measurement (we will discuss these in detail in the Application section) methods. Among these methods, the SCLC method is widely employed to determine the carrier mobility of perovskite single crystals. Upon applying the SCLC method for the measured I–V curves under an applied bias by sandwiching a single crystal of perovskite between two electrodes with outer contacts, one can determine the carrier mobility and trap density. The J–V curve can be divided into three parts: the first region, where an Ohmic contact exists, hence the conductivity of the sample can be estimated; the second region is the trap-filling region, which is increased sharply at VTFL; and the third region, known as the child region. According to the relation between VTFL and the trap density (ntrap) , where VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant, L is the thickness of the crystal, and e is the electron charge, the trap density can be calculated. Moreover, the hole mobility is determined by fitting the J–V curve with Mott–Gurney's law: , where J is the current density and V is the applied voltage. Liu's group designed a hole-only device, which was made from a MAPbI3 single crystal with gold electrodes on both sides, and tested its dark current–voltage behavior, as shown in Fig. 8a.101 A large hole mobility of 67.27 cm2 V−1 s−1 was estimated. The SCLC method was also applied on MAPbBr3 single crystals, with a ntrap of 5.8 × 109 cm−3 and a mobility of 38 cm2 V−1 s−1, as shown in Fig. 8b.48 The current–voltage response of a MAPbCl3 single crystal was measured by Bakr's group, as shown in Fig. 8c, with an ntrap of ∼3.1 × 1010 cm−3 and a mobility of (42 ± 9) cm2 V−1 s−1.92
Table 4 Summary of OIHP single crystal carrier properties




Materials
Carrier lifetime
Carrier mobility
Trap density
Diffusion length




MAPbBr375
28 ± 5 ns (fast)
24.0 cm2 V−1 s−1
3 × 1010 cm−3
∼4.3μm


300 ± 26 ns (bulk)


MAPbI375
18 ± 6 ns (fast)
67.2 cm2 V−1 s−1
1.4 × 1010 cm−3
∼10.0μm


570 ± 69 ns (bulk)


MAPbCl392
83 ± 4 ns (fast)
(42 ± 9) cm2 V−1 s−1
3.1 × 1010 cm−3
∼8.5 μm


662 ± 44 ns (slow)


MAPbBr348
74 ± 5 ns (fast)
38 cm2 V−1 s−1
5.8 × 109 cm−3
∼17 μm


978 ± 22 ns (slow)


MAPbI348
22 ± 6 ns (fast)
—
3.3 × 1010 cm−3
∼8 μm


1032 ± 150 ns (slow)


MAPbI3104
82 ± 5 μs at 1 sun
24.8 ± 4.1 cm2 V−1 s−1
3.6 × 1010 cm−3
175 ± 25 μm under 1 sun


MAPbI374
—
34 cm2 V−1 s−1
1.8 × 109 cm−3
—


MAPbBr374
—
4.36 cm2 V−1 s−1
2.6 × 1010 cm−3
—




 Fig. 8  (a) The dark current–voltage curve of the hole only MAPbI3 single crystal device.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Characteristic I–V trace of MAPbBr3 single crystals.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Current–voltage response of MAPbCl3 single crystals.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Time-of-flight (ToF) traces of MAPbBr3 single crystals.48,66 (e) A linear fit of transit time versus inverse voltage V−1.48 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic of the time-of-flight measurement for the device based on MAPbI3 single crystals.66,104 (g) Transient current curves of the OIHP single crystal devices.66,104 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Schematic of the Hall effect measurement device.105 (i) Hall mobility of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals with μHall(T) on a linear plot.105 (j) A double-log plot of the same data as shown in (h), μHall(T).105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (k) Schematic of the time-resolved multi-THz spectroscopy experiment.100 (l) The incident (black), transmitted (blue) and reflected (red) multi-THz pulses after the interaction with the crystal, in the absence of photoexcitation.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (m) PL time decay trace of a MAPbBr3 crystal.48 (n) PL time decay trace of a MAPbI3 crystal.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (o) Transient absorption in MAPbCl3.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (p) The normalized TR kinetics recorded at 2.38eV for three different pump energies.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Springer Nature. (q) The plot of τeff as a function of the grain size for various surface recombination velocity. The black dashed line τb is the measured bulk lifetime and the red-dashed line represents τeff calculated in the perovskite single crystals.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Another method to measure the carrier mobility of OIHP single crystals is the TOF method. Bakr's group used this method to obtain the carrier mobility, by measuring the transient current after photoexcitation in a bilogarithmic plot, as shown in Fig. 8d.48 The transient current under different driving voltages provides the transit time τt, which is defined by the kink in each trace and is linearly fitted in Fig. 8e. The mobility μ, which is equal to μp ≈ μn and calculated to be 115 cm2 V−1 s−1, where μp and μn are the hole and electron mobility, respectively,102,103 can be defined by the equation , where d is the sample thickness and V is the applied voltage. In Fig. 8f, the same method was applied by Huang's group and the electron mobility was verified to be 24.0 ± 6.8 cm2 V−1 s−1, as shown in Fig. 8g.104
Apart from the above two methods, the Hall effect measurement is another widely used technique to investigate the carrier transport properties in materials. The technique was first introduced to check the carrier mobility by Osman's group.48 From their work, the complementary Hall effect measurements at room temperature confirmed an estimated mobility in the range from 20 to 60 cm2 V−1 s−1. They also mentioned that the slightly lower Hall effect mobilities may be ascribed to surface effects that are negligible for time-of-flight, which constitutes a bulk probe. Meanwhile, Jinsong Huang's group used gallium as the electrodes to apply the Hall effect measurement,103 and they showed that the crystals were slightly p-doped with a low free hole concentration and the majority carrier was determined to be holes. Moreover, the Hall effect hole mobility was as high as 105 ± 35 cm2 V−1 s−1, which agreed with the SCLC results, and indicated that the band-tail states in the perovskite single crystals were negligible. Thereafter, Podzorov's group increased the conductivity of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals by sputtering Ti on the flat-faceted single crystal to form Hall bar electrodes.105 As shown in Fig. 8h, after poling single crystals to be a lower-resistance state at room temperature, they carried out the Hall effect measurements in the 4-probe contact geometry at different voltages with the magnetic field swept at a rate 15 G s−1 between −0.5 and +0.5 T. The Hall mobility was calculated to be 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 (at 300 K) and showed hardly any relation to the bias, following the equation: , where D is the distance between the voltage probes (V− and V+), W is the sample's width, V4p is the longitudinal voltage drop between the voltage probes. The relationship between temperature and Hall-effect mobility is shown in Fig. 8i and j, which demonstrated the increase of mobility when the measurement temperature passed below the cubic-tetragonal phase transition.
Although the above measurement approaches have been widely used in various materials systems and in perovskite single crystals, the obtained measurement results from different research groups are usually different. Sargent and co-workers demonstrated that one of the challenges that may explain these order-of-magnitude discrepancies is that the Hall effect, TOF, and SCLC methods all probe the mobilities near the respective Fermi levels during the experiment, and the (nonequilibrium, high-injection-level) Fermi level is widely different in each experiment.105 In this regard, they developed a contactless method to measure the carrier mobility and further extract the diffusion lengths of a perovskite single crystal directly and straightforwardly. Such a technique is based on a 3D diffusion-quenching method, which also has the advantage of avoiding both the effects of contact resistance and those of a high electric field. To accurately evaluate the charge carrier transport features within the OIHP single crystal, more suitable methods should be further developed and studied.
Additionally, THz pulse measurement is another method to estimate the mobility of perovskite single crystals. David and co-workers used a two-colour laser plasma in dry air to generate multi-THz pulses and excited the large single crystal CH3NH3PbI3 samples and detected the electric field by an air-biased coherent detection scheme with 1–30 THz (4–125 meV) ultra-bandwidth after normal incidence reflection off the crystal facet, as shown in Fig. 8k and l.100 Such spectra measurements indicate the ultrafast dynamics and efficiencies of free charge creation and remarkably high charge carrier mobility as high as 500–800 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Carrier lifetime (τ) is an important parameter that should be considered when designing an optoelectronic device. Upon excitation by photons, the active materials will be in an excited state. After that, the photo-induced holes and electrons will recombine back to the ground state. Usually, if this recombination process, that is, the carrier lifetime of electrons and holes, is sufficiently long, a high performance of the relevant device will be expected. Moreover, the carrier lifetime of the semiconductors strongly depends on the nature, dimension, and purity of the materials. So far, determined by Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) statistics, τ can be obtained from the PL decay, transient absorption, as well as the transient photovoltage decay and impedance methods.106 Among these methods, the PL decay approach has been widely applied. According to the PL spectra measurement result from Bakr's group, as shown in Fig. 8m and n, the superposition of fast and slow components of carrier dynamics yield τ ≈ 41 and 357 ns for MAPbBr3, and τ ≈ 22 and 1032 ns for MAPbI3.48 Following a tri-exponential fitting function: F(t) = ∑aie−t/τi, i = 1, 2, 3, where ai is the prefactor and τi is the time constant.107 The two different parts were assigned to be a surface component (fast) and a bulk component (slow), which indicates that the carrier lifetime propagates deep in the materials, and the fast decay component may result from the carrier recombination and carrier diffusion owing to the high carrier mobility of single crystals; while the slow component may be related to the bulk recombination and indicate the high quality of single crystals.108 Transient absorption (TA) also suggests the recombination property of excitons and is used to determine the carrier lifetime. Bakr's group synthesized MAPbCl3 single crystals and analyzed their carrier lifetime of using TA spectra after a biexponential fit with fast (τ ∼ 83 ns) and slow (τ ∼ 662 ns) components, as shown in Fig. 8o.92 The carrier diffusion length LD can be further estimated based on the equation: , where kB is Boltzmann's constant and T is the sample temperature. From the above-examined values of μ and τ, LD was calculated to be ∼17 μm in MAPbBr3 and ∼8 μm in MAPbI3. Huang's group also tested the carrier diffusion length under 1 sun, which was calculated to be 175 ± 25 μm.104 Furthermore, from the so-called contactless method developed by Sargent et al., the obtained diffusion length in metal-halide perovskites was approximately 2.6 μm ± 0.1 μm.105
Luther and Beard's group investigated the surface recombination of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals without post treatment on the surface using broadband transient reflectance (TR) spectroscopy.109 They operated the TR measurements under various pump intensities and normalized the kinetic traces, finding that the TR kinetics is independent of excitation density under a given excitation energy and the decay of TR kinetics is not because of the first-order bulk recombination due to their shorter time scale than ∼31 ns, indicating that the reasons for TR kinetics decay are surface recombination and the carrier diffusion from the surface into the bulk. Furthermore, by changing the excitation energies, they found a linear relationship between the relative reflectance change (ΔR(ℏω)/R) and the photoexcited carrier density N, as shown in the normalized Fig. 8p, following the equation  where t means the delay time, x represents the distance from the surface, α is the absorption coefficient, D is the ambipolar diffusion coefficient, S means the surface recombination velocity, and w(z) = exp(z2)[1 − erf(z)]. After a non-linear global fitting routine with the detecting region being approximated at the surface N(t,0) and α being determined from the ellipsometry, the best-fit parameters are S = 3.4 ± 0.1 × 103 cm s−1 and D = 0.27 ± 0.01 cm2 s−1, which are ∼2–3 orders of magnitude smaller than that in many solar cell semiconductors. The surface recombination is mainly because of the surface-defect-caused mid-gap states for single crystal semiconductors and the grain boundaries for polycrystalline thin films, which can determine the effective carrier lifetime.109 They also compared the effective lifetime τeff as a function of grain size and S, as shown in Fig. 8q, following the equation , where τb is the bulk carrier lifetime and d represents the planar grain size. To make τeff approach τb when d < 5 μm, ultra-low S is required, which means the surface passivation is necessary when the grain size is smaller than 5 μm. When the grain size is larger than 30 μm, the influence of the surface recombination is eliminated.
4. Applications of perovskite single crystals
The dramatic increase of performance in solar cells based on hybrid perovskite films has aroused the interest of scientists all over the world, which has also promoted the remarkable boom of other optoelectronic applications based on perovskite polycrystalline films. Encouragingly, as shown in the above section, hybrid perovskite single crystals have much more promising physical properties as compared with the polycrystalline candidates, thus the single crystals have evoked new research interest in the optoelectronics and sensing communities. In the following part, we will discuss the up-to-date research progress of perovskite single crystals in the relevant fields, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram showing the potential applications of hybrid perovskite single crystals. 
4.1. Optoelectronic applications

4.1.1. Photovoltaic cells. 
The widely studied hybrid perovskite solar cells with high device performance are usually based on polycrystalline films; however, the current studies have also focused on the developments and optimization of hybrid perovskite single crystal solar cells, owing to the significant advantages over the polycrystalline devices.
Huang's group first fabricated photovoltaic devices based on MAPbI3 bulk single crystals by depositing 25 nm gold (Au) electrodes on one side of the crystal's surface as anodes and bringing gallium (Ga) in contact with the opposite surface as cathodes, as shown in Fig. 10a.104 They peeled off a thickness of 100 to 200 μm single crystals to prepare >3 mm- or >200 μm-thick devices and compared the MAPbI3 single crystal (MSC) devices with the MAPbI3 polycrystalline (MPC) devices with respect to the normalized external quantum efficiency (EQE) (Fig. 10b). A red-shift of 50 nm of the EQE cutoff to 850 nm showed that the MSCs increased the upper limit of short-circuit current density (JSC) compared with the MPC solar cells from 27.5 mA cm−2 to 33.0 mA cm−2. The band gap of MSCs was 1.61 eV and the EQE of a 3 mm MSC solar cell ranged from 12.6% to 15.8% for the wavelength range from 520 nm to 810 nm. As compared with the perovskite polycrystalline solar cells, the photovoltaic devices based on bulk single crystals showed much lower efficiency, which was attributed to the fact that photo-generated carriers could not be fully collected in a thick active layer. Much thinner MAPbBr3 monocrystalline films grown on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass were applied into solar cell devices by Bakr's group by using gold electrodes, as shown in Fig. 10c.79 The illuminated J–V curves of the devices are presented in Fig. 10d, and the devices showed the best cell performance with a fill factor (FF) of 0.58, a JSC of ≈7.42 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of ≈1.24 V, and a PCE of 5.37%.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic device structure of the MAPbI3 single crystal solar cell.66,104 (b) Normalized EQE of a 3 mm-thick and a 200 μm-thick OIHP single crystal photovoltaic device, and an OIHP polycrystalline thin film device.66,104 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Dark and illuminated J–V curves of ITO-based MAPbBr3 single crystal solar cells.79 (d) Dark and illuminated J–V curves of FTO-based MAPbBr3 single crystal solar cells, with a device illustration in the inset picture.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Device structure of the single-crystal solar cells.110 (f) Current density–voltage curves of the OIHP single crystal photovoltaic device after methylammonium iodide (MAI) treatment measured under different scanning directions.110 (g) Stabilized JSC and PCE of single-crystal solar cells with MAI treatment.110 Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Springer Nature. (h) Schematic illustration of MAPbI3 single crystals solar cells with a lateral structure.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (i) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbI3 single crystal perovskite solar cells.112 (j) Energy-level diagram for the MAPbI3 single crystal perovskite solar cells.112 (k) Statistical summary of the photovoltaic parameters from 12 hybrid perovskite single crystal devices.112 Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
With the aim to enhance the performance of solar cells based on perovskite single crystals, Huang's group further grew MAPbI3 single crystal layers with different thicknesses on ITO substrates covered with a hole transport layer (HTL) and fabricated single crystal solar cells with the structure of ITO/poly triaryl amine (PTAA)/MAPbI3/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/copper (Cu) by depositing electron transport layers (ETLs) and metal electrodes on the top of the single crystals, as shown in Fig. 10e.110 The best device had a JSC of 20.5 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.06 V, a FF of 74.1%, as well as a PCE of 16.1%. As shown in Fig. 10f, the PCE was increased to 17.8% with a JSC of 21.0 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.08 V, and a FF of 78.6%. The PCE was calculated by the steady-state photocurrent output at the maximum power point, as shown in Fig. 10g. They also measured the shell lifetime of the single crystal solar cell in air, which remained nearly unchanged after storage in the dark for 30 days, which indicated better air stability than that of the polycrystalline thin-film solar cells.
In addition to the vertical structure solar cells, a new kind of lateral structure perovskite single crystal solar cell was synthesized by Huang's group, as shown in Fig. 10h.111 They observed the piezoelectric effect and ion migration behavior, which were generated by strain-generated grain-boundaries and could form a p–i–n structure, within the MAPbI3 single crystals. The lateral structure device showed a VOC of 0.82 V, the highest PCE of 5.36% at 170 K, and a PCE of 1.88% at room temperature.
More recently, a 20 μm MAPbI3 single crystal inverted p–i–n solar cell with PCE as high as 21.09% and a FF of up to 84.3% was fabricated by Bakr's group.112 The cross-sectional SEM image and energy band diagram of the ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3 single-crystal/C60/BCP/Cu architecture and photovoltaic performances are shown in Fig. 10i–k. They avoided a soluble solvent for the hybrid perovskite by spin-coating post-treatment and fabricated, stored, and tested their devices in a N2 environment to prevent interface hydration. To further realize the optimized performance of perovskite single crystal solar cells, more efforts will be made to enhance the sample quality and to design promising device structures.


4.1.2. Photodetectors. 
Photodetectors (PDs) are typical optoelectronic devices that can convert incident light into electrical signals, and are critical for various industrial and scientific applications. Based on their absorption of different spectral regions, perovskite single crystal photodetectors can be divided into visible light PDs, UV light PDs, and infrared PDs. Furthermore, some special wavelengths may also be detected, such as in X-ray and gamma-ray spectroscopy (Fig. 11). In the following section, we will classify the photodetectors based on perovskite single crystals operating in different spectral regions.
 Fig. 11  Classification of light. OIHP single crystals have been synthesized to fabricate the photodetection devices for detecting light from gamma-ray to infrared. 
To evaluate the performance of a photodetector, several parameters are important. Although certain applications require different features, the key figure-of-merit parameters in photodetectors are the responsivity (R), detectivity (D*), linear dynamic range (LDR), and response speed. Some of these parameters are discussed here: several key performance parameters are listed and are explained in Table 5 briefly.
Table 5 Quantity of OIHP single crystal photodetectors




Quantity
Unit
Definition




Photocurrent (Ilight)
A
Current through a photodetector resulting from illumination.


Dark current (Idark)
A
Current through a device in the absence of illumination.


Photoresponsivity (R)
A W−1

R is calculated according to the formula, R = (Ilignt − Idark)/Plight, where Ilight and Idark represent photocurrent and dark current and Plight is the power of the incident light.


Detectivity (D*)



D* can be calculated as , where q is the elementary charge and Jd is the dark current density.


Gain (G)
—
Gain can be calculated as , where e is the elemental charge and hν is the incident photon energy,


Linear dynamic range (LDR)
dB
LDR is calculated by the formula:  or , where Psa t (Plow) is the light intensity when the incident light intensity is stronger (weaker) than that when the photocurrent begins to deviate from linearity.


External quantum efficiency (EQE)
%
Carrier number divided by the number of incident photons.


Internal quantum efficiency (IQE)
%
It is the ratio of carrier number to the number of incident photons that are absorbed by the device.




I. In the visible region. 
Huang's group fabricated single crystal photodetectors based on MAPbI3 and mixed MAPbBr3−xClx perovskites that exhibited a high sensitivity capacity, which led to a narrow-band photoresponse with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of less than 20 nm under a reverse bias (−1 V) of the device, as shown in Fig. 12a.72 EQE spectra of each kind of single crystal only showed a narrow peak near the absorption edge, which promised a detection application at a specific wavelength, where the background emission is suppressed. The peak specific detectivity (D*) shown in Fig. 12a was over 2 × 1010 Jones at 570 nm under a bias of −4 V. They also measured the current spectrum using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) analyzer, which showed a decreasing signal peak as the light intensity was decreased, as shown in Fig. 12a.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the device structure and the specific detectivity (D*) spectrum under −4 V bias with measured total noise under −4 V, calculated shot noise limit and instrument noise floor as the inset picture.72 Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature. (b) Schematic structure of the photodetector based on a vertical p–i–n structure-OIHP thin single crystal, and the current density of the OIHP thin single crystal photodetectors under dark and one sun (AM1.5) conditions.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic of the planar-type photodetector based on the (100) facet of a MAPbI3 single crystal and the photocurrent versus voltage curves under different irradiation densities.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Three-dimensional illustration of the MAPbBr3 photodetector and the photocurrent of the photodetector.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Photograph of ≈100 photodetectors fabricated on an OIHP single crystal wafer and the photocurrent response of OIHP single crystal photodetector measured using an AM 1.5G solar simulator, as well as the photoresponsivities.80 Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic of the device structure and its mechanism for a narrowband photodetector and the normalized EQE spectra of the laminar MAPbBr3 single crystal photodetectors with thicknesses of 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 mm under a bias of −1 V.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (g) I–V curves in forward and backward sweeping directions under dark and 250 nW illumination conditions of a photodetector, as well as the gain and responsivity of the device. Inset: Optical image of the device.116 Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Thereafter, Huang and his co-workers further fabricated vertical structured p–i–n photodetectors based on OIHP thin single crystals with low noise and a large linear-dynamic-range.113 They grew MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 thin crystals directly on the nonwetting hole transport layer-coating substrates (PTAA) using a space-confined method, and then fabricated the vertical-structured p–i–n photodetectors, as shown in Fig. 12b. The J–V curve is shown in Fig. 12b, which indicated an almost constant current at the reverse bias close to 0 V and the self-powered characteristic of the photodetectors. The MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 photodetectors exhibited a low dark current of 2.0 × 10−9 and 1.8 × 10−7 A cm−2, respectively, at −0.3 V, which contributed to the low noise of the devices, and resulted in their ultrahigh sensitivity. Using a lock-in amplifier and a low noise preamplifier, they measured the noise current, which reached 1.4 and 1.8 fA Hz−1/2 at a frequency of 8 Hz for the devices based on MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3, respectively. The EQEs of the MAPbI3 devices were between 50% and 62%, which corresponded to a responsivity from 0.17 to 0.32 A W−1 in the wavelength range from 400 to 780 nm. In addition, the EQEs of the MAPbBr3 device were between 52% and 60%, which corresponded to a responsivity from 0.17 to 0.26 A W−1 in the wavelength range from 400 to 540 nm. The photocurrent responses of both the MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 devices were linear, and the large LDRs of the detectors were 256 dB and 222 dB. The response times of the two devices were 100 and 300 ns, respectively, and the 3 dB cutoff frequencies were calculated to be 4.4 and 1.5 MHz, respectively.
Sun's group introduced a planar-type photodetector on the (001) facet of a MAPbI3 single crystal with the highest R value of 953 A W−1 and EQE of 2.22 × 105% at an irradiance power density of 2.12 nW cm−2, which is shown in Fig. 12c.70 Under different illumination powers, the photoelectric behavior of this device was convertible, as shown in Fig. 12c. Wei's group used a two-step method to fabricate a self-powered photodetector based on a MAPbBr3 single crystal core–shell heterojunction.114 The device had a JSC of 0.1961 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.61 V, a FF of 41.3%, as well as a broad photoresponse ranging from 350 to 800 nm and a peak responsivity of up to 11.5 mA W−1 with an EQE of 3.17%. It also exhibited a stable On–Off switching with a rise time of 2.3 s and a fall time of 2.76 s after several cycles. Hu's group synthesized photodetectors based on a MAPbI3 single crystal nanowire and nanoplate by transferring them to SiO2/Si slides and depositing Au electrodes.115 The highest On/Off ratio approached 103 under a light illumination of 73.7 mW cm−2.
Although hybrid perovskite single crystal photodetectors have been shown to have better performance, as compared with their polycrystalline counterparts, macroscopic single crystals cannot be grown on a planar substrate, which restricts their potential for optoelectronic integration. To overcome these shortcomings, Bakr's group fabricated large-area planar-integrated SC films by directly growing perovskite (MAPbBr3) single crystals on top of ITO-patterned substrates, as shown in Fig. 12d.64 This integration of micrometer-sized bromine-based perovskite single crystals on a transparent ITO/glass substrate enabled a large gain from the perovskite single crystals, as shown in Fig. 12d. Using this single crystal film, a high-performance photodetector was prepared, which possessed a high gain (above 104 electrons per photon) and a high gain-bandwidth product (above 108 Hz) relative to other perovskite-based optical sensors. A large responsivity exceeding 4000 A W−1 was obtained, which corresponded to a gain above 104 electrons per photon.
Furthermore, the space-limited inverse temperature crystallization (SLITC) method has also been widely used to prepare the thin single crystals onto various substrates, to realize high-performance photodetectors. Liu's group used the SLITC method to fabricate a photodetection device based on a single crystal wafer, which has approximately 100 pairs of interdigitated Au wire electrodes, as shown in Fig. 12e.80 From the photocurrent response under 100 mW cm−2 light illumination, as shown in Fig. 12e, the photocurrent increased to as high as 700 μA at a bias of 2 V. The photoresponse of their device, as shown in Fig. 12e, increased linearly as the radiance intensity decreased, and it was two orders of magnitude higher than that of its polycrystalline counterpart. Moreover, Chen-Yong Su's group sputtered a thin Au layer on a large-area MAPbBr3 thin single crystal to fabricate a narrowband photodetector, as shown in Fig. 12f.81 From the EQE spectra of the devices based on a thin single crystal with different thicknesses, as shown in Fig. 12f, a wide light response range was found from an onset wavelength of about 580 nm to the short wavelength region for a 0.1 mm MAPbBr3 perovskite crystal photodetector, and a decreased response below 530 nm and an obvious peak at 544 nm for a 0.2 mm film. Furthermore, superior performance photodetectors based on MAPbBr3 single crystal thin films (SCTFs) were reported by Ma's group.116 With a higher carrier collection efficiency and an almost 100% absorption of incident light, a SCTF with a thickness of 380 nm was used to fabricate a photodetector, as shown in Fig. 12g. The responsivity reached 1.6 × 107 A W−1 and the highest gain was as high as 5 × 107. The LDRs were 83 dB at a bias of −1.5 V and 50 dB at a bias of 0 V. The minimum number of photons for a response by the device was 200 in each pulse of incident light at 180 Hz under a bias of −1.5 V. The 3 dB bandwidth was 1400 Hz and the self-powered current had a rise time of 81 μs and a fall time of 890 μs.
II. In the ultraviolet region. 
Ultraviolet (UV) detection is a key technology in the fields of flame detection,117 remote security monitoring,118 environmental monitoring,119 and so forth. Researchers have endeavored to develop UV photodetectors based on hybrid perovskite single crystals considering their excellent absorption properties in the UV range. Perovskite MAPbCl3 has a suitable bandgap of approximately 3.11 eV, and its single crystals were applied to fabricate UV photodetectors with a high performance. Visible-blind UV-photodetectors based on MAPbCl3 single crystals were fabricated by Bakr's group, which were crystallized through the proper selection of a DMSO-DMF solution.92Fig. 13a shows the device architecture: a semitransparent Pt layer of 20 nm served as the top electrode and a layer of 20 nm Ti/100 nm Au was deposited as the bottom electrode. The I–V curve of the device showed a dark current as low as 4.15 × 10−7 A at 15 V and a drastically high temporal photoresponse of 24 ms, as shown in Fig. 13b. Moreover, the photocurrent remained stable up to 8000 s under continuous 365-nm light illumination (1 W cm−2) at a bias of 15 V as shown in Fig. 13c, which indicated high photostability.
 Fig. 13  (a) Device architecture of the MAPbCl3 single crystal photodetector.92 (b) Photo and dark I–V curves of the photodetector under invisible UV light (λ = 365 nm) illumination.92 (c) Photostability measured on the MAPbCl3 single crystal photodetector in UV (1 W cm−2). Inset: Data measured under UV light (1 sun excitation density).92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) 3D model of the MAPbCl3 UV-detectors.120 (e) Responsivity and gain as a function of incident light power.120 (f) The response time of the MAPbCl3 UV-detector.120 Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Visible-blind transparent UV photodetectors based on MAPbCl3 single crystals were also synthesized and optimized by Sargent and his co-workers.120 They grew planar-integrated crystal films directly onto the ITO-deposited glass substrate by the ITC method and then removed the pre-added toluene by heating the sample at 145 °C. The relevant UV detectors are shown in Fig. 13d, and the space between the ITO electrodes was 5 μm, which represented the least-resistance path between the contacts. As shown in Fig. 13e, the responsivity of the device was also tested under different light intensities (λ = 385 nm), and displayed a decrease as the incident power was increased, which arose from the electronic trap states at the perovskite–ITO interface and enabled the transition of the contact from rectifying in the dark to Ohmic under light illumination.121 The response time, which is determined by the lifetime of the electronic trap states at the semiconductor–metal interface, was tested as shown in Fig. 13f. After illumination, if the traps stay filled for a long time, the speed will be determined by the slower part of the fall time, and the fall time of the device based on the planar-integrated MAPbCl3 crystal films was determined to be 1 ms.
III. In the infrared region. 
Near-infrared (NIR) and infrared (IR) photodetectors have widespread uses in telecommunication,122 and thermal and biological imaging.123–126 An IR or NIR photoresponse is usually achieved in photodetection devices by using intrinsic semiconductors with a narrow bandgap and extrinsic semiconductors with a wide bandgap. Meredith's group synthesized a hybrid perovskite single crystal that overcame the large bandgap of crystals (>1 eV) and presented photodetectors with performance metrics appropriate for NIR detection at room temperature by using the trap-related linear sub-gap absorption.127 They also showed that the NIR responsivity can be enhanced by adopting a lateral photoresistor geometry, thus accessing a higher density of trap-states within the single crystal surfaces. A strong photoresponse in the NIR range was achieved in photodiodes based on CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, when a continuous wave 808 nm laser with a low light intensity of ∼10 mW cm−2 was used to illuminate the crystal sides. Their photodiodes could also respond to a laser with a wavelength as long as 1064 nm, which was below the bandgap. Fig. 14a shows the device structure of the NIR detector based on hybrid perovskite single crystals, and Fig. 14b demonstrates the unchanged sub-gap photoresponse with trap state absorption of the device. The sub-bandgap absorption, which is close to the valence band, could also benefit from hole trap states. They evaporated interdigitated electrodes on MAPbBr3 single crystals, as shown in Fig. 14c, and measured their responsivities at different reverse bias voltages, which are shown in Fig. 14d. These broadband absorption photoresistors showed narrowband photoresponses in NIR by manipulating the IQE of the devices through charge collection narrowing (CCN).128
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a MAPbI3 single crystal photodiode architecture.127 (b) One of the possible sub-gap electron trap state absorptions.127 (c) Photographs of photoresistors based onMAPbBr3.127 (d) Responsivity of MAPbI3 photoresistors under illumination of light above the gap (visible, 600 nm) and below the gap (NIR, 900 nm) under a reverse bias of 0.5 V.127 Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
IV. In the X-ray region. 
In addition to the common light detections from UV to IR, hybrid perovskite single crystals have been employed for the detection of X-rays, which have important applications in various fields, such as medical diagnostics, clinical treatment, and the non-destructive testing of products.78 Actually, the initial applications of methylammonium lead perovskite films (thickness of 60 μm) in photoconductive and photovoltaic devices have already been shown to be able to detect the soft X-rays, because of their high-Z elements Pb, I, and Br. Additionally, a high sensitivity for the device based on sintered hybrid lead perovskite wafers was also determined from the slope of the current output versus X-ray dose.129 However, the polycrystalline films formed by spray coating in that work had a small μτ product, which was still much smaller than that of state-of-the-art X-ray detector materials such as some common inorganic semiconductors. The hybrid perovskite single crystals combine the advantages of high stopping power, low trap density, and high charge collection efficiency, which should enable high-sensitivity soft and hard X-ray detection. Huang's group fabricated a sensitive X-ray detector based on MAPbBr3 single crystals with the structure of Au/MAPbBr3 single crystal/C60/BCP/Ag or Au, as shown in Fig. 15a.78 As shown in Fig. 15b, the stopping energy of OIHPs is similar to that of CdTe, which is much stronger than that of silicon, and the devices attenuated almost all of the X-rays. The generated current density signal had a linear relationship with the X-ray dose rate, as shown in Fig. 15c. Through reducing the bulk defects and passivating surface traps, the authors showed that the single-crystal devices with a thickness of 2–3 mm showed a detection efficiency of 16.4% at a near zero bias under irradiation with continuum X-ray energy up to 50 keV. The lowest detectable X-ray dose rate was 0.5 μGyair s−1 with a sensitivity of 80 μC Gyair−1 cm−2, which is four times higher than the sensitivity achieved in α-Se-based X-ray detectors. This allows the radiation dose applied to a human body to be reduced for many medical and security check applications.
 Fig. 15  (a) Structure of a MAPbBr3 single crystal sensitive X-ray detector.78 (b) Relationship between attenuation efficiency and thickness of CdTe, MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, MAPbCl3 and silicon under 50 keV X-ray photons (in terms of the photoelectric effect).78 (c) X-ray-generated photocurrent at various dose rates.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of the full device structure. Inset: Corresponding cross-sectional SEM images, with scale bars of 500nm.130 (e) Energy level diagram of a MAPbBr3 single crystal photodiode.130 (f) Photocurrent density versus voltage bias under X-ray with different photon energies.130 (g) (1) Object photo. (2) X-ray image under 30 to 100keV energies. (3) X-ray image under low photon energy. (4) X-ray image under high photon energy.130 (h) (1) Optical image of a chicken claw. (2) X-ray image under 30 to 100keV energies. (3) X-ray image under low photon energy. (4) X-ray image under high photon energy.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
An X-ray detector based on a PIN diode array made of a thick MAPbBr3 single crystal was introduced by Chen's group.130 The PIN photodetector with the structure of Au/poly-TPD (N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-N,N′-diphenylbenzidine)/MAPbBr3 PSC/C60 doped PCBM (phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester)/Ag is shown in Fig. 15d, in which poly-TPD acted as a HTL and C60-doped PCBM acted as an ETL, and Au and Ag worked as the anode and cathode, respectively. Fig. 15e shows the schematic energy level diagram of the PIN device, in which photo-generated electrons and holes in the active layer were effectively separated and transported to their corresponding electrodes under an external electric field. As shown in Fig. 15f, the J–V curves showed an increasing saturated photocurrent under an increased voltage bias with the increase of the X-ray photon energy, and the highest sensitivity of 23.6 μC mGyair−1 cm−2 was achieved. The authors also employed the devices for practical applications. They measured a glass of water with a metal pole and a chicken claw with X-ray energies of 30 to 100 eV, low photon energy, and high photon energy separately, as shown in Fig. 15g and h. Water is a low Z material and thus is more sensitive to lower energy, while the metal pole is sensitive to higher X-ray energy but the contrast is not sufficiently high. According to the difficulty for X-ray to pass through bones, the contrast between the fibula and radius is enhanced under a lower energy X-ray. Moreover, because of the lack of soft tissue information in a high energy image, the width of the thumb is larger under a lower energy X-ray.
V. In the gamma-ray region. 
Similar to X-ray detectors, gamma-ray (γ-ray) detectors are also widely used in many fields, owing to their non-invasive detection of a condensed object. However, γ-ray detectors need to work in a weak radiation field pulse mode and perform event-by-event detection to sort out the intensity versus the energy of the radiation quanta. Large and balanced μ and τ are needed for high-energy detection. In 2015, Huang's group reported high-quality MAPbI3 single crystals that were applied to gamma-ray detection with an efficiency of 4% when operated in the gamma voltaic mode.104 Then, Kovalenko's group demonstrated MAPbI3 single crystals for gamma-ray detection, and a 59.6 keV Am energy spectrum was acquired.131 They fabricated a solid-state gamma-ray detector based on a rendered absorption spectrum of MAPbI3 single crystals over a broad range of photon energies by using the atomic absorption coefficients, which is shown in Fig. 16a. A fit of the bias dependence of the photocurrent with the Hecht model, as shown in Fig. 16b, indicated a high μτ product of ∼10−2 cm2 V−1.132,133 A mono-exponential decay of the activity was estimated by continuously recording the photocurrent, as shown in Fig. 16c, and it was equivalent to a half-life of 11C (20.3 min). The γ photon-to-charge carrier generation efficiency was calculated to be 2.5 × 104. Much lower activities could be sensed owing to the high dynamic range of sensitivity of the device, as shown in Fig. 16d, where a portable source of 137Cs with an activity of 2.2 MBq was detected.
 Fig. 16  (a) The attenuation coefficient and penetration depth of MAPbI3 and CdTe under photon energy from soft X-rays to γ radiation.131 (b) The photocurrent and a fit with the Hecht model, generated by Cu Kα X-ray irradiation (8 keV) in a MAPbI3 single crystal.131 (c) The decay of activity from a short-lived 11C isotope with initial activity A0 = 70GBq.131 (d) Response of the conductivity of the MAPbI3 single crystal to a 137Cs source with activity A of 2.2 MBq.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Pictures of the guard ring electrode side of the detector, the anode side of the detector and side view of a MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 single-crystal detector with electrode sides covered with epoxy.134 (f) 137Cs energy spectrum obtained by MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 (device I), CZT and NaI(Tl) detectors.134 (g) Enlarged photo-peak region of the 137Cs energy spectrum obtained by MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 (device II) and MAPbBr3 single-crystal detectors. FWHM, full width at half maximum.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Springer Nature. (h) Schematic illustration of a Schottky-type MAPbI3 detector with an asymmetrical electrode (left) and corresponding energy level diagram (right).135 (i) Typical I–V curve of a Ga/MAPbI3/Au detector on the linear and logarithmic (inset) scales. (j and k) Energy-resolved spectrum by a Schottky-type MAPbI3 detector at 2 °C (j) under 241Am 59.5 keV γ-ray under −50 V and (k) under 57Co γ ray with an energy of 122 keV under −70 V.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Huang's group further reported a Cl− dopant compensation of the MAPbBr3 single crystal process to fabricate a low-cost γ-ray detector.134 CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 single crystals were tested to be one of the most suitable dopants with a larger μτ product than other dopants, and they were equipped with a guard ring electrode to mitigate their leakage current, as shown in Fig. 16e. The 137Cs energy spectrum obtained by CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 with a full-energy peak resolution of 6.50% is shown in Fig. 16f and is compared with the spectrum obtained by CZT and NaI(Tl) detectors, which have a resolution of the full-energy peaks of 2.27% and 7.51%, respectively. Fig. 16g shows the FWHM and an enlarged photopeak region of the 137Cs energy spectrum. After comparison, we can determine the capability of perovskite to obtain a better resolution than that of the typical NaI(TI) scintillator detector with a more economical method in industry.
A high-performance γ-ray spectrometer based on a MAPbI3 single crystal with asymmetric electrodes was designed by Kanatzidis and co-workers.135 Asymmetrical electrodes (Schottky-type) were applied to prohibit the hole injection from the anode or to reduce the leakage current, as shown in Fig. 16h. The low dark current was stable under a high electric field in the reversed bias range, as shown in Fig. 16i. From Fig. 16j and k, the best energy resolution for 241Am 59.5 keV γ-rays was ∼12%; while the best energy resolution achieved for 57Co 122 keV was 6.8%.


4.1.3. Light-emitting diodes and lasers. 
With the exceptional PL efficiency and high color purity, OIHP single crystals can also perform as high-performance light-emitting diodes (LEDs).136 Most of the existing OIHP LEDs employ a polycrystalline film with sizes of nanometers to micrometers, and coherent light emission is a challenge.137 In Yu's work, the LEDs consisted of an ITO anode, a MAPbBr3 single crystal microplatelet emissive layer, and an Au cathode.138 In their LEDs, a vertical p–i–n junction was formed from ion migration under an external electric field, and the junction could be frozen below a certain temperature owing to the immobilized ions. They charged the devices with different voltages at ambient temperature, and then cooled them to −193 °C and removed the bias to test the I–V characteristics, emission spectra, and representative optical images of the LED, which are given in Fig. 17a–c. The turn-on voltage was 1.8 V and the LED could last for at least 54 h with a luminance of ∼5000 cd m−2, which was tested and is shown in Fig. 17d.
 Fig. 17  (a) I–V characteristics of an LED with a frozen junction. Inset: A microscopic optical image of the LED at 0 V.138 (b) Electroluminescence spectra of the frozen junction LED at different applied voltages.138 (c) Microscopic optical images of LEDs at different applied voltages.138 (d) Relative light emission intensity vs time of an LED at 1 mA at −193 °C. Inset: A microscopic image of the LED at t = 12 h.138 Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The excellent properties, which included a small trap density, long electron–hole diffusion length, large carrier mobility, and long lifetime, make OIHP single crystals suitable for laser devices with low lasing thresholds and high qualities. Qihua Xiong's group grew typical CH3NH3PbI3 triangular nanoplatelets and optically pumped them by a femtosecond-pulsed laser, as shown in Fig. 18a.139 Several peaks centered at λ = 776.7, 779.2, 781.9, 784.3, and 786.8 nm appeared over the spontaneous emission band with a FWHM of ∼1.2 nm, when the pump fluence was increased to 40.6 μJ cm−2, as shown in Fig. 18b. Furthermore, the widths of two adjacent peaks were almost the same, which implied the same waveguiding origin of the mode. Time-resolved PL curves, shown in Fig. 18b (right inset), exhibited a long average lifetime of ∼2.6 ns and an ultrafast decay lifetime of ∼80 ps. Zhu's group grew a MAPbI3 single crystal nanowire by low-temperature solution processing and then demonstrated room-temperature lasing, which had a broad tenability covering the near-infrared to visible wavelength region.140 Optically pumped lasing was performed at room temperature in a dry N2 atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 18c. From Fig. 18d, a sharp peak appeared at 787 nm in the representative emission spectra and grew rapidly with increasing pump laser fluence (P). The nanowire emitted lasing uniformly below the lasing threshold PTh (∼595 nJ cm−2) but emitted mainly from the two end facets above PTh with a strong waveguiding effect and axial Fabry–Perot cavity modes. Single-crystal nanowires of MAPbBryI3−y and MAPbClxBr3−x were also synthesized and showed a tunable lasing emission wavelength at room temperature.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the optical setup of a CH3NH3PbI3 triangular nanoplatelet.139 (b) The evolution from spontaneous emission to lasing in a typical CH3NH3PbI3 triangular nanoplatelet. Inset left: Optical image of a nanoplate and log–log scale plot of integrated output emission (Pout) as a function of pumping fluence (Pex). Inset right: Photoluminescence decay curve below (pink) and above (dark green) the threshold.139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of a nanowire on SiO2 substrate pumped by 402 nm laser excitation.140 (d) Nanowire emission spectra. Inset: Integrated emission intensity and FWHM vs. P illustrating the lasing threshold at ∼600 nJ cm−2.140 Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) μ-PL spectra of a square microdisk. Inset: Enlarged μ-PL spectra between 555 and 559 nm.141 (f) SEM image of the square microdisk.141 (g) the μ-PL image of the square microdisk above the lasing threshold.141 (h) Integrated PL intensity as a function of excitation density.141 Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (i) Schematic of a perovskite square microplate on the glass substrate pumped by a 400 nm laser.142 (j) Emission spectra of perovskite microplates excited by different pump densities. Inset: The log–log scale integrated PL intensity as a function of pump density, showing the lasing threshold around 3.5 μJ cm−2.142 Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Additionally, CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal square microdisks were synthesized into a 557 nm single-mode laser based on a built-in whispering gallery mode (WGM) microresonator by Fu's group.141 They collected μ-PL spectra using a charge-coupled device (CCD) from the second harmonic (λ = 400 nm, pulse width 150 fs), as shown in Fig. 18e. From the μ-PL spectra of a microdisk with a side-length of 2.0 μm, as shown in Fig. 18f, under different excitation intensities, broad spontaneous emission (SE) was observed to center at 545 nm upon an excitation density of 2.4 μJ cm−2 with a FWHM of 23 nm. A sharp peak gradually appeared around 557.5 nm with a FWHM of 1.1 nm, as the excitation density was increased to 5.4 μJ cm−2, which indicated the laser emission in this case. In Fig. 18h, a lasing threshold at Pth = 3.6 μJ cm−2 was observed, and a sublinear regime was observed below the threshold. Furthermore, the output PL intensity increased superlinearly above the threshold, which suggested a particular optical cavity in the stimulated process of PL.
Uniform-sized CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal microplates were also created by Jiang et al. by using a “liquid knife” and were made into lasers.142 The beam of a 400 nm pulsed laser was used as a pump source to excite single crystal microplates, as shown in Fig. 18i, and a spontaneous emission peak centered at 550 nm with a FWHM of 20 nm was observed, as shown in Fig. 18j. According to finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations, the transverse magnetic (TM) mode quality factor (Qcal) was higher than that of the transverse electric (TE) mode, which allowed for the total internal reflection and well-defined WGM resonance.

4.2. Sensing applications

4.2.1. Gas sensors. 
The influence of the environment to perovskite optoelectronic properties has been investigated in recent years.143–145 Loi and co-workers modulated the physisorption of O2 and H2O molecules to investigate the surface recombination velocity (SRV) of MAPbBr3 single crystals.60 The increased surface recombination in a vacuum led to a lower fraction of the photogenerated carriers to diffuse toward the interior of the crystal, which resulted in a lower PL intensity in a vacuum, and the gas molecules were physisorbed rather than chemisorbed on the crystal surface. Devices under vacuum also had a shorter PL lifetime. They performed optical spectroscopy in atmospheres of moist air, dry N2, He, CO2, a mixture of O2 (20%) and He (80%), moist N2, moist O2, and a vacuum separately to further determine the effect of the gas molecules on the crystal surface, as shown in Fig. 19a and b. Exposure of the crystal to dry N2, CO2, or Ar had no influence on the PL intensity, while the PL intensity increased rapidly in the presence of air, dry O2, and moist N2, which suggested the role of O2 and H2O in PL enhancement. They also measured the I–V curve of a MAPbBr3 single crystal device in a vacuum and air to investigate the interaction between ambient gas molecules and the defect sites, as shown in Fig. 19c and d. A larger effect on the current was observed that increased from 10 μA in a vacuum to 24 μA in air. This increase was reversible when the device was re-measured in a vacuum, which indicated the important role of surface trap sites in air to determine the optoelectronic properties of the MAPbBr3 single crystal.
 Fig. 19  (a and b) PL intensity of MAPbBr3 single crystals, which were excited with a 400 nm wavelength powered 0.71 μJ cm−2 laser, as a function of time (a) in a vacuum and on exposure to dry N2, dry CO2, and dry Ar and (b) on exposure to air, dry O2, and moist N2. Blue shaded area indicates vacuum.60 (c) Structure of the single-crystal device for current–voltage measurements.60 (d) I–V curves of the MAPbBr3 single-crystal device in air and vacuum under laser illumination.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the AAAS. 


4.2.2. Imaging sensors. 
Liu's group synthesized one kind of imaging sensor based on MAPbBr3 single crystals through a low-temperature-gradient-crystallization approach, and the structure of the device is shown in Fig. 20a.146 Image sensing was realized by recognizing optical patterns generated by 525 nm illumination at a bias voltage of 2 V that were projected on the imaging assembly. Fig. 20b–d shows the projection imaging assembly, which used image assembly units with 729 pixels to measure and display the 525 nm light illumination that penetrated through patterned photomasks. Fig. 20e–g shows the corresponding outputs under a bias of 2 V, which were based on the photocurrent distribution of the full area of the sensor unit. The response speed was trise = 43 μs and tdecay = 36 μs, faster than the pattern recognition of the human eye (>40 ms) and that of the perovskite nanowire counterpart (trise = 20.47 ms and tdecay = 13.81 ms).147,148
 Fig. 20  (a) Photograph of a 27 × 27 photosensor array based on a 34 × 38 mm2 sized MAPbBr3 single crystal.146 (b–d) Schematic diagrams for the projection imaging mechanism, which use a pre-patterned photomask directly above the imaging assembly, under light illumination.146 (e–g) The corresponding photocurrent outputs from pixel arrays measured under 2 V bias.146 Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Optical image of electrode arrays on the perovskite single crystal film.84 (i) Photocurrent mapping of the perovskite single crystal film.84 (j) Optical image of the number ‘10’, with a scale bar of 100 μm.84 (k) Photocurrent intensity profile of the optical image ‘10’.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Springer Nature. 
A perovskite single-crystal film introduced by Song's group was used in imaging sensors by further printing it on high-optical-quality quartz glass, and they also deposited a 120 nm-thick Au electrode array on it, as shown in Fig. 20h.84 The high uniform photoresponse of the device under illumination is revealed in Fig. 20i. The optical image in Fig. 20j was illuminated from the back of the device and the photocurrent intensity map in Fig. 20k demonstrated a clear image, which was very similar to the original image.

4.3. Field-effect transistor applications
The field effect transistor (FET) is a fundamental component to realize modern digital integrated circuits, which is a key active device for the electronics industry. The FET is also often used as a platform to evaluate lateral charge transport and (opto-)electronic transport properties in isotropic materials and for the investigation of new emergent properties by electrostatically doping the material, which is otherwise not easily accessible. Halide hybrid perovskites have emerged as promising semiconductors with outstanding properties for optoelectronics. Despite such unprecedented progress, several riddles remain to be solved, which include the fundamental details of the charge transport mechanisms in halide perovskites. Additionally, recent discoveries have highlighted the important role of external stimuli, such as electromagnetic radiation and electric field, on the structural dynamics, which in turn strongly impact the disorder and charge transport in hybrid perovskites. The dynamic nature of the material also provides opportunities to understand and discover new physical phenomena that couple charge transport, structural dynamics, electric field, and light. The FET is an excellent platform for the elucidation of new physical properties and for the realization of novel perovskite electronic devices.
As mentioned above, OIHP single crystals possess excellent carrier transport properties, owing to the absence of grain boundaries, low trap density, and long carrier diffusion length, which make them good candidates to be planar-structured transistors. In this regard, bottom-gate, top-contact field-effect transistors (BGTC FETs) were fabricated by Aram Amassian's group by using MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) thin single crystals as an active layer. Au electrodes were deposited onto the thin perovskite crystals and an n-doped Si wafer with a SiO2 layer was used as a substrate, where the structure of the device is shown in Fig. 21a.149 As shown in Fig. 21b, the I–V current was measured at a drain voltage (VDS) of −30 V and gate voltage (VGS) sweeping from −40 V to 40 V at room temperature, which indicated the ambipolar transfer characteristics of OIHP single crystal FETs. From the output characteristics in Fig. 21c, the device exhibited an ambipolar transport property at low VGS and showed unipolar transport with linear-to-saturation I–V transistor characteristics at high VGS. Moreover, the perovskite thin single crystal device resistance multiplied by the channel width was estimated to be 80 kΩ cm, which indicated a small contact resistance for the excellent FET performance.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the BGTC FET device based on hybrid perovskite thin single crystals.149 (b) Transfer characteristics of MAPbCl3 TSC-FETs: IDSvs. VGS, IDS1/2vs. VGS and the fit lines show black solid square, red solid line and blue solid line separately.149 (c) Output characteristics of MAPbCl3 TSC-FETs.149 Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Sketch of the vertical-structured FET.150 (e) Output curves for p-type of the [100]-oriented CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal in the dark.150 (f) Output curves for n-type.150 (g) Transfer curves for p-type.150 (h) Transfer curves for n-type.150 Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the IEEE. 
In addition, vertical-structured FET devices based on a MAPbI3 single crystal thin film with different orientations were fabricated by Qingfeng Yan's group.150 The structure of the device is shown in Fig. 21d, with a thick Au layer deposited on the thin film as a drain electrode, and a nickel mask plate on the other side with interdigital Au film electrodes, whose bridging-gap width was 30 μm, served as the source. The dielectric layer was made from thick tantalum pentoxide (Ta2O5), which was deposited on the source. From the FET characteristics of the single crystal with the [100] orientation, as shown in Fig. 21e–h, IDS increased with the increase of VGS, which is a P-type enhancement, when VGS was negative, while an N-type enhancement was observed when VGS was positive. No obvious saturation characteristics in the output curves were observed, which arose from the weaker regulation of vertical structure transistors when compared with the planar structure transistors.
5. Challenges and open issues
Hybrid perovskite single crystals have shown great potential in high-performance optoelectronic/electronic and sensing devices. However, several challenges and issues still remain in terms of the practical applications of these devices. They mainly include the following: (1) the effects of surface defects on the properties of perovskite single crystals need to be systematically studied; (2) the large-area fabrication and (3) the stability of the perovskite single crystal devices require further improvement; (4) the health and environmental concerns should be considered; (5) the magnetic effects of perovskite single crystals are still partly unclear; and (6) a comparison should be made with perovskite polycrystalline films.
5.1. Surface defects
The absence of grain boundaries makes single crystals acquire better optical and charge transport properties than their polycrystalline counterparts. However, the surface of single crystals usually possesses lots of chemical impurities, dangling bonds, surface dislocations, and under-coordinated atoms, and becomes disordered owing to hydration, which can decrease the carrier mobility and carrier diffusion length and promote the recombination of carriers near the surface.70,151,152 Additionally, the recombination at the surface is found to be more important than that at grain boundaries in polycrystalline films.153 Furthermore, the MA+ group on the surface plane is free to rotate out of plane, which leads to the relaxation of Br atoms and causes a different structure on the surface, which was reported by Qi's group by using low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy with the support of density functional theory calculations.154 Thus, a further decrease of defects, especially the surface defects, is needed, with the aim of gaining high-quality hybrid perovskite single crystals. To realize high-performance electronic/optoelectronic and sensing devices based on OIHP single crystals with low-level surface defects, more research should be done on surface passivation. Furthermore, washing the surface of the single crystal after they are taken out of precursors can also help to reduce the surface defects.72,153
5.2. Large-area fabrication
OIHP single crystal films are more free of grain boundaries and exhibit better carrier properties than those of the polycrystalline candidates, so their large-area fabrication will ensure a promising future in industrial applications. However, embedding of volatile and vulnerable organic components in fragile inorganic frameworks makes them difficult to fabricate with a large area by deposition techniques or solution-based methods.64,79 Furthermore, even millimeter- or centimeter-thick single crystal films have been reported. The difficulty of slicing and fabricating electrodes on brittle films make it a challenge to fabricate devices based on themselves.81 Thin single crystals were grown directly on conductive substrates like FTO glass or indium tin oxide (ITO) glass,64,81 and tailored substrates, such as SiO2/Si,136 which can provide in situ growth for thin single crystals and be directly made into devices. Nevertheless, these large-area thin single crystals have rough surfaces, which contain a great number of surface defects, and thus the optoelectronic properties of such materials remain inferior to their bulk single-crystal counterparts. Further optimization of the synthesis method of large-area thin single crystals is needed for application to industrial production in the future.
5.3. Long-term stability
The low stability of the current OIHP single crystal devices hinders their broad practical application. Several factors that affect the stability of these devices, for example, ion migration,155,156 can cause current–voltage hysteresis and photoinduced phase separation, and the interaction between single crystals and their surroundings lies in the degradation of perovskites by humidity and light.157–159 Therefore, to further enhance the stability of OIHP single crystal devices, optimized structures of these devices should be designed to control the migration of ions. At the same time, more attention should be paid to the environmental condition during synthesis and the preservation of single crystals and their devices. Meanwhile, the unstable grain boundaries of OIHP thin films are susceptible to moisture attack, compared with their microwires,160 which also means that the quality of single crystals with fewer defects is an important point to improve the stability of single crystal devices. Moreover, various compositions and interface engineering approaches are also being intensively investigated to solve this critical issue. In addition, encapsulation has been demonstrated to be a valid method to protect OIHP devices.
In addition to reducing the surface defects, surface passivation can be regarded as another strategy for the long-term stability of OIHP single crystals. As was reported by Huang's group, UV–O3 treatment on the top surface of MAPbBr3 single crystals for 20 min led to a stronger PL intensity and longer recombination lifetime and these improvements were retained in a vacuum environment.78 Loi's group introduced benzylamine to permanently passivate the surface of OIHP single crystals by forming a more stable two-dimensional (BA)2PbBr4 on the surface.161 However, the accumulated 2D perovskite layers detached from the crystal surface and led to the formation of randomly distributed square etching pits. Residues of the byproducts were found on the crystal surface, which influenced the morphology and obscured the properties of crystals. Thus, more studies are needed to find cheaper and better methods to passivate the surface of single crystals, without affecting their performance.
5.4. Health and environmental concerns
The synthesis and growth of OIHP single crystals adopt heavy metal ions, like lead (Pb) or tin (Sn), and organic functional groups, which can impact both the environment and human health. This critical issue needs to be overcome, with the aim to further commercialization. As for the common hybrid perovskite single crystal sample, MAPbI3, the Pb ion is toxic to both human health and the natural environment, while the organic solvents used during the production process of single crystals, such as DMF and DMSO, are also toxic and easily penetrate into the human body.162 To solve these problems, capsulation and recycling are needed in the use of lead materials and organic solvents. Furthermore, other alternative metals to lead, with a lower toxicity, are also being studied, such as bismuth and antimony,163,164 and thus, the optoelectronic properties of these Pb-free hybrid perovskite single crystals need to be explored further for optoelectronic device applications.
5.5. Magnetic effects
Hybrid perovskite materials have also been reported to exhibit a balanced carrier mobility and long carrier diffusion length. Furthermore, it has been predicted that MAPbX3 possesses strong spin–orbit coupling and Rashba-type splitting that originates from the heavy metal (Pb).165–167 These properties would also intuitively suggest promising applications in spintronics.
However, there has already been some pioneering work on exploring the magnetic field effects in hybrid perovskite thin films. These studies demonstrated magneto-photoluminescence and magneto-photocurrent effects in perovskites and indicated that both photocurrent and photoluminescence are spin-dependent processes.168 Moreover, photo-induced magnetism has been achieved using the circularly polarized picosecond pump–probe technique.168 However, in-depth investigations of spin-polarized transport in hybrid perovskite materials are still lacking and will be potentially rewarding. As mentioned above, the OIHP single crystals are free of grain boundaries and have low structural defects. Thus, better charge and spin transport properties are expected if the single crystals can be used as the active layer in spintronic devices. The OIHPs can be studied by magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS-NMR) and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (SS-NMR).169 The magnetic effects of single crystals have rarely been discussed but will provide more options for the applications of single crystals.
5.6. Comparison with perovskite polycrystalline films
Hybrid perovskites arose in the form of polycrystal films, which have been developed for many years and have relative mature technologies for device fabrication. Devices based on single crystals are still in the early stage; however, they have high potential for various device applications with the excellent merits as mentioned above. Currently, solar cells made of MAPbI3:xNd3+ (0.5 mol%) thin films can exhibit a PCE of 21.15%,170 and solar cells made of FAPbI3 with additional iodide ions in dripping solution possess a certified PCE of 22.1%,171 and the highest PCE for solar cells based on hybrid perovskite polycrystalline films so far is about 25.2%.44 In comparison, the highest PCE for hybrid perovskite single crystalline solar cells is about 21.09% to date.112 Thus, the perovskite single-crystal solar cells can further be optimized to acquire higher PCE through improving the crystal quality or designing novel device structures. Encouragingly, single crystals also showed leading performance on some other devices. Currently, Liang's group compared the device performances of MAPbI3 single-crystal photodetectors and their polycrystalline-film counterparts, which showed a much higher R of 953 A W−1 and EQE of 2.22 × 105% than those of polycrystalline counterparts with an R of 2.55 A W−1 and EQE values of 5.95 × 102%.70 Furthermore, Huang's group introduced a sensitive OIHP single-crystal X-ray detector with a sensitivity as high as 80 μC Gyair−1 cm−2,78 and Kovalenko's group introduced high-performance single-crystal gamma ray detectors.131 However, few studies reported perovskite polycrystalline thin films in X-ray or gamma ray detection, except for Matt's group who introduced millimeter-thick OIHP wafers with a conversion efficiency of 2527 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 under 70 kVp X-ray exposure.129 Moreover, it should be mentioned that perovskite single crystal samples also demonstrated much more excellent stabilities, which are also the important reason for the fast development of single crystals and their relevant optoelectronic devices. Therefore, perovskite single crystals still have a room for further improvement, despite being developed in recent years; hybrid perovskite single-crystal devices can still be optimized by referring to the development of polycrystalline devices and taking advantage of single crystalline specialty.
6. Conclusions and future perspectives
Inspired by the unprecedented optical and electronic properties of hybrid perovskite materials combined with the advantages of cost-effectiveness and ease of processing, hybrid perovskite optoelectronic devices have progressed tremendously over the past few years. More recently, methylammonium lead trihalide perovskite single crystals, having different dimensional forms: bulk, thin film, nanoplate, and so on, have been widely explored as functional layers for optoelectronic and sensing devices owing to their unique structures and excellent physical properties. Although these types of devices are still in the early stages of development, strong potential for a variety of technological and commercial applications clearly remains, thanks to the combined advantages of processing versatility and promising charge carrier transport with extraordinary optoelectronic properties. Here, we have presented a comprehensive overview of the recent advances in hybrid perovskite single crystals with respect to the background knowledge on the crystal structure, optoelectronic properties, and charge transport dynamics of crystals, and their applications in the area of optoelectronic and sensing devices, and a fundamental understanding of the device performance. The recent progress in the synthesis and processing of single crystals was reviewed and divided, based on two different dimensional forms of the bulk and thin crystals. We summarized and compared the bulk single crystal growth methods, including the solution temperature-lowering (STL) method, inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) method, and temperature-independent anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC) method. In addition, some other modified and optimized approaches to synthesize thin single crystals are summarized for the first time. The detailed discussion is focused on charge-carrier transport characteristics, operation mechanisms, and the challenges of perovskite single crystals, with the aim of providing a critical understanding for the current development and further advance in materials design and device engineering in a variety of optoelectronic/electronic and sensing technologies. More particularly, the recent significant progress of photodetectors based on single crystals is reviewed and subdivided based on the different working wavelength ranges covering from the gamma to ultraviolet, visible and infrared regions.
In conclusion, the research progress achieved to date in the area of optoelectronic/electronic and sensing devices based on perovskite single crystals, with an emphasis placed on the challenges faced by the research community, has been summarized and discussed systematically, and finally the perspective on the opportunities offered by this emerging family to photoactive materials in practical and commercial technologies is also proposed. Nevertheless, hybrid perovskite single crystals and relevant applications are just emerging, and deeper insights into basic physical properties, growth approaches, and underlying working principles are required. Further exploration of high-quality perovskite single crystals, combined with an improved understanding of the optoelectronic properties of devices, indicates a promising future for wide applications with markedly enhanced device performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) scheme (DE180100167) from the Australian Research Council (ARC).
References
D. B. Mitzi, Templating and structural engineering in organic–inorganic perovskites, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2001,(1), 1–12 RSC .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(7), 506 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, Perovskite oxides: preparation, characterizations, and applications in heterogeneous catalysis, ACS Catal., 2014, 4(9), 2917–2940 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Kobayashi, T. Kimura, H. Sawada, K. Terakura and Y. Tokura, Room-temperature magnetoresistance in an oxide material with an ordered double-perovskite structure, Nature, 1998, 395(6703), 677–680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uehara, S. Mori, C. Chen and S.-W. Cheong, Percolative phase separation underlies colossal magnetoresistance in mixed-valent manganites, Nature, 1999, 399(6736), 560–563 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Fong, G. B. Stephenson, S. K. Streiffer, J. A. Eastman, O. Auciello, P. H. Fuoss and C. Thompson, Ferroelectricity in ultrathin perovskite films, Science, 2004, 304(5677), 1650–1653 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Cohen, Origin of ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides, Nature, 1992, 358(6382), 136–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. Bednorz and F. Lichtenberg, Superconductivity in a layered perovskite without copper, Nature, 1994, 372(6506), 532–534 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Cava, B. Batlogg, J. Krajewski, R. Farrow, L. Rupp, A. White, K. Short, W. Peck and T. Kometani, Superconductivity near 30 K without copper: the Ba 0.6 K 0.4 BiO 3 perovskite, Nature, 1988, 332(6167), 814–816 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Savitzky, I. El Baggari, A. S. Admasu, J. Kim, S.-W. Cheong, R. Hovden and L. F. Kourkoutis, Bending and breaking of stripes in a charge ordered manganite, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Senn, J. P. Wright and J. P. Attfield, Charge order and three-site distortions in the Verwey structure of magnetite, Nature, 2012, 481(7380), 173–176 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Pickett and D. J. Singh, Electronic structure and half-metallic transport in the La 1− x Ca x MnO 3 system, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53(3), 1146 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta and J. Sun, Spin-polarized transport and magnetoresistance in magnetic oxides, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1999, 200(1–3), 24–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maignan, S. Hébert, L. Pi, D. Pelloquin, C. Martin, C. Michel, M. Hervieu and B. Raveau, Perovskite manganites and layered cobaltites: potential materials for thermoelectric applications, Cryst. Eng., 2002, 5(3–4), 365–382 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mahendiran, R. Mahesh, A. Raychaudhuri and C. Rao, Resistivity, giant magnetoresistance and thermopower in La0. 7Sr0. 3MnO3 showing a large difference in temperatures corresponding to the ferromagnetic transition and the insulator-metal transition, Solid State Commun., 1996, 99(3), 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
P. Radaelli, G. Iannone, M. Marezio, H. Hwang, S. Cheong, J. Jorgensen and D. Argyriou, Structural effects on the magnetic and transport properties of perovskite A 1− x A x′ MnO 3 (x= 0.25, 0.30), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56(13), 8265 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. Lee, H. Yun, J. Kim, J. Park, C. Choi, D. C. Kim, H. Seo, H. Lee and J. W. Yu, High-Resolution Spin-on-Patterning of Perovskite Thin Films for a Multiplexed Image Sensor Array, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(40), 1702902 CrossRef .
W. Xu, F. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Wang, F. Luo and X. Chen, An ultrasensitive and reversible fluorescence sensor of humidity using perovskite CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(41), 9651–9655 RSC .
W. G. Hardin, D. A. Slanac, X. Wang, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Highly active, nonprecious metal perovskite electrocatalysts for bifunctional metal–air battery electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(8), 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS .
O. Haas, F. Holzer, S. Müller, J. McBreen, X. Yang, X. Sun and M. Balasubramanian, X-ray absorption and diffraction studies of La0. 6Ca0. 4CoO3 perovskite, a catalyst for bifunctional oxygen electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47(19), 3211–3217 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu and J.-S. Lee, Flexible hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite memory, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(5), 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ercan, J.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Shih, C.-C. Chueh and W.-C. Chen, Influence of polymeric electrets on the performance of derived hybrid perovskite-based photo-memory devices, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(39), 18869–18877 RSC .
F. Ma, Y. Jiao, Z. Jiang and A. Du, Rhombohedral lanthanum manganite: a new class of Dirac half-metal with promising potential in spintronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(42), 36088–36093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Deschler, X. Sun, T.-M. Lu, E. A. Wertz, J.-M. Hu and J. Shi, Epitaxial halide perovskite lateral double heterostructure, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(3), 3355–3364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu and R. E. Cohen, Polarization rotation mechanism for ultrahigh electromechanical response in single-crystal piezoelectrics, Nature, 2000, 403(6767), 281–283 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Compositional and solvent engineering in Dion–Jacobson 2D perovskites boosts solar cell efficiency and stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(10), 1803384 CrossRef .
S. Li, S. Tong, J.-Q. Meng, C. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Xiao, J. Sun, J. He and Y. Gao, Fast-response and high-responsivity FAxMA (1− x) PbI3 photodetectors fabricated via doctor-blading deposition in ambient condition, Org. Electron., 2018, 52, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Xian, G. Niu, W. Yuan, H. Li, H. Yin, P. Liu, Y. Long and W. Li, Controllable Cs x FA1–x PbI3 Single-Crystal Morphology via Rationally Regulating the Diffusion and Collision of Micelles toward High-Performance Photon Detectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(14), 13812–13821 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, M. Xu, C. Tong, W. Ji, Z. Fu, Z. Wan, F. Hao, Y. Ming, S. Liu and Y. Hu, High performance printable perovskite solar cells based on Cs0. 1FA0. 9PbI3 in mesoporous scaffolds, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Bian, Y. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and Y. Shi, High-Performance and Stable Mesoporous Perovskite Solar Cells via Well-Crystallized FA0. 85MA0. 15Pb (I0. 8Br0. 2) 3, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11(3), 2989–2996 CrossRef .
A. Babayigit, D. D. Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H.-G. Boyen and B. Conings, Assessing the toxicity of Pb-and Sn-based perovskite solar cells in model organism Danio rerio, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6(1), 1–11 CrossRef .
H. Ma, Y. Ma, H. Wang, C. Slebodnick, A. Alatas, J. J. Urban and Z. Tian, Experimental Phonon Dispersion and Lifetimes of Tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Crystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 10(1), 1–6 CrossRef .
D. Ju, X. Zheng, J. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, B. Cao, H. Xiao, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr and X. Tao, Reversible Band Gap Narrowing of Sn-Based Hybrid Perovskite Single Crystal with Excellent Phase Stability, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(45), 14868–14872 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ju, Y. Dang, Z. Zhu, H. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, X. Li, L. Wang, X. Hu, A. K.-Y. Jen and X. Tao, Tunable Band Gap and Long Carrier Recombination Lifetime of Stable Mixed CH3NH3Pb x Sn1–x Br3 Single Crystals, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(5), 1556–1565 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, J. Liu, G. Portale, H. H. Fang, G. R. Blake, G. H. ten Brink, L. J. A. Koster and M. A. Loi, Highly reproducible Sn-based hybrid perovskite solar cells with 9% efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(4), 1702019 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(17), 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Efficient, high yield perovskite photovoltaic devices grown by interdiffusion of solution-processed precursor stacking layers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(8), 2619–2623 RSC .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501(7467), 395–398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, A fast deposition-crystallization procedure for highly efficient lead iodide perovskite thin-film solar cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(37), 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, F. Li, X. Zhou, J. Yang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, An efficient planar-heterojunction solar cell based on wide-bandgap CH 3 NH 3 PbI 2.1 Br 0.9 perovskite film for tandem cell application, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(2), 304–307 RSC .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7(6), 486 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(9), 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient hybrid solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites, Science, 2012, 338(6107), 643–647 CrossRef CAS .
NREL. Efficiency chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiency-chart.20181214.pdf.
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Steric engineering of metal-halide perovskites with tunable optical band gaps, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, Tuning the light emission properties by band gap engineering in hybrid lead halide perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(51), 17730–17733 CrossRef .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Advancements in perovskite solar cells: photophysics behind the photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(8), 2518–2534 RSC .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger and K. Katsiev, Low trap-state density and long carrier diffusion in organolead trihalide perovskite single crystals, Science, 2015, 347(6221), 519–522 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, J. Jeong, H.-B. Kim, S. Kim, B. Walker, G.-H. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Cesium-doped methylammonium lead iodide perovskite light absorber for hybrid solar cells, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Multicolored organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite light-emitting diodes, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(7), 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, High-performance flexible broadband photodetector based on organolead halide perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(46), 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Lead iodide perovskite light-emitting field-effect transistor, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Water photolysis at 12.3% efficiency via perovskite photovoltaics and Earth-abundant catalysts, Science, 2014, 345(6204), 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Ambipolar solution-processed hybrid perovskite phototransistors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef .
L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Z. Hong, H. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Pure formamidinium-based perovskite light-emitting diodes with high efficiency and low driving voltage, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(4), 1603826 CrossRef .
P. Liu, X. He, J. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite nanowire laser arrays, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 5766–5773 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, The identification and characterization of defect states in hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(1), 112–116 RSC .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Defect passivation in hybrid perovskite solar cells using quaternary ammonium halide anions and cations, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2(7), 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen and Q. Chen, Chemical reduction of intrinsic defects in thicker heterojunction planar perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(23), 1606774 CrossRef .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, H. Wei, J. Yang, G. R. Blake, J. Huang, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Ultrahigh sensitivity of methylammonium lead tribromide perovskite single crystals to environmental gases, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(7), e1600534 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, Organometal trihalide perovskite single crystals: a next wave of materials for 25% efficiency photovoltaics and applications beyond?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(16), 3218–3227 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Li, W. Deng and R. He, Extra long electron–hole diffusion lengths in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3− x Cl x perovskite single crystals, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(33), 8431–8435 RSC .
B.-X. Chen, W.-G. Li, H.-S. Rao, Y.-F. Xu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Large-grained perovskite films via FAxMA1− xPb (IxBr1− x) 3 single crystal precursor for efficient solar cells, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Planar-integrated single-crystalline perovskite photodetectors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Li, C. Zhang, J.-J. Song, X. Xie, J.-Q. Meng and S. Xu, Metal halide perovskite single crystals: from growth process to application, Crystals, 2018, 8(5), 220 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang and S. Liu, Recent Progress in Single-Crystalline Perovskite Research Including Crystal Preparation, Property Evaluation, and Applications, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(1), 1700471 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, M. He, J. Peng, Y. Sun and Z. Liang, Structure and growth control of organic–inorganic halide perovskites for optoelectronics: From polycrystalline films to single crystals, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3(4), 1500392 CrossRef .
J. Ding and Q. Yan, Progress in organic-inorganic hybrid halide perovskite single crystal: growth techniques and applications, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60(11), 1063–1078 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Lu, G. Liu, H. Xia and X. Tao, Bulk crystal growth of hybrid perovskite material CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17(3), 665–670 RSC .
Z. Lian, Q. Yan, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, L. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Pan, Q. Li, L. Wang and J.-L. Sun, High-performance planar-type photodetector on (100) facet of MAPbI 3 single crystal, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16563 CrossRef .
J. Su, D. Chen and C. Lin, Growth of large CH3NH3PbX3 (X= I, Br) single crystals in solution, J. Cryst. Growth, 2015, 422, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Highly narrowband perovskite single-crystal photodetectors enabled by surface-charge recombination, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9(10), 679 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, G. Maculan and O. M. Bakr, Retrograde solubility of formamidinium and methylammonium lead halide perovskites enabling rapid single crystal growth, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(100), 17658–17661 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan and F. Yu, Two-inch-sized perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X= Cl, Br, I) crystals: growth and characterization, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(35), 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He and G. Maculan, High-quality bulk hybrid perovskite single crystals within minutes by inverse temperature crystallization, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–6 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Yan, J. Wang and Y. Chen, Effect of the modulating of organic content on optical properties of single-crystal perovskite, Opt. Mater., 2016, 62, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Yang and S. F. Liu, Perovskite CH 3 NH 3 Pb (Br x I 1− x) 3 single crystals with controlled composition for fine-tuned bandgap towards optimized optoelectronic applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(39), 9172–9178 RSC .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi and L. Cao, Sensitive X-ray detectors made of methylammonium lead tribromide perovskite single crystals, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10(5), 333 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, L. Wang, B. Murali, K. T. Ho, A. Bera, N. Cho, C. F. Kang, V. M. Burlakov, J. Pan and L. Sinatra, Solution-Grown Monocrystalline Hybrid Perovskite Films for Hole-Transporter-Free Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(17), 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, L. Pang and S. Liu, Thinness-and shape-controlled growth for ultrathin single-crystalline perovskite wafers for mass production of superior photoelectronic devices, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(41), 9204–9209 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Rao, W. G. Li, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, In Situ Growth of 120 cm2 CH3NH3PbBr3 Perovskite Crystal Film on FTO Glass for Narrowband-Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(16), 1602639 CrossRef .
Y.-X. Chen, Q.-Q. Ge, Y. Shi, J. Liu, D.-J. Xue, J.-Y. Ma, J. Ding, H.-J. Yan, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, General space-confined on-substrate fabrication of thickness-adjustable hybrid perovskite single-crystalline thin films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(50), 16196–16199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lee, J. Baek, K. S. Park, Y.-E. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and M. M. Sung, Wafer-scale single-crystal perovskite patterned thin films based on geometrically-confined lateral crystal growth, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–8 CrossRef .
Z. Gu, Z. Huang, C. Li, M. Li and Y. Song, A general printing approach for scalable growth of perovskite single-crystal films, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(6), eaat2390 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Formability of ABX3 (X= F, Cl, Br, I) Halide Perovskites, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64(6), 702–707 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Jung, G. Y. Kim, B. P. Nguyen, H.-J. Jin, W. Jo, T. T. Thu Nguyen, S. Yoon, W. S. Woo, C. W. Ahn and S. Cho, Optical and Scanning Probe Identification of Electronic Structure and Phases in CH3NH3PbBr3 Crystal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(40), 21930–21934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luan, J. Song, X. Wei, F. Chen and J. Liu, Controllable growth of bulk cubic-phase CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 single crystal with exciting room-temperature stability, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18(28), 5257–5261 RSC .
B.-W. Park, S. M. Jain, X. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and T. Edvinsson, Resonance Raman and excitation energy dependent charge transfer mechanism in halide-substituted hybrid perovskite solar cells, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), 2088–2101 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Q. Xie, T.-Y. Zhang, L. Chen, N. Guo, Y. Wang, G.-K. Liu, J.-R. Wang, J.-Z. Zhou, J.-W. Yan and Y.-X. Zhao, Organic–inorganic interactions of single crystalline organolead halide perovskites studied by Raman spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(27), 18112–18118 RSC .
H. R. Byun and M. S. Jeong, Optical Characterization of Cubic and Pseudo-cubic Phase Perovskite Single Crystals Depending on Laser Irradiation Time, Appl. Sci. Converg. Technol., 2018, 27(2), 42–45 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, X. Ying, C.-E. Hsiung, R. Sougrat, K. Li and Y. Han, Atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopy of electron beam–sensitive crystalline materials, Science, 2018, 359(6376), 675–679 CrossRef CAS .
G. Maculan, A. D. Sheikh, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, CH3NH3PbCl3 single crystals: inverse temperature crystallization and visible-blind UV-photodetector, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(19), 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, X. Wen, S. V. Kesava, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, Consolidation of the optoelectronic properties of CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 perovskite single crystals, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Fang, R. Raissa, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Adjokatse, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Photophysics of organic–inorganic hybrid lead iodide perovskite single crystals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(16), 2378–2385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chang, Z. Bai and H. Zhong, In situ fabricated perovskite nanocrystals: a revolution in optical materials, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6(18), 1800380 CrossRef .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras and A. G. Lehmann, Correlated electron–hole plasma in organometal perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–10 Search PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, Q. Wang, M. A. Loi, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Perovskite excitonics: primary exciton creation and crossover from free carriers to a secondary exciton phase, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6(3), 1700839 CrossRef .
D. Marongiu, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, The role of excitons in 3D and 2D lead halide perovskites, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(39), 12006–12018 RSC .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Band filling with free charge carriers in organometal halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(9), 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundström and D. G. Cooke, Intrinsic femtosecond charge generation dynamics in single crystal CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(12), 3700–3707 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Yang and S. F. Liu, High-quality perovskite MAPbI3 single crystals for broad-spectrum and rapid response integrate photodetector, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27(3), 722–727 CrossRef .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, High open-circuit voltage solar cells based on organic–inorganic lead bromide perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(6), 897–902 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giorgi and K. Yamashita, Organic–inorganic halide perovskites: an ambipolar class of materials with enhanced photovoltaic performances, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(17), 8981–8991 RSC .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Electron-hole diffusion lengths> 175 μm in solution-grown CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, Science, 2015, 347(6225), 967–970 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Yi, X. Wu, X. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Intrinsic Charge Transport across Phase Transitions in Hybrid Organo-Inorganic Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(30), 6509–6514 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Defects in perovskite-halides and their effects in solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(11), 1–13 Search PubMed .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Lyu, Q. Wang, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, Composition-dependent photoluminescence intensity and prolonged recombination lifetime of perovskite CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3− x Cl x films, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(79), 11727–11730 RSC .
Y. Fang, H. Wei, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Quantification of re-absorption and re-emission processes to determine photon recycling efficiency in perovskite single crystals, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14417 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Yan, M. Yang, S. Choi, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Low surface recombination velocity in solution-grown CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 perovskite single crystal, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7961 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Q. Dong, Y. Liu, C. Bao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Xiao and Y. Bai, Thin single crystal perovskite solar cells to harvest below-bandgap light absorption, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–7 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, J. Song, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Ducharme and J. Huang, Lateral-structure single-crystal hybrid perovskite solar cells via piezoelectric poling, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(14), 2816–2821 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Single-crystal MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells exceeding 21% power conversion efficiency, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(6), 1258–1259 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bao, Z. Chen, Y. Fang, H. Wei, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, L. Li and J. Huang, Low-noise and large-linear-dynamic-range photodetectors based on hybrid-perovskite thin-single-crystals, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(39), 1703209 CrossRef .
M. Cao, J. Tian, Z. Cai, L. Peng, L. Yang and D. Wei, Perovskite heterojunction based on CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal for high-sensitive self-powered photodetector, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109(23), 233303 CrossRef .
X. Qin, Y. Yao, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Perovskite photodetectors based on CH3NH3PbI3 single crystals, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11(19), 2675–2679 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, J. Khurgin, N. X. Fang, X. Zhang and R. Ma, High-Performance Single-Crystalline Perovskite Thin-Film Photodetector, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(8), 1704333 CrossRef .
P. Cheong, K.-F. Chang, Y.-H. Lai, S.-K. Ho, I.-K. Sou and K.-W. Tam, A ZigBee-based wireless sensor network node for ultraviolet detection of flame, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2011, 58(11), 5271–5277 Search PubMed .
M. Li, W. Li, Z. Qiang and E. R. Blatchley III, On-site determination and monitoring of real-time fluence delivery for an operating UV reactor based on a true fluence rate detector, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(14), 8094–8100 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Ojeda and F. S. Rojas, Process analytical chemistry: applications of ultraviolet/visible spectrometry in environmental analysis: an overview, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2009, 44(3), 245–265 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adinolfi, O. Ouellette, M. I. Saidaminov, G. Walters, A. L. Abdelhady, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Fast and sensitive solution-processed visible-blind perovskite UV photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(33), 7264–7268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, High-gain and low-driving-voltage photodetectors based on organolead triiodide perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(11), 1912–1918 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chin, S. Vaddiraju, A. Maslov, C.-Z. Ning, M. Sunkara and M. Meyyappan, Near-infrared semiconductor subwavelength-wire lasers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(16), 163115 CrossRef .

          S.-Q. Cheng, B. Cai and Y.-M. Zhu, in Black silicon as absorber for near-infrared photo-thermal conversion, 2015 Opto-Electronics and Communications Conference (OECC), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–3.
K.-K. Du, Q. Li, Y.-B. Lyu, J.-C. Ding, Y. Lu, Z.-Y. Cheng and M. Qiu, Control over emissivity of zero-static-power thermal emitters based on phase-changing material GST, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6(1), e16194 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Jiang, H. Zeng, Z. Ci and L. Sun, Pure near-infrared to near-infrared upconversion of multifunctional Tm 3+ and Yb 3+ co-doped NaGd (WO 4) 2 nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(22), 4495–4501 RSC .
D. Naczynski, M. Tan, M. Zevon, B. Wall, J. Kohl, A. Kulesa, S. Chen, C. Roth, R. Riman and P. Moghe, Rare-earth-doped biological composites as in vivo shortwave infrared reporters, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(1), 1–10 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Near infrared photodetectors based on sub-gap absorption in organohalide perovskite single crystals, Laser Photonics Rev., 2016, 10(6), 1047–1053 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Filterless narrowband visible photodetectors, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9(10), 687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shrestha, R. Fischer, G. J. Matt, P. Feldner, T. Michel, A. Osvet, I. Levchuk, B. Merle, S. Golkar and H. Chen, High-performance direct conversion X-ray detectors based on sintered hybrid lead triiodide perovskite wafers, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11(7), 436–440 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, D. Zhao, Y. Qiu, Y. Huang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Huang, Q. Khan, A. Nathan and W. Lei, PIN Diodes Array Made of Perovskite Single Crystal for X-Ray Imaging, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 12(10), 1800380 CrossRef .
S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, Y. Shynkarenko, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh, O. Nazarenko, D. Kreil, T. Nauser and M. V. Kovalenko, Detection of gamma photons using solution-grown single crystals of hybrid lead halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10(9), 585 CrossRef CAS .
R. Street, S. Ready, K. Van Schuylenbergh, J. Ho, J. Boyce, P. Nylen, K. Shah, L. Melekhov and H. Hermon, Comparison of PbI 2 and HgI 2 for direct detection active matrix x-ray image sensors, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91(5), 3345–3355 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Kabir and S. Kasap, Charge collection and absorption-limited sensitivity of x-ray photoconductors: Applications to a-Se and HgI 2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(9), 1664–1666 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, D. DeSantis, W. Wei, Y. Deng, D. Guo, T. J. Savenije, L. Cao and J. Huang, Dopant compensation in alloyed CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3− x Cl x perovskite single crystals for gamma-ray spectroscopy, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16(8), 826–833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, W. Ke, G. C. Alexander, K. M. McCall, D. G. Chica, Z. Liu, I. Hadar, C. C. Stoumpos, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Resolving the energy of γ-ray photons with MAPbI3 single crystals, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5(10), 4132–4138 CrossRef CAS .
V.-C. Nguyen, H. Katsuki, F. Sasaki and H. Yanagi, Single-crystal perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 prepared by cast capping method for light-emitting diodes, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57(4S), 04FL10 CrossRef .
Y. K. Chih, J. C. Wang, R. T. Yang, C. C. Liu, Y. C. Chang, Y. S. Fu, W. C. Lai, P. Chen, T. C. Wen and Y. C. Huang, NiOx electrode interlayer and CH3NH2/CH3NH3PbBr3 Interface treatment to markedly advance hybrid perovskite-based light-emitting diodes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(39), 8687–8694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, X. Shan, T. Geske, J. Li and Z. Yu, Manipulating ion migration for highly stable light-emitting diodes with single-crystalline organometal halide perovskite microplatelets, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 6312–6318 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Room-temperature near-infrared high-Q perovskite whispering-gallery planar nanolasers, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(10), 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Zhu, Lead halide perovskite nanowire lasers with low lasing thresholds and high quality factors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(6), 636–642 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Perovskite microdisk microlasers self-assembled from solution, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(22), 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Yan, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Su, H. Fu and L. Jiang, “Liquid Knife” to Fabricate Patterning Single-Crystalline Perovskite Microplates toward High-Performance Laser Arrays, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(19), 3732–3741 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. van Franeker, D. W. DeQuilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini and D. S. Ginger, The importance of moisture in hybrid lead halide perovskite thin film fabrication, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(9), 9380–9393 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pathak, A. Sepe, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, K. C. Goedel, S. D. Stranks, N. Noel and M. Price, Atmospheric influence upon crystallization and electronic disorder and its impact on the photophysical properties of organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(3), 2311–2320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Müller, T. Glaser, M. Plogmeyer, M. Sendner, S. Döring, A. A. Bakulin, C. Brzuska, R. Scheer, M. S. Pshenichnikov and W. Kowalsky, Water infiltration in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite: Fast and inconspicuous, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(22), 7835–7841 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Feng, X. Zhang, K. Wang, L. Meng, H. Ye and M. Liu, A 1300 mm2 ultrahigh-performance digital imaging assembly using high-quality perovskite single crystals, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(29), 1707314 CrossRef .
R. Näsänen, H. Ojanpää, T. Tanskanen and J. Päällysaho, Estimation of temporal resolution of object identification in human vision, Exp. Brain Res., 2006, 172(4), 464–471 CrossRef .
J. Ding, Y. Zhao, S. Du, Y. Sun, H. Cui, X. Zhan, X. Cheng and L. Jing, Controlled growth of MAPbBr 3 single crystal: understanding the growth morphologies of vicinal hillocks on (100) facet to form perfect cubes, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52(13), 7907–7916 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, F. Li, L. Yu, M. R. Niazi, Y. Zou, D. Corzo, A. Basu, C. Ma, S. Dey and M. L. Tietze, Single crystal hybrid perovskite field-effect transistors, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–10 CrossRef .
Q. Lv, Z. Wang, G. Dong and Q. Yan, Anisotropic Carrier Transport in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 Single Crystal Field-Effect Transistor, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39(9), 1389–1392 CAS .
B. Wu, H. T. Nguyen, Z. Ku, G. Han, D. Giovanni, N. Mathews, H. J. Fan and T. C. Sum, Discerning the surface and bulk recombination kinetics of organic–inorganic halide perovskite single crystals, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(14), 1600551 CrossRef .
B. Murali, E. Yengel, C. Yang, W. Peng, E. Alarousu, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, The surface of hybrid perovskite crystals: a boon or bane, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(4), 846–856 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Top and bottom surfaces limit carrier lifetime in lead iodide perovskite films, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2(2), 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, H.-S. Kim, H. Lin, M. V. Lee, Y. Li, N.-G. Park and Y. Qi, Real-space imaging of the atomic structure of organic–inorganic perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(51), 16049–16054 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Ion migration in organometal trihalide perovskite and its impact on photovoltaic efficiency and stability, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49(2), 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Light-induced self-poling effect on organometal trihalide perovskite solar cells for increased device efficiency and stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(20), 1500721 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Fan, Y. Mai and L. Wang, Aquointermediate assisted highly orientated
perovskite thin films toward thermally stable and efficient solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(2), 1601433 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, V. D'Innocenzo, E. R. Dohner, N. Martino, A. S. Kandada, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, H. I. Karunadasa, E. T. Hoke and A. Petrozza, CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite single crystals: surface photophysics and their interaction with the environment, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6(12), 7305–7310 RSC .
B. R. Ecker, C. Wang, H. Wei, Y. Yuan, J. Huang and Y. Gao, Intrinsic behavior of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals under light illumination, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(23), 1801206 CrossRef .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, Aligned single-crystalline perovskite microwire arrays for high-performance flexible image sensors with long-term stability, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(11), 2201–2208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duim, H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, G. H. ten Brink, M. A. Marques, B. J. Kooi, G. R. Blake, S. Botti and M. A. Loi, Mechanism of surface passivation of methylammonium lead tribromide single crystals by benzylamine, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6(3), 031401 Search PubMed .
A. C. Williams and B. W. Barry, Penetration enhancers, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 128–137 CrossRef .
M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, M. Cai, Y. Jiao, P. V. Bernhardt, M. Zhang, Q. Wang, A. Du, H. Wang and G. Liu, Organic–inorganic bismuth (III)-based material: A lead-free, air-stable and solution-processable light-absorber beyond organolead perovskites, Nano Res., 2016, 9(3), 692–702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leng, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, Z. Li, K. Zeng, K. Li, G. Niu, Y. He, Q. Zhou and J. Tang, Lead-free, blue emitting bismuth halide perovskite quantum dots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(48), 15012–15016 CrossRef CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, Importance of spin–orbit coupling in hybrid organic/inorganic perovskites for photovoltaic applications, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(17), 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, P. Umari and F. De Angelis, Electronic and optical properties of MAPbX 3 perovskites (X= I, Br, Cl): a unified DFT and GW theoretical analysis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(39), 27158–27164 RSC .
F. Zheng, L. Z. Tan, S. Liu and A. M. Rappe, Rashba spin–orbit coupling enhanced carrier lifetime in CH3NH3PbI3, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(12), 7794–7800 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. Sun, C. Sheng, Y. Zhai, K. Mielczarek, A. Zakhidov and Z. Vardeny, Magnetic field effects in hybrid perovskite devices, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11(5), 427–434 Search PubMed .
T. Baikie, N. S. Barrow, Y. Fang, P. J. Keenan, P. R. Slater, R. O. Piltz, M. Gutmann, S. G. Mhaisalkar and T. J. White, A combined single crystal neutron/X-ray diffraction and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance study of the hybrid perovskites CH 3 NH 3 PbX 3 (X= I, Br and Cl), J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(17), 9298–9307 RSC .
K. Wang, L. Zheng, T. Zhu, X. Yao, C. Yi, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, L. Liu, W. Hu and X. Gong, Efficient perovskite solar cells by hybrid perovskites incorporated with heterovalent neodymium cations, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 352–360 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Iodide management in formamidinium-lead-halide–based perovskite layers for efficient solar cells, Science, 2017, 356(6345), 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Xingmo Zhang
	Xingmo Zhang is currently an MPhil student at the School of Physics, University of Sydney (Australia). She received her bachelor's degree from Tianjin University (Tianjin, China) in 2018. Her current research interests include the synthesis, characterization and application of hybrid perovskite single crystals.

Feng Li
	Feng Li received his PhD degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He is currently a Lecturer and also a discovery early career researcher award (DECRA) fellow at the School of Physics in the University of Sydney. His main research is centered on the characterization and investigation of physical properties of novel materials, particularly hybrid perovskites and organic semiconductors, as well as diverse electronic, data storage and energy applications, including photodetectors, field-effect transistors, spintronic devices and solar cells.

Rongkun Zheng
	Rongkun Zheng obtained his BSc in Physics from Shandong University in China in 1999 and his PhD in Physics from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2004. He joined the University of Sydney in late 2004, and currently is an Associate Professor at the School of Physics. His research interest spans from condensed matter and materials physics to microscopy and microanalysis, with focus on the growth–structure–property relationships in functional materials and devices.

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structure of perovskites: A (blue) can be organic or inorganic cations and B (grey) represents metal cations; X (purple) is often occupied by halide ions.2 Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of solution temperature-lowering (STL) method to synthesize bulk single crystals.69 (b) Image of CH3NH3PbI3 with its natural facets {100} and {112}.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photograph of a MAPbI3 bulk single crystal with its natural facets.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Single crystals of CH3NH3PbI3 obtained by spontaneous nucleation.71 (e), CH3NH3PbI3 large crystals obtained using seeds.71 (f), CH3NH3PbBr3 crystals obtained by the STL method.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Elsevier. (g) Photographs of halide perovskite single crystals with different halide ratios.72 Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Solubility of MAPbI3 in GBL and MAPbBr3 in DMF at different temperatures.73 Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 crystal growth at different time intervals.75 Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) The pictures of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals with different MAX:PbX2 molar ratios.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier. (d and e) The schematic illustration of the preparation of MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 single crystals and the photos of MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 (x = 0–1) crystals.77 Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the AVC method.48,66 (b) Photograph of MAPbBr3 single crystals grown by the AVC method.48,66 (c) Picture of MAPbI3 single crystals obtained within one week.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

Solution temperature-lowering (STL) method	CH3NH3PbI369	A few days	10 × 10 × 8 mm3	65 to 40 °C
MAPbI370	15 days	12 × 12 × 7 mm3	373 K to 330 K
CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr371	More than 10 days	5 mm	

Inverse temperature crystallization (ITC)	MAPbBr375	Within 3 hours	
	Room temperature to 80 °C
MAPbI375	Within 3 hours	
	60 °C to 110 °C
CH3NH3Pb(BrxI1−x)377	
	
	50 °C to 90 °C
Anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC)	CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr348	About one week	
	Room temperature

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the CTAC method on a microscopic scale, with ultrasonic pulse inducing cavitation in the perovskite solution, collapsing the cavitation bubble and resulting in a high-speed jet toward the substrate, leading to lateral crystallization at the initial stage.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic diagram of the ultrathin single crystal wafer preparation.80 (c) Optical image and cross-sectional image of a thin single crystal with different thicknesses.80 Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation of laminar CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal films with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membranes to limit their thickness. The picture of the CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystal film with a thickness of 0.4 mm and an area around 120 cm2.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic for the growth of perovskite single crystal thin films.82 Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the GC-LCG method to grow CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal thin films.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Springer Nature. (g) Schematic of the scalable growth of perovskite single crystal films using an inkjet printing method.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

Cavitation-triggered Asymmetrical Crystallization (CTAC) strategy79	AVC method	Several μm thick
Dynamic Flow Microreactor (DFM) system80	ITC method and Space-limited method	Several hundreds of μm thick
Space-limited ITC (SLITC) method81	ITC method and Space-limited method	120 cm2 and 0.4 mm thick
Space-confined Solution-Processed method82	Space-limited method and Top-seeded Solution-growth (TSSG) method	13.1 nm to 289.6 nm
Geometrically Confined Lateral Crystal Growth (GC-LCG) method83	
	Large scale
Facile Seed Inkjet Printing approach84	
	Millimeter-sized

X-ray diffraction (XRD)	Regular arrays of atoms scatter X-rays, producing a regular array of spherical waves, which is determined by Bragg's law: 2dsinθ = nλ. Here d is the spacing between diffracting planes, θ is the incident angle, n is any integer, and λ is the wavelength of the beam.
Raman spectroscopy	The laser light interacts with molecular vibrations and phonons, resulting in the shift of laser photon energy, which can give information about the vibrational modes in the system.
High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)	The interaction between electrons and a sample forms images of the sample's atomic structure, which is magnified and focused onto an imaging device.

 	Fig. 6  (a) Experimental and calculated powder XRD pattern of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 single crystals.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) Raman spectra of cubic-phase CH3NH3PbI3.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Raman spectra of cubic phase single crystal (Br/I = 3:0).90 (d) Pseudo-cubic phase of single crystal (Br/I = 5:1).90 Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the Korean Vacuum Society. (e) CTF-corrected denoised HRTEM image.91 (f and g) Normal and parallel configurations off-centered CH3NH3 cations, indicating in-plane and out-of-plane electric dipoles, respectively.91 Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from the AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Steady-state absorption and PL spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystal and MAPbI3 single crystal, respectively.75 Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Springer Nature. (c) Steady-state absorption and PL spectra of MAPbCl3 single crystal. Insets: Absorbance versus photon energy and the determined band gap Eg for the above single crystals.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Normalized PL decays for MAPbBr3 thin film (red) and single crystal (blue) samples, which were excited at 447nm. The inset shows the zoom on the shorter time scale.93 Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Contour plot of PL spectra of I-based perovskite single crystals at different temperatures under weak excitation density (0.42 μJ cm−2) and integrated PL intensity as a function of temperature.94 (f) Time-resolved PL emission at different measurement temperatures of 295 K, 50 K, and 5 K, respectively. At all three temperatures, the data were taken in single-sweep mode and the laser excitation density was 1.4 μJ cm−2. For each temperature, the normalized PL decays integrated over all wavelengths are shown next to the original data, and fitting curves are indicated by red lines on top of the experimental data.94 Reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (g) The two-dimensional data set of the differential reflectance amplitude.100 (h) The vertical lines in (g) at 12 meV and 20 meV correspond to exciton and free charges, respectively.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

MAPbBr375	28 ± 5 ns (fast)	24.0 cm2 V−1 s−1	3 × 1010 cm−3	∼4.3μm
300 ± 26 ns (bulk)
MAPbI375	18 ± 6 ns (fast)	67.2 cm2 V−1 s−1	1.4 × 1010 cm−3	∼10.0μm
570 ± 69 ns (bulk)
MAPbCl392	83 ± 4 ns (fast)	(42 ± 9) cm2 V−1 s−1	3.1 × 1010 cm−3	∼8.5 μm
662 ± 44 ns (slow)
MAPbBr348	74 ± 5 ns (fast)	38 cm2 V−1 s−1	5.8 × 109 cm−3	∼17 μm
978 ± 22 ns (slow)
MAPbI348	22 ± 6 ns (fast)	—	3.3 × 1010 cm−3	∼8 μm
1032 ± 150 ns (slow)
MAPbI3104	82 ± 5 μs at 1 sun	24.8 ± 4.1 cm2 V−1 s−1	3.6 × 1010 cm−3	175 ± 25 μm under 1 sun
MAPbI374	—	34 cm2 V−1 s−1	1.8 × 109 cm−3	—
MAPbBr374	—	4.36 cm2 V−1 s−1	2.6 × 1010 cm−3	—

 	Fig. 8  (a) The dark current–voltage curve of the hole only MAPbI3 single crystal device.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Characteristic I–V trace of MAPbBr3 single crystals.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Current–voltage response of MAPbCl3 single crystals.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) Time-of-flight (ToF) traces of MAPbBr3 single crystals.48,66 (e) A linear fit of transit time versus inverse voltage V−1.48 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic of the time-of-flight measurement for the device based on MAPbI3 single crystals.66,104 (g) Transient current curves of the OIHP single crystal devices.66,104 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Schematic of the Hall effect measurement device.105 (i) Hall mobility of CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals with μHall(T) on a linear plot.105 (j) A double-log plot of the same data as shown in (h), μHall(T).105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (k) Schematic of the time-resolved multi-THz spectroscopy experiment.100 (l) The incident (black), transmitted (blue) and reflected (red) multi-THz pulses after the interaction with the crystal, in the absence of photoexcitation.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (m) PL time decay trace of a MAPbBr3 crystal.48 (n) PL time decay trace of a MAPbI3 crystal.48,66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (o) Transient absorption in MAPbCl3.92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (p) The normalized TR kinetics recorded at 2.38eV for three different pump energies.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Springer Nature. (q) The plot of τeff as a function of the grain size for various surface recombination velocity. The black dashed line τb is the measured bulk lifetime and the red-dashed line represents τeff calculated in the perovskite single crystals.109 Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram showing the potential applications of hybrid perovskite single crystals.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic device structure of the MAPbI3 single crystal solar cell.66,104 (b) Normalized EQE of a 3 mm-thick and a 200 μm-thick OIHP single crystal photovoltaic device, and an OIHP polycrystalline thin film device.66,104 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Dark and illuminated J–V curves of ITO-based MAPbBr3 single crystal solar cells.79 (d) Dark and illuminated J–V curves of FTO-based MAPbBr3 single crystal solar cells, with a device illustration in the inset picture.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (e) Device structure of the single-crystal solar cells.110 (f) Current density–voltage curves of the OIHP single crystal photovoltaic device after methylammonium iodide (MAI) treatment measured under different scanning directions.110 (g) Stabilized JSC and PCE of single-crystal solar cells with MAI treatment.110 Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Springer Nature. (h) Schematic illustration of MAPbI3 single crystals solar cells with a lateral structure.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (i) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbI3 single crystal perovskite solar cells.112 (j) Energy-level diagram for the MAPbI3 single crystal perovskite solar cells.112 (k) Statistical summary of the photovoltaic parameters from 12 hybrid perovskite single crystal devices.112 Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Classification of light. OIHP single crystals have been synthesized to fabricate the photodetection devices for detecting light from gamma-ray to infrared.	 

Photocurrent (Ilight)	A	Current through a photodetector resulting from illumination.
Dark current (Idark)	A	Current through a device in the absence of illumination.
Photoresponsivity (R)	A W−1	
R is calculated according to the formula, R = (Ilignt − Idark)/Plight, where Ilight and Idark represent photocurrent and dark current and Plight is the power of the incident light.
Detectivity (D*)	
	
D* can be calculated as , where q is the elementary charge and Jd is the dark current density.
Gain (G)	—	Gain can be calculated as , where e is the elemental charge and hν is the incident photon energy,
Linear dynamic range (LDR)	dB	LDR is calculated by the formula:  or , where Psa t (Plow) is the light intensity when the incident light intensity is stronger (weaker) than that when the photocurrent begins to deviate from linearity.
External quantum efficiency (EQE)	%	Carrier number divided by the number of incident photons.
Internal quantum efficiency (IQE)	%	It is the ratio of carrier number to the number of incident photons that are absorbed by the device.

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the device structure and the specific detectivity (D*) spectrum under −4 V bias with measured total noise under −4 V, calculated shot noise limit and instrument noise floor as the inset picture.72 Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature. (b) Schematic structure of the photodetector based on a vertical p–i–n structure-OIHP thin single crystal, and the current density of the OIHP thin single crystal photodetectors under dark and one sun (AM1.5) conditions.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic of the planar-type photodetector based on the (100) facet of a MAPbI3 single crystal and the photocurrent versus voltage curves under different irradiation densities.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Three-dimensional illustration of the MAPbBr3 photodetector and the photocurrent of the photodetector.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Photograph of ≈100 photodetectors fabricated on an OIHP single crystal wafer and the photocurrent response of OIHP single crystal photodetector measured using an AM 1.5G solar simulator, as well as the photoresponsivities.80 Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic of the device structure and its mechanism for a narrowband photodetector and the normalized EQE spectra of the laminar MAPbBr3 single crystal photodetectors with thicknesses of 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 mm under a bias of −1 V.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (g) I–V curves in forward and backward sweeping directions under dark and 250 nW illumination conditions of a photodetector, as well as the gain and responsivity of the device. Inset: Optical image of the device.116 Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Device architecture of the MAPbCl3 single crystal photodetector.92 (b) Photo and dark I–V curves of the photodetector under invisible UV light (λ = 365 nm) illumination.92 (c) Photostability measured on the MAPbCl3 single crystal photodetector in UV (1 W cm−2). Inset: Data measured under UV light (1 sun excitation density).92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (d) 3D model of the MAPbCl3 UV-detectors.120 (e) Responsivity and gain as a function of incident light power.120 (f) The response time of the MAPbCl3 UV-detector.120 Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of a MAPbI3 single crystal photodiode architecture.127 (b) One of the possible sub-gap electron trap state absorptions.127 (c) Photographs of photoresistors based onMAPbBr3.127 (d) Responsivity of MAPbI3 photoresistors under illumination of light above the gap (visible, 600 nm) and below the gap (NIR, 900 nm) under a reverse bias of 0.5 V.127 Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Structure of a MAPbBr3 single crystal sensitive X-ray detector.78 (b) Relationship between attenuation efficiency and thickness of CdTe, MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, MAPbCl3 and silicon under 50 keV X-ray photons (in terms of the photoelectric effect).78 (c) X-ray-generated photocurrent at various dose rates.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of the full device structure. Inset: Corresponding cross-sectional SEM images, with scale bars of 500nm.130 (e) Energy level diagram of a MAPbBr3 single crystal photodiode.130 (f) Photocurrent density versus voltage bias under X-ray with different photon energies.130 (g) (1) Object photo. (2) X-ray image under 30 to 100keV energies. (3) X-ray image under low photon energy. (4) X-ray image under high photon energy.130 (h) (1) Optical image of a chicken claw. (2) X-ray image under 30 to 100keV energies. (3) X-ray image under low photon energy. (4) X-ray image under high photon energy.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The attenuation coefficient and penetration depth of MAPbI3 and CdTe under photon energy from soft X-rays to γ radiation.131 (b) The photocurrent and a fit with the Hecht model, generated by Cu Kα X-ray irradiation (8 keV) in a MAPbI3 single crystal.131 (c) The decay of activity from a short-lived 11C isotope with initial activity A0 = 70GBq.131 (d) Response of the conductivity of the MAPbI3 single crystal to a 137Cs source with activity A of 2.2 MBq.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) Pictures of the guard ring electrode side of the detector, the anode side of the detector and side view of a MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 single-crystal detector with electrode sides covered with epoxy.134 (f) 137Cs energy spectrum obtained by MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 (device I), CZT and NaI(Tl) detectors.134 (g) Enlarged photo-peak region of the 137Cs energy spectrum obtained by MAPbBr2.94Cl0.06 (device II) and MAPbBr3 single-crystal detectors. FWHM, full width at half maximum.134 Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Springer Nature. (h) Schematic illustration of a Schottky-type MAPbI3 detector with an asymmetrical electrode (left) and corresponding energy level diagram (right).135 (i) Typical I–V curve of a Ga/MAPbI3/Au detector on the linear and logarithmic (inset) scales. (j and k) Energy-resolved spectrum by a Schottky-type MAPbI3 detector at 2 °C (j) under 241Am 59.5 keV γ-ray under −50 V and (k) under 57Co γ ray with an energy of 122 keV under −70 V.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) I–V characteristics of an LED with a frozen junction. Inset: A microscopic optical image of the LED at 0 V.138 (b) Electroluminescence spectra of the frozen junction LED at different applied voltages.138 (c) Microscopic optical images of LEDs at different applied voltages.138 (d) Relative light emission intensity vs time of an LED at 1 mA at −193 °C. Inset: A microscopic image of the LED at t = 12 h.138 Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the optical setup of a CH3NH3PbI3 triangular nanoplatelet.139 (b) The evolution from spontaneous emission to lasing in a typical CH3NH3PbI3 triangular nanoplatelet. Inset left: Optical image of a nanoplate and log–log scale plot of integrated output emission (Pout) as a function of pumping fluence (Pex). Inset right: Photoluminescence decay curve below (pink) and above (dark green) the threshold.139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of a nanowire on SiO2 substrate pumped by 402 nm laser excitation.140 (d) Nanowire emission spectra. Inset: Integrated emission intensity and FWHM vs. P illustrating the lasing threshold at ∼600 nJ cm−2.140 Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Springer Nature. (e) μ-PL spectra of a square microdisk. Inset: Enlarged μ-PL spectra between 555 and 559 nm.141 (f) SEM image of the square microdisk.141 (g) the μ-PL image of the square microdisk above the lasing threshold.141 (h) Integrated PL intensity as a function of excitation density.141 Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (i) Schematic of a perovskite square microplate on the glass substrate pumped by a 400 nm laser.142 (j) Emission spectra of perovskite microplates excited by different pump densities. Inset: The log–log scale integrated PL intensity as a function of pump density, showing the lasing threshold around 3.5 μJ cm−2.142 Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) PL intensity of MAPbBr3 single crystals, which were excited with a 400 nm wavelength powered 0.71 μJ cm−2 laser, as a function of time (a) in a vacuum and on exposure to dry N2, dry CO2, and dry Ar and (b) on exposure to air, dry O2, and moist N2. Blue shaded area indicates vacuum.60 (c) Structure of the single-crystal device for current–voltage measurements.60 (d) I–V curves of the MAPbBr3 single-crystal device in air and vacuum under laser illumination.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Photograph of a 27 × 27 photosensor array based on a 34 × 38 mm2 sized MAPbBr3 single crystal.146 (b–d) Schematic diagrams for the projection imaging mechanism, which use a pre-patterned photomask directly above the imaging assembly, under light illumination.146 (e–g) The corresponding photocurrent outputs from pixel arrays measured under 2 V bias.146 Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (h) Optical image of electrode arrays on the perovskite single crystal film.84 (i) Photocurrent mapping of the perovskite single crystal film.84 (j) Optical image of the number ‘10’, with a scale bar of 100 μm.84 (k) Photocurrent intensity profile of the optical image ‘10’.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the BGTC FET device based on hybrid perovskite thin single crystals.149 (b) Transfer characteristics of MAPbCl3 TSC-FETs: IDSvs. VGS, IDS1/2vs. VGS and the fit lines show black solid square, red solid line and blue solid line separately.149 (c) Output characteristics of MAPbCl3 TSC-FETs.149 Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Springer Nature. (d) Sketch of the vertical-structured FET.150 (e) Output curves for p-type of the [100]-oriented CH3NH3PbI3 single crystal in the dark.150 (f) Output curves for n-type.150 (g) Transfer curves for p-type.150 (h) Transfer curves for n-type.150 Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the IEEE.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
