Conductive polymer nanocomposites: a critical review of modern advanced devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC04269D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04269D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1569-1585Conductive polymer nanocomposites: a critical review of modern advanced devices

        
          
            Chuanxing 
            Zhan†
a, 
      
        
          
            Guoqiang 
            Yu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Lu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Luyan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Evan 
            Wujcik
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Suying 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Lamar University, Beaumont, TX77710, USA. E-mail: suying.wei@lamar.edu;   Tel: +409-880-7976
bDan F Smith Department of Chemical Engineering, Lamar University, Beaumont, TX 77710, USA
cSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong 250022, P. R. China
Received 
      30th September 2016
    , Accepted 16th January 2017First published on 16th January 2017AbstractAs a unique group of advanced polymer-based materials, conductive polymer nanocomposites combining the flexibility and/or conductivity of the polymer with the distinct properties of nanofillers have found many intriguing applications in various modern devices. This review provides a concise yet inclusive introduction to the concept of conductive polymer nanocomposites backed by some modern technologically advanced devices resulting from the advances made in this area. The most commonly adopted preparation strategies are first summarized, which mainly include direct mixing/blending (ex situ) and in situ methods (in situ polymerization or nanostructure synthesis). Selective examples of device applications are then detailed including organic light emission diodes (OLEDs), photovoltaics (PV), electrochromic devices (ECDs) and others. Lastly, concluding remarks and future perspectives are given for conductive polymer nanocomposites as viable electronic integration tools.
Chuanxing Zhan
Mr Chuanxing Zhan is currently a Master’s degree student in Chemistry and Biochemistry at Lamar University studying under Prof. Suying Wei. He received a BE degree in Polymer Materials from Nanchang University (2015). His research interests focus on analytical techniques and materials for sustainability and environmental remediation.
Guoqiang Yu
Guoqiang Yu is currently a PhD student in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University studying under Prof. Evan K. Wujcik. He received a MS degree in Chemical Technology from the Zhejiang University (2015) and a BS degree in Light Chemical Engineering from the East China University of Science and Technology (2011). His research mainly focuses on applications of nanomaterials to sensor design and environmental remediation, especially the detection and removal of heavy metals from water.
Yang Lu
Mr Yang Lu, currently a PhD student in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University, obtained his BE (2014) degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology, Guangdong, China. His research interests include polymer and carbon nanocomposites, electrospinning, and environmental remediation.
Luyan Wang
Dr Luyan Wang is currently an Associate Professor in the college of chemistry and chemical engineering at the University of Jinan, Jinan, China. She got a bachelor’s degree in silicate engineering from Shandong Light Industry Institute in 1996, a master’s degree in environmental engineering from Beijing University of Technology in 2002, and a doctor of philosophy in physical chemistry from Shandong University in 2005. Her research interests are in morphology, properties and applications of inorganic nanomaterials and conducting polymers, and interfacial chemistry in lytropic liquid crystals.
Evan Wujcik
Dr Evan K. Wujcik is currently an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University (Beaumont, TX, USA). He obtained his PhD in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from The University of Akron (2013) and his MBA (2011), MS in Chemical Engineering (2009), BS in Applied Mathematics (2010), and BS in Chemical Engineering (2008) from The University of Rhode Island. Dr Wujcik directs the Materials Engineering And Nanosensor (MEAN) Laboratory at Lamar University. His research interests include advanced materials, bionanotechnology, nanocomposites, and nanosensor design & development.
Suying Wei
Dr Suying Wei, currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Lamar University, obtained a PhD degree in chemistry from Louisiana State University (2006), a MS in applied chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2000) and a BS in chemical engineering from Shandong University of Science and Technology (1996). Her research interests are in analytical, environmental and polymer-based nanocomposite materials.
1. Introduction
Polymer nanocomposites are one specific type of nanocomposite in which the polymer serves as the matrix while other components at the nanoscale serve as the nanofiller. Conductive polymer nanocomposites, a unique group of polymer nanocomposites that are rendered conductive by incorporation of a polymer matrix (either conducting or insulating) with nanofillers (either conducting or insulating), are poised for great potential in many different areas thanks to the synergistic effects brought about by the polymer matrix and the nanofiller. The most popularly studied conducting polymers (Fig. 1) include polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), polyacetylene (PAc), polythiophene (PTh) and their derivatives, while the most widely incorporated nanofillers consist of conducting nanostructures such as carbon nanotubes, graphene, metals and insulating ceramic nanostructures. Moreover, conducting polymers have been made into nanostructures, and have served as nanofillers themselves, adding many intriguing structures/properties in some insulating polymer matrices. This has formed a very compelling group of conductive polymer nanocomposites.1,2 Furthermore, non-conducting ceramic nanostructures can be coated with conducting polymers to fabricate conducting hybrid nanostructures that subsequently serve as conducting nanofillers to produce more complex conductive polymer nanocomposites with enhanced compatibility between the matrix and nanofiller.3,4
 Fig. 1  The chemical structure of (a) polyaniline (PANI), (b) polypyrrole (PPy), (c) polyacetylene (PAc), and (d) polythiophene (PTh). 
With the potentially increasing demand for light-weight materials in many practical applications from transportation carriers (e.g., airplanes, automobiles) to construction structures (e.g., flame retardant insulating layers, roof-top light-weight solar panels), conductive polymer nanocomposites are viable options for replacing conventionally heavy components like metals and ceramics, meanwhile providing enhanced mechanical, thermal, and flame-retardant properties. The vast choice of nanofillers with enormous varieties of structures/properties further strengthens the potential of conductive polymer nanocomposites, as new functions and synergistic performances are frequently generated. Electrochromic WO3 in a polymer matrix5–7 contributes to easily processed and malleable color changing screens for windows, sunglasses and so on. Ferric oxide (Fe2O3) adds magnetic and catalytic characteristics to traditional adsorbents resulting in recyclable and more efficient new generation nanoadsorbents.8 Nanocarbons9,10 enhance electronic device performances due to their high electronic conductivity and superior mechanical and thermal properties.
The synthesis of conductive polymer nanocomposites generally involves three major strategies: (1) direct mixing/blending: the polymer is dissolved in an appropriate solvent, then the well wetted nanofiller is added to the polymer solution under vigorous stirring.11,12 (2) In situ polymerization in the presence of nanoparticles: typically, the nanofiller is first surface treated or modified, then the monomer and oxidant and/or the doping agent are added under a chosen stirring technique to finish polymerization and/or form a polymer network with nanostructures embedded relatively uniformly. This strategy generally results in better interactions between the polymer matrix and the nanofiller, thus enhancing the properties, e.g., mechanical strength.13–16 (3) In situ nanoparticle formation in the presence of a polymer: in this strategy, the polymer usually is first dissolved in an appropriate solvent, and the nanofiller precursor is then added, followed by thermal or electrochemical treatment to form the conductive polymer nanocomposite. This strategy has generated very intriguing and uniform nanostructures in various morphologies within the polymer matrix.17
De et al.18 gave a brief overview on conducting polymer nanocomposites sixteen years ago, which mainly focused on their synthesis, properties and potential applications. In this review, we provide a more inclusive and updated look at conductive polymer nanocomposite systems, which includes either a conducting polymer or an insulating polymer as the matrix, but with significantly augmented conductive properties due to the incorporation of conducting nanostructures. The following sections describe optoelectronic devices (organic light emitting diodes, photovoltaics, and electrochromic devices) and other interesting devices (stretchable electronics, electrochemical energy storage devices and biosensors) to exemplify the significant potential of conductive polymer nanocomposites in advanced devices. These devices hold great economic and environmental value for future processing and advancements made using conductive polymer nanocomposites.
2. Optoelectronic devices
Optoelectronic devices are electronic devices that involve light (any range of electromagnetic radiation), and depending on whether light is used or produced in the operation, they can be light sensitive or light generating devices. Light sensitive devices operate as optical-to-electrical transducers or devices including solar cells, photodiodes, and phototransistors, while light generating devices are electrical-to-optical, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs), laser diodes, and cathode ray tubes.19–21 Optoelectronic devices can be applied to many areas, including automatic control systems, telecommunications, military services, and medical equipment, among others.22 Due to the outstanding electronic, optical, and mechanical properties, high structural stabilities, easy processing features, and economical synthesis costs, conducting polymers—and moreover their derivatives, conductive polymer nanocomposites—are widely used in various optoelectronic devices.23–26 It is possible to enhance their characteristics, achieve some new functionalities, and improve their performances by designing, tailoring, and modifying their structure compositions and morphologies.27–33
2.1 Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)
Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are a type of LEDs in which light is emitted by a layer of organic materials in response to an electric current. In other words, the electroluminescent layer is a film of organic materials. Currently, OLEDs are most often used for displays and lighting.34,35 Compared with LCDs, they consume less energy, provide better image quality, and have shorter response time and wider viewing angle, in addition to enabling the fabrication of ultra-thin and flexible displays.36 There are two main classes of OLEDs. One is small molecule based LEDs, and the other is polymer LEDs (PLEDs), which employ small organic molecules and polymers as the emissive layer (EML), respectively.34,37 A typical OLED has a substrate, an anode, a cathode, and an EML, as shown in Fig. 2.38–41 Besides that, it may contain an electron transport layer (ETL), a hole transport layer (HTL), an electron injection layer (EIL), a hole injection layer (HIL), and others.42–44 Once a voltage is applied, electrons and holes flow from the cathode and anode, respectively, into the EML where they meet and recombine to form excitons.45,46 During the decay process of excitons, light at specific wavelengths is emitted, depending on the organic materials.45,46 Conducting polymers can be used for almost every part of OLEDs. For example, some common polymer hole transporters are poly(N-ethyl-2-vinylcarbazole), poly(2-vinylcarbazole), poly(9-vinylcarbazole), poly(1-vinylnaphthalene), and poly(2-vinylnaphthalene).47,48Fig. 3 shows some representative classes of light-emitting polymers (LEPs).49 Incorporated with some unique nanofillers, conductive polymer nanocomposites were given enhanced properties and served as various device components for OLEDs, including the EML, electrodes, and the HTL which will be further discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  An OLED device stack. Reprinted with permission from Sigma-Aldrich.38 
 Fig. 3  Some LEPs and their corresponding colors of electroluminescent light. Reprinted with permission from Sigma-Aldrich.49 

2.1.1 Emissive layer (EML). 
Chen et al.50 reported cubic zinc blend ZnSe nanowires with an entangling structure grown via oriented attachment and their application in PLEDs. The fabricated bulk-heterojunction PLEDs using ZnSe nanowires hybridized with poly[2-methoxy-5-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] as the EML showed a more than 330% increase in the electroluminescence intensity and a significantly decreased driving voltage compared to those without ZeSe nanowires. Mucur et al.51 synthesized a triarylamine-functionalized fluorene-based copolymer via a Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling procedure, which could emit blue light in solution. The as-prepared copolymer was blended with CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs) to fabricate EMLs in multilayered hybrid PLEDs. The devices with CdSe/ZnS QDs showed 3.4-fold and 2.2-fold more luminous efficiency and brightness than those without CdSe/ZnS QDs. Furthermore, if 1,3,5-tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-2-yl)benzene was employed as the electron transport layer, the luminous efficiency could rise from 0.065 to 1.740 cd A−1.
Singh et al.52 have prepared poly(9,9-dioctyl fluorene-alt-bithiophene)-reduced graphene oxide (rGO2) nanocomposites as the active EML to prepare PLEDs in which ITO, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doped with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS), LiF, and Al were the anode, HIL/HTL, EIL/ETL, and cathode, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Poly(9,9-dioctyl fluorene-alt-bithiophene) was synthesized via the Suzuki cross-coupling reaction, and rGO2 was prepared from graphite by repetition of Hummers oxidation and hydrazine hydrate reduction methods twice. The as-prepared nanocomposites showed sufficiently high thermal stability to be used in the PLEDs. An electrochemical band gap of 2.68 eV was obtained with the HOMO and LUMO calculated as −5.66 eV and −2.98 eV, respectively. Fig. 4(b) shows the band diagram. The UV-Vis absorption spectra exhibited that the nanocomposites had a maximum absorption wavelength at 445 nm in chloroform solution and 461 nm in the film state, which might be because the intermolecular interactions increased in the film state. Compared with the photoluminescence emission spectra of pure poly(9,9-dioctyl fluorene-alt-bithiophene), the peak intensities were substantially quenched after rGO2 was incorporated. The PLEDs made with the nanocomposites showed a maximum luminance of 54.31 cd m−2 and a maximum power efficiency of 0.084, which were about three times and 4.7 times higher than those of PLEDs fabricated with pure poly(9,9-dioctyl fluorene-alt-bithiophene). Moreover, the turn-on voltage for both kinds of PLEDs was only 4 V. It was believed that once rGO2 was added, there was a shift in balance of hole and electron injection towards the center of the EML, which significantly improved the brightness and efficiency of PLEDs.
 Fig. 4  (a) The working OLED and process of emitting light and (b) the band diagram of OLEDs. Reprinted with permission from Springer.52 


2.1.2 Electrodes. 
Jung et al.26 fabricated flexible AgNW/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes through a successive spin-coating method. The PEDOT:PSS could effectively enhance the smoothness and mechanical properties of AgNW electrode films. The optimized AgNW/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes had a low sheet resistance of 26.8 Ω sq−1 and a high transmittance of 91% at 550 nm. Compared to AgNW and PEDOT:PSS electrodes, the PLEDs using AgNW/PEDOT:PSS composites as the electrode showed a lower leakage current and shorter operating voltage, respectively. Lee et al.39 developed a new graphene (GR) transfer method by employing PEDOT:PSS as the supporting layer, which also achieved stable doping of GR films. The GR/PEDOT:PSS bilayer could be utilized directly without removing the supporting layer. The PLED with a GR/PEDOT:PSS electrode exhibited a lower turn-on voltage and higher luminous efficiency in the low operating voltage range (4–7 V) than that with the ITO electrode. As a result, Joule heating was reduced and the operational lifetime of the GR/PEDOT:PSS-based PLEDs was prolonged.
Liang et al.53 successfully fabricated fully stretchable white PLEDs for the first time using a film of polyurethane acrylate coated with a graphene oxide-soldered silver nanowire percolation network (GO-AgNW/PUA) as the transparent conductive electrode (TCE). GO sheets were wrapped around the AgNWs and their junctions in the GO-AgNW network, which could significantly reduce the inter-nanowire contact resistance and prevent the nanowire disjointing and sliding. As a result, the stretchability of the GO-AgNW networks was enhanced, and their electrical conductivity did not decrease under large tensile strain. Furthermore, the addition of GO had almost no effect on the transparency of the AgNW networks, and increased their storage stability. The structures of the PLEDs are shown in Fig. 5(a), namely GO-AgNW/PUA/PEDOT:PSS/emissive polymer layer/polyethylenimine (PEI)/GO-AgNW/PUA. PEDOT:PSS was employed as the HTL, and the ETL was PEI. Fig. 5(b) exhibits optical photographs of the PLEDs without and with a voltage applied. It could be seen that the normal semitransparent PLED emitted white light from both sides due to the use of GO-AgNW/PUA TCE as both the anode and cathode. There was current leakage between 1 V and 6 V, the turn-on voltage was about 7 V, and the brightness reached 1100 cd m−2 at 21 V, as shown in Fig. 5(c). From Fig. 5(d) it could be seen that the PLED had a maximum current efficiency of 2.0 cd A−1, which corresponded to a brightness of 571 cd m−2. Since light emitted from either side of the PLED had almost the same intensity, the actual current efficiency should be twice that shown in Fig. 5(d), which meant that the maximum current efficiency was 4.0 cd A−1. Fig. 5(e) shows a few optical photographs of a lit PLED at different degrees of strain. As could be seen, light was emitted uniformly from the whole lit area. Moreover, the PLED could still keep working well after 100 stretching–releasing cycles between 0 and 40% strain, though there were some decreases in the current density and brightness. As for the efficiency, it was shown to have increased.
 Fig. 5  (a) Structures of the PLED; (b) optical photographs of the unlit and lit PLED that was driven at 13 V; the current density–brightness–voltage (c) and current efficiency–brightness (d) curves of the PLED; (e) optical photographs of the lit PLED at 14 V under different degrees of strain. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.53 


2.1.3 Hole transport layer (HTL). 
Gupta et al.34 reported enhancement in blue OLEDs with a polymer nano-composite HTL. Polyfluorene was employed as the emissive layer, and TiO2 nanoparticle doped PEDOT:PSS was used as the HTL. The effects of the TiO2 nanoparticle concentration on the performance of the OLED devices were investigated, and significantly enhanced blue emission at 430 nm was observed with increasing concentrations of TiO2 nanoparticles. Moreover, the turn-on voltage was improved by the TiO2 nanoparticles. The optimized concentration of TiO2 nanoparticles in the HTL was found to be 15 wt%, at which the OLED devices showed the maximum efficiency. Posudievsky et al.54 prepared the nanocomposites based on polyaniline with a poly(2-acrylamide-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) interpolymer complex and partially oxidized graphene (PAni·PAMPSA/POGr). The fabricated PLED using PAni·PAMPSA/POGr nanocomposites as the HTL showed better performance in terms of current density, brightness, current and luminous efficiency than that with the PAni·PAMPSA interpolymer complex. The PAni·PAMPSA/POGr nanocomposites may be employed to replace the traditional PEDOT/PSS in manufacturing organic optoelectronic devices.
Riedel et al.55 employed SiO2 nanoparticle doped PEDOT:PSS as the HTL to prepare OLEDs, as shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c). SiO2 was used to improve the out coupling efficiency of the OLEDs. Fig. 6(a) exhibits the SEM images of cross sections of the OLEDs. As more SiO2 nanoparticles were incorporated, the thickness of the HTL layer gradually increased. Moreover, it seemed that by increasing the SiO2 relative solid volume, SiO2 nanoparticles in the HTL film were arranged more orderly and densely, and there were less defects in its morphology. Compared to the pristine PEDOT:PSS film without SiO2, the nanocomposite HTLs had higher lateral conductivities at 24% and 44% SiO2 relative solid volume due to the favorable change in morphology. Based on the UV-Vis absorption spectra of HTLs, there was a decrease in the absorption coefficients with increasing SiO2 content. For example, the absorption coefficient of the pristine PEDOT:PSS film was 5278 cm−1 at 550 nm, which was about 25 times as much as that of the HTL at 94% SiO2 relative solid volume. The OLEDs with nanocomposite HTLs had a slightly lower current density than the reference OLEDs which were fabricated using pristine PEDOT:PSS films. For the luminance, a similar performance was shown for the reference OLEDs and OLEDs with a SiO2 relative solid volume of 76% and 89%, whereas the OLEDs with 84% and 94% SiO2 relative solid volume performed better. There were obviously higher power and current efficiencies for the OLEDs with SiO2 than those without SiO2. Using the reference OLED as an example, it had a power efficiency of 6 lm W−1 at 4 V. In contrast to that, a power efficiency of 10 lm W−1 was observed for the OLEDs with 84% SiO2 relative solid volume under the same operating conditions. It increased by 66%. To sum up, the addition of SiO2 nanoparticles had significantly enhanced the performance of OLEDs, and the organic/inorganic HTLs had provided a new option to design OLEDs.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of cross sections of OLEDs with different SiO2 relative solid volumes; (b) structures of the PLED, and (c) its corresponding SEM image. Reprinted with permission from Wiley.55 

2.2 Photovoltaic devices
Organic solar cells (or organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices) are a kind of device that convert solar energy, like visible light and ultraviolet, to electrical energy by the photovoltaic effect, in which the photocurrents are generated through organic photoactive materials.56 Compared with inorganic photovoltaic cells such as silicon solar cells, they are lightweight, flexible, and thin, can be large in area and easily manufactured at low cost, have high optical absorption coefficients, and so on.57–61 Due to the different types of organic photoactive materials, they are either organic small molecule-based solar cells or polymer-based solar cells. They can also be divided into single layer OPV cells, bilayer OPV cells, bulk heterojunction OPV cells, etc. on the basis of their structures and junction types.62 Similarly to OLEDs, a series of layers make them up, some of which may be a donor layer, an acceptor layer, an electron selective layer, a hole selective layer, a cathode, and an anode.63Fig. 7 shows a typical bilayer OPV device, and its working process can be depicted by four steps, which are light absorption, exciton diffusion, charge separation, and charge extraction.64–67 Excitons are formed in the donor or acceptor layer when photons from sunlight are absorbed. Then the excitons migrate to the donor/acceptor interface, and separate into electrons and holes. After that, the electrons and holes move to the cathode and anode, respectively, and as a result, a voltage is generated between the electrodes. Conducting polymers are common in the OPV cells. For example, some materials for the buffer layer include polythiophenes, polyanilines, and polypyrroles.
 Fig. 7  Structure of (a) bilayer or (b) bulk heterojunction OPV cells. Reprinted with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.64 

2.2.1 Buffer layer. 
Yin et al.58 demonstrated highly efficient and stable inverted polymer solar cells (PSCs) using hybrid poly(ethylene glycol)–titanium oxide (PEG–TiOx) nanocomposite film as cathode buffer layers (CBLs). The PSCs with PEG–TiOx CBLs showed much better performance than those with pure TiOx CBLs or without CBLs due to enhanced charge extraction/collection and reduced interface energy barriers. A power conversion efficiency of up to 9.05% was observed under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) for PEG–TiOx CBL-based PSCs, which was a record high value among inverted PSCs with TiOx-based interface materials. Chuang et al.61 developed amphiphilic gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) for use in dual plasmonic nanostructures within OPVs. A graphene oxide (GO) template and poly(ethylene glycol) bis(amine) (PEG–NH2) were employed to enhance the solubility of Au NPs, and the as-prepared PEGylated Au NP/GO composites were incorporated into both the buffer and photoactive layers of the OPVs. As a result, the photocurrents and overall device efficiencies were significantly improved. Moreover, different spectral enhancement regions were observed with the PEGylated Au NP/GO composites at different locations.
Hu et al.68 prepared ZnO@reduced graphene oxide–poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (ZnO@RGO–PVP) nanocomposites that were employed as the cathode buffer layers for polymer solar cells (PSCs). Fig. 8 depicts the synthesis process. RGO–PVP was first prepared via a wet-chemical route, which was characterized by UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy, FTIR, XRD, Raman spectroscopy, TGA, XPS, and TEM. Then ZnO grew in situ on the surface of the graphene as a result of the interaction between ZnO and PVP. The as-prepared ZnO@RGO–PVP had a much smoother morphology than ZnO@GO, which was attributed to PVP in the dispersion of graphene nanosheets. The XPS and photoluminescence spectra of ZnO, ZnO@GO, ZnO@PVP, and ZnO@RGO–PVP indicated that the defects and traps of ZnO were significantly passivated and repaired with the introduction of GO, PVP, and RGO–PVP. Compared to ZnO, the ZnO@RGO–PVP exhibited obviously enhanced charge extraction, charge collection, and electrical conductivity based on their UV photoelectron spectra and the space-charge-limited current measurements. PSCs with a structure of indium tin oxide/cathode buffer layer/thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene (PTB7):[6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM)/MoO3/Ag were fabricated using ZnO, ZnO@GO, ZnO@PVP, and ZnO@RGO–PVP as the cathode buffer layer, respectively. Their short-circuit current densities, open-circuit voltages, and power conversion efficiencies were all in the same order ZnO@RGO-PVP- > ZnO@PVP- > ZnO@GO- > ZnO-based devices. Moreover, the device with ZnO@RGO–PVP had the minimum leakage current in the dark and highest stability in air. PTB7:PC71BM was replaced with another three photoactive layers, which were poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester, poly[4,8-bis-(2-ethylhexylthiophene-5-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]-alt-[2-(2-ethylhexanoyl)thieno[3,4-b]thiophen-4,6-diyl] (PBDTTT-C-T):PC71BM, and P3HT:indene-C60 bisadduct, and all the results showed that the ZnO@RGO-PVP had the best performance.
 Fig. 8  Synthesis process of ZnO@RGO–PVP. Reprinted with permission from Wiley.68 


2.2.2 Photoactive layer. 
Sharma et al.60 successfully synthesized hydrophobic and surfactant-free ZnO nanoparticles and ZnO decorated graphene nanocomposites (Z@G) via a time-efficient microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. Two kinds of bulk heterojunction solar cells (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PCPDTBT:PCBM:ZnO (or Z@G)/Al) were fabricated. The device based on the PCPDTBT:PCBM:ZnO active layer had a power conversion efficiency of 1.76%, a short circuit current density of 9.53 mA cm−2, and an open circuit voltage of 0.59 V, while the corresponding values for the Z@G based devices were 3.65%, 17.45 mA cm−2, and 0.66 V, respectively. Chehata et al.65 studied the effects of polystyrene functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (PSMWCNTs) on PSCs. PSCs with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MEH-PPV:PSMWCNTs/Al were fabricated, in which MEH-PPV:PSMWCNTs were used as the active layer. The best performance was achieved at a 0.15 wt% concentration of PSMWCNTs, where the fill factor was 36% compared to 26% for MEH-PPV-based devices. Moreover, the PSC with PSMWCNTs had higher power conversion efficiency than that without CNTs.
Guo et al.69 prepared an inverted polymer bulk heterojunction solar cell using a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposite-doped PCDTBT:PCBM blend as the photoactive layer. For the first time, the scattering effect of NaYF4 nanoparticles and the up-conversion effect of Yb3+,Er3+ ions combined to enhance the performance of PSCs. The NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites were synthesized by a facile solvothermal method, had a size of 8–16 nm, and were cubic crystals. Moreover, they emitted strong green light when excited at 980 nm. The structure of the PSC, ITO/nanocrystal TiO2/PCDTBT:PCBM:NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposite/MoO3/Ag, and its energy level are shown in Fig. 9. TiO2 was an electron-selective layer, and MoO3 was employed to improve hole collection. Compared to PSCs without NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the doped PSCs increased by 19.1%, which was 6.87%. The PSCs with only NaYF4 had higher PCE and short-circuit current density than undoped PSCs, and had lower values than PSCs doped with NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites. There was a maximum photon-to-current efficiency of ∼75% at 500 nm for doped PSCs. In contrast, it was only ∼57% for undoped PSCs. Increased light absorption and decreased transmittance were observed with the incorporation of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocomposites into PSCs. Theoretical calculations showed similar results to the experiments. It was believed that the enhanced performance of doped PSCs was due to the improvement in photo-induced electrons and absorption of visible and near infrared light, which could be attributed to the scattering effect of NaYF4 nanoparticles and the up-conversion effect of Yb3+,Er3+ ions.
 Fig. 9  Structure and energy level of the PSC. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.69 

2.3 Electrochromic devices
Electrochromism can be defined as the capability of a material to alter its optical properties within the whole electromagnetic spectrum under an applied voltage, such as in the visible region (400–800 nm) and in the near-infrared (NIR) region (e.g., 1000–2000 nm). Electrochromism shows many excellent properties different from that of other display methods like electroluminescence.70–73 There emerged a few electrochromic devices for commercial applications thanks to significant efforts in the synthesis of new electrochromic materials.
In electrochromic devices, because the system needs to switch from a fully bleached state to a fully colored state, two redox couples with two conditions are mandatory, i.e., the colorless bleached state and complementary coloration. One species is oxidized while the other is reduced, as two redox couples must be involved between the two electrodes to ensure proper functioning of the device. As a result, the system switches from the bleached state to the colored state and the other way around. A laminated transmission ECD's working principle is represented in Fig. 10. This device is made of two transparent conductive substrates, two electro-active materials (EC1 and EC2) with one being electrochromic and/or an electrolyte. In order to prevent leakage of the electrolyte and promote ease of handling, the device is sealed by some type of sealant. After an electrical potential is applied to the device, one of the electro-active materials is reduced while the other is oxidized leading to a change in coloration.
 Fig. 10  Basic configuration of a typical laminated transmission electrochromic device. 
Contrast ratio (CR), optical density (OD), and coloration efficiency (η) are important parameters to evaluate an electrochromic material. Organic materials usually have higher coloration efficiencies than inorganic materials because of their higher molar absorptions. Write–erase efficiency, switching time, cycling life, and stability are important performance factors. Thus, a good ECD can be concluded as having properties of (a) high electrochromic efficiency; (b) high optical contrast; (c) short response time; (d) good stability and (e) good optical memory.
Recently, conducting polymers have attracted much interest in the development of electrochromic devices. Generally, the conduction mechanism of conducting polymers can be described as a two-step process: the first step is the formation of a cation or an anion named as a polaron. Then, a second electron may transfer with the formation of a dication (dianion) known as a bipolaron. And alternatively after the first redox reaction, charge transfer complexes may form between charged and neutral segments of the polymer. Most conducting polymers involve p-doping/dedoping processes during the color change. When the polymers are oxidized, they are “p-doped” with counter anions to balance the charge, and form delocalized π-electron band structures by lower-energy intraband transitions. When the “p-doped” state is reduced, counter anions exit (or the incorporation of cations from electrolytes) and recover the original band structure of the neutral state at the same time. Most conducting polymers exhibit extensive delocalization of π electrons. Due to these remarkable characteristics, conducting polymers have attracted many researchers who focus on electrochromic devices, batteries, super capacitors, etc. Moreover, compared to the metal oxides, conducting polymers have higher coloration efficiency, faster response speed, higher color tailorability and require lower redox switching potentials.74–77
Since polymer nanocomposites were reported in ref. 78–82, researchers have paid more attention to their science and applications of electrical conductivity. However, nowadays there are an increasing number of reports in the literature and a growing number of patent applications for electrochromic (EC) devices, because of their potential applications in the windows of energy-efficient building, vehicles and paper-like displays.83–86 Conducting polymers in the form of thin films are potentially all electrochromic arising from the formation of new optical absorption bands due to transferring electrons and counter-anions.87 Hybrid organic–inorganic materials have gained enormous interest among researchers, as they often combine the elasticity and functionality of organic polymers and the high thermal and chemical stability rendered by the inorganics. Polymer nanocomposites as one specific group of organic–inorganic materials have been intensively studied for EC applications in recent years.88–95 Carbon nanotubes96 and graphene97 have been incorporated into conjugated polymers to form EC conductive polymer nanocomposites. Moreover, various metal oxides as the nanofillers in the electrochromic conductive polymer nanocomposites have been widely explored, such as TiO2,89 NiO,90–92 WO393,94 and IrO2,95 Ag,98,99 and Au.98
Zhu et al.94 have successful synthesized a WO3/poly(p-phenylenebenzobisthiazole) electrochromic film, in which the effects of WO3 loading level were systematically investigated. In this work, PBZT was first dissolved in chlorosulfuric acid (CSA), then the WO3/PBZT nanocomposites were prepared by directly mixing various amounts of WO3 into the PBZT/CSA solution. By using CSA as the solvent for dissolving PBZT, it transformed to the doping acid during the formation of thin films and promoted the conductivity of the polymer nanocomposites. Bhandari et al.100 reported their studies on the electrochromic properties of the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)–Au–CdSe nanocomposite films, which were fabricated by first growing a porous PEDOT layer in the ionic liquid 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide. Because Au has an affinity for the sulfur atom on the thiophene ring, AuNP/CdSe quantum dots were uniformly confined to the bulk polymer film thus producing the electrochromic conductive polymer nanocomposite. The optimum composition of Au–CdSe in the nanocomposite achieved a higher coloring efficiency (300 cm2 C−1) and faster kinetic response (it colors in 4.5 s and bleaches in 1.5 s) as compared to the neat PEDOT film, with a coloring efficiency of 191 cm2 C−1 and kinetic response (colors in 5.2 s and bleaches in 3.1 s). In this work, the CdSe QDs were synthesised by a chemical route using a TOP/TOPO capping method reported previously.101 Stable solutions of Au NPs in toluene were prepared by using a method reported by Brust et al.102 in which the organic acids have been used as “compatibilizers” to improve the dispersion of inorganic nanomoieties in conjugated polymers and/or enhance interfacial interactions.
Generally, the nanocomposites of conjugated polymers and inorganic materials exhibit improved EC performances such as higher color efficiency and faster response speed in comparison with that of the corresponding conjugated polymers. CNTs and graphene between crystalline domains of conjugated polymers can improve the coloration efficiency, because these materials can reduce charge transfer resistance by the bridging effect of the conductive nanoparticles, while the fast switching speed is due to the shorter diffusion length in the highly porous structure formed by the inorganic nanofillers such as metal oxides. Some major preparation methods for conductive polymer nanocomposites used for EC are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Typical preparation routes for conductive polymer nanocomposite ECDs




Preparation method
Material system
Benefits




Metal oxides deposited onto an electrode to form a porous coating followed with infusion of conjugated polymers into the porous coating by electropolymerization or chemical bath deposition.
PEDOT/NiO90PANI/NiO91PPy/NiO92
Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed






Electrodeposition of conjugated polymers onto an electrode to form a porous coating and then incorporate nanoparticles into the coating.
PEDOT/Au-CdSe100
Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed






Direct (solution) blending
WO3/PBZT94Au/PEDOT:PSS98Ag/PEDOT:PSS98
Increased contrast ratio







In situ polymerization of conjugated polymers in the presence of nanosized metal oxide moieties
PANI/WO3103
Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed






Layer-by-layer (LbL)
Graphene/PANI104
Improved stability




3. Other device applications
Conductive polymer nanocomposites not only find great potential in optoelectronic devices thanks to the synergistic combination of the polymer matrix and the nanofiller, but also play important roles in other types of devices by taking advantage of their mechanical malleability as well as conductivity. If conductive polymer nanocomposites can replace traditional conductors, the applications could be limitless. Tremendous progress has been achieved in the field of stretchable/wearable electronics based on conductive polymer nanocomposites. The stretchable electronics are flexible due to the incorporation of the polymer, especially elastomers, and they are promising for applications like virtual reality, robotics, and electronic skins.
3.1 Stretchable electronics
Strain sensors are responsive sensors that will demonstrate a change in electrical resistance or capacitance upon mechanical deformation. By using an elastomeric matrix strain sensors are made stretchable, and can be used as wearable devices and easily mounted onto clothes or human skin. A good strain sensor should be highly sensitive, stretchable, stable, simple and quickly responsive. Amjadi et al. reported a strain sensor based on silver nanowire (AgNW)/PDMS elastomer nanocomposites with high stretchability and sensitivity.105 Silver nanowires are well known to have excellent electrical and mechanical properties but poor adhesion with the matrix. PDMS is a common elastomer with good adhesion with nanofillers. The liquid PDMS penetrates into the three-dimensional silver nanowire network and was cured afterwards giving the sensor flexibility and stretchability (Fig. 11a). The sensor possesses a strong piezoresistivity with tunable gauge factors (GFs) from 2 to 14 depending on the loading of silver nanowires and the maximum stretchability is 70%. The static and dynamic loading test showed a high linearity and negligible hysteresis (Fig. 11b). A similar strain sensor using carbon nanotube (CNT)/silicone rubber nanocomposite thin films was also reported by the same group.106 The CNT/silicone rubber based strain sensors showed an excellent stretchability up to 500% strain. Skin motion detection was conducted by mounting the sensor on different parts of the body. Finger bending strain can be accurately measured up to 63%.
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of the silver nanowire embedded PDMS elastomer. (b) Resistance changes of the strain sensor under repeated bending and relaxation cycles. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.105 
Electronic skin is another promising research field based on stretchable electronic devices. To truly mimic the functions of skin, electronic skin should be able to sense pressure, heal by itself and be elastic and biocompatible. Due to these features, electronic skin has potential in applications like artificial intelligence, prosthetics, robotics, and communication devices. Fig. 12 gives a simple comparison between electronic skin and human skin.107 Benjamin et al. has reported flexible and conducting composites that can be used in the field of electronic skin.108 They used a supramolecular organic polymer as the matrix and the embedded nickel nanostructured particles gave the composite conductivity. By varying the amount of nickel particles, the conductivity could go up to 40 S cm−1. For the rupture test, the composite could restore 90% of conductivity within 15 s healing time and was able to fully heal after 10 min. Fig. 13 shows the tactile sensing properties.
 Fig. 12  A simple comparison between electronic skin and human skin. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.107 
 Fig. 13  Tactile sensor circuit demonstration of the electronic skin. The intensity of LED light indicates the sensed tactile pressure. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.108 
3.2 Electrochemical energy storage devices (EES)
Among various EES devices, lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors are most promising. Li-ion batteries are known for their high energy density while supercapacitors possess high power density. To meet the increasing demands of high performance EES, conducting polymers are expected to be a promising option (Fig. 14 and 15).
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of a three-dimensional porous silicon nanoparticles/conducting polyaniline hydrogel composite anode. Silicon is coated by polyaniline due to surface interaction and connected by a porous conducting polyaniline network. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.16 
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the synthesis of Co3O4/PANI coaxial and branched core/shell nanowires. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.109 
Battery life has always been a barrier that limits new high performance materials from replacing commercial Li-ion batteries. Wu et al. recently reported a stable Li-ion battery anode material16 in which they incorporated silicon nanoparticles into the conducting polymer hydrogel network. Due to high specific capacity, silicon is considered to be an ideal Li-ion battery anode material. However, its poor cycling stability has limited its applications. With the electrically conducting polyaniline hydrogel as the network, Wu et al. demonstrated over 90% capacity retention after 5000 charging and discharging cycles. The advantages of these unique hierarchical three-dimensional materials include a continuous conductive path, providing porous space for silicon volume expansion. These advantages could be the reasons for the prolonged Li-ion battery life.
Conducting polymers have been shown to enhance the performance of other electrode materials like Co3O4. Xia et al. constructed a conducting polymer (polyaniline) layer onto the Co3O4 to build organic/inorganic core–shell nanostructures.109 Co3O4 suffers from poor rate capabilities because of its low intrinsic conductivity. With incorporation of a conducting polymer, the coaxial electrode material exhibited superior cycling stability and higher storage capacity than bare Co3O4 nanowire arrays. Murugan et al. synthesized graphene nanosheets/polyaniline nanocomposites and used them as electrode materials for Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors.110 A rapid and facile method, so-called microwave-solvothermal synthesis of graphene nanosheets, was demonstrated. The incorporation of polyaniline can limit the SEI layer formation and help in increasing Li-ion conduction and electron transport during charge–discharge cycling.
3.3 Electrochemical biosensors
Recent progress in controlled synthesis of conducting polymers allows the successful design of biological biosensors. The key process in designing a biosensor system is the enzyme-immobilization onto the transducer to bio-recognize and prolong the operational life. Adsorption, covalent bonding, cross-linking and entrapment are conventional ways for enzyme-immobilization.111 An enzyme-coupled biosensor has two main components: a bio-recognition layer of enzymes which is immobilized on a solid surface and a transducer.
Conducting polymers with conjugated pi bonds can have electrochemical features like low ionization potentials, high electric conductivity and a high electronic affinity which are suitable for the fabrication of biosensors.112 Conductive nanomaterials including gold nanoparticles (GNPs), silver nanoparticles (SNPs) as well as carbon nanomaterials can also be co-immobilized with the enzyme into a polymer matrix. These conductive nanomaterials possess favorable features of high surface area and high electric conductivity. Miao et al. prepared an Au/polypyrrole (AuPPy) biosensor to measure the electrocatalytical reduction of oxygen by laccase. Colloids of AuPPy nanocomposite strongly adhere onto the Au electrodes and exhibit superior reduction capability.113 Shan et al. fabricated a novel glucose biosensor using an electrode composed of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) protected graphene/polyethylenimine functionalized ionic liquid (PFIL)/glucose oxidase (GOD).114 Graphene protected by PVP served as a conductive nanocomposite, and GOD was selected as the enzyme model. Direct electron transfer of GOD was achieved with a linear response to glucose from 2 to 14 mM.
4. Concluding remarks and future perspectives
In the past few decades, conductive polymer nanocomposites have seen drastic progress thanks to the significant efforts in the synthesis of conducting polymers and their derivatives, as well as the vast availability of nanostructures that bear unique optical, electronic, thermal and mechanical properties. The relatively mature strategies of integrating nanostructures into the polymer matrix with desired strong interfacial interactions further advanced this unique group of materials which will find wide applications in areas where light-weight, anticorrosive, and malleable geometries are needed. Furthermore, with the discovery of graphene—the superior nanocarbon material with extraordinary chemical structure and physical properties—and its mature synthesis technique, conductive polymer nanocomposites have stepped into an even more promising era. For example, graphene has been incorporated into some insulating polymers and rendered conductivity to the resulting polymer nanocomposites.10,11 Graphene oxide was used to wrap around silver nanowire junctions and formed stronger connection within the polymer matrix, thus significantly improving the mechanical flexibility and stable electrical conductivity.53 Reduced graphene oxide provided a conductive connection which helped form uniform zinc oxide nanoclusters, which contributed to greater performance of a polymer-based solar cell.68 Addition of more conductive nanofillers into the polymer matrix often leads to poor processability, especially for nanocomposites with high content nanofillers. Doped polyacetylene and polyphenylene are known for poor processability while polyaniline and polypyrrole are fair.115 In recent years, efforts have been made to improve the processability of conductive fillers. For example, incorporation of dopants like dextran sulfate or polystyrene sulfonate, copolymerization with processable polymers, side chain functionalization, etc.116,117
This review provides an up to date account of most technologically advanced devices resulting from the advances made with conductive polymer nanocomposites. The successful strides achieved toward polymer-based optoelectronic devices such as flexible photovoltaics will bring enormous environmental and sustainable value to our society. The low-cost and possible large scale manufacturing of these types of devices will be one of the greatest accomplishments of the materials science community. Based on the fast progress in this exciting field, practical and large-scale applications are envisioned in the near future.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for partial financial support from American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund (ACS PRF#53930-ND6), the Environmental Protection Agency's People, Prosperity and the Planet Program (EPA P3 grant SU83599101), and the Welch foundation (V-0004).
References
X. Zhang, X. Yan, J. Guo, Z. Liu, D. Jiang, Q. He, H. Wei, H. Gu, H. A. Colorado, X. Zhang, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 162–176 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. He, H. Gu, H. A. Colorado, S. Wei and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 898–910 CAS .
H. Gu, S. Tadakamalla, Y. Huang, H. A. Colorado, Z. Luo, N. Haldolaarachchige, D. P. Young, S. Wei and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5613–5624 CAS .
J. Guo, X. Zhang, H. Gu, Y. Wang, X. Yan, D. Ding, J. Long, S. Tadakamalla, Q. Wang, M. Khan, J. Liu, X. Zhang, B. L. Weeks, L. Sun, D. P. Young, S. Wei and Z. Guo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36560–36572 RSC .
J. Zhu, S. Wei, L. Zhang, Y. Mao, J. Ryu, P. Mavinakuli, A. B. Karki, D. P. Young and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16335–16342 CAS .
H. Wei, X. Yan, Y. Li, H. Gu, S. Wu, K. Ding, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16286–16293 CAS .
H. Wei, X. Yan, S. Wu, Z. Luo, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25052–25064 CAS .
H. Gu, S. B. Rapole, J. Sharma, Y. Huang, D. Cao, H. A. Colorado, Z. Luo, N. Haldolaarachchige, D. P. Young, B. Walters, S. Wei and Z. Guo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11007–11018 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7(14), 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhu, S. Wei, J. Ryu, Q. Wang, L. Sun and Z. Guo, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 2429–2438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Zhu, S. Wei, J. Ryu, L. Sun and Z. Guo, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 1951–1959 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Wei, Y. Atarsingh, R. Patil, J. Zhu, R. Ximenes, L. Sun and Z. Guo, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2011, 296(5), 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mallick, M. J. Witcomb, A. Dinsmore and M. S. Scurrell, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7964–7967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei, P. Mavinakuli, Q. Wang, D. Chen, R. Asapu, Y. Mao, N. Haldolaarachchige, D. P. Young and Z. Guo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158(11), K205–K212 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, D. Ding, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10805–10813 CAS .
H. Wu, G. Yu, L. Pan, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1943 Search PubMed .
P. K. Rastogi, V. Ganesan and S. Krishnamoorthi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 933–943 CAS .
R. Gangopadhyay and A. De, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 608–622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ates, T. Karazehir and A. S. Sarac, Curr. Phys. Chem., 2012, 2, 224–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. D. Espinoza, V. H. Poblete, J. C. Bernede, L. Cattin, A. Godoy, F. R. D. Alzamora and N. Gaumer, Polym. Bull., 2013, 70, 2801–2814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, Displays, 2013, 34, 423–436 CrossRef CAS .

          D. M. Kumar, Electronics for You,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. Kumar, S. Singh and B. C. Yadav, IARJSET, 2015, 2, 110–124 Search PubMed .
J. D. Strenger-Smith, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 57–79 CrossRef .
U. Mehmood, A. Al-Ahmed and I. A. Hussein, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Jung, Y. S. Nam, H. Seo, B. R. Lee, J. C. Yu, S. Y. Lee, J.-Y. Kim, J.-U. Park and M. H. Song, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2015, 11, 906–914 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, Y. Lu, X. Liu, W.-J. Wang, Q. Yang, H. Xing, Q. Ren, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 16025–16032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, G. Yu, W.-J. Wang, Q. Ren, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 915–924 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, G. Yu, W.-J. Wang, H. Yuan, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1261–1267 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, G. Yu, W.-J. Wang, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 916–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, G. Yu, W.-J. Wang, H. Yuan, B.-G. Li and S. Zhu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5940–5946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. Yu, B. Li and S. Zhu, US Pat.,  2014, US20140316049A1 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Huang, G. Yu, R. Cardenas, S. Wei, E. K. Wujcik and Z. Guo, WIREs Nanomed Nanobiotechnol, 2016, 8, 654–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gupta, R. Grover, D. S. Mehta and K. Saxena, Displays, 2015, 39, 104–108 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, Z. Zhong, Z. Hu, J. Wang, L. Wang, L. Ying, J. Wang and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2016, 28, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Cheng, Y.-L. Chu, F.-C. Chang, D.-J. Lee, Y.-C. Yen, J.-K. Chen, C.-W. Chu and Z. Xin, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bailey, E. N. Wright, X. Wang, A. B. Walker, D. D. C. Bradley and J.-S. Kim, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 204508 CrossRef .
R. Tipnis, D. Laird and M. Mathai, Mater. Matters, 2008, 3, 92–96 CAS .
B. H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, Y. H. Kahng, N. Kim, Y. J. Kim, J. Lee, T. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1847–1856 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shin, M. Yang, L. J. Guo and H. Youn, Small, 2013, 9, 4036–4044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Lai, M. Y. Chan, M. K. Fung, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2003, 104, 26–30 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, D.-H. Lee, H. Chae and S. M. Cho, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 27, 683–687 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, B. D. Chin, N. C. Yang, M.-H. Kim, H. D. Kim, S. T. Lee and H. K. Chung, Synth. Met., 2007, 157, 343–346 CrossRef CAS .
R. Trattnig, L. Pevzner, M. Jäger, R. Schlesinger, M. V. Nardi, G. Ligorio, C. Christodoulou, N. Koch, M. Baumgarten, K. Müllen and E. J. W. List, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4897–4905 CrossRef CAS .
E. Polikarpov and M. E. Thompson, Mater. Matters, 2007, 2, 21–23 CAS .
S. Hameed, P. Predeep and M. R. Baiju, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2010, 26, 30–42 CAS .
Sigma-Aldrich, Mater. Matters, 2007, 2, 24–25 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, B. Peng, W. Wang, H. Ji, L. Li, K. Xi, W. Lai, X. Zhang and X. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1646–1655 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pei, Mater. Matters, 2007, 2, 26–28 CAS .
G. H. Chen, S. J. Ho and H. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25816–25822 CAS .
S. P. Mucur, D. Lenkeit, I. Kanelidis, S. E. San, E. Holder and E. Tekin, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 147–156 CrossRef .
J. P. Singh, U. Saha, R. Jaiswal, R. S. Anand, A. Srivastava and T. H. Goswami, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2693 CrossRef .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Y. Posudievsky, D. A. Lypenko, O. A. Khazieieva, O. L. Gribkova, A. A. Nekrasov, A. V. Vannikov, V. M. Sorokin, V. G. Koshechko and V. D. Pokhodenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2014, 50, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
B. Riedel, Y. Shen, J. Hauss, M. Aichholz, X. Tang, U. Lemmer and M. Gerken, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 740–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sharma, F. Alam, A. K. Sharma, V. Dutta and S. K. Dhawan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22227–22238 CAS .
A. M. Bagher, Int. J. Renew. Sus. Energy, 2014, 3, 53–58 Search PubMed .
Z. Yin, Q. Zheng, S.-C. Chen, J. Li, D. Cai, Y. Ma and J. Wei, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 456–468 CrossRef .
D. Lee and D.-J. Jang, Polymer, 2014, 55, 5469–5476 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sharma, F. Alam, A. K. Sharma, V. Dutta and S. K. Dhawan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8142–8151 RSC .
M. K. Chuang and F. C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7397–7405 CAS .

          M.-S. Kim, Doctor of Philosophy, University of Michigan,  2009 .
P. Sutradhar and M. Saha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8941–8949 CAS .
P. Sonar, J. P. F. Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558–1574 CAS .
N. Chehata, A. Ltaief, R. Bkakri and A. Bouazizi, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 22, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mayer, S. R. Scully, B. E. Hardin, M. W. Rowell and M. D. McGehee, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Wanninayake, S. Gunashekar, S. Li, B. C. Church and N. Abu-Zahra, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2015, 137, 031016 CrossRef .
T. Hu, L. Chen, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 17178–17184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, K. Zheng, W. Xie, L. Sun, L. Shen, C. Liu, Y. He and Z. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1029–1043 RSC .
R. J. Mortimer, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 241–268 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 397–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Platt, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 34, 862 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, C. M. Amb and J. R. Reynolds, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1396–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1029–1043 RSC .
R. J. Mortimer, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 241–268 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 397–415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fukushima and S. Inagaki, J. Inclusion Phenom., 1987, 5, 473–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fukushima, A. Okada, M. Kawasumi, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, Clays Clay Miner., 1988, 23, 27–34 CAS .
A. Usuki, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1174–1178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kojima, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Vaia, H. Ishii and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 1649–1696 CrossRef .
C. Xu, H. Tamagawa, M. Uchida and M. Taya, Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2002, 4695, 442–450 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lampert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. S. Monk, F. Delage and S. M. C. Vieira, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2195–2202 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tehrani, L. Hennerdal, A. L. Dyer, J. R. Reynolds and M. Berggren, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1799–1802 RSC .
D. R. Rosseinsk y and R. J. Mortimer, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 783–793 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. S. Monk, R. J. Mortimer and D. R. Rosseinsky, Electrochromism and Electrochromic Devices, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,  2007 Search PubMed .
L. J. Ma, Y. X. Li, X. F. Yu, Q. B. Yang and C. H. Noh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1253–1259 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, J. Zhang, X. H. Huang, X. L. Wang, W. K. Zhang and H. Huang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 702–705 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Sonavane, A. I Inamdar, H. P. Deshmukh and P. S. Patil, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 315102 CrossRef .
A. C. Sonavane, A. I. Inamdar, D. S. Dalavi, H. P. Deshmukh and P. S. Patil, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2344–2351 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morita, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1994, 195, 609–620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, S. Wei, M. J. Alexander, T. D. Dang, T. C. Ho and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3076–3084 CrossRef CAS .
H. Elzanowska, E. Miasek and V. I. Birss, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2706–2715 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhandari, M. Deepa, A. K. Srivastava, A. G. Joshi and R. Kant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 9416–9428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Reddy, M. Deepa, A. G. Joshi and A. K. Srivastava, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18354–18365 CAS .
M. A. G. Namboothiry, T. Zimmerman, F. M. Coldren, J. Liu, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Syn. Met., 2007, 157, 580–584 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Nah, S.-S. Kim, J.-H. Park, H.-J. Park, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1542–1546 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhandari, M. Deepa, S. N. Sharma, A. G. Joshi, A. K. Srivastava and R. Kant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14606–14613 CAS .
S. N. Sharma, Z. S. Pillai and K. P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10088–10093 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801–802 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Tu, D. Zhang, Y. Qiao, X. Xia, X. Wang and C. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17316–17324 RSC .
K. Sheng, H. Bai, Y. Sun, C. Li and G. Shi, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5567–5572 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amjadi, A. Pichitpajongkit, S. Lee, S. Ryu and I. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5154–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amjadi, Y. Yoon and I. Park, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 375501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Benight, C. Wang, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1961–1977 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 825–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, D. Chao, X. Qi, Q. Xiong, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5004–5006 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerard, A. Chaubey and B. D. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2002, 17, 345–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Putzbach and N. Ronkainen, Prog. Sensors, 2013, 13, 4811–4840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miao, X. Wu, J. Chen, J. Liu and J. Qiu, Gold Bull., 2008, 41, 336–340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan, H. Yang, J. Song, D. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2378–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhadra, D. Khastgir, N. Singha and J. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 783–810 CrossRef CAS .
D. Harman, R. Gorkin, L. Stevens, B. Thompson, K. Wagner, B. Weng, J. Chung, M. Panhuis and G. Wallace, Acta Biomater., 2015, 14, 33–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Grana, D. Katsigiannopoulos, A. Karantzalis, M. Baikousi and A. Avgeropoulos, Eur. – Polym. J, 2013, 49, 1089–1097 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† CZ, GY and YL contributed equally to the paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Chuanxing Zhan
	Mr Chuanxing Zhan is currently a Master’s degree student in Chemistry and Biochemistry at Lamar University studying under Prof. Suying Wei. He received a BE degree in Polymer Materials from Nanchang University (2015). His research interests focus on analytical techniques and materials for sustainability and environmental remediation.

Guoqiang Yu
	Guoqiang Yu is currently a PhD student in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University studying under Prof. Evan K. Wujcik. He received a MS degree in Chemical Technology from the Zhejiang University (2015) and a BS degree in Light Chemical Engineering from the East China University of Science and Technology (2011). His research mainly focuses on applications of nanomaterials to sensor design and environmental remediation, especially the detection and removal of heavy metals from water.

Yang Lu
	Mr Yang Lu, currently a PhD student in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University, obtained his BE (2014) degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology, Guangdong, China. His research interests include polymer and carbon nanocomposites, electrospinning, and environmental remediation.

Luyan Wang
	Dr Luyan Wang is currently an Associate Professor in the college of chemistry and chemical engineering at the University of Jinan, Jinan, China. She got a bachelor’s degree in silicate engineering from Shandong Light Industry Institute in 1996, a master’s degree in environmental engineering from Beijing University of Technology in 2002, and a doctor of philosophy in physical chemistry from Shandong University in 2005. Her research interests are in morphology, properties and applications of inorganic nanomaterials and conducting polymers, and interfacial chemistry in lytropic liquid crystals.

Evan Wujcik
	Dr Evan K. Wujcik is currently an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering in the Dan F. Smith Department of Chemical Engineering at Lamar University (Beaumont, TX, USA). He obtained his PhD in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering from The University of Akron (2013) and his MBA (2011), MS in Chemical Engineering (2009), BS in Applied Mathematics (2010), and BS in Chemical Engineering (2008) from The University of Rhode Island. Dr Wujcik directs the Materials Engineering And Nanosensor (MEAN) Laboratory at Lamar University. His research interests include advanced materials, bionanotechnology, nanocomposites, and nanosensor design & development.

Suying Wei
	Dr Suying Wei, currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Lamar University, obtained a PhD degree in chemistry from Louisiana State University (2006), a MS in applied chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (2000) and a BS in chemical engineering from Shandong University of Science and Technology (1996). Her research interests are in analytical, environmental and polymer-based nanocomposite materials.

 	Fig. 1  The chemical structure of (a) polyaniline (PANI), (b) polypyrrole (PPy), (c) polyacetylene (PAc), and (d) polythiophene (PTh).	 

 	Fig. 2  An OLED device stack. Reprinted with permission from Sigma-Aldrich.38	 

 	Fig. 3  Some LEPs and their corresponding colors of electroluminescent light. Reprinted with permission from Sigma-Aldrich.49	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The working OLED and process of emitting light and (b) the band diagram of OLEDs. Reprinted with permission from Springer.52	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Structures of the PLED; (b) optical photographs of the unlit and lit PLED that was driven at 13 V; the current density–brightness–voltage (c) and current efficiency–brightness (d) curves of the PLED; (e) optical photographs of the lit PLED at 14 V under different degrees of strain. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.53	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of cross sections of OLEDs with different SiO2 relative solid volumes; (b) structures of the PLED, and (c) its corresponding SEM image. Reprinted with permission from Wiley.55	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of (a) bilayer or (b) bulk heterojunction OPV cells. Reprinted with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.64	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis process of ZnO@RGO–PVP. Reprinted with permission from Wiley.68	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure and energy level of the PSC. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.69	 

 	Fig. 10  Basic configuration of a typical laminated transmission electrochromic device.	 

Metal oxides deposited onto an electrode to form a porous coating followed with infusion of conjugated polymers into the porous coating by electropolymerization or chemical bath deposition.	PEDOT/NiO90PANI/NiO91PPy/NiO92	Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed


Electrodeposition of conjugated polymers onto an electrode to form a porous coating and then incorporate nanoparticles into the coating.	PEDOT/Au-CdSe100	Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed


Direct (solution) blending	WO3/PBZT94Au/PEDOT:PSS98Ag/PEDOT:PSS98	Increased contrast ratio



In situ polymerization of conjugated polymers in the presence of nanosized metal oxide moieties	PANI/WO3103	Improved coloration efficiency and switching speed


Layer-by-layer (LbL)	Graphene/PANI104	Improved stability

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of the silver nanowire embedded PDMS elastomer. (b) Resistance changes of the strain sensor under repeated bending and relaxation cycles. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.105	 

 	Fig. 12  A simple comparison between electronic skin and human skin. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.107	 

 	Fig. 13  Tactile sensor circuit demonstration of the electronic skin. The intensity of LED light indicates the sensed tactile pressure. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.108	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of a three-dimensional porous silicon nanoparticles/conducting polyaniline hydrogel composite anode. Silicon is coated by polyaniline due to surface interaction and connected by a porous conducting polyaniline network. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.16	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the synthesis of Co3O4/PANI coaxial and branched core/shell nanowires. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.109	 
Footnote
† CZ, GY and YL contributed equally to the paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
