On the pseudo-symmetric current–voltage response of bulk heterojunction solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B718563D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B718563D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1644-1651Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOn the pseudo-symmetric current–voltage response of bulk heterojunction solar cells†

        
          
            Z. E. 
            Ooi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Jin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Y. F. 
            Loo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Sellinger
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            J. C. 
            deMello
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), 3 Research Link, 117602, Singapore
bDept. of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, South Kensington, London, UK SW7 2AY. E-mail: j.demello@imperial.ac.uk
cMolecular Vision Ltd, Bessemer Building, Prince Consort Road, London, UK SW7 2BP
Received 
      30th November 2007
    , Accepted 8th January 2008First published on 8th February 2008AbstractWe analyse the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of bulk heterojunction solar cells containing poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate [PEDOT:PSS]-coated indium tin oxide [ITO] as the anode, a 1 : 1 blend by weight of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) [P3HT] and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester [PCBM] as the active layer, and aluminium as the cathode. The J–V characteristics were recorded in the dark and under white-light illumination using a pulsed measurement scheme that ensured the two sets of measurements were obtained at equal temperatures. The dark current was subtracted from the photocurrent to obtain a corrected photocurrent Jph that excludes the photovoltage-induced injection current and is thus due solely to the flux of incident photons. The resultant Jph–V curves—which have a near-symmetric profile centred about the built-in potential VBI—provide critical information about the physical processes governing device operation. For the specific devices tested here, the open-circuit voltage VOC was 0.63 ± 0.002 V at an illumination level of ∼100 mW cm−2—some 50 ± 12 mV above the built-in potential of 0.58 ± 0.01 V. Hence, we find that VOC can exceed VBI by a considerable margin. A simple model is proposed to explain the shape of the Jph–V curves, and application of this model to the measured data indicates that one or both of the electrodes is preferentially selective towards its own carrier type—the anode to holes and/or the cathode to electrons. This ‘self-selectivity’—which results in a significant efficiency gain compared with devices that have non-selective electrodes—is consistent with vertical phase segregation in the active layer, yielding a P3HT-enriched region close to the anode and/or a PCBM-enriched region close to the cathode.
Introduction
Organic solar cells offer a promising route to low cost sustainable electricity generation.1 Bulk heterojunction solar cells based on intimate blends of electron- and hole-transporting materials are of particular interest as they have yielded the highest power efficiencies to date (> 5%).2 However, their performance still lags far behind silicon solar cells, and there is interest in experimental measurements that can provide new insight into the physical processes that govern, and limit, device operation.
In this manuscript, we analyse the operation of bulk heterojunction solar cells by subtracting the dark current from the photocurrent to determine a corrected photocurrent that is independent of carrier injection at the electrodes and is thus due solely to the flux of incident photons. The bias-dependence of the corrected photocurrent indicates how easily charge carriers can be generated in the active layer and subsequently extracted to the external circuit. This information is critical to the development of improved photovoltaic (PV) materials and devices that can operate effectively at low field-strengths and so efficiently harvest photons at operating voltages close to the open-circuit voltage VOC. We extract from the corrected current–voltage characteristics a ‘panel’ of performance metrics that can be used to screen new PV materials and to identify optimal blend compositions and processing protocols. These parameters can be used to judge the potential of new materials systems by providing insight into the physical processes that limit device efficiency and by helping to establish whether they are attributable to inherent properties of the materials system itself or to other (controllable) factors, such as an unfavourable phase morphology, that can be addressed through a change in the processing conditions.
The current Jlight generated by a solar cell can be treated as the sum of a photogenerated current Jph due to the flux of incident photons and a bias-induced current JVphoto due to the photovoltage Vphoto across the electrodes: Jlight = Jph + JVphoto.(1)
Assuming the rate of carrier injection is unaffected by the presence of photogenerated carriers, JVphoto will equal the current measured when the same device in the dark is subjected to an applied bias V = Vphoto. (This assumption will be confirmed experimentally below). JVphoto therefore equals the dark current Jdark and we can write: Jlight(V) = Jph(V) + Jdark(V)(2)Hence, Jph can be determined by subtracting the dark current from the measured photocurrent. Jph(V) = Jlight(V) − Jdark(V)(3)In analogy to the usual definition of quantum efficiency (4)where e is the electronic charge and  is the flux of incident photons, we can define a corrected quantum efficiency (5)
The conventional quantum efficiency η is an important measure of solar cell performance since it relates to the successful conversion of incident photons to electrons in the external circuit. ηph, however, is of more interest here since it is unaffected by carrier injection at the electrodes and thus provides a direct indication of the charge generation and extraction properties of the active layer.
Results

J
ph–V curves can in principle be obtained by performing sequential current–voltage sweeps in the dark and light and then applying eqn (3). The results of such a measurement are shown in Fig. 1 for an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al device (see Methods) under a simulated solar insolation of one sun. The secondary y-axis denotes the corrected quantum efficiency ηph, taking into account only those incident photons that lie within the 300–700 nm spectral range of the device (see inset). ηph increases steadily above 0.65 V and unexpectedly surpasses unity at 1.5 V, which would seem to imply that on average each incident photon generates more than one electron–hole pair. This is unlikely since gain-inducing processes like impact-ionization require higher carrier velocities than typically encountered in organic materials.3 A more prosaic explanation is a mismatch in the temperatures under which Jlight and Jdark are obtained, resulting in an erroneous estimate of Jph; measurements using a Pt100 resistance thermometer placed in direct contact with the aluminium cathode confirmed this to be a likely source of error, revealing a ∼13 °C temperature rise when the device was illuminated by the solar simulator.
 Fig. 1  Current–voltage curves for an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al device obtained by carrying out sequential sweeps of the voltage in the dark and under a simulated solar insolation of 1 sun. The dotted line indicates the corrected photocurrent (Jph) determined by subtracting the dark current (Jdark) from the light current (Jlight). The secondary y-axis indicates the corrected quantum efficiency (ηph), taking into account all incident photons in the 300 to 700 nm spectral range of the device (see inset). ηph exceeds 100% at an applied bias of 1.5 V, suggesting an error in the measurement procedure. The inset shows the short-circuit quantum efficiency as a function of wavelength. 
We were able to reduce the temperature rise to ∼2 °C (for a comparable incident power) by using a white light-emitting diode (LED) in place of the solar simulator. However, a 2 °C temperature rise is still too high to obtain a reliable estimate of Jph so, for the work described here, we used a pulsed measurement scheme to ensure the two J–V curves were obtained at equal temperatures. The voltage was incremented in equal steps of height ΔV = 20 mV and duration Δt = 200 μs, and the LED was subjected to a square-wave modulation of frequency 1/Δt such that the device spent the first half of each voltage-step in the dark and the second half under illumination (see ESI,† Fig. S1, and Methods). Importantly, by selecting a time-step that was much shorter than the heating/cooling time of the device (Δt << 10 ms), the dark- and light-currents could be measured at effectively the same temperature, thereby enabling reliable estimates of Jph to be obtained.
The time-dependence of the current density under the pulsed scheme is illustrated in Fig. 2 for an (instantaneous) illumination level of ∼28 mW cm−2. The inset indicates that the half-step duration of 100 μs provides ample time for both Jlight and Jdark to reach steady-state at each voltage. To avoid measuring transient effects, the currents were determined by averaging the last 10 μs of each half-step only. Jph was then calculated from eqn (3). The resultant Jph–V curve (denoted Jpulsedph) is shown in Fig. 3, together with the equivalent curve obtained at the same illumination level using sequential sweeps in the dark and under steady “DC” light conditions (denoted JDCph). The secondary y-axis indicates the corresponding ηph values. The two curves show a close correspondence in the range −0.4 < V < 0.65 V but diverge at higher biases with JDCph > Jpulsedph.
 Fig. 2  
(Lower) Stair-case plot showing the variation of the applied bias with time for the pulsed measurement scheme. The bias is incremented in steps of height ΔV = 20 mV and width Δt = 200 μs. A white LED light source is modulated with a square wave drive-voltage of frequency ω = 5 kHz (ω = 1/Δt) such that the device is illuminated for the second half of each voltage-step. (Upper) Main – The time-dependence of the measured current. Inset – Expanded view of the time-dependence of the measured current. In subsequent plots, Jlight and Jdark are determined using the final 10 μs of each time-step only to avoid measuring transient effects. 
 Fig. 3  
Corrected current–voltage plots under illumination by a white LED. JDCph was obtained using the sequential DC method outlined in the caption to Fig. 1 and Jpulsedph was obtained using the pulsed method outlined in the caption to Fig. 2. The secondary y-axis indicates the corrected quantum efficiency (ηph) determined using the two methods. The two curves coincide closely in the range −0.4 < V < 0.65 V, but diverge at higher biases with Jpulsedph < JDCph. 
The higher Jph values implied by the DC measurements are consistent with JDCdark being obtained at a lower temperature than JDClight, leading to an underestimate of the contribution that the dark current makes to JDClight and hence an overestimate of JDCph. If the temperature of the device is Td in the dark and Tl in the light (where Td < Tl), then the true value of the corrected photocurrent will be Jph(V) = Jlight(V,T1) − Jdark(V,T1)(6)whereas using the DC scheme we will actually measure JDCph(V) = Jlight(V,T1) − Jdark(V,Td)(7)Hence, the DC approach will overestimate Jph by an amount ΔJ = JDCph(V) − Jph(V) = [Jdark(V,T1) − Jdark(V,Td)](8)where Jdark(V,T1) > Jdark(V,Td). ΔJ increases rapidly with the applied bias due to the sharp growth of the dark current with voltage. In the pulsed approach, there is insufficient time for the temperature to change appreciably between the measurement of Jdark and Jlight and hence Jpulsedph provides an accurate measurement of Jph, albeit at an intermediate temperature Ti where Td < Ti < Tl. In the range −0.4 < V < 0.65 V, the dark current is small so JDCph and Jpulsedph yield similar values‡. Above 0.65 V, the dark current turns on rapidly and the two curves diverge. Previous studies of Jph have used DC measurement schemes and have therefore been restricted to the range 0 < V < Voc where the dark current is small.4,5
A striking feature of the Jpulsedph–V curve is its high degree of symmetry. The curve is reproduced in Fig. 4 where it has been divided into two zones to the left (L) and right (R) of a selected voltage that we refer to as the point of optimal symmetry (POS). To aid visualisation, the left-side data has been rotated 180° about the POS to generate a new curve (Lrot) that overlaps closely with the right-side data. The point of optimal symmetry—as its name suggests—is simply the bias that yields the optimal overlap between Lrot and R; in this case 0.60 ± 0.01 V (note, the overlap between Lrot and R is extremely sensitive to the estimated symmetry point, and a deviation of less than 10 mV from the “true” point of optimal symmetry is sufficient to spoil the quality of the overlap significantly. The errors involved in estimating the POS are consequently small and normally no greater than ±0.01 V). The two curves Lrot and R show a very close correspondence in the vicinity of the POS, but diverge somewhat at higher biases with R being slightly larger in magnitude. To provide further insight into device operation, electroabsorption spectroscopy was used to measure the built-in potential VBI.6 This yielded a value of VBI = 0.59 ± 0.02 V, which coincides with the point-of-optimal symmetry; see ESI† for further details.
 Fig. 4  The Jpulsedph–V curve from Fig. 3. The data has been divided into two parts to the left (L) and right (R) of a point of optimal symmetry (POS) at V = 0.60 ± 0.01 V. The left-side data has been rotated by 180° about the POS to create a new curve (Lrot) that overlaps closely with R, implying a high degree of symmetry in the current–voltage characteristics. The POS is the voltage that yields the best overlap between R and Lrot. 

Fig. 5A shows Jph–V curves at multiple light intensities. The POS shifts slightly to the left with increasing light intensity, moving from 0.61 ± 0.01 V at 1.73 mW cm−2 to 0.58 ± 0.01 V at 97.9 mW cm−2, due presumably to an increase in the temperature of the device. The Jph–V curves have similar zero crossings in the range 0.9 ± 0.05 V. They vary approximately linearly in magnitude with the incident light level as shown in Fig. 5B for three illustrative applied biases of 0, 0.6 and 1.5 V. The data in Fig. 5A and B provides direct experimental validation of eqn (2) since the shape of the calculated Jph–V curves would change with light level if the injection current were dependent on the concentration of photogenerated carriers. The invariance in shape further implies that the observed discrepancy between Lrot and R in Fig. 4 is a real observation rather than an experimental artefact arising from incomplete elimination of the temperature difference.§
 Fig. 5  
(A)
J
pulsedph–V curves at multiple light levels. The curves have similar points of optimal symmetry and similar zero-crossings in the ranges 0.6 ± 0.02 V and 0.9 ± 0.05 V, respectively. (B) The intensity dependence of Jpulsedph at 0, 0.6 and 1.5 V, where 0.6 V corresponds to the POS. 
In Fig. 6, we compare the Jdark–V,Jlight–V and Jph–V curves at the highest investigated intensity of 97.9 mW cm−2. The open-circuit voltage, defined by the zero-crossing of the Jlight–V curve is 0.63 ± 0.002 V, compared with a built-in potential of 0.58 ± 0.01 V. The difference in these two voltages (50 ± 12 mV), although relatively small, is important since it is has conventionally been assumed that the built-in potential places an upper limit on the open-circuit voltage of bulk heterojunction solar cells.7,8 The limiting value VmaxOC of the open-circuit voltage under intense illumination is approximately equal to the zero-crossing of the corrected photocurrent [since in these circumstances the magnitude of the measured photocurrent Jlight(V) is much greater than the magnitude of the dark current Jdark(V), and consequently Jlight(V) is approximately equal to Jph(V)]. This suggests that the open-circuit voltage might reach a value as high as 0.93 V at high illumination levels, although changes to the shape of the Jph–V curve—due e.g. to increased bimolecular recombination at higher intensities—might prevent this value from being reached in practice. In any case, it is clear from Fig. 6 that the open-circuit voltage can substantially exceed the built-in potential.
 Fig. 6  
J
light–V, Jdark–V and Jph–V curves determined using the pulsed measurement technique under 97.9 mW cm−2 illumination by a white LED. The built-in potential VBI, determined from the optimal symmetry point of the Jph–V curve, is 0.58 ± 0.01 V. The open-circuit voltage, determined from the zero-crossing of the Jlight–V curve, is 0.63 ± 0.002 V, some 50 ± 12 mV above VBI. The zero-crossing of the Jph–V curve at 0.93 ± 0.002 V suggests the upper limit for Voc under intense illumination may be as high as 0.93 V, some 350 mV above VBI. 
In accordance with published fabrication protocols,9–11 the P3HT:PCBM devices were annealed at 140 °C for twenty minutes after deposition of the aluminium electrode (see Methods). Fig. 7A shows the Jph–V characteristics before and after annealing at an illumination level of 97.9 mW cm−2. There is a slight reduction in VPOS after annealing (ΔV = −30 mV), a substantial increase in the magnitude of the corresponding photocurrent (ΔJ = −2.36 mA cm−2), and a significant increase in Jph over the full operating range of the device (0 < V < Voc). Intriguingly, annealing increases the symmetry of the Jph–V characteristics, as is evident from the substantially reduced divergence between Lrot and R in Fig. 7B (note, the points of optimal symmetry have been shifted to a common origin for ease of comparison).
 Fig. 7  
(A)
J
pulsedph–V curves for an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al device before and after annealing for twenty minutes at 140 °C. (B) Comparison of R and Lrot before and after annealing. The points of optimal symmetry have been shifted to a common origin for ease of comparison. 
Analysis
The near anti-symmetric Jph–V characteristics—reported above for P3HT:PCBM devices—appear to be an almost universal feature of bulk heterojunction solar cells that we have observed for many donor–acceptor materials combinations. The simplest model of such devices is a single layer of composite semiconductor (in which the HOMO level is derived from the donor and the LUMO level is derived from the acceptor) sandwiched between two electrodes (see ESI,†Fig. S3). Importantly, the Fermi levels of the two electrodes are constrained to lie within the bounds of the effective energy gap due to energy level pinning if the work function of the anode is higher than the ionisation energy of the donor or the work function of the cathode is lower than the electron affinity of the acceptor.12,13 In consequence, there are no energy barriers to the extraction of electrons or holes at either the anode or the cathode, and the electrodes behave non-selectively with respect to carrier type.
Insight into the origin of the symmetric behaviour can be obtained by considering the above description of a bulk heterojunction device, and decomposing the current Jph into separate drift and diffusive contributions: (9)where D is the diffusivity, μ is the mobility, e is the electronic charge, E is the internal electric field strength, the subscripts e and h denote electrons and holes, x is the distance from the anode, and nphh and nphe represent the steady-state distributions of photogenerated electrons and holes. In steady-state the current Jph is constant throughout the device so, taking spatial averages (<…>) of each term across the entire device width, we obtain without loss of generality: (10)
The diffusive terms can be further simplified by applying the identity <df(x)/dx> = [f(b) − f(a)]/(b − a) where f(x) is an arbitrary function of x, and a and b represent the lower and upper spatial limits over which the average is calculated. Hence, we can rewrite eqn (10) as: (11)where d is the width of the device and x = 0 and x = d represent the locations of the anode and cathode, respectively. At ordinary illumination levels, the internal field is uniform throughout the device14 so eqn (11) further simplifies to: (12)The barrier-less extraction of photogenerated carriers at the non-selective electrodes depletes their concentrations, so we may approximate: nphh(0) = nphh(d) = nphe(0) = nphe(d) = 0. The spatially averaged diffusive current is therefore zero and eqn (12) simplifies to: Jph = e[μh < nphh(x) > + μe < nphe(x) >]E(13)
It follows directly from eqn (13) that Jph should reduce to zero at the built-in potential since the internal field strength will be zero. The average carrier densities <nphh(x)> and <nphe(x)> should be approximately even functions of the electric field since they are determined by the average dwell-times of the electrons and holes inside the device, which vary inversely with the drift-speed and hence inversely with E.¶The electron and hole mobilities may also exhibit field-dependencies but these too will vary evenly with the electric field strength.15 The electric field E is related to the applied bias V by: (14)Hence, from eqn (13),Jph will be an odd function of the electric field and an antisymmetric function of the applied bias with a symmetry point at (VBI, 0). This behaviour is supported by numerical modelling studies to be reported elsewhere.16
The above theoretical analysis explains why the symmetry point in Fig. 4 occurs at VBI, but fails to account for the observed negative current at this voltage. This suggests the representation of an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al solar cell as a single layer device with non-selective electrodes is flawed. The negative current at V = VPOS = VBI can be rationalised by assuming that at least one of the two electrodes is self-selective, i.e. preferentially selective to its own carrier type; the anode to holes and/or the cathode to electrons. For the sake of argument, we will consider the case where the anode is self-selective and the cathode is non-selective. This gives rise to a situation in which nphh(0) = nphe(d) = nphh(d) = 0 as before (due to rapid extraction) but nphe(0)>0. In this case, we obtain for the spatially averaged diffusion current a non-zero negative value of: (15)Hence, Jph can be written: (16)
In the event that nphe(0) is independent (or only weakly dependent) on the electric field E, the antisymmetric appearance of the Jph–V curve will be retained, except the symmetry point will be offset in the direction of negative current by an amount eDenphe(0)/d. The symmetry point would be similarly offset in the negative direction if the cathode were self-selective.|| Self-selectivity in the electrodes—as the above data implies is the case for P3HT:PCBM solar cells—leads to a beneficial increase in device efficiency since it yields a larger (more negative) photocurrent Jlight than would otherwise be obtained in the operating range of the solar cell (0 < V < Voc) (in devices with non-selective electrodes, the accidental extraction of electrons at the anode and holes at the cathode constitutes a loss mechanism since it generates a positive current that partially opposes the negative photocurrent arising from the extraction of carriers at the correct electrodes).
Returning to Fig. 6, it is now clear how the open-circuit voltage can exceed the built-in potential. As noted previously, the limiting value VmaxOC of the open-circuit voltage under intense illumination is approximately equal to the zero-crossing of the Jph–V curve. The effect of the negative diffusion current is to shift the entire Jph–V curve downwards (relative to the case for non-selective electrodes), and so move the zero-crossing to the right of the built-in potential. As the light level is decreased from this extreme situation, the open-circuit voltage decreases steadily towards zero, passing through the built-in potential when Jph(VBI) = −Jdark(VBI). The open-circuit voltage can therefore be larger or smaller than the built-in potential depending on the incident light level (we note that a positive spatially averaged diffusion current arising from inversely selective electrodes would push VmaxOC below VBI and hence would certainly give rise to a open-circuit voltage smaller than the built-in potential).
It is useful to re-examine Fig. 7 in light of the above discussion. Annealing appears to have three main effects: firstly, it displaces the Jph–V curve further in the negative direction, leading to a beneficial increase in ηph and η; secondly, it increases the slope of the Jph–V curve at VPOS from 211 to 359 Ω−1 m−2; and, thirdly, it increases the symmetry of the Jph–V characteristics. The first observation can be attributed to an increase in the electron-blocking characteristics of the anode and/or the hole-blocking characteristics of the cathode. To rationalise the increase in slope at VPOS, we differentiate eqn (12) to obtain: (17)We argued above that the carrier densities at the electrodes must depend only weakly on the electric field strength in order to achieve approximate symmetry in the Jph–V characteristics. This assumption is most reasonable in the vicinity of VBI where R and Lrot overlap exactly. Hence, it follows from eqn (17) that at the built-in potential VBI, (18)which, remembering that E = (V − VBI)/d, reduces to: (19)It follows that the increase in slope after annealing is due to an increase in the photogenerated carrier densities and/or the carrier mobilities. The increased symmetry of the Jph–V characteristics after annealing is harder to explain, although it seems to imply a reduction in the field-dependence of the densities of the blocked charge carriers, i.e. a reduction in  (20) and/or  (21)
Interestingly, the annealed device and the un-annealed device have linear Jph–V characteristics in the range 0.55 < V < 0.65 V, which from eqn (19) implies there is no change in the concentration of photogenerated carriers with increasing field-strength. This suggests the charge-generation probability is determined mainly by the phase morphology of the active layer and is not appreciably enhanced by field-dependent processes such as trap-mediated dissociation.17 The linearity of the Jph–V characteristics is consistent with eqn (12) provided the spatially averaged diffusion current is field-independent, which was the assumption we made in the derivation of eqn (19).
Discussion and conclusion
One possible explanation for the observed self-selectivity is the use of PEDOT:PSS, which has previously been found to block electrons in polyfluorene-based devices18,19 due to the formation during annealing of a thin layer of insoluble polyfluorene at the surface of the PEDOT:PSS.20 However, we found no evidence of a similar insoluble layer when P3HT:PCBM is annealed on top of PEDOT:PSS (brief immersion in chlorobenzene removed all traces of the P3HT and PCBM absorption spectra). Hence, it seems unlikely that PEDOT:PSS is the cause of the self-selectivity in P3HT:PCBM solar cells.
A more likely explanation is vertical phase separation of the P3HT:PCBM composite, which has previously been observed to yield thin regions of enhanced P3HT and PCBM concentration close to the anode and cathode, respectively.9 The presence of these layers would in effect give rise to self-selectivity by preventing electron leakage at the anode and hole leakage at the cathode. This explanation is lent additional weight by changes in the composite-film characteristics under annealing: Kim et al. reported a five-fold increase in the intensity of P3HT emission and a three-fold enhancement in a thiophene-related X-ray diffraction peak after annealing, indicating increased phase separation;9 and TEM imaging studies by Yang et al. revealed a favourable enlargement of the P3HT and PCBM domains in the central mixed region, leading to superior bulk transport properties.21 These observations are in agreement with the data in Fig. 7, where the post-annealing enhancement in Jph(POS) indicates improved selectivity at one or both electrodes, and the increase in the slope of the Jph–V curve at the built-in potential implies an increase in the densities and/or mobilities of the photo-generated carriers.
We turn now to the important issue of how the Jph–V characteristics can be used to screen new PV materials and to identify optimal blend compositions** and processing protocols. The schematic in Fig. 8a shows a typical Jph–V curve on which we have marked five important optimisation parameters, denoted A to E: A and B are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at V = 0; C is the voltage at the point of optimal symmetry; and D and E are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at the point of optimal symmetry. A and B correspond to the photocurrent and shunt-resistance under illumination; C corresponds to the built-in potential; and D is the spatially averaged diffusion current at the built-in potential [E has no obvious direct interpretation—other than being the resistance under illumination at the built-in potential—but is related to the carrier densities and mobilities at the built-in potential by eqn (19)].
 Fig. 8  (A) Annotated schematic of a typical Jpulsedph–V curve, illustrating five key parameters for optimisation. A and B are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at short-circuit; C is the bias at the point of optimal symmetry; and D and E are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at the point of optimal symmetry. To optimise device performance, processing conditions should be sought that maximise A, C, D and E whilst simultaneously yielding a value of B close to zero, subject to the additional condition that D should be negative. (B) Schematic illustrating the appearance of the Jpulsedph–V curve after optimisation. 
To optimise device performance, processing conditions should be sought that maximise A, C, D and E whilst simultaneously yielding a value of B close to zero, subject to the additional condition that D should be negative (see Fig. 8(B)). The conditions on A and B are satisfied when the electric field thresholds for efficient charge generation and extraction are low (such that complete saturation of the photocurrent can occur at field strengths less than or equal to the built-in field EBI = −VBI/d). The condition on C is satisfied when EBI attains its largest possible value and the internal field strength E = (V − VBI)/d is therefore maximised in the range 0 < V < VBI. The conditions on D are satisfied when the spatially averaged diffusion current is large and negative and so adds constructively to the spatially averaged drift current. Finally, the condition on E is satisfied when the generation and transport properties of the active layer are optimised, see eqn (19).
In the event that all the above conditions are satisfied at once, a corrected current–voltage response similar to the one shown in Fig. 8(B) would be obtained, representing the best performance one can expect to achieve from the selected blend composition. On the other hand, if the selected processing conditions do not yield such an idealised response, analysis of parameters A to E can provide considerable insight into the reasons why (it may for instance prove impossible to fully optimise one parameter without necessarily worsening others or, alternatively, the threshold for efficient charge generation and extraction may significantly exceed the built-in field). On the basis of this information, one can then decide if further time and effort should be invested in continuing the search for the optimal process conditions or it would be better to move on to an alternative materials system or blend composition. There is clearly much that can be said on the subject of device optimisation, but we defer further discussion to a future paper.
In conclusion, we have used a pulsed measurement scheme to investigate the Jph–V characteristics of bulk heterojunction solar cells, using P3HT:PCBM as a widely studied exemplary system. The resultant Jph–V curves—which have a near anti-symmetric profile centred about the built-in potential VBI—provide critical information about the physical processes governing device operation. For the specific devices tested here, the open-circuit voltage VOC was 0.63 ± 0.002 V at an illumination level of ∼100 mW cm−2—some 50 mV above the built-in potential of 0.58 ± 0.01 V. Hence, we find that VOC can exceed VBI by a considerable margin. A simple model was proposed to explain the shape of the Jph–V curves, and application of this model to the measured data revealed that one or both of the electrodes is preferentially selective towards its own carrier type—the anode to holes and/or the cathode to electrons. This ‘self-selectivity’, which results in a significant efficiency gain compared with devices that have non-selective electrodes, is consistent with vertical phase segregation in the active layer, yielding a P3HT-enriched region close to the anode and/or a PCBM-enriched region close to the cathode. The analysis of Jph–V curves provides a potentially powerful means of screening new PV materials and identifying optimal blend compositions and processing protocols.
Methods
A 60 nm layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Baytron VP Al 4083) was spin-coated at 1500 rpm from aqueous solution on to clean patterned indium tin oxide coated glass. The samples were heated in air at 140 °C for 20 min to drive off excess water, and were then transferred to a dry nitrogen atmosphere. All subsequent fabrication processes and measurements were carried out under nitrogen, and devices were not exposed to air at any point after drying the PEDOT:PSS layer. A 100 nm composite layer of electronic grade regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) (Rieke Metals Inc.) and 99.5% purity phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (American Dye Source Inc.) was spin-coated on top of the PEDOT:PSS at 2000 rpm from a 20 mg ml−1chlorobenzene solution containing equal weights of the two materials. The samples were heated in dry nitrogen at 60 °C for one hour to drive off residual solvent, and a 100 nm layer of aluminium was then evaporated through a shadow mask on top of the composite film at a pressure of 10−5 mbar. Finally, the devices were annealed for 20 min at 140 °C prior to testing. The pixel area of 14.5 mm2 was determined by the spatial overlap of the patterned anode and cathode.
The current–voltage measurements were carried out using the pulsed measurement scheme shown schematically in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The sample was illuminated using the diffused output of a Luxeon III White LED, which was modulated using a 5 kHz square-wave voltage-source derived from the amplified output of a National Instruments PCI-6251 data acquisition (DAQ) card. The intensity of the incident light was determined using an Ophir Nova II thermopile power meter. A second amplified output from the DAQ card was used to increment the voltage across the solar cell in steps of duration 200 μs and height 20 mV, as indicated in Fig. 2. The time-varying current through the device was converted to a voltage using a (low input impedance) gain-100 Ω trans-impedance amplifier, and the amplified signal was supplied as an input to the data acquisition card. The current-trace recorded during a single sweep of the voltage was relatively noisy due to the high sampling rate of the DAQ card, and the light and dark currents were therefore obtained from an average of 200 successive sweeps. The DC current–voltage measurements were made sequentially in dark and light conditions using a Keithley 2400 Source-Measure Unit. The DC data in Fig. 1 was obtained under a simulated solar insolation of one sun using a K. H. Steuernagel Lichttechnik solar simulator, whereas the DC data in Fig. 4 was obtained using the Luxeon III White LED under a constant drive voltage.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (Grant No. GR/S96791/01), and the Singapore Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under the A*STAR-Imperial Partnership.
References
T. L. Benanti and D. Venkataraman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 73 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bude and K. Hess, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3554 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. P. Gommans, M. Kemerink, J. M. Kramer and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 3 .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 4 .
I. H. Campbell, T. W. Hagler, D. L. Smith and J. P. Ferraris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Wuhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger, C. L. Brabec and Zu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, M. T. Rispens and Ft, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 3 .
V. Dyakonov, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 21 CrossRef CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tengstedt, W. Osikowicz, W. R. Salaneck, I. D. Parker, C. H. Hsu and M. Fahlman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 3 .
P. A. Lane, P. J. Brewer, J. S. Huang, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. deMello, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 7 .
G. G. Malliaras, J. R. Salem, P. J. Brock and J. C. Scott, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 1583 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Dunlap, Phys. Rev. B, 1995, 52, 939 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. E. Ooi, C. G. Shuttle, A. Maurano, J. R. Durrant, A. Sellinger and J. C. deMello, in preparation.
J. Kalinowski, J. Godlewski, P. Dimarco and V. Fattori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1992, 31, 818 CrossRef .
P. J. Brewer, J. Huang, P. A. Lane, A. J. deMello, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. deMello, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 6 .
T van Woudenbergh, J Wildeman, P. W. M. Blom, J. Bastiaansen and B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 677 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, R. H. Friend, I. Grizzi and J. H. Burroughes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 3 .
X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional images (Fig. S1–S3). See DOI: 10.1039/b718563d‡ The slight mismatch in this range is an experimental artefact arising from a small difference in the operating temperature of the LED under steady and pulsed operation, which leads to a marginally higher instantaneous light output in the latter case for a given applied bias.§ Note added in proof: An important implication of the linear scaling of the Jph(V) curve with intensity is that losses due to (non-geminate) bimolecular recombination remain negligible over the full operating range of the device, 0 < V < VOC. It has previously been argued that bimolecular recombination is the dominant loss mechanism in bulk heterojunction solar cells, but this is clearly not the case for the P3HT:PCBM devices discussed here. This will be discussed in detail in a future manuscript.16¶ The asymmetry of the generation profile (caused by the one-sided illumination through the glass substrate and potential interference effects) introduces a slight non-evenness into the field-dependence, although device simulations to be reported elsewhere show this to be a very weak effect.|| The symmetry point would be offset in the positive direction if the anode and/or cathode were inversely selective, i.e. preferentially selective to the opposite carrier type. In the event that one electrode were self-selective and the other inversely selective, the offset could occur in either direction, depending on whichever electrode was more strongly selective.** The phrase ‘blend composition’ is used here to refer to any donor–acceptor combination of fixed ratio in solution. Any changes to the active materials, their ratio or even the solvent composition are considered to constitute a material change in the blend composition, requiring a fresh optimisation to be undertaken.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Jlight = Jph + JVphoto.	(1)
Jlight(V) = Jph(V) + Jdark(V)	(2)
Jph(V) = Jlight(V) − Jdark(V)	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Current–voltage curves for an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al device obtained by carrying out sequential sweeps of the voltage in the dark and under a simulated solar insolation of 1 sun. The dotted line indicates the corrected photocurrent (Jph) determined by subtracting the dark current (Jdark) from the light current (Jlight). The secondary y-axis indicates the corrected quantum efficiency (ηph), taking into account all incident photons in the 300 to 700 nm spectral range of the device (see inset). ηph exceeds 100% at an applied bias of 1.5 V, suggesting an error in the measurement procedure. The inset shows the short-circuit quantum efficiency as a function of wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 2  
(Lower) Stair-case plot showing the variation of the applied bias with time for the pulsed measurement scheme. The bias is incremented in steps of height ΔV = 20 mV and width Δt = 200 μs. A white LED light source is modulated with a square wave drive-voltage of frequency ω = 5 kHz (ω = 1/Δt) such that the device is illuminated for the second half of each voltage-step. (Upper) Main – The time-dependence of the measured current. Inset – Expanded view of the time-dependence of the measured current. In subsequent plots, Jlight and Jdark are determined using the final 10 μs of each time-step only to avoid measuring transient effects.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Corrected current–voltage plots under illumination by a white LED. JDCph was obtained using the sequential DC method outlined in the caption to Fig. 1 and Jpulsedph was obtained using the pulsed method outlined in the caption to Fig. 2. The secondary y-axis indicates the corrected quantum efficiency (ηph) determined using the two methods. The two curves coincide closely in the range −0.4 < V < 0.65 V, but diverge at higher biases with Jpulsedph < JDCph.	 
Jph(V) = Jlight(V,T1) − Jdark(V,T1)	(6)
JDCph(V) = Jlight(V,T1) − Jdark(V,Td)	(7)
ΔJ = JDCph(V) − Jph(V) = [Jdark(V,T1) − Jdark(V,Td)]	(8)

 	Fig. 4  The Jpulsedph–V curve from Fig. 3. The data has been divided into two parts to the left (L) and right (R) of a point of optimal symmetry (POS) at V = 0.60 ± 0.01 V. The left-side data has been rotated by 180° about the POS to create a new curve (Lrot) that overlaps closely with R, implying a high degree of symmetry in the current–voltage characteristics. The POS is the voltage that yields the best overlap between R and Lrot.	 

 	Fig. 5  
(A)
J
pulsedph–V curves at multiple light levels. The curves have similar points of optimal symmetry and similar zero-crossings in the ranges 0.6 ± 0.02 V and 0.9 ± 0.05 V, respectively. (B) The intensity dependence of Jpulsedph at 0, 0.6 and 1.5 V, where 0.6 V corresponds to the POS.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J
light–V, Jdark–V and Jph–V curves determined using the pulsed measurement technique under 97.9 mW cm−2 illumination by a white LED. The built-in potential VBI, determined from the optimal symmetry point of the Jph–V curve, is 0.58 ± 0.01 V. The open-circuit voltage, determined from the zero-crossing of the Jlight–V curve, is 0.63 ± 0.002 V, some 50 ± 12 mV above VBI. The zero-crossing of the Jph–V curve at 0.93 ± 0.002 V suggests the upper limit for Voc under intense illumination may be as high as 0.93 V, some 350 mV above VBI.	 

 	Fig. 7  
(A)
J
pulsedph–V curves for an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al device before and after annealing for twenty minutes at 140 °C. (B) Comparison of R and Lrot before and after annealing. The points of optimal symmetry have been shifted to a common origin for ease of comparison.	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
Jph = e[μh < nphh(x) > + μe < nphe(x) >]E	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 8  (A) Annotated schematic of a typical Jpulsedph–V curve, illustrating five key parameters for optimisation. A and B are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at short-circuit; C is the bias at the point of optimal symmetry; and D and E are the value and slope of the corrected photocurrent at the point of optimal symmetry. To optimise device performance, processing conditions should be sought that maximise A, C, D and E whilst simultaneously yielding a value of B close to zero, subject to the additional condition that D should be negative. (B) Schematic illustrating the appearance of the Jpulsedph–V curve after optimisation.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional images (Fig. S1–S3). See DOI: 10.1039/b718563d
‡ The slight mismatch in this range is an experimental artefact arising from a small difference in the operating temperature of the LED under steady and pulsed operation, which leads to a marginally higher instantaneous light output in the latter case for a given applied bias.
§ Note added in proof: An important implication of the linear scaling of the Jph(V) curve with intensity is that losses due to (non-geminate) bimolecular recombination remain negligible over the full operating range of the device, 0 < V < VOC. It has previously been argued that bimolecular recombination is the dominant loss mechanism in bulk heterojunction solar cells, but this is clearly not the case for the P3HT:PCBM devices discussed here. This will be discussed in detail in a future manuscript.16
¶ The asymmetry of the generation profile (caused by the one-sided illumination through the glass substrate and potential interference effects) introduces a slight non-evenness into the field-dependence, although device simulations to be reported elsewhere show this to be a very weak effect.
|| The symmetry point would be offset in the positive direction if the anode and/or cathode were inversely selective, i.e. preferentially selective to the opposite carrier type. In the event that one electrode were self-selective and the other inversely selective, the offset could occur in either direction, depending on whichever electrode was more strongly selective.
** The phrase ‘blend composition’ is used here to refer to any donor–acceptor combination of fixed ratio in solution. Any changes to the active materials, their ratio or even the solvent composition are considered to constitute a material change in the blend composition, requiring a fresh optimisation to be undertaken.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
