n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction solar cells in Si holey arrays   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11752E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11752E
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 737-741Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
        n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction solar cells in Si holey arrays†

        
          
            Xiao-Mei 
            Zhang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Dmitri 
            Golberg
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yoshio 
            Bando
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Naoki 
            Fukata
          
        
      *
      World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: ZHANG.Xiaomei@nims.go.jp; FUKATA.Naoki@nims.go.jp
Received 
      16th November 2011
    , Accepted 5th December 2011First published on 9th December 2011AbstractA wafer-scale, low-cost solar cell based on n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction arrays on holey Si substrates has been fabricated. This device shows a power-conversion efficiency of 1.2% and high photosensitivity. The present n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunction architectures are envisaged as potentially valuable candidates for next-generation photovoltaics.
Photovoltaic (PV) solar cells will increasingly be needed for producing “green”, renewable energy.1 In recent years, the incorporation of active nanostructures such as nanowires (NWs),2nanorods,3nanoparticles,4 and quantum dots5 into new PV systems has led to significant progress. Solar cell devices based on p–n junctions utilizing nanowires are of particular interest, since they decouple light absorption from carrier collection.6 Single-crystal Si solar cells have already demonstrated efficiency over 20%, which is very close to the theoretically calculated limit, however the high cost of Si solar cells becomes the most vital obstacle toward effective commercialization. Finding a cheaper material and a simpler fabrication process are the effective ways to reduce the cost. Moreover, due to a 1.12 eV bandgap of silicon, most of the energy in the UV region is consumed by the thermalization loss,7 which adversely affects the conversion efficiency of Si solar cells. This thermalization loss caused by excess photon energy increases the operating temperature of silicon solar cells, thus degrading their performance.8 It has been demonstrated that the portion of UV light (with a wavelength shorter than 380 nm) that is usable by silicon solar cells is less than 30%.9Zinc oxide (ZnO) has a bandgap of about 3.37 eV, which corresponds to a wavelength of ∼380 nm. It has a very high photoresponse in the ultraviolet (UV) region but is almost transparent in the visible and near-infrared regions.10ZnO is an abundant, inexpensive, and environmentally friendly material. Furthermore, the fabrication of ZnO nanostructures becomes a routine technique that can easily be scaled up. The above characteristics make ZnO a suitable UV absorber candidate for the use in Si solar cells. Heterojunctions based on n-ZnO/p-Si ensembles have recently been demonstrated, however, their power conversion efficiency is still unsatisfactory, less than 0.2%.11,12
In this work, we build up a novel Si micro-holey solar cell combining n-ZnO and p-Si 3D heterojunctions, in which the n-ZnO constituent serves as an UV absorber, and the Si one as a visible and near-infrared absorber. Superior light absorption has been achieved within such holey structures. The regarded n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions also offer a greatly enhanced surface area, an improved power-conversion efficiency, and a highly sensitive photoresponse that can be tuned to different incident light wavelengths. Moreover, owing to the ZnO component, which has perfect absorption in the UV region, these devices may be further employed as sub-cells for constructing more complex tandem solar cells in the near future.
A wafer-scale ordered p+-Si holey array was fabricated using a combination of deep ultraviolet lithography (UVL) and metal-assisted Si etching in aqueous oxidizing hydrofluoric acid (HF).13 Fig. S1 in the ESI† illustrates the fabrication process. Fig. 1a–c show typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a Si holey array produced from the p-type Si (100) wafer in an aqueous solution of HF and H2O2. The concentrations of HF and H2O2 were 4.6 and 0.44 M, respectively. The pore diameters and wall thicknesses were defined using an Au/Ti mask and deep UVL, while the hole depths were dependent on the etching time. Fig. 1a shows a top-view SEM image of well-ordered Si holes with neat edges. It shows that the holes are regularly distributed on the Si surface and that the thicknesses of the hole walls are 2 μm. Fig. 1b displays a top-view high-magnification SEM image of a single Si hole. It has a round profile and a diameter of 4 μm. There are Si NWs inside each Si hole. Fig. 1c shows a SEM image of a cross-section of a single hole, showing that most of the Si NWs stand independently. In order to form n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunctions the ZnO NWs were then fabricated on the exposed Si front surfaces using a hydrothermal chemical method. Fig. 1d shows a SEM image of ZnO nanowires synthesized from a nutrient solution composed of zinc nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) (at a ratio of 1:1) at a temperature of 80 °C for 14 h. Then, the as-grown ZnO/Si 3D heterojunctions were annealed at 500 °C in Ar atmosphere for 2 h. The nanowires grew on the Si surface and had uniform diameters and high packing density. The overall morphology of the typical n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions holey array is depicted in a cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 1e. The Si holes have an even diameter of 4 μm, and each hole has a clear and neat edge. The length of vertically grown ZnO nanowires within the array is very uniform. The ZnO phase has a lighter contrast than the Si one under SEM. The image of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions hole is presented in Fig. 1f. The ZnO NWs are located inside and on the top of each Si hole. An enlarged image within the hole is given in Fig. 1g. It is seen that the ZnO NWs grow everywhere inside the holes and also on the Si nanowires.
 Fig. 1  
          SEM images of (a) well-ordered Si holes on a wafer-scale substrate and (b) a single Si hole with Si NWs protruding from it. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the single Si hole. (d) 30° view SEM micrographs of the ZnO nanowire arrays grown on the Si substrate. Cross-sectional SEM images of n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions within the holey array structure (e) at low magnification and (f) at high magnification. (g) SEM image of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D structure inside the single Si hole. 
Characterization of the present arrays by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is given in Fig. 2. A typical bright-field image of the structure, taken from its cross-section, is illustrated in Fig. 2a. A focused ion beam (FIB) was used to cut a sample for this TEM investigation. A polymer (SF9) with a thickness of 6 μm was in advance spun on the sample to protect the top ZnO NWs array from damage. The sidewalls of the Si holes have clean edges; ZnO nanostructures fill the holes and protrude from them. The bent and disordered morphologies of ZnO NWs are attributable to the polymer spin-coating. The dark-contrast dots are Ag particles which can hardly be removed due to their tight embedment between the Si NWs. The Si hole sidewalls are shown in detail in Fig. 2b. Vertically aligned Si NWs, create the Si base, and ZnO nanostructures with different contrasts are also visible in the image. The EDX spectra separately taken from ZnO NWs and Si domains are displayed in Fig. 2c and d, respectively. All the peaks are attributable to the expected elements within the arrays. The ZnO NWs grow on each Si NW over a 360° azimuth, and from the inner walls of the Si holes. These 3D heterojunctions and holey structures thus provide a spacious interface between the n-ZnO and p-Si domains that should intensify the photocurrent. A bright-field TEM image of a single ZnO NW within the NWs array is depicted in Fig. 2e. The nanowire has a diameter of 150 nm. An HRTEM image taken from the structure edge (framed area in Fig. 2e) is displayed in Fig. 2f, the corresponding diffraction pattern is presented in the inset. A perfect single crystalline structure is apparent. The wire is growing along the [0001] direction, with a zone axis of [20], the most common growth orientation for hexagonal ZnO NWs.14
 Fig. 2  (a) A typical cross-sectional TEM image of n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions in a holey array structure. The single Si hole has a diameter of 4 μm and a depth of 2 μm. A ZnO NWs array is on the top of the Si hole. (b) An enlarged image of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction, seen in (a). (c and d) EDX spectra recorded from the ZnO and Si sides, respectively. (e) TEM image of a single ZnO nanowire on the top array. It has a diameter of 100 nm. (f) A high-resolution TEM image taken from an individual ZnO nanowire (framed area in (e)). The inset shows the corresponding diffraction pattern peculiar to a typical ZnO hexagonal structure. 
The whole structure of the n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions in a Si holey array solar cell device is schematically illustrated in Fig. 3a. An ITO thin film was deposited as a transparent electrode on the front face of the device by magnetron sputtering. The high-density ZnO NW arrays above the Si holes create natural barriers between the p-Si and the ITO electrodes formed by the top-down fabrication processes. An Ag electrode was deposited on the backside of the p-Si wafer to serve as the backside contact to p-Si. n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions are located inside each hole, as shown in Fig. 3b. The 3D heterojunctions offer a greatly enhanced surface area that significantly increases light absorption and trapping within the holes. The absorbing property of the device was further improved by integrating a ZnO NW array layer on the Si holey surface. Another important role of the ZnO NW array layer is to serve as a natural barrier which simultaneously smoothes light refraction from the surrounding Si wafer and protects the device from unwanted electricity leakage. An ideal band diagram for a p+-Si/n-ZnO junction is illustrated in Fig. 3c, based on the Anderson model.15 The valence band offset is 2.55 eV and that of the conduction band is 0.3 eV.16 Due to the large difference in ΔEv and ΔEc, the energetic barrier for electrons is much lower than that for holes. The solar light used consisted of varying wavelengths, from the UV region (250 nm) to the near infrared region (2500 nm). When a heterojunction is illuminated by sunlight, most of the UV photons with the energy E > Eg(ZnO) are absorbed by the ZnO NWs due to their large absorption coefficient in this region. Electron–hole pairs are thus generated in the ZnO NWs. The other photons, with the energy of E < Eg(ZnO), must be transmitted through the ZnO NWs due to their high transparency in the visible and near infrared regions. The transmitted photons reach the p-Si and are absorbed by it, and then again generate electron–hole pairs. Next, the built-in electric field between the interface of n-ZnO and p-Si drives the photogenerated holes in the ZnO NWs toward the Si side, whereas the electrons generated in the Si are driven to the ZnO side. Finally, electrons and holes are separated at the heterojunction interface, and a photocurrent is generated.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction in a holey array structure. (b) A model of an individual ZnO/Si 3D junction inside the hole. (c) The band diagram of a n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunction under solar light illumination. 
The J–V characteristics of the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si 3D heterojunctions measured under dark conditions at room temperature are illustrated in Fig. 4a. The annealed sample exhibits better rectification behavior than that of the as-grown sample. The as-grown diodes show poor rectifying behaviours with a leakage current of −459.0 mA cm−2 at −1 V. After annealing in Ar, the leakage current is reduced to −246.6 mA cm−2 at −1 V. It has been reported that the large leakage current for the as-grown diodes is mainly due to the defect-mediated tunneling effect, caused by the high defect concentration or trap centers in the interfacial layer.17 The photovoltaic properties of the solar cell devices were characterized using a calibrated solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2. J–V characteristics of the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si 3D heterojunction solar cell devices under illuminated conditions are shown in Fig. 4b. The as-grown devices possess an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.06 V with a power-conversion efficiency of 0.4%. The annealed devices exhibit better rectifying behavior with a lower leakage current at reverse bias. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) is greatly increased up to 0.1 V. A short-circuit current density Jsc of 51.52 mA cm−2 was obtained, with a power-conversion efficiency of 1.2% which is nearly three times higher than that for as-grown devices. Thus, when the solar cell devices are annealed in Ar ambient, the number of interfacial defects is reduced, which greatly lifts up the power-conversion efficiency by improving the interfacial structure and decreasing the leakage current. Since the Si substrate was of high crystallinity and was carefully etched, we suppose that some defects were introduced in the ZnO domains upon growth due to the lack of crystallographic continuity between Si and ZnO phases. Despite a fact that the special care was given to the substrate preparation, it is also possible that the Si surface had a natural thin SiOx layer before the ZnO NWs were grown. The presence of such a layer may disturb the crystallographic quality of the interface under ZnO deposition. While the remaining Ag particles also act as deep level traps for photocarriers. Even considering these, the present solar cells still have an insufficiently high power conversion efficiency. Fig. 4c shows the J–V characteristics of planar n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunction without holey array solar cells under dark and illuminated conditions. The open-circuit voltage is around 0.02 V and a power-conversion efficiency is only 0.02%. This observation is similar to the recently reported values for n-ZnO/p-Si thin films.12 Thus, the improved efficiency should be attributable to the excellent antireflection properties of the prepared nanowire arrays. And the holey structure of the solar cell also brings additional possibilities for effective light trapping. Fig. 4d shows the photoresponsivity of a heterojunctions device. The distinctive main peak is the band edge absorption in the Si NW/substrate layer.18 The maximum responsivity measured for this ZnO/Si heterojunction was 3.6 mA W−1 at around 700 nm.
 Fig. 4  (a) Dark J–V plots of the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunctions. (b) J–V characteristics of as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunction solar cell devices under solar light illumination. An enlarged trace (inset) clearly shows Jsc, Voc plots recorded under solar illumination in the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunction solar cell devices. (c) J–V characteristics of the planar ZnO/Si heterojunctions without holey structure under dark and illuminated conditions. The inset shows the enlarged center region. (d) Spectral photoresponsivity of ZnO/Si 3D heterojunctions from 390 to 900 nm. 
The results of the individual photosensitivity measurements are illustrated in Fig. 5a. The photo J–V plots were measured under dark, UV (325 nm) and green laser (532 nm) illumination, respectively. It is clear that the solar cell device appears to be more sensitive to visible light than to UV illumination. We explain this using a simple p–n junction model with a depletion zone, as summarized in Fig. 5b. Under illumination at 325 nm, electron–hole pairs are generated on the n-ZnO side due to the large absorption coefficient of ZnO in this spectral region. However, under illumination at 532 nm most of the incident light is transmitted through the ZnO side, and reaches the Si side, where electron–hole pairs are generated. Thus, under 325 nm illumination the generated holes need to cross the interface while moving to the Si side; whereas under 532 nm illumination, the generated electrons cross the interface towards the ZnO side. Meanwhile, recombination may also occur at the interface between the holes coming from the ZnO side and the electrons coming from the Si side. It is noted that the mobility of holes is usually lower than that of electrons,19 so at the interface, the electrons will move faster than the holes. The holes thus are more likely to be recombined at the interface rather than to be delivered to the Si side. On the other hand, most of the electrons will cross the interface without recombination, due to their higher mobility. Therefore, 532 nm illumination should lead to better separated electrons and holes rather than 325 nm illumination, which results in the observed high photosensitivity.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curve of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction in the holey array structure solar cell device, in the dark and under 325 nm and 532 nm light illuminations. (b) Band diagram of a n-ZnO/p-Si junction explaining the different photosensitivity of the device under 325 nm and 532 nm light illuminations. 
In summary, a novel holey array solar cell device with n-ZnO/p-Si 3D built-in heterojunctions was fabricated. The designed structure largely improved the absorption surface and incident light trapping. With a solar irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2, the device exhibited an open-circuit voltage Voc of 0.1 V, a short-circuit current density Jsc of 51.52 mA cm−2, and a power-conversion efficiency η of 1.2%. These values are superior to those of solar cell devices based on conventional n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunctions. Additional photosensitivity tests under UV and green-light illumination showed that under green light (532 nm) the photocurrent had greatly been improved over that of UV light at the same illuminating power.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Funding Program for Next Generation World-Leading Researchers (NEXT Program).
Notes and references
A. Stoppato, Energy, 2008, 33, 224 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Peng, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. J. Yan, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Small, 2005, 1, 1062 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. S. Leschikies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef ; 
  (c) X. S. Fang, Y. Bando, C. Ye, G. Z. Shen, U. K. Gautam, J. Q. Hu, C. C. Tang and D. Golberg, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4093 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Dong, B. Tian, T. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) E. C. Garnett and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) X. M. Zhang, M. Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2767 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
F. Brown and J. Wu, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 3, 394 CrossRef .
M. B. Prince, J. Appl. Phys., 1955, 26, 534 CrossRef .
B. S. Richards, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2329 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Dogan, V. Avrutin, S.-J. Cho and H. Morkoc, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Cheng, T.-L. Wang, L. Feng, W. Li, K. M. Ho, M. M. T. Loy, K. K. Fung and N. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 475703 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. Huang, G. Fang, X. Mo, L. Yuan, H. Zhou, M. Wang, H. Xiao and X. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063512 CrossRef ; 
  (c) N. H. Alvi, M. Riaz, G. Tzamalis, O. Nur and M. Willander, Solid-State Electron., 2010, 54, 536 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Bano, I. Hussain, O. Nur, M. Willander and P. Klason, J. Nanomater., 2010 Search PubMed  , Article ID 817201, 1.
L. Li, C. X. Shan, B. H. Li, B. Yao, D. Z. Shen, B. Chu and Y. M. Lu, J. Electron. Mater., 2010, 39, 2467 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, R829 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Jeong, J. H. Kim and S. Im, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2946 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Ma and D. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 053103 CrossRef .

  (a) R. Ghosh and D. Basak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 243106 CrossRef ; 
  (b) N. K. Reddy, Q. Ahsanulhaq, J. H. Kim and Y. B. Hahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 043127 CrossRef .
L. C. Chen and C. N. Pan, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2008, 44, 43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nettel and S. Anlage, Phys. Rev. B, 1982, 26, 2076 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11752eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
          SEM images of (a) well-ordered Si holes on a wafer-scale substrate and (b) a single Si hole with Si NWs protruding from it. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the single Si hole. (d) 30° view SEM micrographs of the ZnO nanowire arrays grown on the Si substrate. Cross-sectional SEM images of n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions within the holey array structure (e) at low magnification and (f) at high magnification. (g) SEM image of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D structure inside the single Si hole.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A typical cross-sectional TEM image of n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunctions in a holey array structure. The single Si hole has a diameter of 4 μm and a depth of 2 μm. A ZnO NWs array is on the top of the Si hole. (b) An enlarged image of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction, seen in (a). (c and d) EDX spectra recorded from the ZnO and Si sides, respectively. (e) TEM image of a single ZnO nanowire on the top array. It has a diameter of 100 nm. (f) A high-resolution TEM image taken from an individual ZnO nanowire (framed area in (e)). The inset shows the corresponding diffraction pattern peculiar to a typical ZnO hexagonal structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction in a holey array structure. (b) A model of an individual ZnO/Si 3D junction inside the hole. (c) The band diagram of a n-ZnO/p-Si heterojunction under solar light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Dark J–V plots of the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunctions. (b) J–V characteristics of as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunction solar cell devices under solar light illumination. An enlarged trace (inset) clearly shows Jsc, Voc plots recorded under solar illumination in the as-grown and annealed ZnO/Si heterojunction solar cell devices. (c) J–V characteristics of the planar ZnO/Si heterojunctions without holey structure under dark and illuminated conditions. The inset shows the enlarged center region. (d) Spectral photoresponsivity of ZnO/Si 3D heterojunctions from 390 to 900 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curve of a n-ZnO/p-Si 3D heterojunction in the holey array structure solar cell device, in the dark and under 325 nm and 532 nm light illuminations. (b) Band diagram of a n-ZnO/p-Si junction explaining the different photosensitivity of the device under 325 nm and 532 nm light illuminations.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11752e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
