Diamond surface functionalization: from gemstone to photoelectrochemical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC03381E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03381E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10134-10165Diamond surface functionalization: from gemstone to photoelectrochemical applications

        
          
            Jorne 
            Raymakers
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ken 
            Haenen
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Wouter 
            Maes
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute for Materials Research (IMO), Hasselt University, B-3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. E-mail: wouter.maes@uhasselt.be
bIMOMEC, IMEC vzw, B-3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
Received 
      23rd June 2019
    , Accepted 8th August 2019First published on 8th August 2019AbstractDiamond is a highly attractive material for photoelectrochemical applications such as dye-sensitized solar cells or photocatalysis because of its high chemical stability, high conductivity upon doping and the ease by which synthetic diamond thin films or nanostructures can be grown on various substrates. For these applications in particular, a well-defined surface functionalization is a crucial, yet non-trivial matter. In the first part of this review we therefore provide an extensive overview of the surface chemistry of doped and intrinsic diamond thin films. Different techniques to alter the surface termination of freshly grown diamond electrodes are illustrated and compared. Next, the subsequent functionalization steps to form stable covalent bonds between (linker) molecules and the diamond surface are discussed, with special emphasis on photochemical and (electro)chemical diazonium grafting. Several strategies to fabricate macromolecular brushes via surface initiated and direct polymerization techniques are proposed as well. In the second part, the photocurrent generation of dye-sensitized boron-doped diamond electrodes is compared and the influence of the employed chromophores, functionalization strategy, surface contamination and doping concentrations is analyzed. To conclude, the emerging photocatalytic applications of diamond are highlighted, such as the reduction of carbon monoxide, ammonia synthesis and water splitting.
Jorne Raymakers
Jorne Raymakers obtained his MSc in chemistry at the University of Ghent in 2015. Later that year he started his PhD in organic/diamond surface chemistry at Hasselt University under the supervision of Prof. W. Maes, for which he was granted an FWO-SB scholarship. His research is focused on the functionalization of boron-doped diamond electrodes with push–pull chromophores and their application toward p-type dye-sensitized solar cells. In 2017 he received the Young Scholar Award at the International Conference on Diamond and Carbon Materials.
Ken Haenen
Ken Haenen is Professor and Chair of the Department of Physics, and Director of the Doctoral School of Sciences and Technology at Hasselt University, where he obtained his PhD degree in physics in 2002. He is also a guest professor at IMEC. Ken's research interests focus on CVD diamond as part of a broader scope on carbon materials for energy harvesting and conversion. He has authored over 210 peer-reviewed publications. Ken Haenen is Editor-in-Chief of Diamond and Related Materials and MethodsX (Materials Science) and is involved in the organisation of several leading international diamond and nanocarbon conferences.
Wouter Maes
Wouter Maes is Professor and Vice-Chair of the Department of Chemistry at Hasselt University. He obtained his PhD in (organic) chemistry at the KU Leuven in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Dehaen, then worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) for several years, with external stays in Paris and Oxford, and moved to Hasselt University in 2009 to start an independent academic career. He has (co)authored over 160 peer-reviewed publications. His research group – Design & Synthesis of Organic Semiconductors – focuses on the synthesis of novel conjugated (polymer) materials for organic electronics and advanced healthcare.
1. Introduction
Natural diamond is commonly known as a precious gemstone. However, as a result of the development of high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) diamond synthesis and chemical vapour deposition (CVD) techniques,1–4 synthetic diamond has gained significant scientific and economic importance. Both single crystal and polycrystalline diamond can be grown on multiple surfaces and the grain size can be controlled from ultranano- to nano- and microcrystalline dimensions.5 Polishing of these surfaces allows for the development of atomically flat diamond films,6 whereas reactive ion etching and CVD growth on patterned templates result in different diamond nanostructures such as vertically aligned nanowires,7 diamond foams,8,9 fibres,10etc. Moreover, the conductivity of diamond, which is an insulating material in se due to its wide bandgap of 5.47 eV, can be tuned by substituting carbon atoms in the crystal lattice with boron or nitrogen and phosphorus to obtain p-type or n-type conductivity, respectively.11 At rather low doping levels (≤1019 atoms cm−3) diamond attains semiconducting properties, while higher doping levels (above 1020 atoms cm−3) result in a semi-metallic electrical behavior. In combination with diamond's unique intrinsic properties, i.e., an extreme hardness, high thermal conductivity, chemical inertness, broad potential window and biocompatibility, this has led to a broad range of applications. Boron-doped diamond (BDD) for example excels as an electrochemical material.12 It holds great promise for high power electronics13 and photodetectors,14 and plays a major role in quantum technologies.15 Over the past 10 years, diamond has also been gaining more and more interest as a photocathode material for alternative p-type dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and for photocatalytic applications. Here, not only the bulk properties, but also the surface composition of diamond plays a crucial role in its success.
Although diamond is always considered an inert material, a multitude of strategies have been developed to alter its surface. The surface termination of freshly grown diamond depends on the available molecules during the growth process, which is typically hydrogen. However, these hydrogen atoms can be replaced by other elements such as oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur and even halogens by performing thermal, electrochemical or plasma treatments.16 Subsequently, the resulting surface termination can be exploited to covalently attach larger molecules such as light-harvesting dyes, DNA or proteins. The most popular functionalization strategies involve photochemical or diazonium grafting of terminal alkenes and diazonium salts, respectively, on H-terminated diamond.17 Accordingly, strong carbon–carbon bonds are formed between the surface and the target molecules. This results in a very robust interface that outperforms other semiconducting materials such as silicon, gold or glassy carbon in terms of stability. Oxygen- and nitrogen-terminated diamond are commonly employed as well for further functionalization via silanization, esterification or amidation reactions.18 Moreover, the functionalization of diamond is not limited to (bio)molecules, but larger macromolecular structures, including polymers, have also been successfully grafted onto the surface.
In this review we thoroughly discuss the surface chemistry of diamond thin films, while a recent book chapter by A. Krueger specifically deals with nanodiamonds.19 A complete and up to date overview of the different techniques employed for surface termination, functionalization and polymerization is provided. In contrast with a previous review from 2014,16 which focuses on the biological applications of functionalized diamond, we have paid special attention to the photoelectrochemical applications of these functional surfaces. This includes its application in p-type DSSCs and emerging photocatalytic applications such as CO2 reduction, ammonia synthesis, and water splitting.
2. Diamond surface chemistry
2.1. Surface termination
Under typical CVD growth conditions, the employed hydrogen gas plays an important role. It not only allows the synthesis of diamond through the generation of radicals on both the hydrocarbon source and the monocrystalline or nanodiamond substrate, it also etches away sp2-hybridized carbon (graphite) at a much higher rate than it does for sp3-hybridized carbon (diamond), resulting in high quality diamond films. The employed hydrogen gas stabilizes the dangling bonds at the diamond surface, resulting in H-termination. This H-termination gives rise to some of diamond's unique properties, such as its high chemical inertness, large potential window and negative electron affinity (NEA), which results in a p-type surface conductivity after surface transfer doping, even in undoped diamond films.20 Although H-terminated diamond has a high stability and hence a low surface reactivity, the H-termination will gradually deteriorate when used repeatedly in an electrochemical setup or exposed to air for a prolonged period of time. The most convenient ways of restoring this hydrogen surface termination is by subjecting diamond to a hydrogen plasma or performing an electrochemical cathodic treatment.21,22 The latter method has the advantage of being non-destructive, which can be advantageous when ultra-nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) – having a higher sp2-carbon content that would be etched away by a hydrogen plasma – is being employed.23 Also, it has been demonstrated that plasma treatment can lead to microscopic inhomogenities in the form of non-diamond carbon of 1 nm thickness at the surface.24 Recently, Kasahara et al. have elucidated the mechanism for the hydrogenation of diamond electrodes via cathodic treatment and they demonstrated that a faster and more efficient H-termination can be achieved when lower potentials (−5.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) are applied in strongly acidic electrolyte solutions (pH = 0.9).25
The H-terminated diamond surface can also be deliberately oxidized to form hydroxyl (C–OH), ether (C–O–C), carbonyl (CO) and carboxylic acid (COOH) functional groups, drastically changing the surface properties. O-Terminated diamonds are hydrophilic materials that demonstrate a good biocompatibility.26 The p-type surface conductivity is lost since O-terminated diamond electrodes have a positive electron affinity (PEA). Moreover, due to the possibility of forming H-bonds with other molecules, the electrochemical properties (i.e., electron transfer kinetics and potential window) are altered. Surface oxidation of diamond has been achieved through a variety of techniques, including (i) thermal oxidation,27–29 (ii) hot filament cracking to produce O2˙,30 (iii) reaction of Cl-terminated diamond with H2O,31 (iv) chemical treatment by boiling in sulfochromic acid or piranha,32,33 (v) oxygen plasma treatment,34,35 (vi) photochemical oxidation,36,37 (vii) UV-ozone treatment,33,38,39 and (viii) anodic electrochemical polarization.40–42 The various approaches result in different surface compositions, which have been extensively studied by Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and high-resolution electron loss spectroscopy (HREELS). Oxidation with thermally activated oxygen results in surfaces that mainly contain C–OH and CO groups in the early stages, whereas fully oxidized surfaces are dominated by C–O–C groups.28,30 Thermal treatment is also beneficial for the quality of diamond as this reduces the quantity of non-diamond carbon in thin films.43 However, heating above 600 °C leads to surface defects.44 For samples treated with UV/ozone, a similar trend in the surface termination was observed, with C–OH groups dominating for short treatments while longer treatments result in a high amount of C–O–C groups. Oxygen plasma on the other hand is an extremely fast technique and after only 2 minutes, the surface is completely covered with C–O–C groups. The harsh conditions employed for plasma treatment also lead to a certain amount of undesired graphitization.40,45 Analysis of diamond electrodes oxidized through anodic electrochemical polarization provided somewhat contradicting results. Notsu et al. demonstrated that after applying a constant potential of 2.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M KOH for 1 hour, the majority of the oxygen groups were CO species,40,46 which was later supported by HREELS measurements.44 Conversely, Wang et al. reported that electrochemically oxidized surfaces contain high amounts of C–OH functionalities, which they confirmed through esterification of the surface alcohol groups with trifluoroacetic acid.47 These results were rationalized by the fact that high amounts of OH radicals are formed near the diamond surface during the electrochemical treatment. More recently, the importance of the employed potential during the anodic polarization was pointed out. Electrochemical oxidation occurs starting from potentials higher than 1.6 V vs. Ag/Ag2SO4, with primarily C–OH functionalities being formed. Formation of CO and C–O–C only happens at higher potentials above 2.1 V (Fig. 1),48 which explains the difference between previous results. A similar dependence on the employed potential was also observed by Nakamura and Co.49 Generally, it can be stated that for the discussed techniques, except for plasma treatment, the surface oxygen species can be tuned depending on the conditions. It should also be mentioned that there are differences between single crystal and polycrystalline diamond and the local heterogeneities at different doping level play a significant role as well.32,48 Therefore, it is imperative that the employed conditions and substrate specifications are reported precisely for reproducibility purposes.50
 Fig. 1  Electrochemical oxidation of boron-doped diamond (BDD) by cycling the potential between −1.8 V and +0.5, +1.6 and +2.5 V vs. Ag/Ag2SO4, respectively. At a potential of +0.5 V, only a small amount of C–OH groups are formed. After the threshold value of 1.6 V, the C–OH concentration increases, together with the formation of carbonyl groups. At potentials above 2.5 V, the majority of surface oxygen species are ether groups [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Elsevier].48 
Several methods have also been developed to introduce N-termination on diamond since these surfaces proved to be ideal platforms for the attachment of biomolecules such as DNA and peptides.51,52 Moreover, N-termination can improve quantum-sensing applications by increasing the spin coherence time of nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers.53 N-Terminated diamond is hydrophilic and shows exceptional properties with regards to electron affinity. When the surface is covered by primary amine groups (C–NH2), a NEA is obtained.54 However, if more secondary amines (C–NH–C, CNH) or hydrazine-like (C–NH–NH–C) structures are present, which “fully” terminate the surface, a PEA is observed.55,56 N-Termination of diamond can be achieved through a two-step procedure by thermal or photochemical amination of Cl-terminated surfaces,31,57,58 or directly via photochemical amination with UV light (254 nm),59,60 plasma treatment,61–64 electrochemical or “electroless” amination in liquid ammonia,65–67 and irradiation with a N2/H2 radical beam.68 Although these different methods result in a combination of primary and secondary amine surface groups, XPS analysis showed that the electrochemical amination results in higher amounts (40%) of secondary amines (CNH and C–NH–C), whereas for samples aminated via plasma treatments over 95% of primary amine groups can be obtained (Fig. 2).69,70 Incorporation of small amounts of oxygen during photochemical/plasma treatment or employing O-terminated diamond during electrochemical grafting seems to improve the overall nitrogen coverage.66,71
 Fig. 2  Difference in surface composition upon N-termination of diamond via electrochemical anodic polarization in liquid NH3 and plasma treatment, as shown by deconvolution of the N1s signal in XPS [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2014–2015) Elsevier].67,69 
S-Termination of diamond thin films was first investigated by Nakamura et al. via the photolysis of cyclic disulfides with UV light.72 Analysis of the C1s signal in XPS revealed the formation of two new carbon moieties, i.e., thioethers (C–S–C) and thiols (C–SH). Mechanistically, this means that after photolysis of the cyclic disulfide, one end of the generated radical dithiol grafts itself onto the surface, while the other end remains in contact with the solution, resulting in the formation of a thioalkylthiol layer as shown in Fig. 3. To avoid the synthesis of these cyclic disulfides, a similar procedure was employed using elementary sulfur (S8).73,74 Here, the photolysis of S8 is followed by the grafting of a polythiol (–Sx–) on the surface. Under continuous irradiation, this is further photolysed leading to S-terminated diamond. FTIR and XPS analysis demonstrated that both C–SH and thiocarbonyl groups are present (CS). The resulting surfaces were then employed for the construction of self-assembled monolayers with gold nanoparticles.
 Fig. 3  Diamond surface composition after S-termination through photolysis of cyclic disulfides (XPS spectrum on the left) and elementary sulfur (XPS spectrum on the right) [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2007) The Japan Society of Applied Physics].72,73 
Apart from the conventional H-, O-, N- and the somewhat more exotic S-terminated surfaces, halogenation of diamond has been thoroughly investigated as well and this already starting from 1967.75 Development of F-terminated diamond has received special attention as this drastically improved the (oxidative) stability at elevated temperatures and the lubrication properties. Fluorinated BDD electrodes are the only electrode materials to date that have an electrochemical potential window spanning 5 V.76 This can be explained by the low interaction between adsorbed intermediates and the fluorinated electrode as a result of its polar hydrophobicity.77 Termination of the diamond surface with fluorine has been achieved through treating diamond powder or films with molecular fluorine (F2),75 atomic fluorine (F˙) beams,78 or plasma treatment with SF6,79,80 CF4,81–83 or CHF3.84 However, despite the atomic radius of F (1.4 Å) being only slightly larger than that of H (1.2 Å), a surface termination of only 60% could be obtained.85 Therefore, Smetkowksi et al. developed a novel fluorination strategy through irradiation of perfluorinated butyl iodides (C4F9I) with X-rays.86 This generates the corresponding radical C4F9˙, which can attach onto a H-terminated diamond surface. The functionalized surfaces were then heated to 300 K to remove any non-reacted C4F9I, which resulted in a surface fluorine to carbon ratio of 2. Further increasing the temperature up to 800 K led to a thermal decomposition of the diamond–C4F9 interface to one with simple C–F bonds, as shown in Fig. 4. This was accompanied by a decrease of the surface F to C ratio to a value of 0.6, which is a similar fluorine coverage as produced by the techniques described above.87 Small variations on the perfluorination of diamond were performed through photolysis of perfluoroalkyl iodides with UV light,88 by employing perfluoroazoalkanes (as they also readily decompose into radicals upon illumination)89,90 or through electrochemical oxidation of perfluoroalkyl acids.91
 Fig. 4  Diamond surface fluorination by employing molecular fluorine (F2), atomic fluorine (F˙) beams, plasma treatment or a perfluorination method. 
In addition to fluorine, also Cl-terminated diamond surfaces have been prepared through various methods (Fig. 5). Initially, rather harsh and corrosive reaction conditions were employed, e.g., guiding a Cl2 gas stream over diamond powder at 400 °C75 or generation of atomic chlorine in a microwave reactor at 300 °C.31 A milder route towards chlorination of diamond was first reported by Miller and Brown and employs irradiation of diamond powders or single crystals with a high-pressure Hg arc lamp to photochemically dissociate Cl2.57 There are also some reports on the preparation of Cl-terminated diamond surfaces via two wet-chemical approaches: (i) heating diamond in a solution of thionyl chloride (SOCl2) and chloroform at 50 °C in the presence of azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN), which serves as a radical initiator;92–94 (ii) refluxing diamond in a solution of N-chlorosuccinimide (NCS) and tetrachloromethane (CCl4) in the presence of benzoylperoxide as radical initiator.95 Cl-Terminated surfaces demonstrated a lower stability compared to F-terminated diamond. Exposure of these chlorinated surfaces to water or air resulted in partial hydrolysis of the C–Cl bonds, which decreased the surface termination from 50% to only 5%.31,82 Yet, this higher reactivity of the Cl-terminated surfaces can be beneficial as this resulted in one of the first methods to develop NH2-terminated surfaces31,57,58 and enables direct functionalization of diamond with pyridinium salts96 and n-, sec- or tert-butyl groups (Fig. 5).92,93
 Fig. 5  Cl- and Br-termination of diamond and subsequent surface modifications with pyridine, n-BuLi, ammonia and the Grignard reagent of 1-bromodecane. 
Br-Termination of diamond has received much less attention. The first report dates from 1968, wherein a stream of Br2 gas was guided over a diamond powder at 100 °C.75 However, only very small amounts of bromine were actually bound to the surface. Similarly, a chemical approach in which diamond was heated in a solution of Br2 and chloroform at 50 °C with AIBN as radical initiator resulted in poor Br-termination.92 Wang et al. obtained a Br/C ratio of 0.15 after bromine termination of diamond by refluxing the sample in a mixture of N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) and CCl4. Afterwards, alkylation was attempted through reaction with the Grignard reagent of 1-bromodecane. However, again a low grafting density was observed (Fig. 5).95 The poor Br-termination is explained by a sterical effect due to the increased size of the atomic radius of bromine compared to chlorine and fluorine.97 Bromine is also a better leaving group, which facilitates hydrolysis of the C–Br bonds at the surface. Due to its even larger atomic radius, I-termination of diamond has not been reported to date.
2.2. Surface functionalization
From the above we can conclude that the diamond surface can be readily terminated with hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur and halogen atoms through a broad range of dry and wet chemical approaches. The different terminations can be employed to directly attach molecules to the diamond surface. However, high loadings are hard to achieve. The stability of certain surface terminations is also questionable. Therefore, it is advisable to first covalently attach linker molecules to the diamond surface that in a subsequent reaction can be employed to immobilize larger molecules. The covalent attachment of these linkers will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

2.2.1. Functionalization of H-terminated diamond. 
2.2.1.1. Photochemical functionalization. 
Photochemical functionalization techniques have not only been employed to obtain oxygen-, amine- and halogen-terminated diamond, but the formation of actual C–C bonds between organic linker molecules and the surface has been addressed as well. This method, which was first employed for the functionalization of H-terminated Si (Si–H) surfaces, was translated to diamond by Hamers and co. in 2002.98 Practically, H-terminated diamond is covered with a thin layer of liquid alkenes and subsequently irradiated with UV light of 254 nm to form a self-terminating monolayer. The influence of the functionalization time was carefully investigated and after 1.5 hours of UV irradiation, a rough surface was obtained indicating the formation of a sub-monolayer. For longer irradiation times between 10 and 12 hours, the surface roughness decreased and a complete 2D monolayer was obtained. Further increasing the reaction time lead to the formation of a thick 3D multilayer through cross-polymerization via the alkene functionalities.99,100 The reaction time can eventually be decreased to ±4 hours by applying a negative potential during the functionalization. Nevertheless, this does not change the density of the formed monolayers.101 The employed organic molecules typically comprise a terminal alkene and a protected functional moiety that can be utilized for attaching different molecules to the surface. Protection of the functional head group is necessary for functionalization of Si–H surfaces to prevent etching of the topmost layer. Yet, for diamond this is not required due to its intrinsic stability.102 Employing this technique, diamond has been functionalized with a large variety of short and long alkenes bearing (protected) amines,103–109 carboxylic acids,26,102,110–113 ethers,114,115 alcohols,116–118 thiols,119,120 or more exotic functional groups such as perfluorinated alkanes,121 ferrocene,122 pyridine123 and phosphoric acids.124 Nevertheless, the applicability of these alkenes is limited in a sense that they are not allowed to absorb light with wavelengths around 254 nm, as this would interfere with the functionalization mechanism. An overview of the alkenes that have been employed so far is presented in Fig. 6. Amines and carboxylic acids are most frequently encountered as these types of surfaces present an ideal platform to design biosensors via attachment of either DNA or proteins via EDC/NHS coupling reactions.114,125–128 Mixed molecular monolayers can be developed as well. By introducing ethylene glycol functionalized alkenes for example, non-specific binding of proteins can be drastically decreased.129 Patterned surfaces with a resolution of 1 μm can also be obtained by employing a mask to shield certain parts of the surface during irradiation.130
 Fig. 6  Overview of the (protected) alkenes that have been employed for photochemical functionalization of H-terminated diamond surfaces and the suggested mechanism [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society].132 
The mechanism of the photochemical diamond functionalization has been the subject of several studies, but it was only 8 years after the development of this technique that it was completely elucidated.101,104,131 For a long time it was thought that upon illumination with UV light, electrons were excited from the valence band of H-terminated diamond to its conduction band, and then ejected into the liquid alkene film. However, the electrons are actually directly excited into the liquid and more exactly in the functionalized head group, since alkenes with stronger electron withdrawing groups are grafted more efficiently.129,132 After electron ejection, a positively charged hole stays behind on the diamond surface, which undergoes a nucleophilic attack by the terminal alkene. The resulting positive charge on the grafted alkane will abstract a proton from diamond which can then undergo a nucleophilic attack by the next alkene molecule. A schematic illustration of this mechanism is depicted in Fig. 6.
2.2.1.2. Diazonium grafting. 
Besides photochemical functionalization, grafting of aryl diazonium salts can also be employed to construct stable C–C bonds between the diamond surface and aromatic organic molecules. This method was first demonstrated by Swain and co. in 1999 and it holds considerable advantages over the photochemical method.133 Diazonium grafting is mostly performed electrochemically, by submerging a BDD electrode in a solution of the diazonium salt and cycling to negative potentials.134 By doing so, electrons are ejected from the diamond electrode, resulting in the generation of aryl radicals near the surface and their subsequent grafting. This functionalization proceeds very rapidly as the reduction peak decreases drastically after only one cycle, indicating passivation of the diamond (Fig. 7).135 Compared to the photochemical method, diazonium grafting was calculated to form denser and stronger molecular layers due to π–π stacking between the aromatic molecules.136 This was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) scratching experiments. Removal of a diazonium grafted layer required almost the double amount of force compared to a photochemically functionalized one.128,137 The delocalization of electrons in these aryl linkers also increases the applicability of diamond electrodes in organic electronics because of the improved charge transfer in fully conjugated systems.138 Patterning is also possible via electrospotting.139 Moreover, a large amount of aryl diazonium salts are commercially available or they can easily be prepared (in situ) from the corresponding amines through diazotization with NaNO2 or tert-butyl nitrite.138,140–142
 Fig. 7  (a) Diazotization of functional anilines to afford the corresponding diazonium salts and their grafting mechanism. (b) Overview of commonly employed aryl diazonium salts. (c) Cyclic voltammogram for the electrochemical reduction of an aryl diazonium salt, with a typical sharp reduction peak in the first scan that disappears in subsequent cycles. 
Nevertheless, functionalization via electrochemical diazonium grafting also suffers from a few drawbacks. First of all, this strategy requires an electrically conductive substrate, so it is not applicable for undoped diamond. Also, if the reduction potential is set too negative, the aryl radical will be further reduced to the corresponding anion and the grafting efficiency will be limited.143 The biggest disadvantage, however, is the lack of control and strong tendency to form multilayers due to attack of radicals on the already grafted layer.134,135,144 Since the amount of generated radicals is directly related to the charge passed through the electrode, controlling the amount of charges could suppress multilayer formation. Indeed, by briefly (a few seconds) applying a constant potential, which is just below the redox potential of the diazonium salt, an actual monolayer of nitrophenyl molecules (0.8 nm) could be formed.145 Increasing the time to 600 seconds resulted in the formation of a thin multilayer (2.1 nm), whereas the cycling potential method gave rise to rather thick layers (7.6 nm).146 A different approach to limit the charge passing through the diamond electrode is lowering the (boron) doping concentration, which was successfully applied to construct a compact monolayer.147 In case of H-terminated diamond, which has a p-type surface conductivity due to its NEA, spontaneous diazonium grafting was demonstrated as well. This method was performed by simply submerging the diamond sample in a solution of the diazonium salt in acetonitrile,148 ionic liquids,149 or an acidic aqueous solution for reaction times up to 2 hours.138 After grafting an initial surface layer, the p-type conductivity is lost, making the reaction self-limiting to a monolayer. This method is extremely simple since no electrochemical setup is required and it has the advantage that intrinsic diamond can be functionalized as well. On the other hand, Leroux et al. demonstrated that employing diazonium salts with bulky functional groups, such as triisopropylsilyl protected ethynyls, could prevent multilayer formation as the ortho position is sterically shielded.150 Decreasing the size of the protecting group from triisopropyl- to triethyl- and trimethylsilyl was used to increase the density of the monolayer.151 A final technique to obtain monolayers is the addition of molecules such as 2,2-diphenylpicrylhydrazyl. Its electro-reduced species controls the formation of reactive aryl radicals through a redox reaction with the corresponding diazonium salt.152

Via this grafting method, be it electrochemical or spontaneous, a broad range of functional groups have been attached on the diamond surface, the majority being nitro moieties. They are easily reduced to amines, which are mostly employed for the development of amperometric sensors through attachment of DNA153–155 or proteins.156,157 Aryl diazonium salts bearing carboxylic acids,158 azides,159,160 alkynes,161–163 halogens138,140,164 and boronic acids141,165,166 are also frequently encountered (Fig. 7) since they allow further functionalization via copper(I) azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) or Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. Lastly, some larger conjugated molecules such as anthraquinones,167 ruthenium dyes,168 biphenyls,142,148,169 or nanobodies were directly attached to diamond electrodes as well.170


2.2.2. Functionalization of O-terminated diamond. 
Application of oxygen-terminated diamond surfaces for further functionalization has also received a considerable amount of attention. Although the various oxidation techniques provide surfaces that comprise alcohol, ether, carbonyl and carboxyl functional groups, the large majority of further functionalization approaches focus on the OH-functionalities on diamond. The most frequently employed protocols involve silanization, esterification and thermal alkylation.
2.2.2.1. Silanization. 
Initially, silanization of OH-terminated diamond surfaces was merely performed to confirm the presence of the alcohol groups after surface oxidation, as their XPS signal is indistinguishable from that of ethers. This was first demonstrated by Notsu et al. in 2001 by immersing the BDD samples in an ethanol solution containing 2% of (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) for 2 hours at room temperature.171 Their grafting was confirmed through an increased water contact angle and improved charge transfer kinetics with the [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− redox couple due to attractive electrostatic interaction with the positively charge amine. The amine groups on these APTES layers were also employed to anchor biomolecules via the construction of α-oxo-semicarbazide bonds or a photocleavable o-nitrobenzyl linker, as illustrated in Fig. 8.172,173 Similarly, Boukherroub et al. functionalized a photochemically oxidized diamond surface with perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (PFDS) to prove the formation of OH moieties.37 Functionalization of diamond nanograss arrays with these PFDS molecules resulted in super hydrophobic surfaces.174 More recently, it was demonstrated that the presence of PFDS molecules strongly suppresses the formation of perchlorate ions during the electrochemical oxidation of organic molecules in NaCl and NaClO3 containing electrolyte solutions.91 Functionalization of diamond with aromatic molecules such as N-(3-trimethoxysilylpropyl)pyrrole (TMPP)175 and p-aminophenyltrimethoxysilane was also performed.36 The lower stability of the Si–O bonds allowed patterning of the diamond surface with nanometer resolution through local electro-oxidation using scanning force microscopy.176
 Fig. 8  Multistep functionalization of OH-terminated diamond with biomolecules via a light sensitive o-nitrophenyl linker. Electrochemical impedance spectra show that after irradiation (black) of diamond nanowires functionalized with lysozyme (blue), the Nyquist plot is identical to the one before anchoring of the biomolecules (green). This demonstrates that illumination with light of 365 nm for 20 min is sufficient to completely release all attached molecules [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society].172 
2.2.2.2. Esterification. 
Esterification reactions employing the OH-groups on oxidized diamond surfaces can be performed in multiple ways. The most common method involves a direct reaction of the surface alcohol groups with a DCC or EDC/NHS activated carboxylic acid. As such, diamond has been functionalized with biotin,177 pyrene,178 and benzophenone.179 These benzophenone-decorated surfaces allow for some interesting chemistry. They are stable under standard conditions, but upon irradiation with light of 365 nm, a diradical species is generated. These radicals can then react with sterically available C–H bonds to anchor biomolecules while retaining their activity.180 Diamond has also been functionalized with ionic liquids, which allows for a simple modification of the surface properties and mainly the wettability by exchanging the counter ions.181 Reactions with 4-azidobenzoic acids have also been performed and the resulting azide groups were employed for further functionalization via “click” chemistry, with efficiencies up to 53%.182,183 A different way to functionalize the diamond surface is to perform an esterification reaction with linkers such as adipoyl chloride or succinic anhydride.184,185 The resulting carboxylic acid or acid chloride terminated surface then allows for further reactions. However, for this purpose, the COOH groups which are formed after the oxidation process can also be employed directly.186,187 Finally, also two techniques were developed for the formation of phosphoester bonds. In the first method, the OH-groups are reacted with phosphorus oxychloride to form a diamond–O–POCl2 interface. Next, zirconoyl chloride is added, resulting in the oxidation to phosphoric acids, which immediately form a coordination bond with the present Zr4+ ions. After this zirconation step, carboxylic acid bearing molecules can be anchored to the surface, as shown in Fig. 9.188 In the other method, phosphoester bonds were formed by submerging an OH-terminated diamond sample in a solution of 6-phosphonohexanoic acid. After evaporation of the solvent, the samples were annealed at 180 °C for 20 hours to remove all physisorbed molecules and the procedure was repeated one more time to obtain a good surface coverage.189
 Fig. 9  Functionalization of OH-terminated boron-doped diamond with pyrene molecules via zirconium–phosphate–carbonate chemistry and the cyclic voltammogram of the functionalized surfaces in 0.5 M H2SO4 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society].188 
2.2.2.3. Thermal alkylation. 
The last method that has been applied for functionalization of oxygen-terminated diamond surfaces is thermal alkylation, wherein diamond is heated in a neat solution of octadecene for 3 hours at 200 °C.190 AFM scratching confirmed grafting of the alkene molecules. A layer with a thickness of 1.5 ± 0.4 nm was observed, indicating that the octadecyl chains adopt a tilted orientation. H-terminated diamond was proven to be unaffected under these alkylation conditions. Thus, this technique can be readily employed to develop multifunctional surfaces through a combination of thermal alkylation and photochemical grafting of OH- and H-terminated diamond, respectively.


2.2.3. Functionalization of N-terminated diamond. 
Functionalization of N-terminated diamond surfaces is essentially very similar to that of OH-termination. The primary amine groups can be employed to form amide bonds with molecules bearing activated carboxylic acid moieties. Both flexible and more rigid linkers with various reactive groups have been investigated. For example, bifunctional linkers such succinyl chloride and the activated esters of adipic, terephthalic and trimesic acid have been employed to obtain a layer of COOH functional groups on an initially NH2-terminated surface. Subsequently, different biomolecules such as DNA can be attached via EDC/NHS chemistry.58,59 The advantage of this method over esterification is the improved stability of the interfacial amide bonds toward hydrolysis. Peptide chains and fluorescein dyes were also attached through the formation of an α-oxo-semicarbazide bond or reaction with sulfosuccinimidyl 4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxylate and subsequent Michael-addition.52,62 Moreover, introduction of alkynes through amide bond formation with 4-pentynoic acid allowed the development of catalyst free thiol–yne reactions on diamond. The success of this method was addressed by coupling of perfluorinated and ferrocene functionalized thiol molecules, as this enables straightforward XPS and electrochemical analysis. Afterwards, DNA was also immobilized for the development of amperometric biosensors.191 Finally, NH2-terminated diamond surfaces can also be directly functionalized without using a linker molecule. However, this might result in a lower surface coverage due to sterical factors.68,192

2.3. Surface polymerization
Over the past decades, the discussed functionalization strategies of H-, O- and N-terminated diamond have been employed to covalently attach various (bio)molecules, which resulted in a broad range of applications. However, all these functionalization strategies suffer from the same drawback that only a limited amount of molecules can be attached. Even for diamond electrodes functionalized through electrochemical diazonium grafting, which has the tendency to form multilayers, sterical crowding will prevent a high surface coverage for subsequent coupling reactions. This issue can be overcome by functionalizing the surface with thicker polymer films that bear a multitude of reactive moieties. Typically, functionalization of surfaces with polymers can be performed in two different ways, i.e., via the “grafting from” and “grafting onto” strategy. For diamond, only surface initiated polymerizations and direct surface polymerizations, which are two variations on the “grafting from” approach, have been investigated so far.

2.3.1. Surface initiated polymerization. 
In the case of surface initiated polymerizations, a macro-initiated surface has to be prepared through functionalization of the diamond surface via conventional grafting procedures. This was first reported by Matrab et al. in 2006 for boron-doped ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD) by reaction with 4-(1-bromoethyl)benzenediazonium salts. The bromine groups then serve as an initiator for the atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of vinyl monomers such as styrene and methyl methacrylate in the presence of a Cu catalyst and a multidentate amine ligand.193 After polymerization of the poly(styrene) and poly(methyl methacrylate) polymer brushes, XPS analysis showed that a terminal Br group is still present, which is in line with the ATRP mechanism.194 UNCD was also functionalized with non-fouling poly(ethylene glycol)methacrylate polymer brushes via ATRP on an α-bromoisobutyryl functionalized surface.195 In addition to controlled radical polymerizations, polymer–protein bioconjugate systems were developed via the free radical photopolymerization of hydroxyethyl methacrylate on benzophenone-terminated diamond (Fig. 10). The resulting OH-groups in the side chains of poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate) were employed to construct carbamate bonds with bovine serum albumin (BSA), which demonstrates specific interactions with anti-BSA.169 Other than radical polymerizations, Szunerits and co. have investigated the electropolymerization of O-terminated diamond surfaces that have been functionalized with pyrrole and thiophene units.175,182 Electropolymerization was performed by submerging the functionalized electrodes in an aqueous electrolyte solution and cycling to oxidative potentials. Local polymerization resulting in polypyrrole dots between 1 and 250 μm could be obtained via scanning electrochemical microscopy techniques.
 Fig. 10  (a) Functionalization of BDD with poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) polymer brushes and bovine serum albumin for sensing applications. (b) XPS analysis of the H-terminated (black), benzophenone functionalized (red) and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) grafted (blue) diamond. (c) High resolution XPS analysis of the C1s signal showing the increasing oxygen content with each functionalization step [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2013) Elsevier].169 


2.3.2. Direct surface polymerization. 
Different from surface initiated polymerizations, direct surface polymerization does not require immobilization of an initiator on the diamond surface. The direct approaches that have been employed include electrochemical polymerization, self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization (SIPGP), and plasma polymerization.
The electropolymerization of BDD thin films with a polyaniline/poly(acrylic acid) copolymer by Gu et al. in 2004 presented the very first report of diamond being covalently functionalized with a polymer.196 This specific copolymer was chosen since poly(acrylic acid) contains COOH groups, which can be used for the attachment of (bio)molecules, and polyaniline is a semiconducting material that improves charge transfer between the anchored molecules and the diamond electrode. Attachment of amino-functionalized single stranded DNA probes via EDC/NHS chemistry led to the development of an impedimetric sensor for DNA hybridization events. The detection limit was as low as 20 nM with a good selectivity between complementary and one-base mismatch targets, without detectable nonspecific interactions.197 Another material that has been intensively studied for electropolymerization on diamond is pyrrole. Thick (25 nm) poly(pyrrole) films are readily obtained on both H- and O-terminated diamond from a 0.24 M aqueous pyrrole solution under galvanostatic conditions.198 Grafting of these poly(pyrrole) chains on nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) significantly changes both the photoluminescence properties and transport behavior of free charge carriers in the bulk diamond.199,200 Pyrrole has also been polymerized in the presence of analytes such as theophylline and histamine for the development of molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) on diamond. After polymerization, these analytes can be removed from the polymer matrix and a cavity remains. In this cavity, however, the orientation of the pyrrole units is ideal for rebinding the analyte molecules, which can be used to develop very specific impedimetric sensors.201,202 A different kind of impedimetric sensor was developed by modifying diamond nanowires with a poly(3-carboxypyrrole) film. Depending on the charge that is passed through the diamond electrode, a different morphology is obtained. For a low deposition charge of 2 mC cm−2, polymer formation occurs only in between the nanowires. When a high charge of 23 mC cm−2 is applied, the polymer film becomes too thick and the wire structure is lost. However, only when a moderate deposition charge of 11 mC cm−2 is employed, all nanowires are properly coated. The resulting COOH groups were employed to coordinate with divalent Cu2+ ions, which are further utilized for the binding of histidine-tagged peptides, as shown in Fig. 11. The advantage of this functionalization approach is that the sensor is reusable since the complexes are easily disrupted using competing chelators.203 More recently, a hemin integrated poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) was electropolymerized from a solution containing 1.5 mM hemin and 4.5 mM 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene. The hemin groups are incorporated in the PEDOT structure via interactions between their carboxylic acid groups and the thiophene units, resulting in a “cauliflower” structure, which is related to 3D branched multi-globular films. The Fe atoms in these hemin groups allow for the electrochemical oxidation and detection of peroxynitrite with a sensitivity as low as 10 nM.204
 Fig. 11  Coordination of the carboxylic acid groups from poly(3-carboxypyrrole), which is polymerized on boron-doped nanowires, with Cu2+ at pH values above 6 and subsequent chelation of histidine-tagged peptides [reprinted with permission].203 
Another way to easily prepare polymer brushes on diamond surfaces is the self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization or SIPGP of alkene-functionalized molecules. The first account of this SIPGP on diamond was reported by Steenackers et al. for the development of poly(styrene) brushes by simply submerging diamond substrates in freshly distilled styrene and irradiating the samples for 16 hours with light of 350 nm.205 Remarkably, no surface polymerization occurred on H-terminated diamond, whereas OH-terminated surfaces afforded 110 nm thick poly(styrene) brushes. This large difference is related to the SIPGP mechanism, where a proton is abstracted from the surface after photosensitization of the monomer. Since the bond dissociation energy for O–H bonds is lower than those of C–H bonds, the difference in surface polymerization behavior can be explained. The grafted poly(styrene) layers are extremely stable and vigorous reaction conditions can be employed to perform post-polymerization modifications toward poly(nitrostyrene) and poly(styrene sulfonic acids). To further increase the structural complexity of the grafted polymers, a bifunctional 2-isoprenyl-2-oxazoline monomer was employed. The isoprenyl groups allow for the SIPGP of polymer brushes that contain oxazoline molecules, which hold the potential to be further polymerized via living cationic ring opening polymerization.206 To do so, an excess of methyl triflate was added to prepare a polycationic macroinitiator. Next, either 2-ethyl-2-oxazoline or 2-carbazole-2-oxazoline monomers were added to prepare so-called polymer bottle-brush brushes, as shown in Fig. 12. Functionalization of these bottle-brush brushes is also possible by terminating the cationic ring opening polymerization with a glycine derivative of which the COOH group can be employed to attach biomolecules such as green fluorescent protein.207 In addition to oxazoline and styrene monomers, different acrylates such as methyl methacrylate, tert-butyl methacrylate and N,N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate were grafted on diamond as well via SIPGP. After hydrolysis of the tert-butyl groups from poly(tert-butyl methacrylate) to poly(methacrylate), green fluorescent protein was attached to the carboxylic acid groups.207 The same functionalization strategy was also utilized to covalently attach cytochrome c and aminomethylferrocene.208
 Fig. 12  Fabrication of poly(2-oxazoline) bottle-brush brushes on nanocrystalline diamond thin films. (a) Surface structuring of H-terminated diamond via a combination of photolithography and oxygen plasma treatment. (b) Selective polymerization of a poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline) brush on oxygen-terminated diamond. (c) Conversion of the oxazoline backbone to a polycationic macroinitiator with methyl triflate. (d) Living cationic ring opening polymerization of 2-oxazoline monomers and termination with piperidine [reprinted with permission].206 
A final technique that has been employed for direct polymerization on H-terminated diamond thin films is the microwave pulsed-plasma polymerization of allylamine. These “plasma polymer films” display a strong adherence, good mechanical properties and high thermal resistance. However, the cross-linked poly(allylamine) film does not only contain primary amine groups, but also secondary amines, imines, cyanides and amides.209

3. Photoelectrochemical applications
3.1. (Dye-sensitized) solar cells

3.1.1. Diamond-based active layers. 
Thanks to diamond's extraordinary properties and good (photo)electrochemical behavior, the material has received a considerable amount of attention for its application in photovoltaic devices. Initial experiments on photocurrent generation using either doped or undoped diamond films were performed by irradiating the surface with monochromatic laser light of various intensities.210,211 By employing above bandgap light (>5.5 eV), cathodic photocurrents of a few μA cm−2 were obtained. Irradiation with light that has an energy below the bandgap of diamond still resulted in detectable photocurrents. Since this effect was more pronounced for doped electrodes, the observed currents were related to energy states arising from dopants and the presence of graphitic sp2-carbon.212 The influence of the vacuum annealing temperature on the photopotential of undoped diamond electrodes was studied213 and photovoltaic cells were made that comprised an amorphous carbon (a-C:H) film on top of a heavily doped BDD electrode.214 Since the a-C:H film has a lower bandgap (between 0.8 and 3.0 eV) than diamond, this layer mainly absorbs visible light, whereas diamond absorbs the UV light. By combining both layers, the photocurrents improved, but remained low (ca. 20 nA cm−2). Next to the conversion of UV light to energy, diamond photovoltaic cells with a p-i structure were also investigated for the generation of photocurrents based on the absorption of α-particles and X-rays.215 From the obtained open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC) and the irradiation input, the conversion efficiencies for α-particles and X-rays were calculated to be 4.5 and 8.2%, respectively. This is lower than the conversion efficiencies for UV light (14%). Diamond was also proposed as a potential material for the conversion of high energy ions, generated by nuclear reactions, to energy.216
The previously mentioned applications all employ diamond as the absorber material. However, due to its large bandgap, photocurrents remained limited. Nevertheless, the optical transparency, surface inertness and tunable conductivity upon doping also allow to employ diamond in different other functions for photovoltaic applications. For instance, von Huth et al. constructed an inverted p–n heterojunction solar cell wherein diamond was employed as the p-type window layer and CdTe as n-type absorber.217 Good energy level alignment of the valence band of diamond with the valence band of CdTe provided sufficient driving force for charge separation. J–V measurements for this solar cell revealed a VOC of 230 mV, a JSC of 1.54 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 0.32 when illuminated with AM 1.0 light. The low VOC and JSC were attributed to transmission losses related to the diamond film and high recombination in the CdTe film. In another application, diamond films were deposited on industrial silicon solar cells, which contributed to the stability of the devices under earth- and space-like illumination conditions (AM 1.0 and AM 0, respectively).218 Intrinsic diamond was also investigated as an alternative for Pt counter electrodes in TiO2 n-type DSSCs.219 The device efficiency of the diamond electrode–DSSCs (0.4%) was approximately 10 times lower as compared to that of the standard device, which was explained by the presence of a high resistance in undoped diamond films. In a similar experiment wherein BDD was used to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) as the electrode material in poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC61BM) bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.91% was obtained.220 Again, the obtained values were significantly lower than when applying standard ITO electrodes. In this case, the decreased transparency of BDD and its increased roughness, which hinders electron transitions at the diamond–ZnO interface, were held accountable.
In addition to diamond thin films, nanodiamond has also been employed as p-type semiconductor to develop composite materials with fullerene-C60 derivatives and phthalocyanines.221,222 Adding nanodiamond to the active layer led to improved light absorption and an increase of the interfacial p–n heterojunction area. However, since no efficient pathways are available for charge separation in the donor/acceptor microstructure, strong charge recombination was observed.223 Nanodiamond has also been used as acceptor material in combination with tetrakis(carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP).224 Herein, a nanodiamond–TCPP supramolecular assembly was made through hydrogen bond formation between diamond and the porphyrin chromophore. The resulting nanoclusters were deposited as a thin film on an ITO electrode and photocurrents of 31 μA cm−2 were obtained under 0.1 sun illumination. Finally, blends of nanodiamond and regioregular P3HT were investigated as photoactive material. The obtained photocurrents were about 10 times larger than when TiO2 or ZnO nanoparticles were employed. In addition to the more favorable energy level alignment, a well-structured hexagonal arrangement of the active layer was obtained in the films containing blends with nanodiamond.225,226


3.1.2. Functionalized diamond electrodes. 
When the absorption spectrum of diamond is compared with the photon flux density of solar light, which is the highest between 500 and 1500 nm, it is easy to understand that photovoltaics solely based on diamond as active material will always result in inefficient devices. To extend the absorption to the visible and potentially even the near-infrared (NIR) region of the solar spectrum, diamond can be sensitized with light-harvesting molecules through various functionalization strategies. Because of its p-type conductivity, BDD is a promising photocathode material for the development of DSSCs. The hole diffusion coefficient (2–30 cm2 s−1)227 and optical transparency in the region between 300 and 1000 nm compare favorable to NiO, which is currently being employed as photocathode. In addition to this, the possibility to covalently functionalize diamond – resulting in actual C–C bonds between the dyes and the surface – has been demonstrated to be beneficial for the stability at the interface.
The working principle of a p-type DSSC is illustrated in Fig. 13. Under illumination, an electron is promoted from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the dye to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), leaving behind a positively charged hole in the ground state. For efficient photocurrent generation to occur, these charges need to be transported to the respective electrodes. The electron is first transferred to a redox electrolyte, which can diffuse to the counter electrode, whereas the positively charged hole is injected into the valence band of diamond. To minimize charge recombination, a good energy level alignment is required. Hence, the HOMO of the dye should be below the valence band maximum (VBM) of diamond (ca. −5.5 eV when in contact with an electrolyte solution), while the LUMO of the dye should be located above the redox potential of the employed electrolyte. However, the differences between the energy levels cannot be too large either as this will result in voltage drops. In the following paragraphs, the functionalization of diamond with metal-complex, donor–acceptor and some less conventional chromophores is discussed.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the working mechanism of p-type dye-sensitized solar cells. 
3.1.2.1. Metal-complex chromophores. 
Pioneering work on dye sensitization of p-type semiconductive diamond was performed by Fujishima and co. in 1999.228 In their first report, diamond was not yet covalently functionalized. A BDD working electrode was simply submerged in an electrolyte solution containing 0.1 M tetra-n-butylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) and 0.1 mM tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) (Ru(bpy)32+) (Fig. 14a). Two diamond electrodes with different doping levels, showing acceptor densities of Na = 1017 and 1019 cm−3, were investigated under illumination with 400–600 nm light from a 150 W Xe arc lamp. Larger photocurrents (100 nA cm−2) were obtained for low acceptor density electrodes than for those with a higher density of acceptor states (12 nA cm−2) at an applied bias of −1.0 V. An explanation for this observation was found in the thickness of the space charge layer. In case of the more highly doped diamond, the strongly decreased size of this space charge layer hindered effective charge separation.
 Fig. 14  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with different metal-complex chromophores: (a) Ru(bpy)3 electrolyte solution, (b) covalently functionalized Ru(tpy)2 dye, (c) covalently functionalized N3 dye, (d) grafted Mn–phthalocyanine, which adopts a planar geometry. 
As mentioned above, good energy level alignment for the HOMO and LUMO of the dye with the valence band of diamond and the redox potential of the electrolyte are essential for the conversion of solar light into energy. Himpsel and coworkers studied the position of the energy levels for a bis(terpyridine)ruthenium(II) (Ru(tpy)2) dye that was covalently attached to a diamond electrode.229 First, H-terminated diamond was functionalized with undecanol through photochemical grafting of 1-undecen-11-ol. The alcohol moiety was subsequently converted to an azide, that was employed to attach an alkynylated Ru(tpy)2 complex via CuAAC chemistry (Fig. 14b).116 Information on the position of the HOMO of the Ru dye was obtained through ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), while the position of the LUMO was determined via near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. The HOMO of surface attached Ru(tpy)2 was found to be 0.9 eV below the VBM of diamond. This large energy difference will surely result in a fast hole injection and regeneration of the dye. However, the voltage drop of 0.9 eV would lead to large losses in efficiency. Hence, no photochemical measurements were performed for these electrodes.
A more suitable system consisted of BDD electrodes functionalized with cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) or “N3” dye molecules through a combination of spontaneous diazonium grafting, Suzuki cross-coupling and EDC/NHS chemistry (Fig. 14c).164 Spectroscopic analysis of the diamond electrodes revealed that approximately 3 × 1014 Ru atoms were present per square centimeter, which is a quite dense film. UPS analysis also indicated that there is a more favorable energy level alignment of the N3 dye with diamond. The HOMO of the dye is situated 0.5 eV below the valence band of diamond, which provides sufficient driving force for hole injection without a too large voltage drop. Proof-of-concept photoelectrochemical measurements of these N3-functionalized surfaces were performed by employing diamond as a working electrode in a three-electrode electrochemical setup. The electrodes where submerged in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution that contains 5 mM methyl viologen (MV2+), which serves as a redox couple. Under illumination of the electrodes with a 150 W halogen lamp at an intensity of 1.5 sun (150 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G), photocurrents of ca. 25 nA cm−2 were obtained. During these chronoamperometric measurements, a negative bias of −0.1 V was applied to the system as this was previously demonstrated to positively influence the current generation due to the establishment of a net vectorial electron flow from the photocathode to the counter electrode.230,231
In addition to the commonly employed Ru-based dyes, other metal complexes have been investigated as well for the sensitization of diamond. For instance, manganese phthalocyanines (Mn-Pc) were grafted onto the surface of OH/NH2-terminated boron-doped nanocrystalline diamond (Fig. 14d). This was done through a nucleophilic substitution reaction between the alcohol or amine group at the diamond surface and the metal center of Cl–Mn–Pc.232 Such a functionalization approach will result in a flat geometry of the phthalocyanines on the surface, which impedes high dye coverage. Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed in a phosphate buffed saline (PBS) solution under illumination with a light-emitting diode (LED) operating at 770 nm. In case of the samples where an OH-terminated surface was employed to graft the Mn–Pc dyes, either no or extremely weak photocurrents were observed. In contrast, the NH2-terminated surfaces afforded photocurrents up to 40 nA cm−2. Follow-up work demonstrated that a difference in band bending at the two surfaces is at the origin of the respective photovoltaic behavior. The moderate band bending at NH2-terminated surfaces allows a nearly barrier-free transition from the hole in the HOMO of the dye into diamond. Stronger band bending at OH-terminated surfaces on the other hand results in an energy barrier that is too high to overcome, preventing photocurrent generation.233
3.1.2.2. Donor–acceptor chromophores. 
A second class of dye molecules that has received considerable attention for application in DSSCs and (bulk heterojunction) organic photovoltaics are the push–pull or donor–acceptor chromophores. They typically consist of an electron-rich (donor) and an electron-deficient (acceptor) building block. The large variety of both donor and acceptor units enables easy tuning of the optical and electrochemical properties through molecular design. Other advantages of this family of dyes in comparison with Ru-based metal complexes are the high molar extinction coefficients, lower production costs and a smaller environmental impact.234 The first report on the functionalization of BDD with donor–acceptor chromophores for photovoltaic applications was published in 2008 by K. P. Loh and coworkers.138 Initial surface functionalization was performed via the electrochemical diazonium grafting of in situ diazotized 4-aminophenylboronic acid pinacol ester. Next, the donor–acceptor chromophore 2T-C60 was assembled on the surface in two steps (Fig. 15a). First, the phenylboronic acid group was used to attach the bithiophene donor unit through Suzuki cross-coupling with 5′-iodo-[2,2′-bithiophene]-5-carbaldehyde (I-2T-CHO). Secondly, the acceptor unit was coupled to the carbaldehyde moiety by refluxing the diamond substrate, fullerene-C60 and N-methyglycine in toluene. It should be mentioned here that for donor–acceptor chromophores the organization of the dye on the surface plays an important role. After excitation of the chromophore, the generated charges will have the tendency to separate, where the electron and hole will move toward the electron-deficient (acceptor) and electron-rich (donor) building block, respectively. Hence, to minimize charge recombination, the donor unit should be as close as possible to the diamond electrode to ensure fast hole injection, while the acceptor unit should be in close proximity to the redox electrolyte. As a result, all donor–acceptor chromophores developed for sensitization of p-type photocathodes have a similar “electrode-donor–acceptor” structure. Photoelectrochemical measurements of the 2T-C60-functionalized diamond electrodes were performed in a 0.1 M Na2SO4/5 mM MV2+ electrolyte solution at an applied bias of −0.1 V. These proof-of-concept measurements resulted in stable light photocurrents of ca. 130 nA cm−2. The stability of this system was attributed to the strong carbon–carbon bonds at the diamond–chromophore interface and the robustness of the Suzuki coupling, resulting in a fully conjugated system that facilitates charge transport. In follow-up work by the same authors, photoelectrochemical currents of ca. 3.50 μA cm−2 were measured under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5G) illumination without application of an external bias.166
 Fig. 15  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with different donor–acceptor chromophores through diazonium grafting and subsequent Suzuki cross-coupling of (a). 2T-C60, (b) 2T-(CN)2, and (c) BT-Rho/CPDT-Fur. (d) Diazonium grafting and Sonogashira cross-coupling of DTP-BT. 
Employing a similar functionalization strategy – diazonium grafting and Suzuki cross-coupling – a second iodine-bearing donor–acceptor chromophore, 2-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-ylmethylene)malononitrile (2T-(CN)2), was covalently immobilized onto diamond as well (Fig. 15b). Also for this system, photocurrents of ca. 3.50 μA cm−2 were obtained. Application of a −0.2 V bias lead to an increase of the photocurrent with 80% to approximately 6.3 μA cm−2. The BDD electrodes were also benchmarked against ITO and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) functionalized using similar reactions. Despite a lower surface coverage (0.44 monolayers), the generated photocurrents on diamond electrodes were 2.3 and 3 times larger than those on ITO (0.60 monolayers) and FTO (0.55 monolayers), respectively. Stability tests showed that after continuous illumination for 2 hours (1 sun), the diamond electrodes only suffered a 10% decrease in photocurrent, whereas this was 40% and 36% for ITO and FTO, respectively. These results highlight the advantage of the strong carbon–carbon bonds at the interface, which is unique to diamond photocathode materials.
Diamond surface functionalization with light-harvesting molecules through a combination of diazonium grafting and Suzuki cross-coupling was also investigated in our institute.141 In this work, special attention was devoted to the efficiency of the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction and the surface coverage was optimized by employing a combination of palladium(II) acetate (Pd(OAc)2) and 2-dicyclohexylphosphino-2′,6′-dimethoxybiphenyl (SPhos) as the catalyst system. SPhos is a sterically hindered electron-rich biarylmonodentate ligand that is employed for the coupling of large and bulky molecules.235 The electron-rich nature of the ligand favors oxidative addition, whereas its bulkiness results in a very reactive complex that undergoes rapid reductive elimination, affording increased coupling efficiencies.236 Hence, the Suzuki coupling efficiency of a phenylboronic acid functionalized diamond surface with brominated (5-([2,2′-bithiophen]-5-ylmethylene)-4-oxo-2-thioxothiazolidin-3-yl)acetic acid (BT-Rho) and (3-cyano-4-(2-(4,4-diethyl-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophen-2-yl)vinyl)-5,5-dimethylfuran-2(5H)-ylidene)malononitrile (CPDT-Fur), as shown in (Fig. 15c), was increased to 0.58 and 0.56 monolayers, respectively, an increase of approximately 30% compared to previous reports.166 The inverted functionalization strategy – bromophenyl functionalized diamond and chromophores carrying boronic acid groups – was also pursued, but a lower surface coverage was obtained. This was tentatively explained by the fact that the cross-coupling reaction proceeds slower when the Pd-complex is formed at the diamond interface, as was also observed for the Stille cross-coupling on diamond (vide infra).140 Both the BT-Rho and CPDT-Fur chromophores have high molar extinction coefficients (ε = 43200 M−1 cm−1 at λmax = 473 nm and ε = 73100 M−1 cm−1 at λmax = 582 nm) and a suitable energy level alignment where the HOMO is situated 0.3 and 0.5 eV below the valence band of diamond, respectively (as determined by UPS). Illumination of diamond electrodes sensitized by BT-Rho provided photocurrents of ca. 85 nA cm−2, whereas those sensitized with CPDT-Fur yielded currents up to approximately 140 nA cm−2. The measurements were performed in an 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte solution containing 5 mM methyl viologen under 0.15 sun irradiation (15 mA cm−2) at an applied bias of −0.2 V. Despite the increased surface coverage, the generated photocurrents are still several orders of magnitude lower than the state of the art TiO2 and NiO DSSCs. This can partly be attributed to the morphology of the diamond films. The employed flat diamond electrodes have a roughness factor (Rf) of 4, which is far lower than those of nanostructured TiO2 electrodes (RF = 1000).
In order to improve the photocurrents, a mesoporous diamond electrode was created by spin-coating silica spheres (d = 500 nm) on top of a flat BDD electrode.9 These spheres were subsequently overgrown with BDD (gas feed with a 12000 ppm B/C ratio), resulting in 5–6 layers of diamond coated spheres. Finally, the silica spheres were etched away through an HF treatment, giving rise to a porous diamond electrode. The roughness factor for these diamond foams was calculated to be 114, approximately 30 times higher than for the thin films. Functionalization of these foam electrodes with BT-Rho and CPDT-fur resulted in photocurrents between 500 and 700 nA cm−2 under 0.2 sun illumination at an applied bias of −0.2 V. If we consider the slightly increased light intensity, only a 3-fold increase in the photocurrent was obtained despite the nearly 30-fold increase in Rf value.165 This lower than proportional increase of the current is most likely caused by an incomplete dye coverage due to sp2 carbon impurities and a complex morphology of the diamond foam.
Remarkable results were obtained when the long-term stability of BT-Rho functionalized electrodes was investigated under 1 sun illumination and at an applied bias of −0.3 V. Initially, currents of ca. 2 μA cm−2 were observed, which is more or less proportional with the increased light intensity. However, after 24 hours of constant illumination, the photocurrents increased to ca. 15 μA cm−2 and even values of 22 μA cm−2 were reached for the best performing electrode. This so-called “aging-activation” mechanism was also observed for diamond foams functionalized with CPDT-Fur, albeit with lower photocurrents, as well as on flat diamond electrodes. Analysis of the action spectra (incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) vs. wavelength) for BT-Rho functionalized electrodes showed that the absorption peak at 470 nm gradually decreases over time, whereas the originally weaker absorption peak at 350 nm becomes more intense (Fig. 16). This seems to indicate that degradation of the dye occurs. However, how this then positively influences the photocurrents has yet to be unraveled.
 Fig. 16  Action spectra for a diamond foam electrode sensitized with BT-Rho after chopped illumination at 1 sun and an applied bias of −0.3 V [reprinted with permission].165 
In addition to the Suzuki cross-coupling, other Pd-catalyzed reactions have also been investigated for the construction of uninterrupted conjugated diamond–chromophore systems. The Stille cross-coupling was recently deemed unsuitable since a high amount of Pd and Sn impurities remained on the diamond surface due to the unstable nature of the organotin reagents.140 On the other hand, the Sonogashira cross-coupling, which uses more stable alkyne derivatives, was successfully employed to couple alkynylated 2-(benzo[2,1,3]thiadiazol-4-yl)-4-hexyl-4H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP-BT) onto iodophenyl-functionalized diamond (Fig. 15d).159 By varying the employed catalyst system, base and concentration, the surface coverage, which is expressed by the atomic concentration of sulfur as measured by XPS, was increased from 1.1 to 2.3%. The photoresponse of the corresponding diamond electrodes increased accordingly from ±200 to ±450 nA cm−2 under 0.9 sun illumination at an applied bias of −0.2 V. The possibly negative effects of contamination with Pd were also demonstrated, as the photocurrents for samples that show increased Pd concentrations on the surface were considerably lower. The same alkynylated DTP-BT dye was also attached to an azidophenyl functionalized diamond electrode via CuAAC. By “clicking” the dye to the diamond surface, a slightly higher surface coverage was obtained. However, the generated photocurrents were 3 times lower (140 nA cm−2). The observed difference was ascribed to the employed linker. In comparison with the flat diamond electrodes functionalized via Suzuki cross-coupling, the photocurrents are slightly lower (taking into account the different light intensities). However, it should be mentioned that the molar extinction coefficient of the DTP-BT chromophore (ε = 18600 M−1 cm−1 at λmax = 474 nm) is rather modest and its high HOMO level (−5.21 eV), which is situated slightly above the VBM of diamond, is actually unfavorable for hole injection.
A final donor–acceptor chromophore that was thoroughly investigated by Krysova et al. is 4-(bis-(4-[5-(2,2-dicyanovinyl)-thiophene-2-yl]phenyl)amino)benzoic acid or the “P1” dye. This commercially available chromophore has a high molar extinction coefficient of 58000 M−1 cm−1 at a wavelength of 468 nm and was previously employed for sensitization of p-NiO,237 making it an excellent starting point in the quest for a suitable diamond sensitizer. The HOMO of P1 (−5.81 eV) is also well below the VBM of diamond in contact with an electrolyte solution. In their first study, BDD (gas feed with a 4000 ppm B/C ratio) was first non-covalently functionalized by adsorption of a thin (5 nm) layer of polyethyleneimine (PEI). The amine groups on the polymer were then employed to form a stable amide bond through an acylation reaction with the acid chloride derivative of the P1 dye, P1–Cl (Fig. 17a).238 The advantage of this functionalization strategy is obviously the circumvention of the sometimes complicated multi-step surface reaction sequence or the poor yields when the chromophores are directly attached to the surface. Photoelectrochemical measurements in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution with MV2+ as redox couple under 0.18 sun illumination resulted in photocurrents of ca. 130 nA cm−2 at an applied bias of −0.2 V. This demonstrates that PEI, which has insulating properties, does not prevent hole injection into diamond, which proceeds in a tunneling fashion.
 Fig. 17  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with the P1 dye through reaction with (a) adsorbed PEI or (b) photochemically grafted amine groups. 
In their second study related to the P1 dye, similar BDD electrodes were functionalized in a completely covalent fashion.109 The primary surface functionalization in a near monolayer fashion was done through photochemical grafting of short terminal alkene linkers, bearing a protected amine group. After deprotection, the amine could again be employed to form an amide bond with P1–Cl (Fig. 17b). The employed linkers are N-allyltrifluoroacetamide and N-allyltrifluoromethanesulfonamide. Photoelectrochemical measurements on electrodes where the P1 dye was tethered via a sulfonamide linker demonstrated a poorer performance (200 nA cm−2) than when an acetamide linker was employed (900 nA cm−2; under 1 sun illumination and at an applied bias of −0.3 V). This is somewhat surprising since the strong electron-accepting properties of the sulfonamide linker should facilitate photochemical grafting. However, sulfonamide protecting groups also require harsher deprotection conditions. As a result, a lower amount of P1 dye molecules can eventually be coupled in comparison with the acetamide linker, which is reflected in the photocurrents. The value of 900 nA cm−2 for a fully covalently functionalized electrode also compares favorably to the non-covalent approach previously employed, even after taking into account the difference in irradiation intensity. This highlights the importance of the actual carbon–carbon bond formation at the diamond interface.
The long term stability of these systems was evaluated upon extended illumination with 1 sun. A similar “aging-activation” phenomenon as for the diamond foams was observed. After 5 hours of chopped light illumination, the initial photocurrent increased from 900 nA cm−2 to 1.5 μA cm−2, after which it dropped again to 600 nA cm−2 when the illumination was extended for up to 45 hours. In the most recent study, the fully covalent surface functionalization as demonstrated in Fig. 17b was further improved by employing an upgraded photoelectrochemical setup. All reactions were initially performed on nanodiamond in order to carefully characterize the surface chemistry and then extended to flat diamond electrodes.239 This optimization resulted in a 3-fold increase of the photocurrents (2.5 to 3.2 μA cm−2) when identical illumination (1 sun and a bias of −0.3 V) and doping (4000 ppm B/C) conditions were applied. In addition to improving the surface functionalization, the influence of the doping level was addressed and diamond electrodes with varying doping levels (250, 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 ppm B/C ratio's in the gas phase) were investigated. Surface analysis of the different functionalized electrodes by AFM did not reveal any significant differences in morphology. Additionally, XPS analysis indicated a similar surface coverage for all samples based on the sulfur concentrations. Nevertheless, the generated photocurrents strongly increased with decreasing doping levels and stable (up to 1 hour) currents of 6.6 μA cm−2 were generated for the diamond electrodes with the lowest (250 ppm B/C) doping level (Fig. 18). The only notable difference between the samples was the lower oxygen concentration on the 250 ppm B/C sample. This lead to the hypothesis that oxygen-rich diamond surfaces are potentially undesirable for photocurrent generation in diamond-based DSSCs.
 Fig. 18  Long-term photoelectrochemical measurements for P1-sensitized BDD electrodes with different doping levels under 1 sun illumination at an applied bias of −0.3 V [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) Elsevier].239 
3.1.2.3. Various chromophores. 
Apart from the metal complexes and donor–acceptor molecules, other types of chromophores have been employed as well to sensitize diamond electrodes. One such example is the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon pyrene. A BDD electrode was first treated with singlet oxygen to hydroxylate the surface. The resulting alcohol groups were then employed to anchor pyrenebutyric acid molecules through esterification (Fig. 19a).178 Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed in a 0.1 NaCl solution under illumination with a 351 nm Ar laser at an intensity of 5 mW cm−2 and a bias of −0.2 V. When an Ar-purged electrolyte solution was employed, photocurrents of 150 nA cm−2 were obtained. When the solution was saturated with oxygen, the photocurrents increased to 3.0 μA cm−2, which was explained by the possibility of oxygen to react with excited pyrene molecules.
 Fig. 19  (a) Functionalization of OH-terminated diamond with pyrenebutyric acid. (b) Self-assembly of phosphotungstic acid (PTA) on diamond electrodes functionalized with a pyridinium dye. 
Other work involved the electrostatic self-assembly of phosphotungstic acid (PTA), a type of polyoxometalate, on BDD electrodes functionalized with a bilayer of an in situ diazotized pyridinium dye through electrochemical diazonium grafting (Fig. 19b).142 In the action spectrum of diamond electrodes functionalized with only the pyridinium dye, photocurrents of approximately 600 nA cm−2 were detected at a wavelength of 350 nm and at an applied bias of −0.1 V. After self-assembly of PTA, the photocurrents remarkably decreased to only 50 nA cm−2 under similar operating conditions, indicating that the addition of PTA impedes the flow of electrons. Electrochemical analysis of the energy levels of PTA revealed that its redox potential is slightly below (0.3 eV) that of the redox couple MV2+/MV1+. As a result, the excited electrons from the HOMO of the dye are transferred back to the PTA layer, where recombination is higher since PTA cannot diffuse to the counter electrode.
A limiting factor for high photocurrents on dye-sensitized electrodes, especially for diamond due to its intrinsic inertness, will always be the difficulty to anchor a large amount of chromophores. Lim et al. attempted to circumvent this problem by coating BDD with P3HT, a commonly employed polymer in organic photovoltaics.240 H-Terminated, OH-terminated and O-terminated BDD electrodes were decorated with a thin (20 nm) layer of P3HT through spin-coating and the photovoltaic performance was compared to ITO. The lowest photocurrents – under 1 sun irradiation and no applied bias – were obtained for H-terminated diamond and the ITO reference (both ca. 3 μA cm−2). OH-Terminated diamond electrodes on the other hand generated currents of 9 μA cm−2, whereas the best results were obtained for O-terminated diamond electrodes, with photocurrents of 12 μA cm−2. The observed results can partially be explained by looking at the VOC for the different electrodes, which is defined by the energy difference between the Fermi level of the electrode and the redox potential of methyl viologen (Fig. 20). H-Terminated diamond and ITO both have a VOC of 100 mV, which is much smaller than the values (1.0 and 1.3 V) for OH- and O-terminated diamond, respectively. Additionally, in case of the OH- and O-terminated electrodes, an interfacial dipole with P3HT is present, which facilitates the injection of charge carriers, resulting in a higher photocurrent density. Under prolonged irradiation for 2 hours, no decrease in photocurrent was observed for O-terminated electrodes, which is in sharp contrast with the 52% decrease on ITO after only 20 minutes.
 Fig. 20  Energy level alignment between the HOMO and LUMO levels of P3HT on H-, OH-, and O-terminated diamond and ITO, and the Fermi levels of the respective electrodes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2010) Wiley].240 
The final system discussed here for photovoltaic applications is somewhat unique in the sense that not merely simple dye molecules, but more complex “reaction centers” are employed. These reaction centers are the biological units that enable solar energy harvesting in plants and bacteria. Their highly efficient charge separation mechanism renders them attractive candidates for the development of “bio”-solar cells.241 However, great care is needed when immobilizing these reactions centers on inorganic electrodes to prevent their denaturation. Caterino et al. have successfully functionalized BDD electrodes with reaction centers via two different approaches (Fig. 21).208 In the first strategy, a monolayer of 6-phosphonohexanoic acid was grafted onto OH-terminated diamond. The available carboxylic acid groups were then employed to anchor cytochrome c (cyt-c), an electron mediator that regenerates the reaction center, through an amide bond. Finally, the reaction centers were physisorbed onto the functionalized electrodes. Photoelectrochemical measurements were performed in 10 mM PBS buffer with 10 μM cyt-c and 100 μM of free quinone molecule (Q0), which functions as a redox electrolyte (similar to MV2+ in the previously discussed systems). Upon irradiation with NIR light (870 nm) and at an applied bias of −0.1 V, this system afforded photocurrents of 50 nA cm−2. An improvement to this system was made by replacing cyt-c with aminomethylferrocene (AMF). The more efficient electron transfer between AMF and the diamond electrode resulted in 5 times larger photocurrents (250 nA cm−2) and a faster response to light/dark. A second functionalization strategy involved the polymerization of poly(tert-butyl methyl acrylate) brushes on the diamond surface. Saponification of the methyl ester functional groups allowed attachment of AMF and physisorption of the reaction centers similar to the monolayer approach. Obviously, in this way a larger amount of reaction centers could be attached to the functional surface, which immediately translated itself in much higher photocurrents of 1500 nA cm−2. Despite the increasing distance from the reaction center to the electrode, the light/dark response did not decrease. Long-term stability measurements showed that after 15 hours of illumination, only 30% of the photocurrent was retained. This was attributed to a combination of denaturation and desorption of the reaction centers.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a hybrid system consisting of a reaction center immobilized on a modified diamond electrode. (b) Illustration of the monolayer (top) and polymer brush (bottom) functionalization approach. (c) Energy levels of the different components for the developed “bio”-solar cell [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society].208 
A summary of the performances for the discussed functionalized diamond photoelectrodes is presented in Table 1. Although it is not straightforward to compare the different results because of strong variations in the employed doping concentration, light source, light intensity and even applied bias, a few general conclusions can be drawn: (i) covalent surface functionalization of diamond electrodes results in a better photocurrent generation when compared to a non-covalent approach for the same dye system. (ii) Increasing the surface coverage by employing nanostructured diamond significantly improves the photocurrents. However, this increase is not proportional to the increase in surface area due to the higher sp2-carbon content in these nanostructured electrodes and their complex morphology. (iii) Lowering the boron doping concentration positively influences the photoelectrochemical performance. This can be partially explained by the fact that the structural quality of the diamond film increases with lower doping concentrations due to lower amounts of sp2 carbon. However, it is remarkable that the sample that has a gas feed with a 250 ppm B/C ratio shows the best performance since the resulting boron concentration of 1 × 1020 places it slightly below the threshold to have a metallic conductivity,11 which is assumed to be necessary to obtain good charge carrier mobilities. Hence, further research on the influence of the doping concentration is required.
Table 1 Overview of the photocurrents generated by BDD electrodes functionalized with different chromophores




Entry
Boron conc.
Dye
Electrolyte solution
Light source
Intensity (mW cm−2)
Applied bias (V)
Photocurrent (μA cm−2)




1.1228
1017 cm−3
Ru(bpy)32+
0.1 M TBAP in MeCN
150 W Xe lamp
—
−1.0
0.10


1.2228
1019 cm−3
Ru(bpy)32+
0.1 M TBAP in MeCN
150 W Xe lamp
—
−1.0
0.012


2164
1021 cm−3
N3
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W halogen lamp
150
−0.1
0.025


3232
1021 cm−3
Mn-Pc
PBS buffer
LED light (770 nm)
—
—
0.040


4138
1020 cm−3
2T-C60
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W halogen lamp
—
−0.1
0.13


5.1166
1020 cm−3
2T-C60
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W halogen lamp
100
0.0
3.5


5.2166
1020 cm−3
2T-(CN)2
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W halogen lamp
100
0.0
3.5


5.3166
1020 cm−3
2T-(CN)2
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W halogen lamp
100
−0.2
6.3


6.1141
1021 cm−3
BT-Rho
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
15
−0.2
0.085


6.2141
1021 cm−3
CPDT-Fur
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
15
−0.2
0.14


7165
(7–10) × 1021 cm−3
BT-Rho
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
100
−0.3
22.0


8159
1021 cm−3
DTP-BT
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
90
−0.2
0.45


9238
2.3 × 1021 cm−3
P1
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
18
−0.2
0.14


10109
2.3 × 1021 cm−3
P1
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
100
−0.3
0.90


11.1239
2.3 × 1021 cm−3
P1
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
100
−0.3
2.5


11.2239
1 × 1020 cm−3
P1
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
150 W Xe lamp
100
−0.3
6.6


12178
1020 cm−3
Pyrene
0.1 M NaCl
Ar laser (352 nm)
5
−0.2
0.15


13142
1020 cm−3
Pyridinium dye-PTA
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
300 W Xe lamp
—
−0.1
0.050


14240
1020 cm−3
P3HT
0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+
—
100
0.0
12.0


15208
1020 cm−3
Reaction center
10 mM PBS, 100 μM Q0, 200 μM AMF
Ar laser (870 nm)
—
−0.1
1.5





3.2. Photocatalysis

3.2.1. NH3 synthesis. 
Another specific feature that is strongly related to the surface functionalization of diamond is the possibility to generate solvated electrons.242 This is a direct consequence of the NEA intrinsic to H-terminated diamond electrodes.243,244 The terminal C–H bonds generate a surface dipole that lowers the electron affinity and thus increases the position of the conduction band minimum up to −1.3 eV (compared to the vacuum level).245 As a result, upon illumination of H-terminated diamond surfaces with UV light (hν > 5.5 eV), the electrons that are excited from the valence band to the conduction band can readily be ejected into vacuum or in a liquid in a barrier-free fashion.210,246,247 Through electron ejection into liquids, solvated electrons can be created. These solvated electrons are simple, yet, extremely potent reducing agents that can be employed in chemical and biological reactions.248–250 In 2013, the group of R. J. Hamers was the first to demonstrate diamond's unique property to serve as a direct source of solvated electrons in water.242 The electron emission from diamond into water was detected by directly measuring the resulting solvated electrons employing transient absorption spectroscopy, as illustrated in Fig. 22a. The diamond sample was illuminated using a pulsed UV laser (213 nm) while the change in intensity of a laser beam with a wavelength of 633 nm in parallel with the diamond surface was detected. In Fig. 22b one can clearly see a decrease in intensity of the transmitted 633 nm light due to absorption by solvated electrons, which have a maximum lifetime of approximately 150 ns. By purging the aqueous solution for 90 seconds with N2O, a commonly known electron scavenger, both the intensity and lifetime of the solvated electrons drastically decreased. When performing this experiment under acidic conditions (pH = 2), barely any solvated electrons were detected since they rapidly react with protons to form neutral atomic hydrogen. When metallic electrodes (Niobium) are employed, the lifetime of the generated solvated electrons drastically decreased.251 This observation is easily explained by the presence of a continuum of states in metal surfaces, which provides an easy pathway for recombination. In diamond electrodes on the other hand, the energy of the solvated electrons lies well below the conduction band minimum and no or very limited states are available for recombination. The lifetime of solvated electrons near the diamond surface is therefore controlled by reactions with other chemical species. As mentioned above, these solvated electrons are extremely useful as they can be employed as strong reducing agents (ca. −4.6 V vs. NHE) in chemical reactions that are not accessible through conventional methods.
 Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the transient light absorption measurements. (b) Change in intensity of transmitted 633 nm light after excitation of H-terminated BDD with UV light of 213 nm [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2013) Springer Nature].242 
One such example is the photocatalytic reduction of nitrogen gas (N2) to ammonia (NH3), which is especially difficult since binding both N2 and hydrogen gas (H2) to a solid-state catalyst is not convenient252,253 and high-energy intermediates are involved in the reaction.254 By employing diamond as a source of solvated electrons, the issue of adsorbing N2 is circumvented and high-energy intermediates become more readily accessible.242 The actual capability of diamond to produce ammonia was demonstrated by employing a BDD sample of electrochemical quality in a single-compartment cell filled with N2-saturated water under illumination with above-bandgap light. To maintain charge neutrality, it is required that for every reduction reaction, a corresponding oxidation reaction should occur as well. Since oxidation of water at a diamond electrode is an inefficient process, the reduction of ammonia is limited by the oxidation rate.255 Therefore, the efficiency was further improved by employing a dual-compartment cell, where the oxidation reaction occurs at a platinum electrode in a 0.002 M KI solution. During prolonged illumination of the diamond sample, the ability to reduce nitrogen was retained. However, with increasing illumination time, a gradual decrease in the activity was observed. XPS and valence-band photoemission spectroscopy showed that the initially H-terminated sample is slowly being oxidized and that the surface is gradually converted to one with a PEA, which prevents electron emission (since the conduction band minimum is below the vacuum level) and thus decreases the ammonia yield. The issue of the decreasing photocatalytic activity was resolved by changing from a H-terminated diamond sample to a NH2-terminated one through plasma treatment of the surface.54 When operating at neutral pH values, all primary amino (C–NH2) groups at the diamond surface should be protonated,256 creating a positively charged layer, resulting in a NEA. As-prepared NH2-terminated diamond electrodes showed a similar efficiency in reducing N2 compared to a H-terminated surface. However, after briefly submerging the samples in concentrated HCl, an almost 2-fold increase in efficiency was observed (Fig. 23). This can be attributed to the fact that in case of a monolayer of primary amine groups at neutral pH, only a fraction of the NH2 groups are protonated and more acidic conditions are required to overcome coulombic repulsion between the positively charged groups.257,258 The increased positive charge on the surface after submerging the samples in HCl facilitates electron emission and thus increases the ammonia yields. More importantly, XPS analysis of NH2-terminated samples showed a significant enhancement of the stability under the employed photochemical reaction conditions compared to the H-terminated samples.
 Fig. 23  Ammonia yield for H-terminated, NH2-functionalized and HCl treated NH2-functionalized diamond electrodes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Elsevier].54 
Recently, the photoelectron emission of diamond and its ability to photo-catalyse the synthesis of ammonia has been further improved by developing an electrode where silver nanoparticles of approximately 100 nm are embedded within the diamond film.259 These diamond–Ag–diamond (D–Ag–D) electrodes show a ca. 2.5-fold increase in ammonia yield compared to regular electrodes under illumination with full spectrum light for 5 hours. When a filter is employed that eliminates wavelengths below 225 nm, the D–Ag–D electrodes show a 5-fold increase, while upon eliminating wavelengths below 280 nm, a double efficiency is still obtained compared to the standard H-terminated diamond (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Ammonia yield for diamond–Ag–diamond electrodes using selected wavelengths [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].259 
To get a clear understanding of how Ag can influence the properties of diamond to reduce N2, the different pathways for the photoemission of electrons were investigated (Fig. 25).259 The first pathway (1) involves the direct excitation of an electron from the valence band of diamond to the conduction band upon illumination with above bandgap light. The presence of Ag nanoparticles can enhance the optical scattering and thus increase the optical path length for deep UV photons within the diamond film.260 The second pathway (2) involves internal photoemission, where electrons are directly excited from the valence band of Ag to the conduction band of diamond. Since the valence band of Ag lies slightly above that of diamond, the required wavelengths for this pathway should be below 260 nm. The final pathway (3) is classified as defect associated photoemission. In this case, electrons are excited from states associated to higher energetic sp2-hybridized “graphitic” carbon impurities present in the diamond lattice with wavelengths of ca. 350 nm. Incorporation of Ag nanoparticles could contribute to this pathway if the amount of graphitic carbon is increased by doing so. Based on the experimental results in Fig. 25, it was concluded that the introduction of Ag nanoparticles has the strongest contribution to pathway (2), whereas pathway (3) is relatively unimportant.
 Fig. 25  Different pathways for the excitation of electrons to the conduction band of diamond and subsequent steps leading to the reduction of N2 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].259 
A combination of experimental and theoretical studies has revealed that the reduction of N2 to ammonia in an aqueous solution proceeds via a single mechanism.251,261,262 First, the solvated electrons react with protons to form atomic hydrogen (e−(aq.) + H+ → H˙). Next, the atomic hydrogen will react with N2 to form N2H, which will again react with atomic hydrogen to produce diazene (N2H2). Diazene is a stable molecule that can be further reduced to hydrazine (N2H4) and ammonia (NH3).263,264


3.2.2. CO2 reduction. 
Apart from the photoreduction of nitrogen gas to ammonia, the photo- and electrochemical properties of diamond also make it a very suitable candidate for the reduction of carbon dioxide. Nowadays, decreasing the amount of carbon dioxide in the Earth atmosphere is receiving a huge amount of attention, also at a political level, and large investments for the development of novel technologies are being made because of the impeding climate crisis. However, research on the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 in aqueous conditions has already been performed since the 1970's.265 Depending on the employed electrode material, carbon dioxide can be transformed into a variety of valuable chemical compounds, such as methanol, formic acid, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide and methane.266,267 Initial reports on the application of diamond electrodes for CO2 reduction solely rely on its electrochemical properties, i.e., a broad potential window. In these cases, highly doped diamond (B conc. 1021 cm−3) is either functionalized with Co-porphyrins to facilitate the reduction of CO2,117 or the boron/nitrogen-doped diamond is employed as such, while applying a reductive potential using cyclic voltammetry.268,269 Only in 2014, the photochemical properties of diamond were harnessed for the reduction of CO2 to carbon monoxide.270 BDD electrodes of electrochemical grade in an electrolyte solution with a Pt counter electrode (dual-compartment cell) were pressurized to 2.5 MPa with CO2. Upon illumination with UV light, CO2 was reduced to CO with very high selectivity (more than 95%) over the reduction of H+ to form hydrogen gas. Similar to the reduction of N2, the mechanism is expected to proceed through (1) the excitation of an electron from the valence band of diamond to its conduction band and (2) subsequent emission into the aqueous solution, (3) generating solvated electrons (Fig. 26). These solvated electrons have strong reductive properties and can react in a one-electron reaction with either H+ or CO2 to form H˙ or CO2˙−. Due to the high CO2 concentration (2.5 MPa) and lower energy of the CO2 anion radical, the latter reaction is favored. CO2˙− then further photo-dissociates into CO.
 Fig. 26  Energy diagram of H-terminated diamond and relevant redox potentials regarding the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2014) Wiley].270 
The same experiment was also performed by dispersing detonation nanodiamond (ca. 5 nm diameter) in water. In this setup, a single-compartment cell had to be employed, so both the reduction and oxidation reaction occur at the diamond electrode.251 However, employing isotopically labeled 13CO2 revealed that the detected 12CO did not originate from the photocatalytic reduction of 13CO2, but from oxidation of carbon from the diamond surface itself, which is favored over the oxidation of water.271 To avoid this photo-induced etching of diamond, two specific improvements to the system were made.272 First, the detonation nanodiamond, which was determined to have a large amount of reactive surface defects and possible poor H-termination, was replaced with nanoparticles made from natural diamond (ca. 125 nm diameter). These nanoparticles have a better crystal quality, which diminishes oxidation of the surface, and superior H-termination, which favors electron emission.273 Next, an electrolyte solution containing Na2SO4 and Na2SO3 was employed as a sacrificial donor. The SO32− anion is an efficient hole scavenger and its oxidation provides an alternative, more suitable pathway for maintaining charge neutrality in the system, decreasing the oxidation of the diamond surface itself. These combined efforts resulted in the successful reduction of CO2 to CO employing diamond nanoparticles. However, the required high operating pressure of 2.5 MPa to favor CO2 reduction over H2 gas production is inconvenient for actual applications.
Roy et al. studied an alternative approach to employ diamond electrodes for the reduction of CO2 at atmospheric pressure and temperature by electrodepositing Ag nanoparticles on top of O-terminated lightly boron-doped diamond (BDDL) electrodes.274 By cycling to a reductive potential of −1.5 V vs. RHE, a clear reduction peak could be observed when the BDDL–Ag electrode was employed in a CO2 saturated aqueous solution with and without illumination (Fig. 27a). While applying a constant potential of −1.1 V vs. RHE, the dark experiment showed a rapid decrease of the photocurrent from −0.3 to −0.2 mA cm−2. The experiment where the samples were illuminated with UV light (222 nm) showed an increase in activity, which stabilized after approximately 60 minutes, as shown in Fig. 27b. The observed increase in photocurrent density was attributed to the photo-excitation and activation of the Ag-covered BDDL electrodes. Analysis of the reduction products revealed a faradaic efficiency of 72.5% for CO and 9.08% for H2 for a Ag-covered diamond electrode electrodeposited from a 0.1 M AgNO3 solution. The high product selectivity for CO was obtained due to the presence of the Ag nanoparticles. A decrease of the AgNO3 concentration resulted in lower faradaic efficiencies for CO. Employing highly boron-doped diamond (BDDH) or glassy carbon electrodes also had a negative influence on the selective reduction to CO. The performance of these Ag-covered BDDL electrodes was further improved via a pretreatment of the diamond surface.275 This was done by cycling the BDD electrode between a potential of 0 and −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 250 cycles in a sulfuric acid solution, resulting in H-termination of the surface. The resulting NEA lead to a positive shift of the current for the reduction of CO2 with approximately 0.4 V and the faradaic efficiency for CO further increased to 77.6%.
 Fig. 27  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of BDDL showing the reduction of CO2 in dark and under illumination. (b) Chronoamperometric current–time curves of the photocurrent generated in dark and under illumination at −1.1 V vs. RHE for 180 minutes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Springer Nature].274 


3.2.3. Water splitting. 
Amongst the different photocatalytic applications, the conversion of water to O2 and H2 gas might be the one with the highest environmental impact as this allows the conversion of solar energy into chemical fuel. In these photoelectrochemical cells, sunlight is absorbed by a semiconductor and the resulting electron–hole pairs can catalyze the splitting of water into its components. Depending on the employed photocatalyst, water is either oxidized or reduced in the respective oxygen or hydrogen evolution reaction at the working electrode. Generally, a broad absorption window, good charge separation and long term stability of the electrode material are required to obtain efficient electrodes for solar water splitting.276 Although diamond is not an ideal candidate as a photocatalyst for water splitting due to its wide bandgap, H-terminated detonation nanodiamond has been employed for the photocatalytic reduction of water.277 Nevertheless, the true potential of diamond for water splitting lies in its application as a protective coating due to its high corrosion resistance and transparency or as electrode material due to its good p-type conductivity upon doping with boron. Since diamond will only function as a backing electrode or coating, a suitable semiconductor should be employed to provide sufficient energy for the electrolysis of water.278
Silicon-based photoelectrodes absorb a significant fraction of the solar light and they have been proven to be excellent materials for the development of solar cells. However, application of silicon in water splitting is limited due to its high sensitivity for corrosion and dissolution of the electrode material under continuous oxidizing conditions in a photoelectrochemical cell. By employing conductive BDD as a coating, Ashcheulov et al. were able to protect the underlying silicon photoelectrode during the oxygen evolution reaction (Fig. 28).279 However, since diamond has a wide electrochemical potential window and thus poor catalytic properties, the oxygen evolution reaction has a large onset potential of 1.9 V vs. RHE in dark conditions, whereas the water oxidation potential is 1.23 V vs. RHE. The low catalytic activity and large overpotential for the oxygen evolution reaction was addressed by electrodepositing cobalt phosphate, an oxygen evolution catalyst, onto the diamond coating.280 This resulted in a significant reduction of the water oxidation onset potential to 1.6 V vs. RHE. Under 1 sun illumination, the photovoltaic component of the photoelectrode provided a photovoltage of approximately 0.5 V, which promotes charge separation of the generated holes and electrons. Upon injection of the holes into the valence band of diamond, they can participate in the oxidation of water, which further decreased the onset potential to ∼1.1 V vs. RHE. In addition to employing diamond coated Si photovoltaics for the oxygen evolution reaction, Halima et al. investigated their performance for the hydrogen evolution reaction under acidic conditions, which improved the stability of the electrode. However, it should be mentioned that in this study all experiments were performed without exposure to light.281
 Fig. 28  Schematic representation of a Si-based photoelectrochemical cell coated with a thin film of boron-doped diamond. The Si solar cell is responsible for light absorption and charge separation, while the oxygen evolution reactions occurs at the cobalt phosphate functionalized diamond electrode/electrolyte interface and the hydrogen evolution reactions takes place at the coiled metal electrode [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society].280 
Diamond can also serve as backing electrode material since it demonstrated superior performances in a benchmarking study against different electrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting.282 Geiger et al. have constructed p–n hetero-structured electrodes to enhance the oxygen evolution reaction by sputtering a uniform TiO2 thin film on BDD.283 Optimization of the electrodes was performed by varying the sputtering time. The best electrode showed low leakage currents and a remarkably high rectifying ratio of 63773 at an applied potential of 5.0 V. For photoelectrochemical water splitting under 1 sun illumination, the generated currents for TiO2/diamond and the TiO2 reference electrode were similar when the voltage was increased from −0.1 to +0.43 V vs. SHE. However, in the potential region above 0.43 V, the TiO2/diamond electrode showed superior behavior, with an increase of 60% compared to the TiO2 reference. The improved quality of the hetero-structured electrodes is ascribed to the presence of a high quality p–n junction that promotes charge separation.
In addition to covering diamond with TiO2, which is an efficient photocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction, BDD electrodes have also been functionalized with NiO–Cu2O particles to catalyze the hydrogen evolution reaction.284 The bandgap and energy levels of Cu2O make it an interesting material for the photoelectrochemical reduction of water. However, the short exciton diffusion length, low hole mobilities and self-photo-corrosion of Cu2O limit its practical application. By employing NiO as a co-catalyst, self-photo-corrosion of Cu2O can be overcome. Hence, after electrodepositing cubic Cu2O particles on BDD, the electrodes were functionalized with NiO particles through repetitive dip-coating steps. Photoelectrochemical performances of the photocatalysts were evaluated under 1 sun illumination. When no external potential was applied one can see from Table 2 that the photocurrent increased with an increasing amount of coating steps up to 15 “layers”. The improved activity of the photoelectrochemical cell is a result of the suitable energy level alignment of the NiO-coated Cu2O particles, which facilitates transfer of the generated charges to the interface. Further increasing the amount of NiO on the electrode to 20 “layers” resulted in a decrease of the photocurrent since a too thick layer of NiO hinders photoabsorption by Cu2O. Also, it should be mentioned that after 6 coatings steps, the photoconversion efficiency dropped due to an increased dark current.
Table 2 Photoelectrochemical response of various BDD–Cu2O–NiO electrodes under 1 sun illumination




Electrode
NiO coatings
Photocurrent (mA cm−2)
Photoconversion efficiency (%)




BDD–Cu2O
0
0.12
0.06


BDD–Cu2O–NiO
3
0.33
0.26


BDD–Cu2O–NiO
6
0.33
0.28


BDD–Cu2O–NiO
10
0.39
0.11


BDD–Cu2O–NiO
15
0.42
0.15


BDD–Cu2O–NiO
20
0.25
0.05




Apart from thin film heterostructures, composite materials were made by embedding nanodiamond in Cu2O nanocrystals. The electron-donating behavior of nanodiamond and a suitable energy level alignment promote electron injection from diamond into the Cu2O matrix. As a result, these nanocomposites demonstrated an improved charge separation and thus higher hydrogen evolution reaction rates compared to Cu2O only.285 The hydrogen evolution for nanodiamond–Cu2O nanocrystals were studied under 1 sun illumination. Upon increasing the nanodiamond loading, the H2 production increased accordingly, reaching a maximum at 3 wt%. Further increase of the nanodiamond loading again resulted in a decrease of the H2 yield. Similar results were observed for nanodiamond–graphitic carbon nitride (ND@g-C3N4) heterostructures. Here, a maximum yield for the hydrogen evolution reaction was observed for a nanodiamond content of 12 wt%.286 In both cases, addition of nanodiamond improved the light absorption due to efficient light scattering at the nanodiamond/g-C3N4 or Cu2O interface. The photoluminescence intensity of the composites was also significantly lower, which indicates a suppression of charge recombination. Hence, the addition of nanodiamond allows the generation of more charge carriers, while improving their separation at the same time. However, employing an excessive amount of nanodiamond might hinder the contacts between the photocatalyst and the reagent, water, resulting in a lower hydrogen gas yield.

4. Conclusions and future perspectives
In order to transform diamond from a simply beautiful object to a relevant photoelectrochemical material, understanding and controlling the surface chemistry plays a crucial role. Diamond is generally considered to be a very inert material that is difficult to functionalize. However, after three decades of research on its surface chemistry, a multitude of innovative methods have been developed to alter the diamond surface composition and to attach functional (macro)molecules. The hydrogen termination on as-grown CVD diamond is readily exchanged for oxygen, nitrogen and even halogen atoms, drastically altering the surface properties. Depending on the treatment protocol or the applied potential during electrochemical oxidation, the ratio of alcohol, carbonyl and ether species can be controlled.32,48 In most cases, OH-termination is desired as this enables straightforward further functionalization via silanization, esterification or thermal alkylation. Similarly, for nitrogen-terminated surfaces a high amount of primary amine groups is targeted toward subsequent amidation reactions, which can be achieved by controlled plasma treatments.70 On the other hand, H-terminated surfaces have also been employed to covalently attach small (linker) molecules via stable and robust carbon–carbon bonds. This, however, remains limited to two well-known approaches, i.e., diazonium and photochemical grafting. Nevertheless, significant improvements have been achieved over the years for both grafting procedures. A major drawback of electrochemical diazonium grafting, the lack of control over the thickness of the grafted layer and multilayer formation, has been resolved. By either controlling the charge in a constant potential method, employing bulky diazonium salts, adding radical scavengers or using the spontaneous grafting method, thin monolayers can be obtained. Very recently, an alternative for the photochemical grafting of alkenes has also been proposed, that generates surface radicals, which can react with the terminal alkene functionalities.287 Accordingly, a broader range of molecules can be grafted to the surface since the prerequisite that they should not absorb light at 254 nm, as employed in photochemical grafting, no longer holds. Functionalization of diamond with molecules bearing reactive moieties via diazonium or photochemical grafting enabled the exploration of numerous chemical reactions on diamond. In this way, complex light-harvesting small molecule chromophores have been immobilized on the diamond surface toward the development of p-type dye-sensitized solar cells. Very important here is a good energy level alignment between the dye molecules and both the valence band of diamond and the reduction potential of the redox electrolyte. Hence, the surface has been decorated with various metal-complex, donor–acceptor and less conventional dyes such as polyoxometalates and biological reaction centers. Combined efforts on optimization of the employed chromophores and diamond surface chemistry resulted in the improvement of the photocurrent from a few nA to 6.5 μA cm−2 for boron-doped nanocrystalline thin films and even 22 μA cm−2 for boron-doped diamond foams.165,239 Additionally, the photoelectrochemical properties of diamond have been harnessed for the creation of solvated electrons, which are extremely potent reduction reagents that allow for the synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and the reduction of carbon dioxide. Again, the surface functionalization plays a crucial role. Decorating diamond with protonated primary amines for instance increases the ammonia yield by a 3-fold.54 Similarly, embedding Ag nanoparticles in the diamond film or putting them on top of the surface results in a more efficient reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide.259,275
It should be mentioned here that in most cases the diamond surface functionalization has been limited to a single functional group, despite the existence of patterning methods and the availability of orthogonal functionalization strategies. For example by applying both photochemical grafting and thermal alkylation procedures on a partially oxidized surface, two different functionalities can readily be introduced. Even on a completely H-terminated surface, mixed layers can be prepared via diazonium grafting of different diazonium salts.144 This can afford significant advances in the solar cell field since dyes with a complementary absorption spectra can be attached. On the other hand, also biosensors can be developed that screen for multiple target molecules. Therefore, we believe that continued efforts in exploring and optimizing the diamond surface chemistry, with special emphasis on multifunctionalized surfaces, will pave the road to various applications of functional diamond substrates.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank UHasselt and the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO Vlaanderen) for financial support. J. Raymakers thanks the FWO for his PhD fellowship. K. Haenen acknowledges the Methusalem “NANO” network.
References
M. Kamo, Y. Sato, S. Matsumoto and N. Setaka, J. Cryst. Growth, 1983, 62, 642–644 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsumoto, Y. Sato, M. Tsutsumi and N. Setaka, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 3106–3112 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Bundy, H. T. Hall, H. M. Strong and R. H. Wentorf, Nature, 1955, 176, 51–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsumoto, M. Hino and T. Kobayashi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 737–739 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. May, M. N. R. Ashfold and Y. A. Mankelevich, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 053115 CrossRef .
E. L. H. Thomas, G. W. Nelson, S. Mandal, J. S. Foord and O. A. Williams, Carbon, 2014, 68, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Wu and J. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14326–14351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Varga, S. Stehlik, O. Kaman, T. Izak, M. Domonkos, D. S. Lee and A. Kromka, Carbon, 2017, 119, 124–132 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, J. Hees, R. Hoffmann, M. Wolfer, N. Yang, S. Yamasaki and C. E. Nebel, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 33, 88–91 CrossRef CAS .
V. Petrák, Z. Vlčková-Živcová, H. Krýsová, O. Frank, A. Zukal, L. Klimša, J. Kopeček, A. Taylor, L. Kavan and V. Mortet, Carbon, 2017, 114, 457–464 CrossRef .
J. V. Macpherson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2935–2949 RSC .
N. Yang, S. Yu, J. V. Macpherson, Y. Einaga, H. Zhao, G. Zhao, G. M. Swain and X. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 157–204 RSC .
O. Loto, M. Florentin, C. Masante, N. Donato, M. L. Hicks, A. C. Pakpour-Tabrizi, R. B. Jackman, V. Zuerbig, P. Godignon, D. Eon, J. Pernot, F. Udrea and E. Gheeraert, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2018, 65, 3361–3364 CAS .
Y.-J. Lu, C.-N. Lin and C.-X. Shan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800359 CrossRef .
P. Siyushev, M. Nesladek, E. Bourgeois, M. Gulka, J. Hruby, T. Yamamoto, M. Trupke, T. Teraji, J. Isoya and F. Jelezko, Science, 2019, 363, 728–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits, C. E. Nebel and R. J. Hamers, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 517–524 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1532–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 12, 1205–1218 CrossRef .

          A. Krueger, in Nanodiamonds, ed. J.-C. Arnault, Elsevier,  2017, ch. 8, pp. 183–242 Search PubMed .
F. Maier, M. Riedel, B. Mantel, J. Ristein and L. Ley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 3472–3475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Salazar-Banda, L. S. Andrade, P. A. P. Nascente, P. S. Pizani, R. C. Rocha and L. A. Avaca, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4612–4619 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vanhove, J. de Sanoit, J. C. Arnault, S. Saada, C. Mer, P. Mailley, P. Bergonzo and M. Nesladek, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 2931–2939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, B. Wang, L. Dai and W. Hu, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2744–2748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezek and C. E. Nebel, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 1374–1377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kasahara, K. Natsui, T. Watanabe, Y. Yokota, Y. Kim, S. Iizuka, Y. Tateyama and Y. Einaga, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 11341–11347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Chong, K. P. Loh, S. R. Vedula, C. T. Lim, H. Sternschulte, D. Steinmuller, F. S. Sheu and Y. L. Zhong, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5615–5621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ando, K. Yamamoto, M. Ishii, M. Kamo and Y. Sato, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1993, 89, 3635–3640 RSC .
P. John, N. Polwart, C. E. Troupe and J. I. Wilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6600–6601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Jiang, H. Yu, X. Li, S. H. Lu and X. J. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Pehrsson and T. W. Mercer, Surf. Sci., 2000, 460, 49–66 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ando, M. Nishitani-Gamo, R. E. Rawles, K. Yamamoto, M. Kamo and Y. Sato, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1996, 5, 1136–1142 CrossRef CAS .
F. Klauser, S. Ghodbane, R. Boukherroub, S. Szunerits, D. Steinmüller-Nethl, E. Bertel and N. Memmel, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 474–478 CrossRef CAS .
J. Navas, D. Araujo, J. C. Piner, A. Sanchez-Coronilla, E. Blanco, P. Villar, R. Alcantara, J. Montserrat, M. Florentin, D. Eon and J. Pernot, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 408–418 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yagi, H. Notsu, T. Kondo, D. A. Tryk and A. Fujishima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 473, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. O'Donnell, M. T. Edmonds, J. Ristein, A. Tadich, L. Thomsen, Q.-H. Wu, C. I. Pakes and L. Ley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5608–5614 CrossRef .
R. Ohta, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Sugimura and O. Takai, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2004, 22, 2005–2009 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boukherroub, X. Wallart, S. Szunerits, B. Marcus, P. Bouvier and M. Mermoux, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 937–940 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kanazawa, K. S. Song, T. Sakai, Y. Nakamura, H. Umezawa, M. Tachiki and H. Kawarada, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2003, 12, 618–622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riedel, J. Ristein and L. Ley, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2004, 13, 746–750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Notsu, I. Yagi, T. Tatsuma, D. A. Tryk and A. Fujishima, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 522–524 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Girard, E. de la Rochefoucauld, D. Ballutaud, A. Etcheberry and N. Simon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, F34–F37 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Thostenson, E. Ngaboyamahina, K. L. Sellgren, B. T. Hawkins, J. R. Piascik, E. J. D. Klem, C. B. Parker, M. A. Deshusses, B. R. Stoner and J. T. Glass, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16610–16619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Pei, S. H. Cheng, Y. B. Ma, D. F. Wu, J. S. Liu, Q. L. Wang, Y. Z. Yang and H. D. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 346, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghodbane, T. Haensel, Y. Coffinier, S. Szunerits, D. Steinmuller-Nethl, R. Boukherroub, S. I. Ahmed and J. A. Schaefer, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18798–18805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Simon, C. Decorse-Pascanut, M. Bouttemy, A. Etcheberry, M. S. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5818–5824 CrossRef CAS .
H. Notsu, I. Yagi, T. Tatsuma, D. A. Tryk and A. Fujishima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 492, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, N. Simon, G. Charrier, M. Bouttemy, A. Etcheberry, M. S. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryl, L. Burczyk, R. Bogdanowicz, M. Sobaszek and K. Darowicki, Carbon, 2016, 96, 1093–1105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogose, S. Kasahara, N. Ikemiya, N. Hoshi, Y. Einaga and M. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27456–27461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryl, L. Burczyk, A. Zielinski, M. Ficek, A. Franczak, R. Bogdanowicz and K. Darowicki, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 1018–1027 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuga, J. H. Yang, H. Takahashi, K. Hirama, T. Iwasaki and H. Kawarada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13251–13263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Coffinier, S. Szunerits, C. Jama, R. Desmet, O. Melnyk, B. Marcus, L. Gengembre, E. Payen, D. Delabouglise and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4494–4497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Chou, A. Retzker and A. Gali, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, J. A. Bandy, S. Li and R. J. Hamers, Surf. Sci., 2016, 650, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stacey, K. M. O'Donnell, J. P. Chou, A. Schenk, A. Tadich, N. Dontschuk, J. Cervenka, C. Pakes, A. Gali, A. Hoffman and S. Prawer, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500079 CrossRef .
S. Kawai, H. Yamano, T. Sonoda, K. i. Kato, J. J. Buendia, T. Kageura, R. Fukuda, T. Okada, T. Tanii, T. Higuchi, M. Haruyama, K. Yamada, S. Onoda, T. Ohshima, W. Kada, O. Hanaizumi, A. Stacey, T. Teraji, S. Kono, J. Isoya and H. Kawarada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3594–3604 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Miller and D. W. Brown, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5809–5817 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, M. Tanga, O. Takai and H. Okamura, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2003, 12, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, K. S. Song, G. J. Zhang, M. Degawa, Y. Sasaki, I. Ohdomari and H. Kawarada, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 11245–11250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Zhang, K. S. Song, Y. Nakamura, T. Ueno, T. Funatsu, I. Ohdomari and H. Kawarada, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3728–3734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szunerits, C. Jarna, Y. Coffinier, B. Marcus, D. Delabouglise and R. Boukherroub, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1185–1190 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koch, W. Kulisch, C. Popov, R. Merz, B. Merz and J. P. Reithmaier, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2011, 20, 254–258 CrossRef CAS .
A. Artemenko, H. Kozak, H. Biederman, A. Choukourov and A. Kromka, Plasma Processes Polym., 2015, 12, 336–346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chandran, M. Shasha, S. Michaelson and A. Hoffman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 111602 CrossRef .
N. Simon, C. Decorse-Pascanut, A. M. Gonçalves, D. Ballutaud, G. Charrier and A. Etcheberry, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 890–894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Charrier, D. Aureau, A. M. Goncalves, G. Collet, M. Bouttemy, A. Etcheberry and N. Simon, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2013, 32, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
N. Simon, G. Charrier, A. M. Goncalves, D. Aureau, P. Gautier, M. Ndjeri and A. Etcheberry, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 42, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
E. Suaebah, Y. Seshimo, M. Shibata, S. Kono, M. Hasegawa and H. Kawarada, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 044506 CrossRef .
J. J. Wei, J. L. Liu, L. X. Chen, L. F. Hei, F. X. Lv and C. M. Li, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2015, 54, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kuntumalla, M. Attrash, F. Li and A. Hoffman, Surf. Sci., 2019, 679, 37–49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torrengo, A. Miotello, G. Speranza, L. Minati, I. Bernagozzi, M. Ferrari, A. Chiasera, M. Dipalo and E. Kohn, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2010, 71, 45–49 CAS .
T. Nakamura, T. Ohana, M. Hasegawa and Y. Koga, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2007, 46, 348–350 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, T. Ohana, Y. Hagiwara and T. Tsubota, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 730–734 RSC .
T. Nakamura and T. Ohana, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 085201 CrossRef .
R. Sappok and H. P. Boehm, Carbon, 1968, 6, 283–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferro and A. De Battisti, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 7040–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mayrhofer, G. Moras, N. Mulakaluri, S. Rajagopalan, P. A. Stevens and M. Moseler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4018–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Freedman and C. D. Stinespring, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57, 1194–1196 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cadman, J. D. Scott and J. M. Thomas, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1975, 654–655 RSC .
W. Kulisch, A. Voss, D. Merker, J. P. Reithmaier, R. Merz, M. Kopnarski and C. Popov, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2016, 302, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Martin, A. Argoita, J. C. Angus and L. Uziel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, H. Ito, K. Kusakabe, K. Ohkawa, Y. Einaga, A. Fujishima and T. Kawai, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3841–3848 CrossRef CAS .
A. Denisenko, A. Romanyuk, C. Pietzka, J. Scharpf and E. Kohn, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 423–427 CrossRef CAS .
C. Popov, H. Vasilchina, W. Kulisch, F. Danneil, M. Stuber, S. Ulrich, A. Welle and J. P. Reithmaier, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 895–898 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Tiwari, J. P. Goss, P. R. Briddon, N. G. Wright, A. B. Horsfall, R. Jones, H. Pinto and M. J. Rayson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245305 CrossRef .
V. S. Smentkowski and J. T. Yates, Science, 1996, 271, 193–195 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Smentkowski, J. T. Yates, X. Chen and W. A. Goddard, Surf. Sci., 1997, 370, 209–231 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Kim, R. C. Mowrey, J. E. Butler and J. N. Russell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9290–9296 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, M. Suzuki, M. Ishihara, T. Ohana, A. Tanaka and Y. Koga, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5846–5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakamura, M. Ishihara, T. Ohana and Y. Koga, Chem. Commun., 2003, 900–901 RSC .
P. Gayen and B. P. Chaplin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27638–27648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ikeda, T. Saito, K. Kusakabe, S. Morooka, H. Maeda, Y. Taniguchi and Y. Fujiwara, Diamond Relat. Mater., 1998, 7, 830–834 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saito, Y. Ikeda, S. Egawa, K. Kusakabe, S. Morooka, H. Maeda, Y. Taniguchi and Y. Fujiwara, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 929–932 RSC .
T. Tsubota, K. Urabe, S. Egawa, H. Takagi, K. Kusakabe, S. Morooka and H. Maeda, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2000, 9, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. R. Das, V. G. Praig, F. Lenormand, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6294–6296 RSC .
B. Ohtani, Y. H. Kim, T. Yano, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima and K. Uosaki, Chem. Lett., 1998, 953–954 CrossRef CAS .
K. Larsson and S. Lunell, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
T. Strother, T. Knickerbocker, J. N. Russell, J. E. Butler, L. M. Smith and R. J. Hamers, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 968–971 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Yang, H. Uetsuka, H. Watanabe, T. Nakamura and C. E. Nebel, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2852–2859 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, H. Uetsuka, H. Watanabe, T. Nakamura and C. E. Nebel, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2008, 17, 892–895 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Nichols, K. M. Metz, K. Y. Tse, J. E. Butler, J. N. Russell and R. J. Hamers, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16535–16543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhong, K. F. Chong, P. W. May, Z.-K. Chen and K. P. Loh, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5824–5830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, O. Auciello, J. E. Butler, W. Cai, J. A. Carlisle, J. E. Gerbi, D. M. Gruen, T. Knickerbocker, T. L. Lasseter, J. N. Russell, L. M. Smith and R. J. Hamers, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 253–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Nebel, D. Shin, D. Takeuchi, T. Yamamoto, H. Watanabe and T. Nakamura, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezek, D. Shin, T. Nakamura and C. E. Nebel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3884–3885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Tian, T. N. Rao, Y. Einaga and J. F. Zhi, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 939–945 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, Y. Niwano, A. Tamura, T. A. Ivandini, Y. Einaga, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and T. Kawai, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1556–1564 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sund, C. P. Causey, S. D. Wolter, C. B. Parker, B. R. Stoner, E. J. Toone and J. T. Glass, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 301, 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krysova, J. Barton, V. Petrak, R. Jurok, M. Kuchar, P. Cigler and L. Kavan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16444–16450 RSC .
Y. Zhou, J. Zhi, Y. Zou, W. Zhang and S. T. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 4141–4146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kondo, Y. Niwano, A. Tamura, J. Imai, K. Honda, Y. Einaga, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and T. Kawai, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2312–2319 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Drew, A. R. Konicek, P. Jaroenapibal, R. W. Carpick and Y. Yamakoshi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12682–12688 RSC .
C. Wang, N. Huang, H. Zhuang, B. Yang, Z. Zhai and X. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 646, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Lasseter, B. H. Clare, N. L. Abbott and R. J. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10220–10221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Hamers, J. E. Butler, T. Lasseter, B. M. Nichols, J. N. Russell, K. Y. Tse and W. S. Yang, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2005, 14, 661–668 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Ruther, M. L. Rigsby, J. B. Gerken, S. R. Hogendoorn, E. C. Landis, S. S. Stahl and R. J. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5692–5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Yao, R. E. Ruther, L. Zhang, R. A. Franking, R. J. Hamers and J. F. Berry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15632–15635 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nie, M. Yang, W. Fu and Z. Liang, Analyst, 2015, 140, 4549–4557 RSC .
S. L. Young, J. E. Kellon and J. E. Hutchison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13975–13984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Young and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2750–2761 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Henke, T. P. Saunders, J. A. Pedersen and R. J. Hamers, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 2153–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kondo, H. Hoshi, K. Honda, Y. Einaga, A. Fujishima and T. Kawai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11887–11892 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, A. Tamura and T. Kawai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, F145–F150 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, Y. Taniguchi, M. Yuasa and T. Kawai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 090121 CrossRef .
T. Knickerbocker, T. Strother, M. P. Schwartz, J. N. Russell, J. Butler, L. M. Smith and R. J. Hamers, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 1938–1942 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartl, E. Schmich, J. A. Garrido, J. Hernando, S. C. Catharino, S. Walter, P. Feulner, A. Kromka, D. Steinmuller and M. Stutzmann, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 736–742 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Nebel, H. Uetsuka, B. Rezek, D. Shin, N. Tokuda and T. Nakamura, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 1648–1651 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezek, D. Shin and C. E. Nebel, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7626–7633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Stavis, T. L. Clare, J. E. Butler, A. D. Radadia, R. Carr, H. Zeng, W. P. King, J. A. Carlisle, A. Aksimentiev, R. Bashir and R. J. Hamers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 983–988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, P. E. Colavita, K. M. Metz, J. E. Butler and R. J. Hamers, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11623–11630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Nichols, J. E. Butler, J. N. Russell and R. J. Hamers, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, P. E. Colavita, J. A. Streifer, J. E. Butler and R. J. Hamers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4067–4074 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Kuo, R. L. McCreery and G. M. Swain, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 288–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. A. Firestone, O. Auciello and J. A. Carlisle, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11450–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pinson and F. Podvorica, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 429–439 RSC .
P. Allongue, C. H. de Villeneuve, G. Cherouvrier, R. Cortes and M. C. Bernard, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 550, 161–174 CrossRef .
D. Shin, B. Rezek, N. Tokuda, D. Takeuchi, H. Watanabe, T. Nakamura, T. Yamamoto and C. E. Nebel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, 3245–3272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhong, K. P. Loh, A. Midya and Z.-K. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3137–3144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agnes, M. Bonnauron, F. Omnes, J. C. Arnault, P. Bergonzo, M. Nesladek and P. Mailley, Sens. Lett., 2009, 7, 872–879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raymakers, A. Artemenko, S. S. Nicley, P. Štenclová, A. Kromka, K. Haenen, W. Maes and B. Rezek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23446–23454 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yeap, D. Bevk, X. Liu, H. Krysova, A. Pasquarelli, D. Vanderzande, L. Lutsen, L. Kavan, M. Fahlman, W. Maes and K. Haenen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42044–42053 RSC .
Y. L. Zhong, W. Ng, J. X. Yang and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18293–18298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Andrieux and J. Pinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14801–14806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. M. Silva, S. Fan, Y. Wu, M. T. Alam, G. Liu and J. J. Gooding, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 785, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hoffmann, H. Obloh, N. Tokuda, N. Yang and C. E. Nebel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 47–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uetsuka, D. Shin, N. Tokuda, K. Saeki and C. E. Nebel, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3466–3472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Svorc, D. Jambrec, M. Vojs, S. Barwe, J. Clausmeyer, P. Michniak, M. Marton and W. Schuhmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18949–18956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Lud, M. Steenackers, R. Jordan, P. Bruno, D. M. Gruen, P. Feulner, J. A. Garrido and M. Stutzmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16884–16891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shul, P. Actis, B. Marcus, M. Opallo, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 17, 1394–1398 CrossRef .
Y. R. Leroux, H. Fei, J. M. Noel, C. Roux and P. Hapiot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14039–14041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Leroux and P. Hapiot, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
I. López, M. Cesbron, E. Levillain and T. Breton, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1197–1202 CrossRef .
D. C. Shin, N. Tokuda, B. Rezek and C. E. Nebel, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 844–850 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, S. E. Baker, J. E. Butler, C. S. Lee, J. N. Russell, L. Shang, B. Sun and R. J. Hamers, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 938–940 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, H. Uetsuka and C. E. Nebel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 887–893 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhou and J. F. Zhi, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and J. A. Carlisle, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nidzworski, K. Siuzdak, P. Niedzialkowski, R. Bogdanowicz, M. Sobaszek, J. Ryl, P. Weiher, M. Sawczak, E. Wnuk, W. A. Goddard, A. Jaramillo-Botero and T. Ossowski, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Raymakers, H. Krysova, A. Artemenko, J. Cermak, S. S. Nicley, P. Verstappen, S. Gielen, A. Kromka, K. Haenen, L. Kavan, W. Maes and B. Rezek, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 33276–33290 RSC .
W. S. Yeap, M. S. Murib, W. Cuypers, X. Liu, B. van Grinsven, M. Ameloot, M. Fahlman, P. Wagner, W. Maes and K. Haenen, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1145–1154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, M. Akahori, K. Natsui, T. Saitoh and Y. Einaga, Carbon, 2018, 130, 350–354 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsubara, M. Ujie, T. Yamamoto, M. Akahori, Y. Einaga and T. Sato, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8981–8984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Natsui, T. Yamamoto, M. Akahori and Y. Einaga, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yeap, X. Liu, D. Bevk, A. Pasquarelli, L. Lutsen, M. Fahlman, W. Maes and K. Haenen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10322–10329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Krysova, L. Kavan, Z. Vlckova-Zivcova, W. S. Yeap, P. Verstappen, W. Maes, K. Haenen, F. Gao and C. E. Nebel, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 81069–81077 RSC .
Y. L. Zhong, A. Midya, Z. Ng, Z. K. Chen, M. Daenen, M. Nesladek and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17218–17219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Foord, W. Hao and S. Hurst, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
C. Agnes, J. C. Arnault, F. Omnes, B. Jousselme, M. Billon, G. Bidan and P. Mailley, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11647–11654 RSC .
Z. Salmi, A. Lamouri, P. Decorse, M. Jouini, A. Boussadi, J. Achard, A. Gicquel, S. Mahouche-Chergui, B. Carbonnier and M. M. Chehimi, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2013, 40, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chrouda, A. Sbartai, F. Bessueille, L. Renaud, A. Maaref and N. Jaffrezic-Renault, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 2444–2451 RSC .
H. Notsu, T. Fukazawa, T. Tatsuma, D. A. Tryk and A. Fujishima, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, H1–H3 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Coffinier, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 6515–6523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Coffinier, S. Szunerits, B. Marcus, R. Desmet, O. Melnyk, L. Gengembre, E. Payen, D. Delabouglise and R. Boukherroub, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 892–898 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Coffinier, E. Galopin, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10671–10675 RSC .
P. Actis, M. Manesse, C. Nunes-Kirchner, G. Wittstock, Y. Coffinier, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4924–4931 RSC .
S. E. Pust, S. Szunerits, R. Boukherroub and G. Wittstock, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075302 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Delabouglise, B. Marcus, M. Mermoux, P. Bouvier, J. Chane-Tune, J. P. Petit, P. Mailley and T. Livache, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2698–2699 RSC .
P. Bouvier, D. Delabouglise, A. Denoyelle, B. Marcus, M. Mermoux and J.-P. Petit, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, E57–E61 CrossRef CAS .
S. Szunerits, N. Shirahata, P. Actis, J. Nakanishi and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2793–2795 RSC .
L. Marcon, M. Wang, Y. Coffinier, F. Le Normand, O. Melnyk, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, A. Schneider, J. Niedziółka-Jönsson, L. Marcon, S. Ghodbane, D. Steinmüller-Nethl, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1582–1587 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, M. R. Das, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17082–17086 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Das, M. Wang, S. Szunerits, L. Gengembre and R. Boukherroub, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2753–2755 RSC .
J. Niedziółka-Jönsson, S. Boland, D. Leech, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 959–964 CrossRef .
P. Krysinski, Y. Show, J. Stotter and G. J. Blanchard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12726–12728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ushizawa, Y. Sato, T. Mitsumori, T. Machinami, T. Ueda and T. Ando, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 351, 105–108 CrossRef CAS .
E. Suaebah, T. Naramura, M. Myodo, M. Hasegawa, S. Shoji, J. J. Buendia and H. Kawarada, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1686 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mazur, P. Krysinski and G. J. Blanchard, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8802–8808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Caterino, R. Csiki, M. Wiesinger, M. Sachsenhauser, M. Stutzmann, J. A. Garrido, A. Cattani-Scholz, G. Speranza, S. D. Janssens and K. Haenen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13909–13916 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoeb, M. Auernhammer, S. J. Schoell, M. S. Brandt, J. A. Garrido, M. Stutzmann and I. D. Sharp, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18862–18867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meziane, A. Barras, A. Kromka, J. Houdkova, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, A. Kromka, J. Houdkova, O. Babchenko, B. Rezek, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 587–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matrab, M. M. Chehimi, J. P. Boudou, F. Benedic, J. Wang, N. N. Naguib and J. A. Carlisle, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4015–4039 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kulisch, C. Popov, D. Gilliland, G. Ceccone, L. Sirghi, A. Ruiz and F. Rossi, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 745–749 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Gu, X. D. Su and K. P. Loh, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 388, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gu, X. Su and K. P. Loh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13611–13618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rezek, J. Cermak, A. Kromka, M. Ledinsky and J. Kocka, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 249–252 CrossRef CAS .
P. Galar, J. Cermak, P. Maly, A. Kromka and B. Rezek, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 223103 CrossRef .
P. Galar, B. Dzurnak, P. Maly, J. Cermak, A. Kromka, M. Omastova and B. Rezek, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 57–70 CAS .
V. Ratautaite, M. Nesladek, A. Ramanaviciene, I. Baleviciute and A. Ramanavicius, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 2458–2464 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ratautaite, S. D. Janssens, K. Haenen, M. Nesládek, A. Ramanaviciene, I. Baleviciute and A. Ramanavicius, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .
P. Subramanian, I. Mazurenko, V. Zaitsev, Y. Coffinier, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Analyst, 2014, 139, 4343–4349 RSC .
S. F. Peteu, B. W. Whitman, J. J. Galligan and G. M. Swain, Analyst, 2016, 141, 1796–1806 RSC .
M. Steenackers, S. Q. Lud, M. Niedermeier, P. Bruno, D. M. Gruen, P. Feulner, M. Stutzmann, J. A. Garrido and R. Jordan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15655–15661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Hutter, A. Reitinger, N. Zhang, M. Steenackers, O. A. Williams, J. A. Garrido and R. Jordan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4360–4366 RSC .
N. A. Hutter, M. Steenackers, A. Reitinger, O. A. Williams, J. A. Garrido and R. Jordan, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4861–4867 RSC .
R. Caterino, R. Csiki, A. Lyuleeva, J. Pfisterer, M. Wiesinger, S. D. Janssens, K. Haenen, A. Cattani-Scholz, M. Stutzmann and J. A. Garrido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8099–8107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bogdanowicz, M. Sawczak, P. Niedzialkowski, P. Zieba, B. Finke, J. Ryl, J. Karczewski and T. Ossowski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8014–8025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Boonma, T. Yano, D. A. Tryk, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L142–L145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Sakharova, Y. V. Pleskov, F. Diquarto, S. Piazza, C. Sunseri, I. G. Teremetskaya and V. P. Varnin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2704–2709 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Green, L. S. A. Mahe, D. R. Rosseinsky and C. P. Winlove, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Pleskov, M. D. Krotova, V. V. Elkin, V. G. Ralchenko, A. V. Khomich and R. A. Khmelnitskiy, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 1149–1156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akasaka, T. Imai and N. Ohtake, New Diamond Front. Carbon Technol., 2007, 17, 301–308 CAS .
N. B. Rodionov, V. N. Amosov, S. A. Meshchaninov, A. F. Pal, V. P. Rodionova and A. G. Trapeznikov, Instrum. Exp. Tech., 2016, 59, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Prelas, in Laser Interaction and Related Plasma Phenomena, ed. H. J. Schwarz and H. Hora, Springer,  1992, pp. 403–419 Search PubMed .
P. von Huth, J. E. Butler and R. Tenne, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 69, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Semikina and A. N. Shmyryeva, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2002, 11, 1329–1331 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Vispute, A. Vats, V. Venkatesan, A. Seiser, J. Dozier, J. Feldman and L. Robinson, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2011, 1282, 155–160 CrossRef .
A. Kovalenko, P. Ashcheulov, A. Guerrero, P. Heinrichova, L. Fekete, M. Vala, M. Weiter, I. Kratochvilova and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oku, A. Takeda, A. Nagata, T. Noma, A. Suzuki and K. Kikuchi, Energies, 2010, 3, 671–685 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nagata, T. Oku, K. Kikuchi, A. Suzuki, Y. Yamasaki and E. Osawa, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2010, 20, 38–43 CrossRef .
A. Nagata, T. Oku, A. Suzuki, K. Kikuchi and S. Kikuchi, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 118, 1006–1008 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ohtani, P. V. Kamat and S. Fukuzumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 582–587 RSC .
N. Giambrone, M. McCrory, A. Kumar and M. K. Ram, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 615, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Ram, H. Gomez, F. Alvi, E. Stefanakos, Y. Goswami and A. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21987–21995 CrossRef CAS .
P.-N. Volpe, J. Pernot, P. Muret and F. Omnès, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 092102 CrossRef .
S. Nakabayashi, N. Ohta and A. Fujishima, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 3993–3997 RSC .
I. Zegkinoglou, P. L. Cook, P. S. Johnson, W. Yang, J. Guo, D. Pickup, R. González-Moreno, C. Rogero, R. E. Ruther, M. L. Rigsby, J. E. Ortega, R. J. Hamers and F. J. Himpsel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13877–13883 CrossRef CAS .
T. Otsubo, Y. Aso and K. Takimiya, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2565–2575 RSC .
D. Hirayama, K. Takimiya, Y. Aso, T. Otsubo, T. Hasobe, H. Yamada, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 532–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Petkov, U. Glebe, E. Petkov, A. Pasquarelli, C. Pietzka, M. Veres, L. Himics, R. Merz, W. Kulisch, U. Siemeling, J. P. Reithmaier and C. Popov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 2048–2054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bechter, C. Pietzka, C. Petkov, P. Reintanz, U. Siemeling, C. Popov and A. Pasquarelli, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2333–2338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. Fischer and P. Bauerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Barder, S. D. Walker, J. R. Martinelli and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4685–4696 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Naber and S. L. Buchwald, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, H. Zhu, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8570–8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Krysova, Z. Vlckova-Zivcova, J. Barton, V. Petrak, M. Nesladek, P. Cigler and L. Kavan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1165–1172 RSC .
J. Bartoň, H. Krýsová, P. Janda, H. Tarábková, P. Ashcheulov, V. Mortet, A. Taylor, J. Vávra, P. Cígler and L. Kavan, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 12, 153–162 CrossRef .
C. H. Y. X. Lim, Y. L. Zhong, S. Janssens, M. Nesladek and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1313–1318 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Janzen and M. Seibert, Nature, 1980, 286, 584–585 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, L. Zhang, R. E. Ruther and R. J. Hamers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 836–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Clark, P. J. Dean and P. V. Harris, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1964, 277, 312–329 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Himpsel, J. A. Knapp, J. A. VanVechten and D. E. Eastman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1979, 20, 624–627 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Cui, J. Ristein and L. Ley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 429–432 CrossRef CAS .
J. van der Weide, Z. Zhang, P. K. Baumann, M. G. Wensell, J. Bernholc and R. J. Nemanich, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 5803–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Krohn, P. R. Antoniewicz and J. C. Thompson, Surf. Sci., 1980, 101, 241–250 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schindewolf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1968, 7, 190–203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Abel, U. Buck, A. L. Sobolewski and W. Domcke, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 22–34 RSC .
C. E. Nebel, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 780–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Hamers, J. A. Bandy, D. Zhu and L. Zhang, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 397–411 RSC .
M. Vettraino, M. Trudeau, A. Y. Lo, R. W. Schurko and D. Antonelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9567–9573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Leigh, Science, 1998, 279, 506–507 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bauer, J. Phys. Chem., 1960, 64, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Milletti, L. Storchi, L. Goracci, S. Bendels, B. Wagner, M. Kansy and G. Cruciani, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2010, 45, 4270–4279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Fears, S. E. Creager and R. A. Latour, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 837–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Bryant and R. M. Crooks, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 385–387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. A. Bandy and R. J. Hamers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5395–5403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakayama, K. Tanabe and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 121904 CrossRef .
I. Boukahil, P. S. Johnson, F. J. Himpsel, R. Qiao, J. A. Bandy and R. J. Hamers, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2017, 35, 04D102 CrossRef .
J. R. Christianson, D. Zhu, R. J. Hamers and J. R. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 195–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Barney, J. McClead, D. Lukoyanov, M. Laryukhin, T. C. Yang, D. R. Dean, B. M. Hoffman and L. C. Seefeldt, Biochemistry, 2007, 46, 6784–6794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Bazhenova and A. E. Shilov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1995, 144, 69–145 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, S. R. Waldvogel and X. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28357–28371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Lim, M. S. Xie, M. A. Sk, J. M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. H. Lim, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11631–11636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Zhu, G. M. Nathanson and R. J. Hamers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9746–9750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Gallagher, G. Yushin and T. F. Fuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B820–B830 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and R. J. Hamers, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2017, 78, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
T. Enoki, Y. Kobayashi, C. Katsuyama, V. Y. Osipov, M. V. Baidakova, K. Takai, K. I. Fukui and A. Y. Vul, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 2029–2034 CrossRef CAS .
N. Roy, Y. Hirano, H. Kuriyama, P. Sudhagar, N. Suzuki, K. I. Katsumata, K. Nakata, T. Kondo, M. Yuasa, I. Serizawa, T. Takayama, A. Kudo, A. Fujishima and C. Terashima, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakabayashi, Y. Hirano, Y. Sakurai, A. Okazaki, H. Kuriyama, N. Roy, N. Suzuki, K. Nakata, K. Katsumata, A. Fujishima and C. Terashima, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 48, 61–73 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
D. M. Jang, Y. Myung, H. S. Im, Y. S. Seo, Y. J. Cho, C. W. Lee, J. Park, A. Y. Jee and M. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 696–698 RSC .
L. M. Peter, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ashcheulov, M. Kusko, F. Fendrych, A. Poruba, A. Taylor, A. Jager, L. Fekete, I. Kraus and I. Kratochvilova, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2347–2352 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ashcheulov, A. Taylor, V. Mortet, A. Poruba, F. Le Formal, H. Krysova, M. Klementova, P. Hubik, J. Kopecek, J. Lorincik, J. H. Yum, I. Kratochvilova, L. Kavan and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29552–29564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Halima, U. A. Rana and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 639–643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Geiger, O. Kasian, A. M. Mingers, S. S. Nicley, K. Haenen, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and S. Cherevko, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4140–4143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Terashima, R. Hishinuma, N. Roy, Y. Sugiyama, S. S. Latthe, K. Nakata, T. Kondo, M. Yuasa and A. Fujishima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1583–1588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Mavrokefalos, M. Hasan, J. F. Rohan, R. G. Compton and J. S. Foord, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 408, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Lin, J. Xiao, L. H. Li, P. Liu, C. X. Wang and G. W. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501865 CrossRef .
L. X. Su, Q. Z. Huang, Q. Lou, Z. Y. Liu, J. L. Sun, Z. T. Zhang, S. R. Qin, X. Li, J. H. Zang, L. Dong and C. X. Shan, Carbon, 2018, 139, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. A. Tamijani, M. E. Taylor, B. Zhi, C. L. Haynes, S. E. Mason and R. J. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8277–8288 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Jorne Raymakers
	Jorne Raymakers obtained his MSc in chemistry at the University of Ghent in 2015. Later that year he started his PhD in organic/diamond surface chemistry at Hasselt University under the supervision of Prof. W. Maes, for which he was granted an FWO-SB scholarship. His research is focused on the functionalization of boron-doped diamond electrodes with push–pull chromophores and their application toward p-type dye-sensitized solar cells. In 2017 he received the Young Scholar Award at the International Conference on Diamond and Carbon Materials.

Ken Haenen
	Ken Haenen is Professor and Chair of the Department of Physics, and Director of the Doctoral School of Sciences and Technology at Hasselt University, where he obtained his PhD degree in physics in 2002. He is also a guest professor at IMEC. Ken's research interests focus on CVD diamond as part of a broader scope on carbon materials for energy harvesting and conversion. He has authored over 210 peer-reviewed publications. Ken Haenen is Editor-in-Chief of Diamond and Related Materials and MethodsX (Materials Science) and is involved in the organisation of several leading international diamond and nanocarbon conferences.

Wouter Maes
	Wouter Maes is Professor and Vice-Chair of the Department of Chemistry at Hasselt University. He obtained his PhD in (organic) chemistry at the KU Leuven in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Dehaen, then worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) for several years, with external stays in Paris and Oxford, and moved to Hasselt University in 2009 to start an independent academic career. He has (co)authored over 160 peer-reviewed publications. His research group – Design & Synthesis of Organic Semiconductors – focuses on the synthesis of novel conjugated (polymer) materials for organic electronics and advanced healthcare.

 	Fig. 1  Electrochemical oxidation of boron-doped diamond (BDD) by cycling the potential between −1.8 V and +0.5, +1.6 and +2.5 V vs. Ag/Ag2SO4, respectively. At a potential of +0.5 V, only a small amount of C–OH groups are formed. After the threshold value of 1.6 V, the C–OH concentration increases, together with the formation of carbonyl groups. At potentials above 2.5 V, the majority of surface oxygen species are ether groups [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Elsevier].48	 

 	Fig. 2  Difference in surface composition upon N-termination of diamond via electrochemical anodic polarization in liquid NH3 and plasma treatment, as shown by deconvolution of the N1s signal in XPS [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2014–2015) Elsevier].67,69	 

 	Fig. 3  Diamond surface composition after S-termination through photolysis of cyclic disulfides (XPS spectrum on the left) and elementary sulfur (XPS spectrum on the right) [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2007) The Japan Society of Applied Physics].72,73	 

 	Fig. 4  Diamond surface fluorination by employing molecular fluorine (F2), atomic fluorine (F˙) beams, plasma treatment or a perfluorination method.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cl- and Br-termination of diamond and subsequent surface modifications with pyridine, n-BuLi, ammonia and the Grignard reagent of 1-bromodecane.	 

 	Fig. 6  Overview of the (protected) alkenes that have been employed for photochemical functionalization of H-terminated diamond surfaces and the suggested mechanism [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society].132	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Diazotization of functional anilines to afford the corresponding diazonium salts and their grafting mechanism. (b) Overview of commonly employed aryl diazonium salts. (c) Cyclic voltammogram for the electrochemical reduction of an aryl diazonium salt, with a typical sharp reduction peak in the first scan that disappears in subsequent cycles.	 

 	Fig. 8  Multistep functionalization of OH-terminated diamond with biomolecules via a light sensitive o-nitrophenyl linker. Electrochemical impedance spectra show that after irradiation (black) of diamond nanowires functionalized with lysozyme (blue), the Nyquist plot is identical to the one before anchoring of the biomolecules (green). This demonstrates that illumination with light of 365 nm for 20 min is sufficient to completely release all attached molecules [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society].172	 

 	Fig. 9  Functionalization of OH-terminated boron-doped diamond with pyrene molecules via zirconium–phosphate–carbonate chemistry and the cyclic voltammogram of the functionalized surfaces in 0.5 M H2SO4 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2005) American Chemical Society].188	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Functionalization of BDD with poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) polymer brushes and bovine serum albumin for sensing applications. (b) XPS analysis of the H-terminated (black), benzophenone functionalized (red) and poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) grafted (blue) diamond. (c) High resolution XPS analysis of the C1s signal showing the increasing oxygen content with each functionalization step [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2013) Elsevier].169	 

 	Fig. 11  Coordination of the carboxylic acid groups from poly(3-carboxypyrrole), which is polymerized on boron-doped nanowires, with Cu2+ at pH values above 6 and subsequent chelation of histidine-tagged peptides [reprinted with permission].203	 

 	Fig. 12  Fabrication of poly(2-oxazoline) bottle-brush brushes on nanocrystalline diamond thin films. (a) Surface structuring of H-terminated diamond via a combination of photolithography and oxygen plasma treatment. (b) Selective polymerization of a poly(2-isopropyl-2-oxazoline) brush on oxygen-terminated diamond. (c) Conversion of the oxazoline backbone to a polycationic macroinitiator with methyl triflate. (d) Living cationic ring opening polymerization of 2-oxazoline monomers and termination with piperidine [reprinted with permission].206	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the working mechanism of p-type dye-sensitized solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 14  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with different metal-complex chromophores: (a) Ru(bpy)3 electrolyte solution, (b) covalently functionalized Ru(tpy)2 dye, (c) covalently functionalized N3 dye, (d) grafted Mn–phthalocyanine, which adopts a planar geometry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with different donor–acceptor chromophores through diazonium grafting and subsequent Suzuki cross-coupling of (a). 2T-C60, (b) 2T-(CN)2, and (c) BT-Rho/CPDT-Fur. (d) Diazonium grafting and Sonogashira cross-coupling of DTP-BT.	 

 	Fig. 16  Action spectra for a diamond foam electrode sensitized with BT-Rho after chopped illumination at 1 sun and an applied bias of −0.3 V [reprinted with permission].165	 

 	Fig. 17  Functionalization of boron-doped thin film diamond electrodes with the P1 dye through reaction with (a) adsorbed PEI or (b) photochemically grafted amine groups.	 

 	Fig. 18  Long-term photoelectrochemical measurements for P1-sensitized BDD electrodes with different doping levels under 1 sun illumination at an applied bias of −0.3 V [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) Elsevier].239	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Functionalization of OH-terminated diamond with pyrenebutyric acid. (b) Self-assembly of phosphotungstic acid (PTA) on diamond electrodes functionalized with a pyridinium dye.	 

 	Fig. 20  Energy level alignment between the HOMO and LUMO levels of P3HT on H-, OH-, and O-terminated diamond and ITO, and the Fermi levels of the respective electrodes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2010) Wiley].240	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic representation of a hybrid system consisting of a reaction center immobilized on a modified diamond electrode. (b) Illustration of the monolayer (top) and polymer brush (bottom) functionalization approach. (c) Energy levels of the different components for the developed “bio”-solar cell [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society].208	 

1.1228	1017 cm−3	Ru(bpy)32+	0.1 M TBAP in MeCN	150 W Xe lamp	—	−1.0	0.10
1.2228	1019 cm−3	Ru(bpy)32+	0.1 M TBAP in MeCN	150 W Xe lamp	—	−1.0	0.012
2164	1021 cm−3	N3	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W halogen lamp	150	−0.1	0.025
3232	1021 cm−3	Mn-Pc	PBS buffer	LED light (770 nm)	—	—	0.040
4138	1020 cm−3	2T-C60	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W halogen lamp	—	−0.1	0.13
5.1166	1020 cm−3	2T-C60	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W halogen lamp	100	0.0	3.5
5.2166	1020 cm−3	2T-(CN)2	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W halogen lamp	100	0.0	3.5
5.3166	1020 cm−3	2T-(CN)2	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W halogen lamp	100	−0.2	6.3
6.1141	1021 cm−3	BT-Rho	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	15	−0.2	0.085
6.2141	1021 cm−3	CPDT-Fur	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	15	−0.2	0.14
7165	(7–10) × 1021 cm−3	BT-Rho	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	100	−0.3	22.0
8159	1021 cm−3	DTP-BT	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	90	−0.2	0.45
9238	2.3 × 1021 cm−3	P1	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	18	−0.2	0.14
10109	2.3 × 1021 cm−3	P1	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	100	−0.3	0.90
11.1239	2.3 × 1021 cm−3	P1	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	100	−0.3	2.5
11.2239	1 × 1020 cm−3	P1	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	150 W Xe lamp	100	−0.3	6.6
12178	1020 cm−3	Pyrene	0.1 M NaCl	Ar laser (352 nm)	5	−0.2	0.15
13142	1020 cm−3	Pyridinium dye-PTA	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	300 W Xe lamp	—	−0.1	0.050
14240	1020 cm−3	P3HT	0.1 M Na2SO4 + 5 mM MV2+	—	100	0.0	12.0
15208	1020 cm−3	Reaction center	10 mM PBS, 100 μM Q0, 200 μM AMF	Ar laser (870 nm)	—	−0.1	1.5

 	Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the transient light absorption measurements. (b) Change in intensity of transmitted 633 nm light after excitation of H-terminated BDD with UV light of 213 nm [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2013) Springer Nature].242	 

 	Fig. 23  Ammonia yield for H-terminated, NH2-functionalized and HCl treated NH2-functionalized diamond electrodes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Elsevier].54	 

 	Fig. 24  Ammonia yield for diamond–Ag–diamond electrodes using selected wavelengths [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].259	 

 	Fig. 25  Different pathways for the excitation of electrons to the conduction band of diamond and subsequent steps leading to the reduction of N2 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].259	 

 	Fig. 26  Energy diagram of H-terminated diamond and relevant redox potentials regarding the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2014) Wiley].270	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Cyclic voltammogram of BDDL showing the reduction of CO2 in dark and under illumination. (b) Chronoamperometric current–time curves of the photocurrent generated in dark and under illumination at −1.1 V vs. RHE for 180 minutes [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2016) Springer Nature].274	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic representation of a Si-based photoelectrochemical cell coated with a thin film of boron-doped diamond. The Si solar cell is responsible for light absorption and charge separation, while the oxygen evolution reactions occurs at the cobalt phosphate functionalized diamond electrode/electrolyte interface and the hydrogen evolution reactions takes place at the coiled metal electrode [reprinted with permission, Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society].280	 

BDD–Cu2O	0	0.12	0.06
BDD–Cu2O–NiO	3	0.33	0.26
BDD–Cu2O–NiO	6	0.33	0.28
BDD–Cu2O–NiO	10	0.39	0.11
BDD–Cu2O–NiO	15	0.42	0.15
BDD–Cu2O–NiO	20	0.25	0.05

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
