Comprehensive modelling study of singlet exciton diffusion in donor–acceptor dyads: when small changes in chemical structure matter   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP05201A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP05201A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 25023-25034Comprehensive modelling study of singlet exciton diffusion in donor–acceptor dyads: when small changes in chemical structure matter†

        
          
            Giacomo 
            Londi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rishat 
            Dilmurat
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gabriele 
            D’Avino
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vincent 
            Lemaur
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yoann 
            Olivier
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            David 
            Beljonne
          
        
      *a
aLaboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, University of Mons, Place du Parc, 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium. E-mail: David.BELJONNE@umons.ac.be
bInstitut Néel, CNRS and Grenoble Alpes University, 38042, Grenoble, France
cUnité de Chimie Physique Théorique et Structurale & Laboratoire de Physique du solid, Namur Institute of Structured Matter, Université de Namur, Rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium
Received 
      20th September 2019
    , Accepted 29th October 2019First published on 29th October 2019AbstractWe compare two small π-conjugated donor–bridge–acceptor organic molecules differing mainly in the number of thiophene rings in their bridging motifs (1 ring in 1; 2 rings in 2) with the aim of rationalizing the origin of the enhancement in the singlet exciton diffusion coefficient and length of 1 with respect to 2. By combining force field molecular dynamics and micro electrostatic schemes with time-dependent density functional theory and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, we dissect the nature of the lowest electronic excitations in amorphous thin films of these molecules and model the transport of singlet excitons across their broadly disordered energy landscapes. In addition to a longer excited-state lifetime associated with a more pronounced intramolecular charge-transfer character, our calculations reveal that singlet excitons in 1 are capable of funneling through long-distance hopping percolation pathways, presumably as a result of the less anisotropic shape of the molecule, which favours long-range 3D transport.
1 Introduction
Bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) based on small molecules appear as compelling alternatives to polymer-based OSCs thanks to their peculiar benefits, including high purity, low molecular weight, well-defined and tunable structure, ease of synthesis and processability.1 So far, the most efficient OSCs based on blends of conjugated-polymer donors and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have reached power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 16% in single-junction devices2,3 and 17% in tandem cells.4 These tremendous breakthroughs stem from molecular and device engineering towards reducing or minimizing the losses that affect dramatically the performance of an OSC. Small modifications in the primary chemical structure of the electro-active molecules can turn into large changes in their photo-physical behavior and the resulting optoelectronic response at the device dimensions. We report such an example here, where the focus is on the nature and dynamics of singlet excitations in two small π-conjugated organic molecules: a {4-[5-(2-phenyl-1,1-dicyanoeth-1-en-2-yl)-2-thienyl]phenyl}diphenylamine (TPA-T-DCV-Ph) compound and a 2-(1-{5′-[4-(diphenylamino)phenyl]-2,2'-bithien-5-yl}ethylidene)malononitrile (TPA-2T-DCV-Me) one, referred to as 1 and 2, respectively, in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of 1 (left) and 2 (right). 
These π-conjugated molecules belong to the class of push–pull systems, which in the last decades have found applications as active layers in organic devices, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC),5 field-effect transistors (OFET),6 light-emitting diodes (OLED)7 and photovoltaic (OPV)8 cells. Such molecules were designed with the purpose of introducing a partial intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) character into the lowest exciton states. As these excitons likely feature reduced Coulomb binding energy associated with larger electron–hole separation, they should also be more prompt to dissociate into separated charges at the interface with fullerene electron acceptors. The two D–π–A molecules both comprise a triphenylamine (TPA) fragment, acting as an electron donor (D), and a dicyanovinylene moiety (DCV), acting as an electron acceptor (A), linked through either a thiophene (in 1) or a bithiophene (in 2) π-linker. The electronic excited states in these molecules can be pictured as resulting from the mixing between Frenkel excitations (FE) on the π-conjugated spacer and through-bridge intramolecular D–A charge-transfer (CT) ones. While mixing of CT configurations would red-shift the excitation energies, overlapping electron–hole configurations predominantly feed the oscillator strength, hence enabling large absorption cross-sections in the visible and efficient solar light harvesting. The synthesis of the two dyes and their electrochemical and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) characterization along with OSC device fabrication and testing have been reported elsewhere.9–11
Because it features a more extended conjugated backbone, one would anticipate that 2 has significantly red-shifted optical absorption yielding better overlap with the solar emission spectrum and should thus outperform 1 when used as a donor in BHJ solar cells. It turns out, however, that this is not the case, with significantly larger PCE values reported for 1 (>5%) compared to 2 (∼2%) in vacuum-evaporated single solar cells using fullerenes as acceptors. Changes in morphology can be ruled out, as the same trend is observed irrespective of whether the active layer is solution-processed or vacuum-processed. Instead, it was suggested in ref. 11 that this improvement at least partly arises from more efficient singlet exciton diffusion in amorphous films of 1. As a matter of fact, the reported exciton diffusion length, that is, the distance covered by the singlet excitons during their lifetime, was measured using PL quenching experiments to be significantly larger in 1 (∼26 nm) compared to 2 (∼10 nm). This result was attributed to the concerted effects of the longer exciton lifetime, ∼1.6 ns in 1versus less than 1 ns in 2, together with the reduced energetic disorder in the smaller molecule. We note that typical values for singlet exciton diffusion lengths in organic semiconductors span the range 5–20 nm and are often limited by static conformational and/or electrostatic disorder.12,13
Here, to gain an in-depth microscopic picture of the relationships between primary chemical structure and excited-state properties, we performed a fully atomistic modelling study of the energetics and dynamics of singlet electronic excitations in solid films of 1 and 2. More specifically, we employed classical molecular dynamics (MD) to simulate the large scale morphologies of the two donors, in order to sample the conformational space in the amorphous (and crystalline) state. The MD morphologies were then employed in time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) and classical Micro Electrostatic (ME) calculations, which allowed the assessment of the nature of the relevant electronic excitations and their energy landscape, fully accounting for environmental effects in the solid state. The results of this combined MD/TD-DFT/ME approach, together with excitonic intermolecular couplings, were then used in kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations of singlet exciton diffusion, based on the semi-classical Marcus–Levich–Jortner (MLJ) energy transfer rates. Our results confirm the experimental finding that 1 has both a larger exciton diffusion constant and diffusion length with respect to 2, a feature that arises from the combined effect of the extended lifetime and the higher likelihood of long-range percolation pathways in the less anisotropic molecule 1, promoting 3D transport.
2 Theoretical methodology
2.1 Force-field molecular dynamics simulations
In order to model the morphology of these materials, classical force field (FF) MD simulations were carried out. The employed FF was derived from Dreiding,14 while re-parameterizing the soft inter-ring torsional potentials (see the ESI,† Fig. S1 and S2) against reference MP2/cc-pVDZ calculations, as required for an accurate description of the conformational degrees of freedom. Amorphous phases of the two compounds (from now on 1a and 2a) were built using the amorphous builder tool of the Materials Studio (MS) 6.0 package, which implements periodic boundary conditions. The protocol consisted of the following steps: (1) creation of an initial configuration of 1000 molecules in a large 3D periodic cubic box (initial density ∼0.2 g cm− 3); (2) a MD run in the canonical (NVT) ensemble at 1000 K for 200 ps to randomize molecular orientations; (3) a MD run in the isothermal–isobaric (NPT) ensemble at 1000 K for 1 ns, compressing the sample by progressively increasing the pressure from 1 atm to 1 GPa; (4) a NPT-MD run at 1 GPa for 600 ps, gradually cooling down the system from 1000 to 298 K; (5) a NPT-MD run at 298 K for 800 ps, releasing the pressure from 1 GPa to 1 atm; and finally (6) a NPT-MD run for 2.5 ns at 298 K and 1 atm. In addition, for 1, a crystalline 8 × 6 × 5 triclinic supercell (from now on 1x) was generated based on the experimentally resolved crystallographic unit cell,15 in order to reach a comparable size in terms of the numbers of molecules within the simulation box (960 molecules for 1x and 1000 molecules for 1a). The crystalline supercell was subjected to the following steps: (1) a NVT-MD run for 200 ps at 298 K; and (2) a NPT-MD run for 2.5 ns at 298 K and 1 atm. For both the amorphous and crystalline NPT-MD final runs of 2.5 ns, 500 ps was needed for equilibration and 2 ns for production, saving snapshots every 5 ps along the trajectory. The Nosé–Hoover thermostat and the Berendsen barostat (for NPT runs) were adopted. The electrostatic interactions were taken into account by calculating the electrostatic potential (ESP) derived atomic charges on the isolated molecule at the MP2 level. MP2 calculations were performed with the GAUSSIAN0916 suite, while MS 6.0 was adopted for the FF MD simulations.
The reparameterized FF was first benchmarked against experimental data by running simulations on 1x. Our NPT-MD simulations at standard conditions yield a density of dMD = 1.23 g cm−3, in perfect agreement with the experimental value of dexp = 1.24 g cm−3. Also, the predicted cell parameters compare very favorably with the measured crystallographic data, with a relative error of less than 2% (see Table T1 in the ESI†). The densities of the amorphous samples were dMD = 1.02 g cm−3 for 1a (lower than for the crystal, as expected) and dMD = 0.97 g cm−3 for 2a. Moreover, the orientational order in the amorphous samples was assessed by computing the second-rank order parameter , where θ is the angle between the long molecular axis and a given reference axis and angular brackets denote the average over the production MD trajectory. We obtained P2= −0.001 for 1a and P2 = 0.009 for 2a, testifying to the isotropic nature of the amorphous samples.
2.2 Excited-state energetics
Electronic structure calculations were performed to track the excited-state energetics for molecular snapshots extracted along the MD trajectories. In the DFT framework, global-hybrid functionals, such as the popular B3LYP17 and PBE0,18 are well-known to present shortcomings for the description of CT states in π-conjugated molecules. In addition to the self-interaction error (SIE) and the delocalization one,19,20 they suffer from a lack of the correct asymptotic behavior in the exchange–correlation energy functional. The latter is recovered in range-separated hybrid (RSH) functionals21 as adopted in the present study. Specifically, the optimally-tuned (OT) RSH functional ωB97X-D22,23 was employed. Moreover, according to the “gap tuning” procedure,24,25 the ω value was finely adjusted in order to match, within 50 meV of tolerance, the HOMO energy with the molecular vertical ionization potential (IP) and the LUMO energy with the vertical electron affinity (EA) of the molecule. Optimized ω values in RSH functionals are usually strongly system-dependent, in particular for π-conjugated molecules, yet they turn out to have very similar values here for 1 (ω = 0.139 Bohr−1) and 2 (ω = 0.141 Bohr−1). These values were kept fixed throughout the DFT and TD-DFT simulations, carried out using GAUSSIAN0916 with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set, except where otherwise specified.
The effect of the polarizable molecular environment on the intra-molecular excitation energies was accounted for by means of classical ME calculations,26,27 following our previous work.28 In a nutshell, ME allows the calculation of a perturbative correction (Δ, the exciton polarization energy) to the gas-phase TD-DFT lowest energy excitation (S1), which can be decomposed into an electrostatic and an induction contribution: Δ = ΔE + ΔI(1)where ΔE, the electrostatic component, accounts for the interaction of the exciton and the charge densities of the surrounding ground-state molecules, and the induction term ΔI describes the interaction between the excitation and the microscopic dipoles induced in the medium. Self-consistent ME calculations were performed for spherical clusters of 4 nm radius centred around the molecule of interest. The ME model was parametrized with gas-phase ESP29 atomic charges calculated at the DFT and TD-DFT ωB97X-D/6-311++G(d,p) level for the ground (S0) and the excited (S1) state, respectively. The polarizability tensor of the ground-state molecule, computed at the same level of theory mentioned above, was adopted to describe both S0 and S1.
TD-DFT calculations were repeated for all individual molecules extracted from the last MD frame and also for 20 molecules (extracted from 400 snapshots) followed along the 2 ns trajectory, thus allowing us to build some statistics in space and time. The fluctuations of the S1 excitation energy can be quantified by the standard deviation σtotal of its distribution. These fluctuations can be split into two distinct contributions, according to the relevant timescales of the fluctuations: a static contribution (i.e. presenting negligible variations over the timescales characterizing exciton lifetimes, ∼1 ns), which results from the different environment experienced by each molecule, and a dynamic contribution, associated with faster molecular motions: (2)

σ
total is obtained as the full S1 standard deviation for all molecules extracted from the last MD frame. In order to assess the dynamic contribution, 20 molecules were randomly selected and their excitation energies tracked along the 2 ns MD trajectory. The fluctuations around their individual mean lead to the dynamical variance: (3)where Eik is the S1 energy of molecule k at time i,  is the mean energy of molecule k, and n is the number of samples. σstatic is then obtained by subtraction from eqn (2).
2.3 Singlet exciton hopping rates and diffusion
Singlet exciton diffusion in the amorphous phase of the two materials was reproduced using a hopping transport model, which is fully justified owing to the much smaller excitonic couplings (<100 meV) compared to the total relaxation energies (∼500 meV). The hopping rate was computed using the non-adiabatic semi-classical MLJ expression, which accounts for quantum tunneling effects:30 (4)where κif is the exciton hopping rate between molecular sites i and f; Vif is the corresponding excitonic coupling; λs is the external reorganization energy; kB is the Boltzmann constant; T is the temperature; ΔG0if is the Gibbs free energy difference involved in the hopping mechanism; ħωeff is the energy of an effective high-frequency intramolecular vibrational mode (the overarching carbon–carbon stretching) that assists the exciton hopping; and S = λi/(ħωeff) is the Huang–Rhys factor, which measures the internal reorganization energy λi.
Our atomistic calculations were used to provide reliable parameters for eqn (4). Site energies were drawn from a Gaussian distribution with standard deviation σstatic and then used to compute inter-site free energy differences ΔG0if. The dynamic disorder σdynamic is instead related to the total reorganization energy, and specifically for linear exciton–phonon coupling to a bath of classical harmonic modes: (5)
In turn, λtotal comprises two different contributions: λtotal = λi + λs(6)where the internal part, λi, arises from the difference in the equilibrium geometries between the molecule ground state (S0) and the first excited state (S1), while the external part, λs, is due to the structural relaxation of the surrounding medium upon energy transfer. Since high-frequency modes are quantum in nature, λi can be more safely estimated with the 4-point approach based on DFT/TD-DFT calculations in the gas-phase, namely: λi = E(S1|r0) − E(S1|r1) + E(S0|r1) − E(S0|r0)(7)where E(Sm|rn) indicates the energy of state Sm at the geometry optimized for state Sn. We note that the geometry optimization in the excited state was performed starting from the ground state geometry and freezing the soft torsional angles, in order to account only for the contribution from the high-frequency modes (and thus avoid double-counting, since the low-frequency modes enter λi through the classical MD simulations). The external contribution was then calculated by subtraction from the total reorganization energy, according to eqn (5) and (6).
The excitonic couplings, Vif, between molecules in the amorphous samples were computed at the TD-DFT level, resorting to the fragment excitation difference (FED) scheme.31 The molecular pairs (dimers) were selected according to geometrical criteria: electronic couplings were computed for dimers with a less than 20 Å distance between their center of mass and whose atom–atom distance was found to be smaller than 6 Å. The FED scheme is a diabatization procedure that relies on the calculation of the attachment density (the density of the electron promoted in the transition) and the detachment density (the hole density created in the transition).32 The electronic couplings are obtained through a unitary transformation that yields the localized diabatic states by maximizing the excitation density difference between the two molecules involved in the energy transfer process. While exchange and overlap might contribute at short intermolecular distances, the Coulomb term is expected to dominate at long range, where it is expected to decay following the usual Förster-like R−3 dipole–dipole interaction.
Finally, KMC simulations employing the first reaction method (FRM) algorithm33 were performed to assess the exciton diffusion coefficient and length. Such a stochastic approach involves the following steps: (1) initialization of the system at time t = 0; (2) calculation of the hopping rates from the MLJ equation; (3) quantifying the time for hopping events between an initial (i) and a final site (f) using the following equation: (8)where r is a random number generated between 0 and 1 and κif is the MLJ hopping rate; (4) selecting the event with the smallest tif for the exciton to hop and update its position; and (5) updating the time t = t + tif if t is less than the simulation time (10 ns), or else stopping the simulation. In order to obtain statistically relevant results, and because of the sizeable energetic disorder, a large number of simulations were required (i.e. one million). From the time-dependent mean-square displacements, the averaged singlet exciton diffusion coefficient and diffusion length, Ld, are related through: (9)with τ1 the exciton lifetime.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Excited-state electronic structure
The ground-state equilibrium geometry of the two molecules was optimized at the ωB97X-D/6-31G(d,p) level of theory. To get insight into the nature of the lowest electronic excitations in the two molecules, we first performed gas-phase TD-DFT calculations at the ground-state geometries. Multiple metrics allow assessing the character of electronic excitations.34,35 Here, we have opted for the overlap, Φs, between the hole and electron densities shown in Fig. 2 for the two molecules. Pure CT excitations correspond to non-overlapping hole and electron density (Φs = 0), while fully FE excitations instead lead to Φs = 1. The CT or FE character of the excitation depends strictly on the molecular geometry and its fluctuation around equilibrium, as well as on the choice of the exchange–correlation functional.
 Fig. 2  Hole (ρh) and electron (ρe) densities calculated in the attachment/detachment formalism for S1 in 1 (left) and 2 (right), as obtained at the OT-RSH TD-DFT level (ωB97X-D/6-31G(d,p)) based on gas-phase equilibrium ground-state geometries. Isodensity plots were taken at 0.004. 
TD-DFT calculations in the gas phase were also performed to assess the vertical excitation energies. The S0–S1 transition energy is 3.15 eV in 1 (with an oscillator strength of 1.167), and 3.04 eV in 2 (with an oscillator strength of 1.657). The excitation energies obtained for single molecules are close to the mean values obtained by sampling the gas-phase conformations using MD simulations in Fig. 5 (see below). The hole and electron density plots in Fig. 2 show that S1 has a mixed π–π*/CT character,36 with both the hole and electron density spreading over most of the π-system in both compounds. This translates into Φs values of ∼0.66 in 1 and ∼0.72 in 2. Thus, extending the bridge from one to two thiophene rings slightly reduces the CT character of the electronic excitations. We next repeated the TD-DFT calculations on all molecules individually extracted from the last MD frame of the three investigated samples (the amorphous 1a and 2a and the crystalline 1x). The results, reported in Fig. 3, show a broad distribution of the hole–electron overlap factors around the values predicted at the equilibrium geometries, clearly associated with thermal fluctuations in the conformation of the molecules. In particular, rotations around the single bonds connecting the donor to the bridge and the bridge to the acceptor (see Fig. S3 in the ESI†) modulate the coupling between the donor and the acceptor groups of the molecule and, therefore, the amount of CT–FE mixing. It is interesting to point out that the Φs distributions of the wavefunction overlap are asymmetric, showing a long tail at low Φs values that correspond to low-energy conformations, hence possibly slowing down exciton diffusion. As expected, the molecules in the long-range ordered 1x explore a much smaller region of the conformational space, hence the narrower Φs distribution. Very interestingly, Fig. 4 demonstrates that the S1 excitation energy and its CT character are correlated, with larger CT mixing (lower Φs) translating into red-shifted excitations. This is particularly pronounced for molecule 1, where conformations yielding the lowest excitation energies are predominantly CT-like, with Φs approaching 0.3.
 Fig. 3  Room-temperature MD distributions of hole-electron density overlaps Φs in S1 for 1a, 1x and 2a. The averaged Φs values and their standard deviations are also reported in the table. Solid lines are Gaussian fits. 
 Fig. 4  Hole–electron density overlap Φsversus transition energy to S1, as obtained at the OT-RSH TD-DFT level on MD geometries for 1a (red dots), 1x (blue triangles) and 2a (black squares). The data set standard deviation at RT is represented by vertical bars. In the low-energy regime (below ∼3 eV) the correlation coefficient for 1a is R2 = 0.95, while for 2a it is R2 = 0.76. 
From sampling of the configurational space at room-temperature, exciton Density of States (DOS) distributions were calculated for single molecules either in the gas phase or with fully atomistic electrostatic embedding. The results, portrayed in Fig. 5, show a broad, Gaussian-like, DOS primarily governed by changes in molecular conformation, with different standard deviations obtained in the absence versus in the presence of the polarizable environment (Δσtotal < 30 meV). The environmental effects primarily contribute a shift of the distributions, by 0.17 eV for 1a, 0.13 eV for 1x and 0.10 eV for 2a. These small energy corrections reflect the reduced ionic character of the lowest electronic excitations – for the sake of comparison, excess positive or negative charges are typically stabilized by about 1 eV energy corrections in polarizable molecular crystals.26,37,38 The most striking feature from Fig. 5 is the rather similar mean values predicted in the amorphous phase of the two molecules, despite the more extended π-bridge in 2 compared to 1. This is ascribed to the increased CT character in the shorter molecule, as documented above, which compensates for its reduced conjugation length.
 Fig. 5  Exciton Density of States (DOS) for the lowest electronic excitation based on gas-phase TD-DFT calculations (coloured) and accounting for electrostatic embedding TD-DFT/ME (in black). Averaged excitation energies and their standard deviations are also reported in the table. Solid lines are Gaussian fits. In the inset, the measured absorption spectra of neat films of 1 and 2 taken from ref. 10 and 11 are shown; their extracted excitation energies and Full Width Half Maximum values are reported also in the table. 
We stress that these predictions both qualitatively and quantitatively match with thin-film optical absorption measurements reported in ref. 10 and 11 and in Fig. 5. There, the transition energies measured at λmax for the two molecules almost coincide and the spectral lineshapes can be reasonably fitted with Gaussian functions of standard deviations close to those predicted by theory, although a quantitative comparison with experiment is hampered by the lack of quantum nuclear effects (i.e. Franck–Condon structure) and by the assumption of excitons strictly localized on molecular units in the calculations. Moreover, it should be stressed that these large σ values refer to the total width, which encompasses static and dynamic disorder, see Table 1 below. As a side note, we remark that, besides its obvious narrower character, the centre of the energy distribution predicted in crystalline 1 is almost iso-energetic with that in the corresponding amorphous phase. While this might sound surprising at first glance, this is once again the result of the interplay of the molecular conformation (on average more planar in the crystalline phase) and CT–FE mixing (reduced CT character in the crystal). We believe this is a potentially important result, as local crystalline domains embedded in an otherwise amorphous matrix usually act as trapping sites. This would not be the case for exciton transport in 1, which thus should be more resilient to positional disorder and morphological inhomogeneities.
Table 1 Calculated σtotal, σstatic and σdynamic values, along with λtotal, λi and λs ones. σEXP values extracted from a Gaussian fit of the experimental absorption spectra are also indicated (from ref. 10 and 11)







σ
total (eV)

σ
exp (eV)

σ
static (eV)

σ
dynamic (eV)

λ
total (eV)

λ
i (eV)

λ
s (eV)





1a

0.294
0.25
0.270
0.115
0.514
0.245
0.269



2a

0.268
0.28
0.243
0.113
0.494
0.296
0.198




Another molecular characteristic that, in addition to being relevant for the excited-state lifetime and therefore the singlet exciton diffusion length, directly probes the nature of the electronic excited states is the radiative decay rate Γrad. This quantity may be related to the nature of the excited states in the two compounds, since a larger CT character would result in a smaller transition dipole moment and, hence, a smaller Γrad. From a perturbative treatment of light–matter interactions, the spontaneous emission rate Γrad is written as:39 (10)where ωeg is the transition frequency from the excited to the ground state, eg the transition dipole moment, ε0 the dielectric vacuum permittivity, ħ the reduced Planck constant, c the speed of light, and  the refractive index of the medium, here set equal to 1.49 for a poly(methyl) acrylate (PMMA) matrix (for comparison to the experiments reported in ref. 11). For the three investigated samples, the calculated radiative exciton lifetime, τrad, averaged over all accessible conformations as explored by room-temperature MD simulations, amounts to 2.6 ns in 1a, 1.5 ns in 1x and 1.9 ns in 2a. The radiative lifetimes are in line with expectations based on the character of the electronic exited states, with namely a larger value for 1 reflecting an increased CT contribution in the amorphous phase. They are also on par with the total lifetimes measured in amorphous films of the two dyes, 2.6 ns and less than 1 ns in 1 and 2, respectively.10,11 PL quantum yield measurements using an integrating sphere yield a value of 46% in a powder of 1,15 which, combined with the PL total lifetime, provides an experimental estimate for τrad of about 3.5 ns, in fair agreement with the theoretical value of 2.6 ns. This comforts us in the robustness of our theoretical methodology to properly reproduce the nature and energetics of singlet optical excitations in the molecular materials at hand. Actually, while we are here averaging over the full, broad, exciton DOS, it is likely that low-energy molecular sites contribute predominantly to the PL signal, after (partial) thermalization of the energy carriers.
3.2 Singlet exciton hopping rates
The excited-state energetics enters the MLJ rates in three different ways: (i) the Gibbs free energy, simply equated to the static energetic disorder; and (ii) the external, classical (low-frequency) and (iii) the internal, quantum (high-frequency) contributions to the nuclear reorganization energies. All these energies can be obtained from our atomistic simulations, provided some educated guess on time-scale separations. Namely, processes that are slow (fast) compared to hopping events were considered static (dynamic). From now on, we will analyze only the exciton diffusion properties for the amorphous pristine materials in order to provide a better comparison among our investigated samples. The calculated data that feed the MLJ equation for 1a and 2a are collected in Table 1.
The energetic disorder is primarily caused by nuclear motions that are slow relative to exciton hopping, and thus static in nature. These likely involve large-amplitude changes in the conformation of the molecules, which are slowed down by packing effects in the solid. Much faster (internal) reorganization in bond lengths mediated by high-frequency stretching/breathing modes and small (external) rearrangement around the intramolecular equilibrium geometry induced by the environment contribute with similar weights to the total reorganization energy.
We now discuss the excitonic couplings, Vif, mediating singlet exciton hopping and the MLJ hopping rates, κif. The FED values are plotted as a function of the intermolecular distance between centers of mass in Fig. 6 top. For comparison, we show in Fig. 6 bottom the corresponding couplings obtained by retaining only Coulomb interactions in the point dipole–point dipole approximation (PDA). As documented previously,31 this approximation fails at short distances where it produces erroneously large couplings. At long distances, FED and PDA show the expected inverse cubic distance dependence.
 Fig. 6  Excitonic coupling calculated with the FED scheme (top) and in the point dipole–point dipole approximation (bottom) for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars. 
A more useful metric for the interactions between molecules is the electronic connectivity or effective coordination number, defined as the number, n(Vth), of neighbor molecules f coupled to a central molecule i with a coupling Vif larger than a given threshold value Vth. As expected, n(Vth) decreases with Vth to reach values close to zero for couplings larger than ∼40 meV, Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Electronic connectivity calculated with the FED scheme for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars. 
The two molecules show similar evolutions with, on average, 2–6 molecules displaying excitonic couplings in the range 10–25 meV. Combining these excitonic couplings with the internal and external reorganization energies listed in Table 1, we obtained the distributions of nearest neighbor exciton hopping rates, shown in Fig. 8. These span about six orders of magnitude in timescale with a long tail at small κif corresponding to unlikely events associated with poorly connected molecules. For both molecules, the rate distributions peak at around 0.1–1 ps−1, which is significantly faster than the exciton lifetimes, thus allowing for multiple jumps during the exciton lifespan.
 Fig. 8  MLJ exciton hopping rate κif distribution calculated for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). 
3.3 Singlet exciton diffusion
KMC simulations were performed to model the exciton dynamics. In a first set of simulations, we assumed as initial conditions broad band excitation, that is, all molecular sites were excited with the same probability irrespective of their energy. We start by analysing the time evolution of the average exciton energy. The results, reported in Fig. 9, clearly show two different regimes. At early times after light absorption (<10 ps), there is a rapid and large (about half-an-eV) drop in energy attributed to non-equilibrium relaxation processes from initially hot energy carriers. At longer timescales, the system keeps cooling down at a much slower pace, with no sign of full thermalization during the exciton lifetime. At this point, we can already conclude that exciton diffusion in these disordered molecular materials proceeds largely in a non-equilibrium manner. This is corroborated by the calculated mean square displacement over time ratio in Fig. 10. In the normal diffusion regime, this ratio should converge to a time-independent value at equilibrium conditions, which is not reached during the excited-state lifetime in our simulations. Yet, for the sake of simplicity, we will keep referring to the equilibrium concept of the diffusion coefficient in the following. With this caveat, it is interesting to notice that for simulation times commensurate with the singlet lifetime (1–2 ns) D is slightly larger for 1 compared to 2, see Fig. 10a and Table 2. We will return to this point later but the consequence of this difference in the diffusion coefficient, together with the longer-lived singlet exciton, is that molecule 1 shows a significantly larger exciton diffusion length than 2, see Fig. 10b and Table 2 (where we used the measured total lifetimes). In view of the multifaceted aspect and complexity of the modelling approach, the calculated Ld values are in remarkable agreement with experiment, see Table 2.
 Fig. 9  Average exciton energy as a function of the KMC simulation time for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars. 
 Fig. 10  In the upper panel, the calculated (a) diffusion coefficient, D, and (b) exciton diffusion length, Ld, for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). In the bottom panel, the same quantities, respectively in (c) and in (d), were calculated using the ‘site-selective’ excitations method. 
Table 2 Calculated diffusion coefficient at the exciton lifetime and exciton diffusion length for 1a and 2a. The experimental values10,11 for the latter are also reported






Diffusion coefficient (cm2 s−1)
Diffusion length (nm)


Exp.
Calc.





1a

1.53 × 10−3
∼26
18



2a

1.28 × 10−3
∼10
10




We discussed before the origin of the difference in exciton lifetimes between the two molecules, namely the various amount of charge-transfer mixing in the lowest electronic excitations. In view of the very similar excitonic coupling and rate distributions shown in Fig. 6 and 8 respectively, it is, however, not obvious why 1 features an improved diffusion coefficient over 2. We believe this is rooted in the more efficient percolation pathways available for excitons in the shorter molecule, in analogy with the random resistance network for charge transport in organics.40 To test this idea, we assessed the averaged length covered by excitons that hop between molecular sites within a given range of rates. The corresponding distributions are shown for the two molecules in Fig. 11, considering hopping frequencies for the most likely events (in the range of 109–1011 s−1). The distributions are clearly shifted towards longer distances for 1 compared to 2, rationalizing the difference in diffusion coefficient. Thus, it appears that there are more long-distance continuous hopping pathways that the excitons can funnel through in the smaller compound 1, presumably as a result of its reduced anisotropic shape favouring 3D transport.
 Fig. 11  Percolation pathways calculated in two different ranges of exciton hopping rates for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). 
To close this part, we would like to come back to the non-equilibrium nature of singlet exciton transport in these molecular materials. As previously proposed by Bässler and co-workers,41 a useful set of numerical experiments to probe energetic disorder in organics is to run diffusion simulations using energy-selective excitations, namely generating excitons only on molecular sites matching a given energy window. Consistent with the disorder model, Fig. 10c and d show a strong dependence of the ‘effective’ diffusion coefficient and length with excitation energy. While high-energy excitons can easily find electronically coupled nearest neighbours with lower energy and thus undergo fast downhill migration, excitons at the bottom of the DOS are instead surrounded by a smaller number of thermally accessible sites and move via slow uphill hopping events.
4 Conclusions
We have performed a comprehensive theoretical investigation of the nature and dynamics of electronic excitations in two small π-conjugated organic molecules that differ mostly by one thiophene ring in their bridging unit. Earlier experimental reports point to a somewhat unexpected increase in PCE for 1 with respect to 2 in vacuum-evaporated OSCs using fullerenes as acceptors,9,10 a result that was explained by the improved singlet exciton diffusion in 1. It was tentatively concluded that the larger diffusion coefficient and diffusion length in the shorter molecule stem from a longer exciton lifetime and reduced energetic disorder. Our multiscale computation approach, combining MD, TD-DFT and ME calculations with KMC simulations, yields similar overall conclusions, yet for slightly different reasons. The MD/TD-DFT/ME results show that the lowest singlet electronic excitations in these molecules have a mixed localized/charge-transfer nature, which largely fluctuates in time and space as a result of conformational motion. On average 1 displays slightly more pronounced CT character, which explains why it absorbs at about the same wavelength as 2, despite its shorter conjugated backbone. As a consequence of its increased CT character, 1 features a longer (radiative) lifetime compared to 2, in line with the experimental findings and in part responsible for the extended exciton diffusion lengths. The full spectral linewidths of the excitation energy distributions are very large (>0.2 eV) in both molecules because of both conformation and dielectric disorder in the amorphous films. In such a disordered energy landscape, exciton diffusion proceeds largely in a non-equilibrium regime during the finite excited-state lifetime. Close to equilibrium, the diffusion coefficient predicted from KMC simulations is larger for 1 compared to 2, although the total energetic disorder computed for the two molecules is comparable. The difference in exciton migration in fact reflects the existence of long-range, efficient percolation pathways, likely arising from the slightly less anisotropic shape of 1 prompting three-dimensional transport. As a concluding remark, it is important to highlight that the amount of energy disorder actually probed by ps transient experiments as performed in ref. 11 is only a fraction of the total disorder, because in addition to the ultrafast energy drop at very early timescales that requires sub-ps resolution, full energy relaxation has not completed during the exciton lifespan. Rather, fs-resolved photoluminescence measurements using site-selective excitations are required to cover the broad dynamic range in energy distribution present in these inherently disordered soft molecular materials. Despite, or perhaps thanks to, their large energetic disorder, molecules such as 1 appear to be very promising candidates for energy photo-conversion. We speculate that, in analogy with electron transport in fullerenes and some of the novel non-fullerene acceptors,42–47 the 3D excitonic conductivity of 1 is key to drive long-range exciton motion at dissociation spots.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work in Mons was supported by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Marie Sklodowska Curie Grant agreement No. 722651 (SEPOMO). Computational resources were provided by the Consortium des Équipements de Calcul Intensif (CÉCI), funded by the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifiques de Belgique (F. R. S.-FNRS) under Grant No. 2.5020.11, as well as the Tier-1 supercomputer of the Fédération Wallonie–Bruxelles, infrastructure funded by the Walloon Region under Grant Agreement No. 1117545. D. B. is a FNRS Research Director.
Notes and references
F. Bureš, Fundamental aspects of property tuning in push–pull molecules, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(102), 58826–58851 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip and T.-K. Lau, 
            et al., Single-Junction Organic Solar Cell with over 15% Efficiency Using Fused-Ring Acceptor with Electron-Deficient Core, Joule, 2019, 3(4), 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang and L. Hong, 
            et al., Over 16% efficiency organic photovoltaic cells enabled by a chlorinated acceptor with increased open-circuit voltages, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 2515 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Wang, 
            et al., Organic and solution-processed tandem solar cells with 17.3% efficiency, Science, 2018, 361(6407), 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353(6346), 737–740 CrossRef .
S. Allard, M. Forster, B. Souharce, H. Thiem and U. Scherf, Organic Semiconductors for Solution-Processable Field-Effect Transistors (OFETs), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(22), 4070–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohmori, Development of organic light-emitting diodes for electro-optical integrated devices, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4(2), 300–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Molecular Semiconductors in Organic Photovoltaic Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Bakiev, D. G. Selivanova, I. V. Lunegov, A. N. Vasyanin, O. A. Maiorova and A. A. Gorbunov, 
            et al., Novel thiophene-containing push-pull chromophores that include carbazole and triphenylamine moieties: study of optical and electrochemical properties, Chem. Heterocycl. Compd., 2016, 52(6), 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Kozlov, X. Liu, Y. N. Luponosov, A. N. Solodukhin, V. Y. Toropynina and J. Min, 
            et al., Triphenylamine-Based Push–Pull Molecule for Photovoltaic Applications: From Synthesis to Ultrafast Device Photophysics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(12), 6424–6435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, Y. N. Luponosov, A. N. Solodukhin, B. Flament, O. Douhéret and P. Viville, 
            et al., Simple donor-acceptor molecule with long exciton diffusion length for organic photovoltaics, Org. Electron., 2018, 53, 185–190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Athanasopoulos, E. V. Emelianova, A. B. Walker and D. Beljonne, Exciton diffusion in energetically disordered organic materials, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(19), 195209 CrossRef .
S. Athanasopoulos, E. Hennebicq, D. Beljonne and A. B. Walker, Trap Limited Exciton Transport in Conjugated Polymers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(30), 11532–11538 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Mayo, B. D. Olafson and W. A. Goddard, Dreiding: a generic force field for molecular simulations, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94(26), 8897–8909 CrossRef CAS .
Courtesy of Enikolopov Institute of Synthetic Polymeric Materials of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg and M. Had, Gaussian 09, Revision D.01,  2009 Search PubMed .
P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski and M. J. Frisch, Ab Initio Calculation of Vibrational Absorption and Circular Dichroism Spectra Using Density Functional Force Fields, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98(45), 11623–11627 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, Toward reliable density functional methods without adjustable parameters: The PBE0 model, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110(13), 6158–6170 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, T. Stein, S. Refaely-Abramson and R. Baer, Excitation Gaps of Finite-Sized Systems from Optimally Tuned Range-Separated Hybrid Functionals, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8(5), 1515–1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Körzdörfer and J.-L. Brédas, Organic Electronic Materials: Recent Advances in the DFT Description of the Ground and Excited States Using Tuned Range-Separated Hybrid Functionals, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47(11), 3284–3291 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yanai, D. P. Tew and N. C. Handy, A new hybrid exchange–correlation functional using the Coulomb-attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP), Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393(1), 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Chai and M. Head-Gordon, Long-range corrected hybrid density functionals with damped atom–atom dispersion corrections, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10(44), 6615–6620 RSC .
J.-D. Chai and M. Head-Gordon, Systematic optimization of long-range corrected hybrid density functionals, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128(8), 84106 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Do, M. K. Ravva, T. Wang and J.-L. Brédas, Computational Methodologies for Developing Structure–Morphology–Performance Relationships in Organic Solar Cells: A Protocol Review, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(1), 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, C. Zhong and J.-L. Brédas, Reliable Prediction with Tuned Range-Separated Functionals of the Singlet–Triplet Gap in Organic Emitters for Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11(8), 3851–3858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D’Avino, L. Muccioli, C. Zannoni, D. Beljonne and Z. G. Soos, Electronic Polarization in Organic Crystals: A Comparative Study of Induced Dipoles and Intramolecular Charge Redistribution Schemes, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10(11), 4959–4971 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D’Avino, L. Muccioli, F. Castet, C. Poelking, D. Andrienko and Z. G. Soos, 
            et al., Electrostatic phenomena in organic semiconductors: Fundamentals and implications for photovoltaics, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28(43), 433002 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Olivier, B. Yurash, L. Muccioli, G. D’Avino, O. Mikhnenko and J. C. Sancho-García, 
            et al., Nature of the singlet and triplet excitations mediating thermally activated delayed fluorescence, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1(7), 75602 CrossRef .
B. H. Besler, K. M. Merz Jr. and P. A. Kollman, Atomic charges derived from semiempirical methods, J. Comput. Chem., 1990, 11(4), 431–439 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner, Temperature dependent activation energy for electron transfer between biological molecules, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64(12), 4860–4867 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Hsu, Z.-Q. You and H.-C. Chen, Characterization of the Short-Range Couplings in Excitation Energy Transfer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(4), 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS .
M. Head-Gordon, A. M. Grana, D. Maurice and C. A. White, Analysis of Electronic Transitions as the Difference of Electron Attachment and Detachment Densities, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99(39), 14261–14270 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Gillespie, A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of coupled chemical reactions, J. Comput. Phys., 1976, 22(4), 403–434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Olivier, J.-C. Sancho-Garcia, L. Muccioli, G. D’Avino and D. Beljonne, Computational Design of Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence Materials: The Challenges Ahead, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(20), 6149–6163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W. Evans, Y. Olivier, Y. Puttisong, W. K. Myers, T. J. H. Hele and S. M. Menke, 
            et al., Vibrationally Assisted Intersystem Crossing in Benchmark Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(14), 4053–4058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, Y. N. Luponosov, S. A. Ponomarenko, N. Kausch-Busies, D. Y. Paraschuk and Y. Olivier, 
            et al., Ultrafast Charge Generation Pathways in Photovoltaic Blends Based on Novel Star-Shaped Conjugated Molecules, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(7), 1401657 CrossRef .
F. Castet, G. D’Avino, L. Muccioli, J. Cornil and D. Beljonne, Charge separation energetics at organic heterojunctions: on the role of structural and electrostatic disorder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(38), 20279–20290 RSC .
G. D’Avino, Y. Olivier, L. Muccioli and D. Beljonne, Do charges delocalize over multiple molecules in fullerene derivatives?, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(17), 3747–3756 RSC .
R. A. L. Vallée, M. Van Der Auweraer, F. C. De Schryver, D. Beljonne and M. Orrit, A Microscopic Model for the Fluctuations of Local Field and Spontaneous Emission of Single Molecules in Disordered Media, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6(1), 81–91 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, 25th Anniversary Article: Organic Field-Effect Transistors: The Path Beyond Amorphous Silicon, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(9), 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bässler and B. Schweitzer, Site-Selective Fluorescence Spectroscopy of Conjugated Polymers and Oligomers, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32(2), 173–182 CrossRef .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf and C. B. Nielsen, 
            et al., High-efficiency and air-stable P3HT-based polymer solar cells with a new non-fullerene acceptor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 11585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Chen, D. Qian, B. Gautam, G. Yang and J. Zhao, 
            et al., Fast charge separation in a non-fullerene organic solar cell with a small driving force, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef CAS .
X. Che, Y. Li, Y. Qu and S. R. Forrest, High fabrication yield organic tandem photovoltaics combining vacuum- and solution-processed subcells with 15% efficiency, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(5), 422–427 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Next-generation organic photovoltaics based on non-fullerene acceptors, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12(3), 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Material insights and challenges for non-fullerene organic solar cells based on small molecular acceptors, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(9), 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K.-Y. Jen and S. R. Marder, 
            et al., Non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05201aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of 1 (left) and 2 (right).	 
Δ = ΔE + ΔI	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
λtotal = λi + λs	(6)
λi = E(S1|r0) − E(S1|r1) + E(S0|r1) − E(S0|r0)	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 2  Hole (ρh) and electron (ρe) densities calculated in the attachment/detachment formalism for S1 in 1 (left) and 2 (right), as obtained at the OT-RSH TD-DFT level (ωB97X-D/6-31G(d,p)) based on gas-phase equilibrium ground-state geometries. Isodensity plots were taken at 0.004.	 

 	Fig. 3  Room-temperature MD distributions of hole-electron density overlaps Φs in S1 for 1a, 1x and 2a. The averaged Φs values and their standard deviations are also reported in the table. Solid lines are Gaussian fits.	 

 	Fig. 4  Hole–electron density overlap Φsversus transition energy to S1, as obtained at the OT-RSH TD-DFT level on MD geometries for 1a (red dots), 1x (blue triangles) and 2a (black squares). The data set standard deviation at RT is represented by vertical bars. In the low-energy regime (below ∼3 eV) the correlation coefficient for 1a is R2 = 0.95, while for 2a it is R2 = 0.76.	 

 	Fig. 5  Exciton Density of States (DOS) for the lowest electronic excitation based on gas-phase TD-DFT calculations (coloured) and accounting for electrostatic embedding TD-DFT/ME (in black). Averaged excitation energies and their standard deviations are also reported in the table. Solid lines are Gaussian fits. In the inset, the measured absorption spectra of neat films of 1 and 2 taken from ref. 10 and 11 are shown; their extracted excitation energies and Full Width Half Maximum values are reported also in the table.	 


1a
	0.294	0.25	0.270	0.115	0.514	0.245	0.269

2a
	0.268	0.28	0.243	0.113	0.494	0.296	0.198
	(10)

 	Fig. 6  Excitonic coupling calculated with the FED scheme (top) and in the point dipole–point dipole approximation (bottom) for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electronic connectivity calculated with the FED scheme for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars.	 

 	Fig. 8  MLJ exciton hopping rate κif distribution calculated for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue).	 

 	Fig. 9  Average exciton energy as a function of the KMC simulation time for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). The data set standard deviation is represented by vertical bars.	 

 	Fig. 10  In the upper panel, the calculated (a) diffusion coefficient, D, and (b) exciton diffusion length, Ld, for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue). In the bottom panel, the same quantities, respectively in (c) and in (d), were calculated using the ‘site-selective’ excitations method.	 



1a
	1.53 × 10−3	∼26	18

2a
	1.28 × 10−3	∼10	10

 	Fig. 11  Percolation pathways calculated in two different ranges of exciton hopping rates for 1a (in red) and 2a (in blue).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp05201a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
