Chemical formation of soft metal electrodes for flexible and wearable electronics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00192D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00192D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4611-4641Chemical formation of soft metal electrodes for flexible and wearable electronics

        
          
            Dongrui 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yaokang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xi 
            Lu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhijun 
            Ma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chuan 
            Xie
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zijian 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      *
      Laboratory for Advanced Interfacial Materials and Devices, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: tczzheng@polyu.edu.hk;  Fax: +852-27731432
Received 
      31st December 2017
    First published on 3rd May 2018AbstractFlexible and wearable electronics is one major technology after smartphones. It shows remarkable application potential in displays and informatics, robotics, sports, energy harvesting and storage, and medicine. As an indispensable part and the cornerstone of these devices, soft metal electrodes (SMEs) are of great significance. Compared with conventional physical processes such as vacuum thermal deposition and sputtering, chemical approaches for preparing SMEs show significant advantages in terms of scalability, low-cost, and compatibility with the soft materials and substrates used for the devices. This review article provides a detailed overview on how to chemically fabricate SMEs, including the material preparation, fabrication technologies, methods to characterize their key properties, and representative studies on different wearable applications.
Dongrui Wang
Dongrui Wang is currently working in Prof. Zijian Zheng's group at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a visiting researcher. He received his BEng (2003) and PhD (2009) in polymer science and engineering from Tsinghua University (China). After a postdoctoral stay at the same university, he joined University of Science and Technology Beijing (China) as an Associate Professor in 2011 and was promoted to full Professor in 2016. His research interest involves electroactive soft matters, flexible materials and devices for electrochemical energy storage, and high-performance composites.
Yaokang Zhang
Yaokang Zhang received his BSc degree from Renmin University of China in 2013. Currently, he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zijian Zheng at Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest focuses on the fabrication of solution-processed flexible electronic devices.
Xi Lu
Xi Lu is currently a PhD candidate at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include fabrication approaches and applications of flexible and stretchable electronic materials.
Zhijun Ma
Zhijun Ma received his BSc in science and technology of optical information from Wuhan University of Technology (China) in 2005, and PhD in materials science and engineering from Zhejiang University (China) in 2011. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at South China University of Technology from 2011 to 2014. He is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology. Presently, he is also a postdoctoral fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include composite fibers with photonic/electronic functionalities, photonic/electronic nanomaterials.
Chuan Xie
Chuan Xie obtained his BEng (2014) and MSc (2017) in polymer science and engineering from Sichuan University in China. He is currently a PhD candidate of the Institute of Textiles and Clothing at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include flexible electrode materials and cell configuration for energy storage such as lithium batteries.
Zijian Zheng
Zijian Zheng is currently Full Professor at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest includes surface and polymer science, nanolithography, flexible and wearable materials and devices. He received his BEng. in Chemical Engineering at Tsinghua University in 2003, and PhD in Chemistry at the University of Cambridge in 2007. He is elected as a Founding Member of The Young Academy of Sciences of Hong Kong.
1. Introduction
Both the industrial and academic communities have shown enormous enthusiasm for flexible and wearable electronics in the past decade.1–12 Indeed, nowadays any new proof-of-concept report of prototype flexible/wearable devices, such as deformable smartphones and wearable sensors, can always attract immediate attention in the social media. As shown in Fig. 1, academic publications with regard to flexible and wearable electronics are also undergoing exponential growth. In contrast to their rigid counterparts, electronic circuits and devices constructed on flexible substrates provide substantial advantages in terms of light weight, mechanical flexibility and durability to withstand multiple deformations (stretching, compression, bending, twisting). The carefully designed flexible electronics also offer specific benefits of being conformable to non-planar structures, comfortable to wear, and easy to integrate with other systems and objects. Without a doubt, the emerging flexible wearable electronics will redefine the paradigms of electronic products in the near future.
 Fig. 1  Number of publications sorted by year with the key words “wearable electronics” and “flexible electronics” indexed in the Web of Science in Dec. 2017. 
On the way toward practical applications of these exciting devices and systems, one of the most significant obstacles is the lack of high-performance flexible electrodes, which are indispensable for all electronic devices. Ideal electrodes for flexible and wearable electronics require good integration of electrical and mechanical properties, and sometimes optical properties. Electrically conductive materials, including metals, carbon materials, and conducting polymers, have been widely examined as candidates to fabricate flexible electrodes.13 After decades of research, it is getting clear that metal-based electrodes are a more reasonable choice owing to their intrinsically high electrical conductivity, stability, cost-effectiveness and better understanding of device optimization. However, the relatively high-density and rigid characteristics of bulk metals determine that thick metal foils cannot be used as ideal flexible electrodes. Therefore, metal electrodes, in which conductive metal thin films are physically or chemically deposited on flexible plastic or elastomer substrates in specific structures, are advocated.14–16
To achieve metal electrodes with superior flexibility, many structural designs and optimizations have been established over the past decade. Common metals can only sustain limited tensile strains (<1%). However, ultrathin metal can withstand harsh bending conditions without deformation because the bending strain proportionally decreases with thickness.17 For example, bending a 100 nm thin film with a radius of curvature of 1 cm only yields a tensile strain of 0.1% on the materials, which is far below the fracture limit of metals. In light of this, highly flexible and stretchable soft metal electrodes (SMEs) can be readily obtained by combining suitable bendable structures with particular layouts that enable stress absorption. The efficient layouts include wavy structures, buckling, serpentine patterns, coiled springs and others.4,14 These SMEs have led to the development of a wide variety of flexible and wearable electronic devices ranging from flexible circuit boards, sensors and actuators, to displays and energy conversion/storage devices.
Early works on SMEs are based on conventional microfabrication which consists of evaporation of metal layers, resist deposition, lithography and pattern development, and post-etching. This is mostly due to the direct migration from Si technology that has been long-used in the industry. However, such a “hard” fabrication not only suffers from a high production cost per area due to the use of expensive equipment and sophisticated treatment procedures, but also may damage the soft substrate due to the use of strong solvents, high temperature or high vacumm.3,18–21 In contrast, solution-based wet chemical methods including a variety of printing and plating techniques allow rapid, low-temperature and cost-effective fabrication of SMEs over large areas.
This review aims at providing a broad overview of the recent progress in the chemical formation of SMEs toward advanced flexible and wearable electronics. In order to give a better understanding of the desirable properties of SMEs, an overview of the characteristics of the often-used metal and substrate materials is firstly discussed. The methods to measure these properties are also briefly provided. We then review the chemical approaches to fabricate SMEs in detail, including the chemical mechanisms to prepare the materials, the processing strategies including coating, printing and spinning technologies to fabricate the patterns and thin films, and the post-treatments necessary to achieve good electrode properties. Subsequently, some representative examples of the applications of chemically formed SMEs in wearable electronic circuits and devices are presented. Finally, a summary of the progress and a perspective comment on the future development of the field are provided.
2. Characteristics of soft metal electrodes
2.1 Choice of metal
In the literature, the most frequently reported metal materials for chemical formation of soft electrodes include gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu) and Nickel (Ni). An ideal metal electrode should possess high electrical conductivity (σ) and should be low-cost and easy to synthesize. In terms of direct current (dc) electrical conductivity (σdc), bulk Ag exhibits the highest value of 6.30 × 107 S m−1, followed by Cu (5.96 × 107 S m−1), and Au (4.10 × 107 S m−1). However, by taking the cost into account, noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt, and Pd) show extremely low conductivity/price ratios (as shown in Table 1). Cu, a typical transition metal, shows a considerably high σdc which is only 6% lower than that of Ag but possesses an excellent conductivity/cost ratio. However, the spontaneous surface oxidation of Cu in air introduces significant challenges for its practical application. Ni, another important transition metal, shows a similar conductivity/price ratio but much better resistance to oxidation than Cu. Therefore, Ni is emerging as a very promising metal for SME fabrications, especially for electrochemical energy storage devices.22,23 Currently, Ag is the dominant material that has been utilized to fabricate soft metal electrodes, though its cost performance is only ca. 1% of that of Cu. Other noble metals, carbon materials, and conducting polymers are prohibitively expensive, and are not suitable for mass production of flexible electrodes.
Table 1 Conductivity and costs of candidate materials for fabrication of flexible conductive electrodes




Material

σ
dc (S m−1)@20 °C
US dollars per kg
Normalized conductivity/cost ratio





a Price collected from the website of London metal exchange (Dec. 2017).
b Price collected from the website of Sigma-Aldrich (Dec. 2017).
c Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate), conductivity grade.





Ag
6.30 × 107
510a
0.014


Cu
5.96 × 107
6.7a
1


Au
4.10 × 107
40070a
0.00011


Al
3.50 × 107
2.0a
2


Ni
1.43 × 107
11.1a
0.14


Pd
1.0 × 107
32408a
0.000035


Pt
9.43 × 106
28260a
0.000037


Carbon (graphite)
2.0 × 105
25b
0.0008


PEDOT/PSSc
2.0 × 104
167000b
0.000000013




2.2 Choice of substrate
Many polymer thin films have been developed as substrates of soft electrodes and electronic devices because they are low-cost and readily processable. To date, the widely utilized polymer films in bendable electronics include polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), polyimide (PI), and polycarbonate (PC). Elastomers such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and polyurethane (PU) can serve as suitable substrates for stretchable electronics. Currently the flexible electronic devices are often fabricated on substrates of PI, PET, or PEN with a typical thickness of 100–200 μm. Some PI substrates with a low thickness of 251 or 12.53 μm have also been employed to endow the devices with better flexibility (smaller bending radii). Polymer foils with extremely low thicknesses of 1–3 μm were also reported to fabricate ultrathin, ultraflexible devices.18,24 The key physical properties of typical polymer substrates for fabricating SMEs are summarized in Table 2. It should be noted that, with specific consideration of the compatibility between these physical properties of the polymer substrates and the practical requirements in different SME manufacturing operations, there are actually several key challenges to be overcome. Though the developments of polymer substrates for advanced flexible electronics are beyond the scope of this review, we would like to highlight these key challenges as they are fundamental guidelines in designing the chemical approaches for SMEs.
Table 2 Typical physical properties of polymeric substrates for soft metal electrodes




Properties
PET
PEN
PI
Cellulose paper
PDMS
PU





a Temperature of glass transition.
b Temperature of melting.
c Coefficient of thermal expansion.
d Young's modulus.





Density (g cm−3)
1.39
1.36
1.42
∼1.4
0.95–0.98
1.0–1.3



T
g

 (°C)
110
155
360
—
—
—



T
m

 (°C)
255
269
—
—
—
—


CTEc (ppm °C−1)
17
13
20
—
>150
>100



Y

 (GPa)
5
5
2.5
1–2
<0.01
<0.01


Ultimate elongation (%)
90
85
80
5–15
50–500
300–800


Surface roughness (nm)
∼30
∼15
∼30
50–100
—
—




First, the relatively low thermal stability of polymers severely limits the processing temperature of the electrode fabrication. For example, PET, the most common substrate for flexible electronics, allows a maximum processing temperature of only ∼140 °C25 above which the polymer chains begin to slip and the film becomes mechanically unstable. PI can withstand a processing temperature as high as 350 °C; however, its yellow color partially reduces this advantage for optoelectronic applications. In addition, polymers exhibit a higher coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) than metals and inorganic materials. When polymers undergo thermal stresses, the mismatch between the CTE of the polymer substrate and the functional materials deposited on top of it will result in cracks or delamination.26
Second, the high permeability of polymer substrates gives rise to substantial difficulty for the long-term stability of flexible electronics, especially for those containing oxygen or moisture sensitive materials. For example, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) require the permeation rate for oxygen and water vapor to be less than 10−5 mL m−2 day−1 and 10−6 mL m−2 day−1, respectively. The requirement of electronics with extremely low penetration rates poses a serious challenge to the polymer substrates which generally exhibit a gas barrier performance in the range of 100–102 mL m−2 day−1.27 Therefore, additional encapsulation or surface treatment such as atomic layer deposition (ALD) may be needed.
Third, the surface quality of the polymer substrates can be hardly compared to Si wafers (0.32 nm RMS) commonly used in the electronic industry. The relatively high surface roughness will cause pinholes of materials deposited on it, and will lead to failing devices and low yield. Further planarization of the polymer substrates is very much required for ultrathin electronic devices such as thin-film transistors (TFTs).3 Furthermore, it is also necessary that the polymeric substrates should be chemically inert to solvents used in the solution-based processing so that the surface will not be damaged.
2.3 Evaluation methods for soft metal electrodes

2.3.1 Electrical conductivity. 
An ideal soft electrode should exhibit very high electrical conductivity and great robustness under complicated mechanical deformations. Usually the electrical conductivity of a flexible electrode is characterized by its sheet resistance (Rs) which is measured with a four-probe or a two-probe resistance meter. The bulk σdc and dc resistivity (ρdc) of a conductive film are related to the Rs by,  where t is the thickness of the metal thin film. The thickness of the metal layer is usually determined by using a thickness profiler or atomic force microscopy (AFM). In some reports, the conductive performance of a soft metal electrode is denoted by using the percentage of the measured σdc to the bulk value of the metal element (as shown in Table 1). Most of the flexible electronic devices require SMEs with lower Rs to save the energy loss, except those for flexible heaters and resistive/capacitive sensors. The Rs of flexible electrodes for touch panels, displays, and photovoltaic devices should not be higher than 500, 50, and 10 Ω sq−1, respectively. The Rs of SMEs can be tailored by tuning the metal type, processing parameters, thickness, and style and size of various metallic patterns.


2.3.2 Mechanical flexibility and robustness. 
Apart from the electrical properties, it is quite necessary to quantitatively measure the mechanical flexibility and robustness of the SMEs. To date, there is still no measurement standard to evaluate such performance in this area. Generally, “bending tests” are used to characterize the bendability of SMEs by monitoring the change of Rs or bulk resistance during repeated bending cycles. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the electrode is repeatedly bent into a curved shape with a given “bending radius”. The normalized resistance change (Rmeasure − R0)/R0 during bending is recorded to evaluate the flex stability of SMEs. Similarly, the stretchability/compressibility of SMEs are characterized by testing the change of normalized resistance under different tensile/compression states (Fig. 2c). Apparently, an intrinsically low Rs along with stable Rs under considerable mechanical strains and a long lifespan are highly useful in practical applications of SMEs. In the literature, the mechanical robustness of SMEs is commonly examined by cyclic deformation tests for thousands of cycles. Some reports also demonstrated the mechanical robustness of SMEs in a simulated wearable environment which couples the multiple dimensional mechanical deformations with changes in temperature and moisture. Nevertheless, the excellent mechanical flexibility and robustness of SMEs rely on the interaction between the polymeric substrate and the metal layer atop. Thus, the characterization toward the metal/substrate interfacial adhesion is also important to fully understand the mechanical properties of SMEs. To this end, standard peeling strength tests are often utilized to characterize the adhesion energy of the chemically formed metals on substrates. The most typical peeling test in a laboratory uses 3 M tape (namely the taping method) to repetitively tape and peel away from the metal electrodes (Fig. 2d). Then one can evaluate the adhesion by viewing the amount of delaminated metal and the resulting resistance.
 Fig. 2  Typical evaluation methods for mechanical properties of soft metal electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of the bending test. (b) Images of a Cu nanowire-based elastic electrode under different bending stages. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration (top) and a practical example (bottom) of the stretching test. The photos showing the stretchable metal electrode under its initial and stretched stages are reproduced with permission.29 Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration (left) and a practical example (right) of the peeling test. The photo shows the peeling test of a Ag nanowire transparent electrode from the PET substrate by using Scotch tape.30 


2.3.3 Optical transparency. 
In addition to electrical and mechanical properties, optical transparency of SMEs should be considered for application in optoelectronic devices. The optical transparency is the physical property of allowing light to pass through an optical medium.31 Transmittance (T, %), the percentage of transmitted light to total incident light of a specific wavelength, is usually measured by using a spectrophotometer to characterize this optical property. Transmittance ranges from 0% to 100%, i.e., no light and all light transmitted, respectively. For most optoelectronic applications, the higher the transmittance is the better.
It is of great importance to optimize the electrical conductivity and the optical transmittance for transparent electrodes. Although it is desirable to obtain both high conductivity and transmittance, in most cases, there is a tradeoff between the two parameters. Therefore, a figure of merit (FoM) is used to illustrate the conductivity and the transparency of a transparent electrode. One commonly used model for the FoM, ϕTC, was defined first by Haacke:32  
Another commonly used FoM, namely the ratio of electrical conductance to optical conductance (σdc/σop), was suggested by Dressel and Grüner:33  or  where Z0 is the impedance of free space (Z0 = 377 Ω). The relationship between Rs and transmittance is controlled by the conductivity ratio σdc/σop. Both models have been used to evaluate the electro-optical performances of transparent electrodes in recent years.34–41 Lower Rs and higher T result in higher value of FoM.

3. Chemical approaches to soft metal electrodes
SMEs play an important role in a wide variety of flexible and wearable electronic devices. However, the technical requirements for the SMEs for every specific electronic device are different from each other. For different end uses, the considerations of the fabrication processes and optimization methods are quite diverse. Therefore, it is a challenging task to elaborate all the aspects in the chemical formation of SMEs. Instead, in this section we mainly focus on the chemical strategy for the chemical formation of SMEs. According to different end uses, the same chemical strategy can be applied, together with additional lithography or processing, to yield different electrode properties. For example, the same nanomaterials can be used to fabricate opaque or transparent electrodes with tunable optical transmittance and electrical resistance based on the applied amount and pattern structure etc. Strategies for the fabrication of SMEs via chemical approaches can be classified into two major categories (as shown in Fig. 3): (1) additive manufacturing of metal patterns on polymeric substrates by using metallic building blocks, and (2) in situ growth of metal patterns through surface chemical reactions. This section will discuss the various chemical approaches in detail.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the chemical approaches for fabricating SMEs. 
3.1 Additive chemical manufacturing on polymeric substrates
In this strategy, the metallic building blocks including metal particles and metal precursors are synthesized first. These building blocks are then deposited by coating, printing, or spinning onto the flexible substrates. A post-treatment to reduce and to sinter the materials is necessary to enable the electrical conductivity of the electrode. These three major steps are discussed below in detail.

3.1.1 Metallic building blocks. 
Zero-dimensional (0D) materials. 
Central to the additive manufacturing of SMEs is the design of metallic building blocks in which metal-based materials are mixed with solvent, stabilizers, and other additives. Most common types of metallic building blocks are metal micro and nanoparticles and metal precursors. Traditionally, commercial metal (Ag, Au) pastes composed of metal particles and adhesive polymers have been widely employed to fabricate metal electrodes through printing.1,42–46 Recently, solution-phase synthesized metal nanoparticles (NPs) with tunable size, morphology, and other physical properties have been widely explored as starting materials to prepare SMEs. For example as shown in Fig. 4a, AgNPs can be synthesized by reducing inorganic Ag-containing salt AgNO3 with various reduction agents including NaBH4,47 triethanolamine,48L-ascorbic acid,49 and D-glucose.50 Ag NPs with a diameter under 100 nm and a narrow size distribution can be well synthesized by controlling the metal salt concentrations, temperature, and surface stabilizing molecules. Other metal NPs including AuNPs, and CuNPs can also be prepared in a similar way by reducing metal salts with external reducing agents. There are several comprehensive reviews concerning the synthesis details, control parameters, and formation mechanisms of AgNPs,51,52 AuNPs,53,54 and CuNPs.55 The percolating networks of these 0D metal particles have been proved to be highly electrically conductive and mechanically flexible.56
 Fig. 4  Metallic building blocks. (a) TEM image of AgNPs with an average diameter of 20 nm and optical image of concentrated AgNP aqueous ink (inset) used for SME printing. Reproduced with permission.1 (b) SEM image of AgNWs with an average diameter of 94.5 nm and the insert shows the optical image of the AgNW dispersion. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of ultrathin single crystalline AuNWs with high-aspect ratio and the insert shows the optical image of AuNWs dispersion, and (d) high-resolution TEM image of an individual single crystalline ultrathin AuNW shows [111] lattice planes and the diameter around 2.5 nm. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) FESEM image of ultralong CuNWs with 90–120 nm in diameter and the insert shows optical image of CuNWs in mother liquor. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright © 2005, American Chemical Society. 
One-dimensional (1D) materials. 
SMEs constructed with one-dimensional 1D metallic building blocks have emerged as more promising materials in recent years (Fig. 4b–e).2,8,57,58 According to the percolation theory, 1D nanomaterials such as nanorods (NDs) and nanowires (NWs) can form percolating networks with much lower thresholds than 0D nanoparticles.59,60 That is, utilizing 1D metal nanomaterials allows one to prepare conductive electrodes with less amount of metal. Therefore, particular interest has been paid to developing Ag or Cu NWs as building blocks for the chemical formation of SMEs.2,57,61 The metal NWs can be synthesized through two mainstream approaches: a hard template assisted synthesis and a soft template assisted synthesis. For the hard template assisted method, porous materials including anodic aluminum oxide (AAO), mesoporous silica, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been widely used as the template to prepare metal NWs in the pores.62,63 However, the complex procedures and the limited production yield severely limit this method. In contrast, the wet chemical synthesis of metal NWs using soft templates such as surface stabilizing molecules and polymers facilitates a scalable production. Perhaps the most successful soft template method for AgNW synthesis, until now, is the polyol method using poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as the capping agent.64,65 In a typical synthesis, ethylene glycol (EG) is utilized as both solvent and reducing agent, AgNO3 is used as the Ag ion precursor, and PVP acts as the soft template to direct the anisotropic assembly of Ag atoms into NWs. By carefully controlling the quantity of reagents, temperature, and reaction time, gram-scale AgNWs with a diameter in the range of 20–100 nm and an aspect ratio of 100–2000 can be easily obtained.63 To further improve the aspect ratio of AgNWs, Lee and coworkers recently developed a successive multistep polyol method, in which previous generation AgNWs were repeatedly concentrated and introduced into fresh EG solutions containing a suitable amount of AgNO3 and PVP.66,67 By carefully tuning the conditions, the average length of AgNWs can be increased step-by-step. Ultralong AgNWs with a length over 500 μm (aspect ratio >3000) can be achieved after 7 generations of growth. Some groups have also been devoted to developing SMEs by using ultrathin AuNWs, with diameters as low as 2 nm, as the building blocks.68–70 The AuNWs are mainly prepared via solution chemistries, in which complexes of HAuCl4 are highly efficiently reduced in the presence of hexadecyl-trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) or oleylamine as the capping agent.71–74 The as-prepared ultrathin AuNWs show high aspect ratios (>1000) that are very promising for construting percolative pathways with low thresholds (Fig. 5a and b).
 Fig. 5  Methods for the growth of ultra-long NWs. (a) Synthesis processes of very long AgNWs through the successive multistep growth (SMG) method and (b) SEM pictures of AgNWs by the SMG method after 1 and 7 times growth. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic process of R2R production of transparent silver nanofiber (AgNF) network electrodes and (d) the corresponding SEM images of the as prepared AgNF network in different magnifications (scale bars: 10 μm and 2 μm and 300 nm from left to right). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the ultralong AgNF by an electrospining and stretching method. (f) Optical images of the cracked PVP sacrificial layer and disconnected AgNFs according to stretching rate of 12.5, 25, 37.5, and 50 cm s−1, respectively. (g) AgNF length as a function of stretching rate. Scale bars are 100 μm. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, CuNWs have come under increased attention as a potential substituent for expensive AuNWs and AgNWs due to their extremely low cost (100 times less expensive than Ag) and relatively high conductivity (only 4% less conductive than Ag). Scalable and low-cost solution synthesis approaches have also been invented to prepare CuNWs. The general chemistry is similar to that of AgNW synthesis, in which Cu ions/complexes are reduced by efficient reducing agents such as hydrazine,76–78 glucose,79–81 silanes,82 or benzoin radicals,83 or by catalyst-assisted methods28,84,85 in the presence of suitable capping molecules. Alkyl amines including ethylenediamine,76,86 hexadecylamine79 and oleylamine84 have been demonstrated as suitable capping agents to produce CuNWs with diameters of 15–60 nm and a length in the range of 10–100 μm. However, the well-known intrinsic weakness of Cu, rapid surface oxidation under ambient conditions, brings a subtaintial challenge for the practical application of CuNWs. Passivating the surface of CuNWs by introducing dense and conductive graphene,87–89 metal oxide,80 Au,90 or Ni28 shells makes them more stable when exposed to air. However, such passivation strategies increase the operation procedures and the production cost, deteriorating their advantages in SME fabrications.
Apart from the wet chemical synthesis, there are also some innovative methods to prepare high quality 1D metal materials. For example, Wu's group proposed a blown spinning approach to prepare Ag nanofibers (NFs) with aspect ratios higher than 10000 (Fig. 5c and d).91,92 The AgNFs were fabricated through a gas-assistant blown spinning of AgNO3/PVP precursor fibers and subsequent calcination91 or UV irradiation.92 During the blown spinning, the solution was quickly solidified into fibers by the shearing force when passing the nozzle. Then in situ reduction of AgNO3 into Ag metal and decomposition of PVP were simultaneously carried out under thermal annealing at 280 °C or UV irradiation, resulting in highly conductive AgNF networks with a diameter of 200–1000 nm and a length over 2 mm.
AgNFs with high aspect ratios can also be synthesized through electrostatic spinning.93 Very recently, Ji et al. developed a novel fabrication strategy to prepare metallic nanofibers (NFs) with controllable aspect ratios (Fig. 5e–g).94 They electrospun a AgNP suspension on a PVP-coated PDMS substrate and heated the resultant materials at 180 °C in air to sinter the AgNPs and form highly aligned, ultralong AgNFs with an average diameter of 300 nm. Then AgNFs with aspect ratios ranging from 167 to 700 were achieved by uniaxially stretching the PDMS substrate under various strain rates. The cracking of the brittle PVP film during stretching caused the fracture of the ultralong AgNFs into shorter ones. The resultant AgNFs can be redispersed to form inks by soaking the samples in water and dissolving the PVP. Remarkably, the 1D AgNFs fabricated through this method possess much lower length distribution (deviation ∼10%) than those prepared by wet chemical systhesis methods.94
Metal precursors. 
Apart from the direct construction of SMEs based on metallic 0D and 1D nanoparticles, there are also some reports using metal-containing precursor materials as the building block to achieve metal electrodes through a post-fabrication transistion process. This approach is also known as metal organic decomposition (MOD), in which solutions of metal organic compounds patterned on substrates are decomposed into metal under suitable conditions. Recently, tremendous interest has been evoked to develop Ag and Cu-based MOD solutions mainly due to the more controllable properties and easier operation of these solutions than the dispersions of metal particles. Ag-Based solutions such as silver carboxylate in xylene,95 silver acetate in aqueous ammonium hydroxide and formic acid,96 and silver neodecanoate in aqueous ethyl cellulose,97 have been examined as efficient precursors to offer SMEs with high σdc even equal to the bulk Ag after treatment by heating96,98 or light exposure.97 Similarly, Cu-based MOD solutions composed of Cu complexes and solvents have also been widely investigated to prepare SMEs through thermal/optical post-treaments.99–104 However, the as-fabricted Cu electrodes commonly showed a σdc nearly one order of magnitude lower than that of bulk Cu, which might be caused by the rapid surface oxidation of Cu.


3.1.2 Chemical fabrication processes of SMEs. 
With the advancement of various solution-based fabrication technologies, it is very convenient to construct SMEs on flexible substrates with solution-processable metal nanomaterials or metal-containing precursors. According to the working principle, the fabrication strategies can be roughly divided into three categories, namely, printing, coating, and spinning. The printing technique is able to make a predesigned pattern directly, while coating and spinning often should be combined with other processing approaches to achieve patterned electrodes. In the following, we will introduce these three categories in the aspects of working principle, application scenario and advantage/disadvantage in processing SMEs specifically by using chemically synthesized metal micro/nanomaterials as building blocks. For conciseness, fabrication of metal electrodes on hard substrates and the fabrication of other components of electronic or optoelectronic devices using these will not be considered.
Printing-based processing. 
Printing is a sort of low-temperature processing technique, which allows for the deposition of patterned films on diverse substrates (Fig. 6). Specifically, such a solution-based and low-temperature technique meets the demand for fast development of soft electronics. The printing techniques that have been applied in the fabrication of SMEs mainly include inkjet printing,105–107 screen printing108–110 and nanoimprinting lithography (NIL).111–113 In a typical printing process of SMEs, metal pastes or inks are deposited on soft substrates, and patterned by a stencil (stencil printing and screen printing), nozzle movement controlled by software (inkjet printing), or pre-processed nanopatterns on the substrate (NIL). The pastes and inks used in a printing process can be both suspensions of metal or metal oxide micro/nanomaterials and solutions of metal salts. The metal micro/nanomaterials include Ag/Cu/Au/Ni or alloy micro/nano-particles114–118 and metal nanowires.119 The metal oxide nanoparticles for printing include CuO nanoparticles and NiO nanoparticles.117,120 For printed metal electrodes using a solution of metal salt, only noble metals have been reported, mainly because of their highly reducible nature.121–123 It was reported that the addition of heterogeneous metal or metal oxide particles, such as Zn particles and ZnO particles, in a metal paste or ink can significantly improve the performance of the final devices.108,124 The substrate used for printing processing of soft metal electrodes can be a polymer film,125–127 fabric,128–130 or paper,131–133etc. Polymer films are usually used for the fabrication of photoelectric devices, such as solar cells and OLEDs, which require optical transparency and a smooth surface. Fabric and paper can be used in the fabrication of wearable electric circuits and sensors, etc.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the printing processes of the fabrication patterned SMEs. 
Different printing techniques are suitable for different application scenarios, depending on the required properties and performance of electrodes. The resolution of typical printing techniques is demonstrated in Fig. 7a. For comparison, electrospinning, which is an attractive and powerful technique to yield nanopatterns and will be discussed in the following section, is also shown in the figure. Screen printing is a well industrialized technique. In a typical manual screen printing process, a mesh is used to transfer ink onto a substrate, except in areas impermeable to the ink by a blocking stencil. A blade or squeegee is moved across the screen to fill the open mesh apertures with ink, and a reverse stroke then causes the screen to touch the substrate momentarily along a line of contact (Fig. 6). This causes the ink to wet the substrate and the desired pattern will be transferred onto the substrate. Screen printing is characterized by high processing efficiency, low cost, and suitability for continuous roll-to-roll (R2R) fabrication. The metal inks used in screen printing should have relatively high viscosity, in order to avoid uncontrolled leakage of inks from the screen. Various kinds of commercial metal inks are available for screen printing, of which the silver inks predominate overwhelmingly. The resolution of the patterns processed by screen printing usually drops in the range of tens of micrometers, which is only slightly better than those fabricated through direct writing approaches (as shown in Fig. 7e–g), making this technique not suitable for processing high-resolution patterns. Because of the high viscosity of the inks, screen printed metal electrodes usually have relatively big thickness, which is not beneficial for flexible devices. Soft metal electrodes prepared by screen printing usually aimed at the applications of solar cells (as a back contact),134–138 lighting sources,139–141 thin film transistors,142–146 flexible or stretchable antenna,147–151 soft sensors,119,152,153 and electric circuits,129,154,155etc.Ref. 155 and 156 give a more comprehensive review of the applications of screen printed electrodes. Recently, a stretchable metal electrode processed by screen printing has been reported.139
 Fig. 7  Metal electrodes prepared by different processing techniques. (a) The resolution of typical printing techniques. (b) Transparent electrode of PET with embedded Ag networks prepared by the nanoimprinting technique with a feature size of ∼3 μm. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible and stretchable CuNW transparent conductive film prepared by the electrospinning template method with a feature size of ∼140 nm. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Inkjet-printed flexible Au electrode arrays showing a minimum feature size of 62 μm. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Stencil printed elastic conductor with a width of ∼500 μm. The scale bars are 5 mm (grey) and 2 cm (black) respectively. Reproduced with permission.223 (f) A piece of polyimide film with screen printed silver patterns, the width of silver line could be as low as 22 μm. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (g) Conductive electronic devices and optical images of bendable silver electrode arrays prepared by direct writing. The line width is 620 μm. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Compared with screen printing, inkjet printing is not so efficient, but its processing resolution can be dramatically enhanced by diminishing the size of the printhead, optimizing the jetting mode to reduce the drop size, and modifying the surface nature of the substrates to inhibit the diffusion of the ink.157 The smallest feature size of the reported SMEs with inkjet printing technology has reached 5–10 μm. Inkjet printing is a non-contact, drop-on-demand type of printing technique, which outweighs screen printing in avoiding the contamination to any pre-made pattern and the substrate and is very material-saving. Inkjet printing requires careful control of the rheological property, drying speed, and wetting property of the metal inks to the substrate to avoid the clogging of the printhead and improve the resolution of the patterns.158 Metal inks with low viscosity, high fluidity, high colloidal stability, and small size of the metal particles are beneficial for practical use. The inks used by inkjet printing can be a suspension of metal nanoparticles,114–116,124,159–163 metal nanowires,121,164,165 metal oxide nanoparticles,120,166 organic/inorganic metal precursors122,167–170 and mixtures of metal nanoparticles and metal precursors.121 For example, Fig. 7d shows an inkjet-printed Au pattern with a feature size of 62 μm by using an AuNP solution as the ink. The reduction of the metal particle size can significantly bring down the postsintering temperature of the metal patterns.114,159 Organic ligands are added to the ink to stabilize the metal nanoparticles and tune the rheological property of the inks. Various kinds of metal electrodes, such as silver,107,122,171 copper,116,166,172 gold,115,161,173 nickel117 and alloys118,124,163 have been prepared by inkjet printing on various kinds of flexible or stretchable substrates, such as PET,120,160,164 PEN,174–176 PC,177,178 PI179–181 and rubber.171,182,183 Very recently, a surface-embedded stretchable metal electrode has been fabricated by direct inkjet printing.182
NIL is a technique for fabrication of patterns with nanometer-scale feature size. It creates patterns by mechanical deformation of the imprint resist and subsequent processes. The imprint resist is typically a monomer or polymer formulation that is cured by heat or UV light during the imprinting. Adhesion between the resist and the template is controlled to allow proper release. For preparation of metal patterns using NIL, usually post metal deposition on patterned substrates is employed. The metal deposition methods include direct metal evaporation,184–186 and site-selective casting of the metal nanoparticle ink and post sintering.70,112,187 When metal inks with proper rheological and drying properties are used, metal patterns of nanosized features can also be processed directly without post metal deposition.188 The fast development of soft photoelectric devices, for example flexible solar cells, flexible photo detectors, and flexible lighting sources, has boosted the demand for high-performance transparent electrodes with high transmittance, high flexibility and low Rs. The NIL has been established as a promising technique for processing such high-quality transparent electrodes (Fig. 7b).189 Some recent works have demonstrated the feasibility of using metal ink in NIL processing of large-area flexible transparent electrodes for industrial applications.190–192 In a typical process, an interconnected nano-trench is firstly patterned on the polymer substrate by nanoimprinting. Then the ink of metal nanoparticles is pasted over the substrate, and surplus ink is scraped away to make a clean surface with the trenches filled by metal ink. After post treating, for example annealing and wet etching, the transparent electrode can be obtained. The flexible transparent electrode with the best performance prepared by NIL demonstrated a Rs of 8.7 Ω sq−1 at the transmittance of 88%.187 In addition, metal grids by NIL can be embedded in a flexible substrate, thus rendering a smooth surface and improved adhesion to the substrate.41,112 Such property is very useful for improving the performance of many devices, especially for solar cells and OLEDs.112,185 Nano-imprinting provides the highest pattern resolution of the metal electrode, and various high-performance soft metal electrodes have been successfully prepared on different soft substrates.70,111,184 However, NIL lacks high enough processing efficiency and is difficult to manipulate. This is the bottleneck that hampers the industrialization of NIL for fabrication of soft metal electrodes.
Coating-based processing. 
Coating processing techniques include spin coating,193–195 spray coating,196–198 doctor-blade or Meyer-rod coating,199–201 dip coating,202,203etc. (Fig. 8). Spin coating is a frequently used lab-scale technique enabling the preparation of metal films with a thickness down to several nanometers. Scalable deposition of large-area metal films using spin coating is not feasible. In addition, it requires high surface smoothness and a certain degree of stiffness of the substrate, which may limit its application for soft electrodes. Spray coating can be conducted on various substrates for the continuous and scalable fabrication of large-area thin films. It is less dependent on the surface morphology of the substrate, and also can be conveniently integrated with R2R systems. Besides, spary coating can deposit patterned structures by using shadow masks. However, like inkjet printing, spray coating also requires careful control of the rheological property, drying speed, and wetting property (to the substrate). Doctor-blade coating is also suitable for scalable and large-area applications. It can precisely control the thickness and uniformity of the metal film by jointly tuning the concentration of the metal suspension or solution, and the gap between the edge of the blade and the surface of the substrate. The relatively low coating speed is the biggest obstacle toward its industrialization. Dip coating is the simplest among all the coating methods. It's easy to operate, and can be applied to various materials and substrates. Nevertheless, the thickness uniformity of the film deposited by dip coating usually is poor, and both sides of the substrate will be coated by the target material.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of coating and spinning processes for the fabrication of SMEs. 
When making SMEs, typically, suspensions of metal nanomaterials or solutions of metal precursors will be first cast on soft substrates by coating to form a thin film. Then the patterning process will be performed through site-selective sintering by the means of a laser,204 focused ion beam,205etc., after which the residual non-sintered metal nanomaterials or precursors will be removed by washing. The metal nanomaterials include metal NPs,204,206,207 metal NWs,194,195 metal oxide nanoparticles,117etc., and the substrate can be various kinds of commercially available polymer sheets. This strategy is extensively applied to fabricate metal-based soft transparent electrodes for many applications like flexible solar cells,208 flexible tough panels,207 flexible supercapacitors,209 flexible OLEDs210 and flexible transparent heaters.197
Spinning-based processing. 
Very similar to the working principle of spray coating, the spinning technique also relies on ejection, smashing, deposition and drying of the solution on the substrate. But the ejected and smashed solution jets will be elongated during flying to the substrate, due to the spinnability of the solution. Finally, a fibrous film can be deposited on the substrate. The driving force in a spinning process can be centrifugation (centrifugation spinning), high-pressure air flow, and electrical field (electrospinning), or their combination. The spinning technique is suitable for synthesis of various kinds of fibers with size down to tens of nanometers, including polymer fibers, inorganic non-metallic fibers, and metallic fibers. For fabricating inorganic fibers, usually post thermal annealing is required. Among the various spinning processes, electrospinning (demonstrated in Fig. 8) has drawn the most research interest, because of its ability in fabricating ultra small fibers (Fig. 7c), and its versatility in controlling the assembly of fibers. Electrospinning has great potential for industrial fabrication of large area fibrous films. In addition, it's also easy to be integrated with R2R processes for continuous fabrication.
Electrospinning processing is particularly suitable for making soft transparent metal electrodes. Transparent electrodes composed of high aspect-ratio metal nanowires synthesized through wet chemical reaction, or metal grids prepared based on lithography and deposition/plating have demonstrated their bright future in replacing the commercial ITO transparent electrode.41,211 However, the limited length of the chemically synthesized metal wire network and the capping agent on the surface of the metal wires ultimately lead to relatively low conductivity of the electrode, while metal grids require high-cost lithography and are difficult to be scaled up. Therefore, researchers began to investigate electrospun metal nanofibrous networks as transparent electrodes. The pioneering work was carried out by H. Wu and Y. Cui, et al.34 By electrospinning PVA aqueous solution containing copper acetate, and post calcination, they prepared a Cu nanofibrous network with a fiber diameter down to ∼100 nm. Due to the ultra small diameter, and perfect welding of the inter-fiber junctions, the Cu fiber network demonstrated Rs as low as 50 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance as high as 90%. By applying a pair of parallelly placed metal plates as a fiber collector, metal grids can be obtained due to oriented assembly of the nanofibers. To inhibit the oxidation induced conductivity degradation of the electrospun copper nanofibrous electrode, P. Hsu, and Y. Cui, et al.212 performed an atomic layer deposition process to coat the copper nanofibers with a passivation layer of aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) and aluminum oxide, thus remarkably enhancing the chemical stability of the transparent electrode in ambient environment. They also demonstrated that mesoscale metal wires derived by near-field electrospinning could substantially improve the performance of transparent electrodes composed of chemically synthesized metal nanowires, oxides, or conductive polymers.213 The performance of the transparent electrode based on electrospun metal nanofibers was further enhanced by the same group by employing an electrospun nanofiber templated deposition of metal nanotroughs, which exhibited a very low resistance of 2 Ω sq−1 at a high transmittance of 90%. Meanwhile, the metal nanotroughs demonstrated very high flexibility, making them promising for flexible devices.19 Many other improvements have been made in this area in the aspects of further improving the performance of electrospun nanofiber electrodes,214–217 fabricating other metal-based nanofiber electrodes,215,218,219 and developing other approaches to room-temperature fabrication processes.220,221 Very recently, S. Lin and H. Wu et al.92 proposed a strategy by combining R2R blow spinning with simultaneous UV reduction for large-scale and continuous and room-temperature fabrication of flexible transparent electrode with Rs of 12 Ω sq−1 at a transmittance as high as 95%, paving the way for the industrialization of the spinning technique for fabrication of metal-based transparent electrodes.


3.1.3 Post-treatments. 
As mentioned previously, the synthesized metallic building blocks are commonly capped with organic or polymeric stabilizers. After additive manufacturing and drying, the presence of remaining capping agents at the junction sites of metallic building blocks prevents their close contact, resulting in increased tunneling distance of charge carriers and low Rs of the SMEs. As demonstrated by Hu et al., networks of single AgNWs with an electrical resistance of only several hundreds of ohms exhibited huge NW–NW junction resistance higher than 108 Ω after preparation and simple drying.201 Therefore, post-treatment, which is also known as sintering or welding, is necessary to efficiently remove the capping agents and ensure an improved Rs for practical applications. Until now, a variety of sintering processes including thermal sintering,1,42,225–227 optical sintering,44,66,228–231 microwave sintering,232 electrical sintering,233 and chemical sintering,234–237 have been reported to treat the SMEs. The mechanism underlying the sintering is the fusion of metallic building blocks when exposed to high energy which could cause vibration of electrons and the corresponding localized temperature rise. It should be mentioned that the sintering process is also constructive to improve the adhesion strength between the metal layer and polymer substrates, which affords SMEs with better mechanical flexibility.1
Thermal sintering is the most commonly used method to treat the metal electrodes, in which the capping agents surrounding the metallic particles are decomposed by simple heating of the samples for a certain time. Thermal sintering depends greatly on the diameter of the metallic NPs and the volatilization or decomposition temperatures of the capping agents. Generally, improving the sintering temperature and extending the sintering time are beneficial to enhance the conductivity of the SMEs. For example, printed AgNP lines exhibited lower resistivity after annealing at higher temperature for shorter time intervals along with morphology evolution (Fig. 9a). Wiley's group also confirmed that AgNW films sintered at 70 °C are more conductive (1.8 × 10−5 Ω cm) than AgNP films annealed at 300 °C.225 However, too high a sintering temperature should be avoided to prevent damage to the underlying flexible polymeric substrates of SMEs whose thermal stability are much lower than that of metals.
 Fig. 9  Post-treatment strategies of the fabrication of SMEs. (a) The microstructural evolution of the printed silver microelectrodes treated with different temperatures from 150 to 550 °C. Reproduced with permission.1 (b) SEM and HRTEM images of AgNW network electrodes after laser nano-welding treatment, which show the well-connected junction spots. The successful local laser nano-welding at NW junctions guarantees both good electrical conductivity and mechanical compliance of the Ag NW transparent electrodes under large mechanical bending. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the moisture treatment process for capillary-force-induced cold welding of AgNWs and the mechanism of capillary interaction between two particles connected with a liquid bridge, and SEM images of an AgNW before and after moisture treatment. Scale bars are 200 nm and 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (d and e) SEM images of AgNW electrodes before and after mechanical pressing at 25 MPa for 5 s. Reproduced with permission.242 (f) SEM images of a pristine AgNW network before nanosoldering and a AgNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid film after nanosoldering. The inset scale bars are 1 μm and 500 nm respectively. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another efficient sintering method is illuminating the metal electrode with lasers, flash lamps, and other light sources. When exposed to suitable photons, the surface plasmon resonance of metal nanomaterials will lead to a localized temperature rise to melt the adjacent metal nanomaterials. Such a photonic sintering is advantageous due to the tailorable illumination conditions including the power of the light source and the illuminating time and area. Therefore, a rapid and selective sintering with a predesigned pattern and controllable heat generation can be achieved. For example, Ko et al. demonstrated an ink-jet printed OFET by using a photonic sintered SME.44 They used a focused Ar ion laser with the wavelength of 514.5 nm to sinter the printed AuNPs into patterns and washed away the unsintered NPs to form patterns. Lee et al. carefully characterized the structure of optically sintered AgNWs.66Fig. 9b shows the SEM and HRTEM pictures of sintered AgNWs after laser irradiation. At the junction site, the top and bottom AgNW pairs fused together with good crystalline characteristics. Such perfect structure ensures both the good electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility of the SMEs. However, the irradiation energy of the light beam should be carefully limited, otherwise the flexible substrates or the metal networks will be destroyed with overdose of photons. Oh and Lee have demonstrated that AgNW transparent electrodes converted into insulating electrodes by irradiating with a nanosecond-pulse ultraviolet laser (wavelength = 355 nm, power = 5 W) for seconds,238 because pristine AgNWs were cut into shorter ones by the laser and the percolating network collapsed. A low-energy photonic sintering has been proposed by using flash lamps with lower energy than lasers.228,239,240 The metal electrodes can also be optically sintered at an air/water interface first, and then transferred onto polymer surfaces, to avoid the photo-induced damage of flexible substrates.235 Usually, SMEs treated by optical sintering processes show relatively lower performance than that of thermally annealed ones.97 In addition, mechanical pressing is also an effective post-treatment to obtain low resistance (8.6 Ω sq−1) and smooth AgNW transparent electrodes (Fig. 9d and e).
Better contact of metallic building blocks in SMEs can also be easily and cost-efficiently realized by wet chemical treatments. For example, the contact resistance of AgNW electrodes can be dramatically reduced by immersing into a boiling HAuCl4 solution,201 immersing in NaCl, KCl, or CaCl2 solutions,241 or coating with PEDOT/PSS conducting polymers (Fig. 9f).234 Recently, Liu and coworkers reported a capillary force sintering process to achieve highly conductive AgNW electrodes (Fig. 9c). They found that the Rs of the AgNW electrode can be reduced from over 6.3 × 104 to 37 Ω sq−1 by exposing to moisture for seconds.236 They proposed that the water droplets at junction sites induce capillary force upon drying which can cause the cold-welding of AgNWs. This simple, rapid, and low-temperature sintering method is highly desirable for fabrication of SMEs.

3.2 
          In situ growth of metal electrodes on polymeric substrates
In this strategy, metal is directly grown on the substrate through in situ reduction of metal salts in a plating solution. The flexible substrate is firstly modified with suitable surface properties such as immobilization of catalytic moieties or a conductive layer to allow the chemical or electrochemical plating process. It is superior to the first strategy in that post-treatment is usually not necessary and the entire fabrication is often carried out at a low temperature, which is favorable for the polymeric substrates. The conductivity, surface smoothness and substrate adhesion are also much better than those made by the first strategy. However, since it requires immersing the entire substrate in a liquid bath with a complex mixture of metal salts, this strategy may not be used to fabricate SMEs on substrates pre-decorated with other functional materials.

3.2.1 Electroless deposition. 
Electroless metal plating refers to the deposition of metals and alloys by autocatalytic electrochemical reactions without the application of external electric current. It is a continuous chemical deposition process on a catalytic substrate without consuming the substrate, and thus is different from the metal displacement reaction which will stop automatically once the surface of the less noble metal is replaced by the target metal completely.243 The typical process is shown in Fig. 10. For example, a classic Ni electroless plating method developed by A. Brenner and G. E. Riddell uses NiCl2 as a Ni source and NaH2PO2 as a reductant.244 The partial reactions are listed as follows:Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni, φ0 = −0.025 VH2PO2− + H2O → H2PO3− + 2H+ + 2e−, φ0 = 0.05 V
 Fig. 10  Electroless metal deposition methods on different substrates. (a) Schematic diagrams of the metallization process through inkjet-printed or pen-written activating patterns followed by electroless copper plating. Reproduced with permission.268 Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of electroless metallization of photoresist-patterned surfaces coated with polydopamine. Photoresist (blue) was removed before silver metallization (left) or after copper metallization (right). Reproduced with permission.271 (c) Localized ligand induced electroless plating (LIEP) process. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim (d) Schematic illustration of polymer-assisted metal deposition (PAMD). Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) PAMD with P(MBP-co-METAC). Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Such reaction only occurs on an active catalytic surface, which is usually of a group VIII metal such as Fe, Co, Ni, and Pd.245–248 The reaction is self-catalyzed because the generated metal Ni functions as the catalyst itself. As a result, the electroless deposition of Ni can also be initiated by metals that are more electropositive than Ni, since catalytic Ni will be generated on the surface of the electropositive metal by a displacement reaction. Autocatalytic electroless metal plating has been studied for decades, and multiple methods have been developed for the deposition of Co, Ni, Cu, Ag, Au, Pt, etc.243,249
Electroless plating bath. 
The electroless plating bath usually consists of precursor solution A and reductive solution B. Solution A is a mixed solution of metal salt, complexing agent and stabilizer (if needed), while solution B contains a reducing agent that is more electronegative comparing with the metal ion. Table 3 lists some typical examples of electroless metal plating systems. The combinations of metal salts, complexing agents and reducing agents are diverse for different plating systems. The metal source is always a metal salt that is not only soluble but also stable in water. The complexing agent has multiple functions that are important for the efficient and stable deposition of the metal. First, the complexing agents stabilize the metal ions to avoid unwanted reactions in the solution. Second, they work as a buffer to prevent dramatic change in pH, which may result in degradation of the solution. Third, the complexing agents coordinate with metal ions to reduce the concentration of free metal ions in the solution, thus preventing the direct reaction between the metal ions and reducing agents in the solution rather than on the catalytic surface. For example, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is a commonly used complexing agent for electroless Cu plating in alkaline solution.250,251 An alkaline environment is preferred for the deposition of Cu by the Cu2+/HCHO system because the redox potential for HCHO is lower at high pH. However, the formation of Cu(OH)2 precipitates at high pH will stop the Cu deposition. Hence, EDTA is applied as a stabilizer for the Cu plating solution by functioning as both pH buffer and ligand. The reducing agent is a water-soluble mild reductant such as formaldehyde (HCHO), dimethylamine borane (DMAB), hydrazine (N2H4) and sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2).252–254 This reducing agent should be neither too strong nor too weak for successful electroless metal plating. If the reducing agent is too strong, the reduction of metal ions will happen in the solution rather than prior to the deposition on the substrate. If the reducing agent is too weak, the plating cannot happen spontaneously under ambient conditions.
Table 3 Typical recipe for electroless plating of metals on soft substrates




Metal
Metal source
Complexing agent
Reducing agent
Ref.





a Dimethylamine borane.
b Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.





Ni
NiCl2
Sodium citrate
NaH2PO2

244



NiCl2
Ethylenediamine
NaBH4

255



NiCl2
Gluconic acid
DMABa

256







Pt
Na2Pt(OH)6
Ethylamine
N2H4

257







Cu
CuSO4
Potassium sodium tartrate
HCHO

258



CuSO4
EDTAb
DMABa

259







Ag
AgNO3
NH4OH
Glucose, tartaric acid

260



AgNO3
NH4OH
Potassium sodium tartrate

261



NaAg(CN)2
NaCN
DMABa

262







Au
KAu(CN)2
KCN
KBH4

263



KAu(CN)2
Sodium citrate
NaH2PO2

264



KAuCl4
—
CH3OCH2CH2N(CH3)2:BH3

265





Substrate pre-treatment for electroless deposition. 
Apart from the plating bath, the substrate is also very important for electroless metal plating. As mentioned above, the electroless metal plating normally takes place in the presence of a catalyst. Hence, the surface of the substrate should be either catalytic itself or modified with the catalyst. The simplest method is using catalytic metals or alloys such as Cu and steel as substrates.266,267 Since commonly used flexible substrates do not have catalytic activity, a pre-modification with catalytic moieties before metal plating is needed. Generally, there are two strategies for the modification of catalysts on flexible substrates. One is direct coating/printing of the catalyst/catalytic precursor on the substrates, and the other is absorbing the catalyst/catalytic precursor with polymer-modified substrates. Fig. 10a demonstrates a simple method to pattern a catalyst on flexible PET and PI substrates by direct printing of AgNO3 ink.268 The viscosity of the ink is adjusted by ethylene glycol to fulfil the requirement of inkjet-printing and direct writing.
The direct printing method is simple and effective, but the adhesion between metal and substrate is often unsatisfactory. To address this issue, employing a layer of polymer as an interfacial layer between the substrate and the metal is an effective approach. For example, polydopamine is a widely used adhesive material, and the ease of self-polymerization makes it convenient for surface modification.269,270Fig. 10b illustrates a simple strategy to deposit patterned metal thin films with the aid of a polydopamine adhesive layer,271 which is found to be a versatile modifier on noble metals, oxides, polymers, etc. However, such a method requires a photolithography process to pattern the substrate, which limits the scalability and processing speed. Instead, Gracia et al. developed a method that can deposit patterned metal by either photolithography or direct printing of the resist. Poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) is grafted on PET and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as the ligand for Cu2+, which is further reduced to Cu0 seeds for electroless plating of Cu (Fig. 10c).272 The chemical bonding between PAA and the substrate provided firm adhesion between the Cu film and the substrate. As a result, the Cu on PET passed the industrial adhesion test that the Cu film could not be peeled-off from the PET substrate using Scotch tape. Apart from PAA, poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl-trimethylammonium chloride] (PMETAC) is another functional polymer that is often used for catalyst immobilization. The quaternary ammonium groups in PMETAC show strong affinity with PdCl42− ions, which are versatile catalytic precursors for the electroless deposition of multiple metals.273 Guo et al. and Yu et al. developed multiple surface coating methods to graft PMETAC on different substrates, such as surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP), free-radical polymerization, and crosslinking between the substrate and poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl trimethylammonium chloride-co-3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate] [P(METAC-co-MPTS)] (Fig. 10d).29,274,275 This polymer-based electroless plating method, namely, polymer-assisted metal deposition (PAMD) is suitable for the deposition of both patterned and unpatterned metal thin films. For the unpatterned fabrication, the polymer/copolymer modified substrates are dipped in an aqueous solution of (NH4)2PdCl4, and then immersed in the metal plating bath. For the patterned fabrications, a sticky paste consisting of (NH4)2PdCl4 and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) is printed on the polymer/copolymer modified substrates to avoid the diffusion of the catalytic precursor. The polymer/copolymer is uniformly modified on these substrates; the acquired metal thin film shows very low surface roughness on flat PET substrates, which is desirable for flexible thin film electronics.
A common disadvantage of all these polymer-grafting techniques is that the grafting process is usually time consuming. To address that, Yu et al. recently reported photoreactive copolymer poly(4-methacryloyl benzophenone-co-2-methacryloyloxy ethyltrimethylammonium chloride) [P(MBP-co-METAC)] that can be grafted on multiple organic substrates by UV-induced crosslinking (Fig. 10e).276 The copolymer shows good solubility in methanol, ethanol, 2-methoxyethanol and some other solvents, so it is easy to dissolve it as an ink for inkjet printing even by a household inkjet printer. The UV-induced crosslinking process only takes several minutes, and the obtained metal electrodes show good conductivity and mechanical robustness. Such printed metal electrodes are demonstrated to be eligible for high performance OSCs, OFETs, etc.276


3.2.2 Electrodeposition. 
Electrodeposition of metals, also traditionally called electroplating, is the coating of an electrically conductive object with a layer of metal using electrical current resulting in a thin, smooth, even coating of metal on the object.278 Electrodeposition of metal involves the reduction of metal ions from aqueous or other kinds of electrolytes. The reduction of metal ions Mz+ in electrolyte could be briefly represented by the following general formula:279Msolutionz+ + ze− → Mlattice
Electrodeposition of metals is widely used in various industries for coating objects with a layer of metal with some desired properties. The universality of electrodeposition in industry is mainly because of the following advantages: thickness and morphology can be precisely controlled by adjusting the electrochemical parameters (such as current density, deposition time, electrolyte composition and concentration, current type (direct current and pulse current), etc.); higher deposition rates are possible; and the low-cost solution process requires inexpensive equipment, when compared with physical vapor deposition (PVD, such as thermal evaporation and sputtering) in terms of simplicity and cost effective use of expensive equipment and metal materials.
Direct electrodeposition on pretreated flexible substrates. 
It should be pointed out that the object used in electrodeposition needs to be electrically conductive. However, unlike metals, most reported flexible or wearable substrates are naturally non-conductive, and require special pre-treatment before the electrochemical deposition process (Fig. 11). The two typical strategies for pre-treatments include electroless deposition of a thin metal layer and seeding the non-conductive surface with an electronically conductive catalyst or activator (such as palladium (Pd) and/or Tin (Sn) colloid), and then the pre-treated flexible substrate can be subjected to the regular electrodeposition to achieve complete metallization.280–282 In recent years, some conductive carbon materials, such as conductive polymers, carbon nanofibers and graphene, have attracted remarkable research interest. These conductive carbon materials could be coated on flexible substrates in some facile technologies, which could enable the non-conductive substrates to be electrodeposited with different kinds of metals. Since electroless deposition has already been introduced in the previous section, we only illustrate the two latter strategies, metal seeding and conductive carbon material layer deposition, for electrodeposition of metals on non-conductive flexible substrates.
 Fig. 11  Electrodeposition methods on different pretreated flexible substrates. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for copper electroplated wire for transparent conducting electrodes CuEW-TCEs. (b) SEM images CuEW-TCEs. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the electrospinning process used to fabricate the core–shell-structured carbon/metal hybrid mesh (CS-CMHM) films, and SEM images of PAN precursor nanofibers (upper left), carbon nanofibers after heat treatment of the PAN precursor (middle left), CS-CMHMs (down left), which were fabricated by electroplating Au on the surface of the carbon nanofiber templates, and CS-CMHMs at various magnifications (right). Reproduced with permission.293 (d) The relationship of resistance variation with the electrodeposition time (upper left) and the SEM images of Ni@GPUS with different electrodeposition times: 1 min, 3 min, 5 min, 7 min and 9 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission.294 Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The conductive seed layers reported mostly are noble metals, such as Pd, Pt, Au, etc. The deposition methods of these thin seed layers on the flexible substrates are usually thermal evaporation or sputtering.283–288 Some research groups used conductive inks consisting of metal nanoparticles or nanowires to pattern seed layers through coating or printing techniques, such as doctor blading, inkjet printing, and photolithography.289–291 Subsequent electroplating of target metals could be easily electrochemically deposited on the seed-coated flexible substrates. An et al. produced copper electroplated nanowire meshes for transparent conducting electrodes as shown in Fig. 11a and b. A polymer nanofiber network is fabricated by the electrospinning technique. Pt metal seeds are produced on the nanofiber through vacuum sputtering or non-vacuum chemical bath deposition. In the process of electroplating, fiber junctions are bonded via metal deposition on the outer surface of the platinum-seeded nanofibers. The electroplated copper fills the space around the crossed nanofibers, which dramatically reduces contact resistance at the junctions.
In addition to conductive metal seeds, some researches indicate that conductive carbon materials could be used to assist metal electrodeposition.292–295 Hub et al.293 controlled the electroplating process to uniformly generate a metal layer on conductive carbon nanofibers. The conductive carbon nanofibers, which were processed using a heat treatment (carbonization), provided bi-functionality: they formed conductive core channels and artificial supports of the metal structures (Fig. 11c). Han et al.294 introduced multilayer graphene to support metal electrodeposition. A polyurethane sponge fully coated with multilayer graphene was formed, which was subsequently coated with Ni metal via an electrodeposition process (Fig. 11d).
Electrodeposition on conductive rigid substrates and subsequent transfer to flexible substrates. 
Since the electroplating of metals on conventional conductive substrates is already very mature, some research groups employed the transfer technique to transfer electroplated metal layers to flexible substrates. For example, Su et al. firstly fabricated a uniform and continuous Ni film by electroplating metallic Ni on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and then transferred it onto a flexible PET substrate via hot-pressing.296 Li's group developed embedded metal-mesh transparent electrodes by an approach combining lithography, electrodeposition, and imprint transfer.40 FTO glass patterned with photoresist is obtained through a lithography technique. In the following electrodeposition step, the selected metal is deposited inside the lithographically defined trenches and fills the trenches with a uniform metal mesh. Finally, the metal mesh is transferred and embedded in the plastic film. Liu et al. reported a similar study where a patterned photoresist was obtained through laser direct writing and the electroplating substrate was Ni metal.297 Furthermore, they promoted this approach to develop a freestanding transparent Ni network.298

4. Recent applications of soft metal electrodes in wearable electronics

Table 4 summarizes the material composition, processing approach, and key properties of the representative performing chemically formed SMEs reported in the literature. These SMEs exhibit tremendous potential in constructing a wide range of flexible and wearable electronic devices. In this section, we will highlight some representative works on the applications of these chemically fabricated SMEs. In light of the many recent review papers on metal electrodes for flexible electronics,2,8,9,57,58,299–301 herein we would like to focus on the works which are specifically devoted to wearable applications.
Table 4 Comparison of selected SMEs with the outstanding overall performance fabricated through chemical approaches




Metal
Substrate
Formation process
Post-treatment

L
metal

 (μm)

t
metal

 (μm)

R
s (Ω sq−1)
ΔR/R0@rbendingc (mm)
ΔR/R0@stensiled (%)

T (%)
Ref.





a 
L = line width.
b 
t = thickness.
c 
r
bending = bending radius.
d 
s
tensile = tensile strain.





AgNPs
PI
3D direct writing
Thermal
23
12–350
0.083
1.66@5, 1000 cycles
—
—

1



AgNPs
PI
Stencil printing
Thermal
22
3
0.018
2.5@2, 1000 cycles
—
—

224



AgNPs
paper
Direct writing
Thermal
620
20
0.0022
4.2@0.5, 10000 cycles
—
—

131



AuNPs
PEN
Inkjet printing
Thermal
62
∼1
0.32
∼0@5, 1000 cycles
—
—

173



AuNPs
PET
LbL deposition
—
—
∼0.2
0.23
0.04@1.5, 10000 cycles
—
—

302



CuNPs
PI
Blade coating
Thermal
—
2
0.25
0.063@15, 1000 cycles
—
—

226



Cu
PET
Electroless plating
—
∼100
∼0.12
0.4
0.2@0.1, 4000 cycles
—
—

274



Cu
Cotton
Electroless plating
—
—
—
0.2
2.5@5, 1000 cycles
—
—

303



AgNPs + flakes
Fluorine rubber
Stencil printing
Thermal
500
30
0.054
—
5.6@400
—

223



AgNWs
PDMS
Filtration + transfer
Thermal
—
—
9
—
∼6@460, 200 cycles
90

67



AgNWs
PET
Meyer rod coating
Chemical
—
—
8
0.05@5, 100 cycles


65

201



AgNWs
PDMS
Filtration + transfer
Photonic
—
—
9
∼0@2, 10000 cycles


89

66



AgNWs
PET
Spin coating
Photonic
—
—
5
0.5@4.75, 100000 cycles


90

240



AgNFs
PET
Blow-spinning
Photonic
—
—
15
∼0.05@4, 2000 cycles


94

92



Au
PET
Electroless plating
—
∼0.9
∼0.47
∼0.22
∼0@3.87, 1000 cycles


90

304



CuNWs
PET
Meyer rod coating
Thermal
—
—
25
0.3@2.5, 1000 cycles


85

305



CuNFs
PDMS
Electroless plating
—
—
—
15.6
∼0@10, 2000 cycles
∼0@25, 800cycles
82

222



Cu mesh
PDMS
Electroplating
—
—
—
0.31–0.42
∼0@5, 1000 cycles
3.6@580%
41–97

286



Cu mesh
PET
Electroplating
—
—
—
0.058
0.1@1.3, 1000 cycles


90

306



Cu mesh
PET
Electroplating
—
2–30
2–15
0.52




87

285





4.1 Wearable interconnects
A simple and direct application of SMEs in electronics is use as a flexible conductive interconnect to connect the soft/rigid functional microelectronic units and construct an intact flexible circuit. The main function of SMEs in such a scenario is to (1) transport electrons and (2) dissipate the mechanical stresses applied on the flexible circuits. Thus, a SME with a Rs of as low as possible and excellent mechanical robustness would be highly welcome. During the past decades, great progress has been achieved in the search and development of flexible interconnects by using the chemically formed SMEs. Up until now, developing large-scale and low-cost manufacturing processes that can readily integrate with well-established electronic industries has become the central issue in this area. Printing is highly desirable for flexible interconnect fabrication due to its programmability, scalability, and cost-effectiveness.15,307–309 Recently, a hybrid 3D printing technique, which combines the direct writing of metal inks with automated pick-and-place processes of electronic components, has been reported to fabricate wearable electronic circuitry (Fig. 12).310 In this approach, insulating substrates and conductive interconnects with arbitrary patterned layouts can be efficiently fabricated by carefully tuning the ink recipes and printing parameters.1,96,131,311–313 Rigid electrical components such as resistors, capacitors, microprocessors, and LEDs can be further integrated into the flexible circuit by using a second vacuum-controlled nozzle to pick-and-place in the desired location (Fig. 12a). Fig. 12b illustrates a flexible circuit composed of five distinct components with lateral dimensions ranging from 0.8 mm × 1.6 mm (LED) to 9 mm × 9 mm (microprocessor) and printed Ag interconnects fabricated through this hybrid 3D printing technique. The hybrid 3D printed LED circuit can work well as a stretchable device withstanding a max tensile strain of 30% (Fig. 12c and d).
 Fig. 12  Fabrication of a flexible circuit with the 3D printing technique. (a) Top: Direct writing of AgTPU ink through a 200 μm nozzle (scale bar 200 μm); bottom: microprocessor chip picked by an empty nozzle (scale bar 2 mm). (b) A flexible circuit consisting of a rigid microprocessor, resistor, capacitor, and LED connected by printed AgTPU electrodes. (c) 3D printed LED devices with the inset showing the interface of the LED with the AgTPU electrodes. (d) Current–voltage curves of the LED device shown in (c) at various tensile strains. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright (2017) John Wiley & Sons. 
SMEs fabricated through the in situ growth strategy can also be utilized as flexible interconnectors. Specifically, the metal-coated yarns with high electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical flexibility are highly suitable for the fabrication of wearable circuits to replace the conventional metal leads. For example, Cu-coated cotton yarns prepared through a polymer-assisted metal deposition method275 exhibited a high conductivity of 1 S cm−1 which can be used as a wearable interconnector to power up electronic devices.314 Importantly, a polyelectrolyte interfacial layer bridged between the top metal layer and the flexible substrate is crucial to improve the adhesion strength. Thus the metallic yarns demonstrated extremely high stability when subjected to bending, tensile, and washing tests.314 Inspired by this unique interface design, flexible and stretchable interconnects which can sustain tensile strains as high as 70% with negligible conductance change were achieved by electrolessly plating Cu on PDMS.274,315
4.2 Wearable resisters
SMEs can also be directly integrated into wearable electronic devices as passive components such as resistors to generate heat or detect mechanical stress/strain. A wearable heater is a kind of device for tuning the body temperature, in order to keep warm or for thermotherapy. For such applications, the heaters should simultaneously provide high wearing comfort and breathability, high controllability over the temperature, high safety to the human body, and acceptable cost. In addition, for a wearable device, the voltage of the power supply cannot be too high, while the power (P) is determined by the equation: P = V2/R, wherein V is the voltage, and R is the resistance. Therefore, to pursue maximized temperature, the R of the resistor should be minimized.316 The SMEs have made the design and realization of high-performance wearable heaters highly possible.209,210,214,215,306,317–324 Among various SMEs, those prepared based on AgNWs are predominant for the fabrication of wearable heaters due to their high electrical conductivity, colorless characteristic, excellent biocompatibility, and good environmental stability. For example, Fig. 13a and b demonstrate a large-area, transparent, conductive film composed of AgNW networks on PI with superior properties (Rs of 1.3 Ω sq−1 with an optical transmittance of 90% in the visible regime). A wearable heater based on it exhibited a maximum temperature of ∼250 °C when connected to an applied voltage of 4.5 V (Fig. 13c–e).214 The transparent and wearable heater can be further integrated with a wireless operation system, realizing temperature control using a smartphone via Bluetooth (Fig. 13f–h). CuNW-based SMEs are also attractive for fabricating low-cost wearable heaters; however, their relatively low conductance stability in the ambient environment is the main challenge.215,306,318,325
 Fig. 13  Wearable heaters based on Ag nanofibers. (a) Optical images of electrospun Ag nanofibers on polymer substrates. The scale bars are 5 mm and 20 μm in the left and right figures, respectively. (b) SEM image of the Ag nanofiber network (scale bar 1 μm) with the inset showing one single Ag nanofiber (scale bar 200 nm). (c) Infrared images of the Ag nanofiber-based heater under various applied voltages (scale bar 3 cm). (d) Temperature evolution of the heater when the voltage increases stepwise from 0.5 to 4.5 V. (e) Temperature response of the heater as a function of time operated at 4.5 V. (f) Schematic illustration of the wearable heater integrated with a controller unit and a wireless operation module which can connect with a smartphone via Bluetooth. (g) Image of the wearable heater with a wristband-type wireless operation device (scale bar 2 cm). (h) The temperature as a function of time for the automatically programmed stretchable wearable heater. Reproduced with permission.214 
Another important application of wearable resistors is in pressure/strain sensors for detecting human physiological movements. Flexible and lightweight pressure and strain sensing devices have been well-known for their importance in a wide variety of applications such as electronic skin,326,327 soft robotics,328 and energy harvesting.240,301 These devices are mainly classified into four categories: piezoresistive, capacitive, iontronic, and piezoelectric.329 Compared to the others, the piezoresistive-type pressure sensors hold the advantage of simplicity in device configuration and fabrication. The change in resistance of conductive materials when subjected to external mechanical stress/deformation, which is also known as the piezoresistive effect, provides the possibility to measure the stress/strain. The sensitivity of a piezoresistive sensor is typically characterized by using the gauge factor (GF). The GF is determined by ΔR/R0/ε, where ΔR is the change in resistance, R0 is the unstrained resistance, and ε is the strain. SMEs with optimized electrical and mechanical properties can be used as a piezoresistive sensor directly.56,69,173,223,237,330–333 For example, a conductive paper dip-coated with ultrathin AuNWs is a high-performance piezoresistive sensor, showing a low energy consumption (<30 μW), a high detection sensitivity of 13 Pa, a fast response time (<17 ms), and a high gauge factor of 7.38 (Fig. 14a).69 The device life is also good, showing high stability over 50000 loading–unloading cycles, thanks to the inert chemical properties of Au and polymer substrates. This highly sensitive wearable AuNW sensor can be used to monitor blood pressure, voice vibrations, and the sport positions of humans by pasting it onto the wrist, throat, and joints. The piezoresistive GF of SMEs can be tailored by optimizing the stacking morphology of metal nanomaterials which is determined by the morphology of the metallic building blocks, the properties of the polymer matrix, and the metal/polymer interfacial interactions. Such an AuNW film based piezoresistive device was also found to be compatible with multiple stretchable substrates, and thus can be integrated on latex rubber to serve as a stretchable strain sensor (Fig. 14b). Very recently, a wearable strain sensor with a large GF of 13.3 was reported using a printed Ag-TPU as the soft electrode (Fig. 14c).310
 Fig. 14  Piezoresistive pressure sensors. (a) Sandwich type sensor based on AuNWs. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature. (b) A μm-thin and highly stretchable strain sensor based on a stretchable latex rubber with flexible black gold nanowire patches (left), and the resistance change of the strain sensors as a function of time with different gestures (right). Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schemes, performance, and images of wearable strain/pressure sensors fabricated by hybrid 3D printing. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.3 Wearable optoelectronic devices
Optoelectronic devices contain electrical-to-optical or optical-to-electrical transducers that can generate, harvest, or detect light. The crucial requirements for transparent electrodes in optoelectronics are high conductivity and high transparency. Vacuum-deposited transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) and metal thin films are widely used as electrodes for thin film optoelectronic devices such as organic solar cells (OSCs), OLEDs, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), perovskite solar cells (PSCs), etc.334–342 However, the intrinsic unbendable and brittle nature of vacuum-deposited TCOs has become the bottleneck for the realization of flexible and wearable optoelectronics.343,344 On the contrary, chemically formed SMEs are very promising due to their balanced electrical, mechanical, and optical performance. Nowadays, SMEs with Rs lower than 10 Ω sq−1 and transparency higher than 90% can easily be chemically fabricated in high-throughput R2R processes,92,137,345 and have become a competitive alternative of TCOs. Over the years, Ag-based transparent electrodes printed from AgNPs through multiple techniques such as flexographic, inkjet, and screen printing have been proposed for solution-processed TCO-free flexible OSCs and OLEDs. Typically, Ag electrodes are printed on top of the solar cells instead of vacuum-deposited metal electrodes, and the printed Ag grids are combined with transparent conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS to replace TCOs.136,346–348 However, the printed SMEs always show relatively high thickness and surface roughness, which lead to poor device performance or short circuit failures.349,350 To overcome this problem, Chen et al. have developed an ultra-smooth Ag/Ni hybrid transparent electrode with printed metal meshes embedded in the substrate.289 The surface roughness of the electrode can be reduced to 0.17 nm after polishing with aqueous silica particle solutions, ensuring a flexible quantum dot LED with an efficiency of 10.4 cd A−1 and 3.2 lm W−1 at 1000 cd m−2 (Fig. 15a). Kang and coworkers introduced a capillary printing method to prepare high quality AgNW-based transparent electrodes.351 By carefully modulating the alignment of AgNWs, SMEs with high optical transmittance (96.7%), low Rs (19.5 Ω sq−1), and low surface root-mean-square roughness (15.6 nm) were achieved. The OLEDs constructed on such SMEs show a luminance efficiency as high as 14.25 cd A−1 (Fig. 15b). A PSC using such aligned AgNWs electrodes also exhibited a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.57% (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  Typical SMEs and their application in optoelectronic devices. (a) An Ag/Ni hybrid mesh-type transparent conductive electrode for QLEDs. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Capillary-assisted solution printing process of highly aligned AgNW arrays as transparent electrodes for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.351 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (c) Cu electrode arrays on PET prepared through electroless deposition and their applications in OSCs. Reproduced with permission.357 Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. 
Besides printing, the SMEs fabricated through the in situ chemical deposition approach are also promising for flexible optoelectronics. For example, electrodeposited Ni is used to smoothen the printed Ag electrodes to form better interfaces between the electrodes and active materials in OSCs and OLEDs.352,353 Electroplated Pt electrodes are reported as counter electrodes for DSSCs to obtain higher solar cell efficiency.354 The advantages of the electrodeposition for flexible optoelectronics include high deposition speed, good film uniformity and scale-up processability.355,356 The major disadvantage is the requirement of a conductive substrate. In contrast, electroless deposition consumes no additional electricity, and the substrates do not need to be conductive. Highly flexible full-solution-processed OSCs are obtained by using Cu bottom electrodes fabricated through electroless deposition. Thin (<100 nm-thick) and smooth (root-mean-square roughness <5 nm) Cu electrodes are obtained through this method, and the mechanical durability of such electrodes is far better than that of reference Cu electrodes fabricated by vacuum deposition (Fig. 15c).357 However, both electrodeposition and electroless deposition require the immersion of the entire substrate in the plating solution, which makes them not suitable for the fabrication of top electrodes in these photoelectronic devices, because most of the active materials are sensitive to water and other solvents.358,359
4.4 Wearable electrochemical energy storage devices
Lightweight and high-energy-density electrochemical energy storage devices are essential components to power wearable electronics. Over the past few years, research on wearable supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries has exhibited rapid growth.360–362 Metals are generally not electrochemically reactive and cannot be used as active materials. Instead, chemically formed SMEs have been recognized as promising flexible current collectors for constructing wearable energy storage devices. Ag- and Cu-based SMEs are rarely used in supercapacitors, mainly due to their weak tolerance to the corrosion of electrolyte solutions. Ni-coated cotton yarns and fabrics are very promising current collectors to fabricate wearable supercapacitors with high-energy-density and high-power-density. For example, Zheng's group demonstrated a yarn type all solid-state supercapacitor with an energy density and a power density of 6.1 mW h cm−3 and 1400 mW cm−3, respectively.23 They used Ni-coated cotton yarns made by electroless deposition of Ni on pristine cotton as the current collector and electrochemically deposited graphene nanosheets as the active material (Fig. 16a).23 They also demonstrated fabric-type supercapacitors, by integrating more amount of carbon nanotubes and/or reduced graphene oxide on Ni-coated cotton fabrics. The as-made wearable supercapacitors demonstrated an ultrahigh areal capacitance up to 6.2 F cm−2 and good capacity retention over 10000 charging–discharging cycles.363,364 All these supercapacitors can be integrated with electronic components into textile-forms (Fig. 16b).
 Fig. 16  Wearable electrochemical energy storage devices. (a) Yarn-type supercapacitor fabricated on Ni coated cotton yarns. Reproduced with permission.23 (b) Fabric-type supercapacitor using Ni-coated cotton as current collectors and multi-walled CNT and reduced graphene oxide as the active materials. Reproduced with permission.364 Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Wearable lithium-ion battery integrated into clothes. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The Ni-coated textiles can also serve as current collectors to fabricate flexible and rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. For example, Lee et al. have developed a prototype wearable lithium-ion battery by using Ni-coated polyester fabric as the current collector, and LiFePO4 and Li4Ti5O12 as the active material pair.22 The resultant wearable battery showed nearly no capacity loss after 40 folding–unfolding cycles (Fig. 16c). Apart from Ni, Ag-based SMEs have also found applications as current collectors of flexible energy storage devices by protecting the surface from electrolyte corrosion with Au365 and graphene.200
5. Summary and outlook
In summary, SMEs have achieved rapid development over the past two decades to meet the rapidly increasing demand for flexible and wearable electronics. In contrast to conventional microfabrication processes migrated from silicon technology, chemical approaches for making SMEs afford significant advantages of simplicity, cost effectiveness, and R2R compatibility to the mass production of SMs. It is also found that in some studies, SMEs made with chemical approaches show better adhesion with the underlying substrates, which provides better fatigue resistance during repetitive mechanical bending, stretching, and twisting. Chemical preparation of SMEs can either go through (i) additive construction on flexible polymers using metallic building blocks; or (ii) in situ growth from flexible substrates. An increasing amount of work on the development of new materials, structural designs and fabrication technologies have emerged in recent years to prepare SMEs with better electrical conductivity and mechanical robustness, simpler and faster processes, and controllable optical and electronic properties related to end applications. Indeed, some effective chemical processes toward SMEs have been transferred to industrial sectors.
In spite of the great progress made in the past decades, several materials and technological challenges are still waiting to be addressed. First of all, the resolution of metal patterns prepared via chemical approaches is rather limited. General inkjet printing and screen printing can only achieve a resolution with a low limit of 20 μm. Therefore, the resultant SMEs can hardly be used for the manufacture of microelectronics with miniature size. In addition, most of the SMEs prepared by printing or plating exhibit unacceptable surface quality for thin-film optoelectronic devices, which results in deteriorated device performance. New and improved fabrication technologies that can overcome these shortcomings are highly desired.
Secondly, the intrinsic nature of metals, such as the relatively large density, the fatigue issue, and the spontaneous surface oxidation of Ag and Cu, restricts the SMEs from practical applications in flexible electronics. To achieve ideal flexible electrodes, conductive materials with improved electrical and mechanical properties are still needed. The promising solutions to modify the metals, at least, include (i) alloying with lightweight and/or chemically inert elements such as titanium and carbon, (ii) developing highly efficient surface protecting/passivation materials and technologies, (iii) developing new chemistries to prepare metals with new structures such as amorphous or new crystal forms, and (iv) optimizing the interfacial structure between the metal and the underlying polymer substrates.
Thirdly, the safety issue of the SMEs and the corresponding flexible electronic devices should be thoroughly considered before they enter our daily life. This is especially true for the wearable, skin-contact, and implantation applications. All the materials and processes to fabricate the SMEs and electronic devices should be cautiously examined to eliminate any safety risk to the health of humans. Developing SMEs and electronics fabricated from bio-compatible materials are highly necessary. For example, wearable electronics constructed on cotton textiles and cellulose papers by using bio-compatible metallic inks are more meaningful.
Finally, a chemical process with low energy consumption, and low CO2 and pollutant emissions is important for the mass-production of SMEs. Those chemistries using a large amount of toxic materials and/or producing much waste should be avoided, and new green chemistry should be developed in the future. We believe the collaboration from a variety of communities of the chemistry, physics, materials, electronics, and textiles industry will effectively promote this multidisciplinary field forward.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the GRF of Hong Kong (Project PolyU153202/16P), the ITF of Hong Kong (ITP/091/16TI) and the Hong Kong Scholar Programme (G-YZ0L).
References
B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers and J. A. Lewis, Science, 2009, 323, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, R. Yerushalmi, K. Takei, A. C. Ford, Y.-L. Chueh and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3730–3743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 1015–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu and J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 14, 113–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, J. Liu and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 937–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Casalini, C. A. Bortolotti, F. Leonardi and F. Biscarini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 40–71 RSC .

          I. C. Cheng and S. Wagner, Flexible Electronics, Springer, Boston, MA,  2009, pp. 1–28 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, I. Kim, M. Kim and H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1789–1822 RSC .
M. Gao, L. Li and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2971–2993 RSC .
J. Shim, H.-Y. Park, D.-H. Kang, J.-O. Kim, S.-H. Jo, Y. Park and J.-H. Park, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600364 CrossRef .
C.-F. Du, Q. Liang, Y. Luo, Y. Zheng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22442–22458 CAS .
W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7342–7372 RSC .
A. B. Kaiser and V. Skakalova, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3786–3801 RSC .
D. H. Kim, J. Xiao, J. Song, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2108–2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perelaer, P. J. Smith, D. Mager, D. Soltman, S. K. Volkman, V. Subramanian, J. G. Korvink and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8446–8453 RSC .
Z. Yin, Y. Huang, N. Bu, X. Wang and Y. Xiong, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2010, 55, 3383–3407 CrossRef .
A. J. Baca, J. H. Ahn, Y. Sun, M. A. Meitl, E. Menard, H. S. Kim, W. M. Choi, D. H. Kim, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2008, 47, 5524–5542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Sekitani, J. Reeder, T. Yokota, K. Kuribara, T. Tokuhara, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, I. Graz, S. Bauer-Gogonea, S. Bauer and T. Someya, Nature, 2013, 499, 458–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, D. S. Kong, Z. C. Ruan, P. C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. F. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. B. Hu, S. H. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Guo, Q. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Z. Suo, C. W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12332–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pan, M. Pharr, Y. Ma, R. Ning, Z. Yan, R. Xu, X. Feng, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702589 CrossRef .
Y. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Yu, C. Yan, K. Li and Z. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Głowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe, M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811–816 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zardetto, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 638–648 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. MacDonald, M. K. Looney, D. MacKerron, R. Eveson, R. Adam, K. Hashimoto and K. Rakos, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2007, 15, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Yoo, H. J. Shin, H. W. Yoon and H. B. Park, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 39628 CrossRef .
J. Song, J. Li, J. Xu and H. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, J. Zeng, C. Chen, Z. Xie, R. Guo, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, Y. Yang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 810–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Liu and X. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 75 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Fox, Optical properties of solids, Oxford University Press,  2002 Search PubMed .
D. S. Ghosh, T. L. Chen and V. Pruneri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 041109 CrossRef .

          M. G. Dressel and G. Gruner, Electrodynamics of solids: Optical properties of electrons in matter, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2002 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, L. B. Hu, M. W. Rowell, D. S. Kong, J. J. Cha, J. R. McDonough, J. Zhu, Y. A. Yang, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4242–4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2513–2517 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2713–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D. H. Kim, D. G. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Park, Y. C. Kang, J. Heo, S. H. Jin, J. H. Park and J. W. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Y. K. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan and Z. J. Zheng, Small, 2015, 11, 3444–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khan, S. Lee, T. Jang, Z. Xiong, C. P. Zhang, J. Y. Tang, L. J. Guo and W. D. Li, Small, 2016, 12, 3021–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 808–816 CrossRef .
T. H. J. vanOsch, J. Perelaer, A. W. M. deLaat and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 343–345 CrossRef .
A. Rida, L. Yang, R. Vyas and M. M. Tentzeris, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., 2009, 51, 13–23 CrossRef .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, C. K. Luscombe, J. M. J. Fréchet and D. Poulikakos, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 345202 CrossRef .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Small, 2014, 10, 3515–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Larmagnac, S. Eggenberger, H. Janossy and J. Voros, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Solomon, M. B. Bahadory, A. V. Jeyarajasingam, S. A. Rutkowsky and C. Boritz, J. Chem. Educ., 2007, 84, 322–325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia, H. Sun and Q. Gu, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 419, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, Y. Zheng, M. Rycenga, J. Tao, Z.-Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8552–8553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Raveendran, J. Fu and S. L. Wallen, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 34–38 RSC .
V. K. Sharma, R. A. Yngard and Y. Lin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 145, 83–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Tran, V. Q. Nguyen and A.-T. Le, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 4, 033001 CrossRef .
E. Boisselier and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1759–1782 RSC .
P. Zhao, N. Li and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 638–665 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F. X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Matsuhisa, M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Yokota, H. Jinno, K. Kuribara, T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Guo and Z. Ren, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 143–154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sannicolo, M. Lagrange, A. Cabos, C. Celle, J. P. Simonato and D. Bellet, Small, 2016, 12, 6052–6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Nan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 1993, 37, 1–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Nan, Y. Shen and J. Ma, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 131–151 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Nam and D. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 47 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kawamura, H. Muto and A. Matsuda, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 104 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang, I. Wyman, J. Hu, S. Lin, Z. Zhong, Y. Tu, Z. Huang and Y. Wei, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2017, 223, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, B. Gates, B. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bergin, Y. H. Chen, A. R. Rathmell, P. Charbonneau, Z. Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1996–2004 RSC .
J. Lee, P. Lee, H. Lee, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6408–6414 RSC .
P. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3326–3332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Ouyang, M. Gu and W. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, W. Schwalb, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Si, B. Shirinzadeh and W. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3132 Search PubMed .
J. H. M. Maurer, L. Gonzalez-Garcia, B. Reiser, I. Kanelidis and T. Kraus, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2921–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huo, C. K. Tsung, W. Huang, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2041–2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Hu, C. M. Lieber and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8902–8903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, Y. Yang, Y. You, G. Li, J. Guo, T. Yu, Z. Shen, T. Wu and B. Xing, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1984–1986 RSC .
F. Kim, K. Sohn, J. Wu and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14442–14443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhan, R. Su, S. Bai, Z. Yu, N. Cheng, C. Wang, S. Xu, W. Liu, S. Guo and X. Z. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18121–18133 RSC .
Y. Chang, M. L. Lye and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3746–3748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell, S. M. Bergin, Y. L. Hua, Z. Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3558–3563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, A. R. Rathmell, I. E. Stewart, Y. C. Ha, A. R. Wilson, Z. Chen and B. J. Wiley, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2562–2564 RSC .
M. Jin, G. He, H. Zhang, J. Zeng, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2011, 50, 10560–10564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, D. Lee, W. Yang, K. Woo, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Aisa Mater., 2014, 6, e105 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aziz, T. Zhang, Y. H. Lin, F. Daneshvar, H. J. Sue and M. E. Welland, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13104–13111 RSC .
F. Cui, Y. Yu, L. Dou, J. Sun, Q. Yang, C. Schildknecht, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7610–7615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cui, L. Dou, Q. Yang, Y. Yu, Z. Niu, Y. Sun, H. Liu, A. Dehestani, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3027–3032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, N. Lin, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Xie, T. Zheng, N. Gao, S. Li, J. Kang, D. Cai and D. L. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2323 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, S.-H. Choi, M. Kim, J.-U. Park, J. Bae and J. Park, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, I. E. Stewart, Z. Chen, B. Li, A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 442–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, F. Cui, Y. Yu, G. Khanarian, S. W. Eaton, Q. Yang, J. Resasco, C. Schildknecht, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2600–2606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong, D. Lee and Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3125–3133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aliprandi, T. Moreira, C. Anichini, M. A. Stoeckel, M. Eredia, U. Sassi, M. Bruna, C. Pinheiro, C. A. T. Laia, S. Bonacchi and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703225 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Niu, F. Cui, Y. Yu, N. Becknell, Y. Sun, G. Khanarian, D. Kim, L. Dou, A. Dehestani, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7348–7354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Bai, M. Zhou, S. Liao, Z. Yu, Y. Wang and H. Wu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5846–5851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, X. Bai, H. Wang, H. Wang, J. Song, K. Huang, C. Wang, N. Wang, B. Li, M. Lei and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703238 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Zhang, K. P. Lv, N. Y. Hu, L. Yu, X. F. Ren, S. L. Liu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2012, 8, 2936–2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ji, J. Jang, E. Cho, S. H. Kim, E. S. Kang, J. Kim, H. K. Kim, H. Kong, S. K. Kim, J. Y. Kim and J. U. Park, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700538 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Dearden, P. J. Smith, D.-Y. Shin, N. Reis, B. Derby and P. O'Brien, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 315–318 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Walker and J. A. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1419–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Kell, C. Paquet, O. Mozenson, I. Djavani-Tabrizi, B. Deore, X. Liu, G. P. Lopinski, R. James, K. Hettak, J. Shaker, A. Momciu, J. Ferrigno, O. Ferrand, J. X. Hu, S. Lafreniere and P. R. L. Malenfant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17226–17237 CAS .
Y. Dong, X. Li, S. Liu, Q. Zhu, M. Zhang, J.-G. Li and X. Sun, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 616, 635–642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Rosen, A. Yakushenko, A. Offenhäusser and S. Magdassi, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, B. Lee, S. Jeong and M. Lee, Opt. Laser Technol., 2017, 88, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Farraj, A. Smooha, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8766–8773 CAS .
Y. Kawaguchi, Y. Hotta and H. Kawasaki, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 197, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, Z. Yin, Y.-k. Ahn, Y. Piao, J. Yoo and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10740–10746 RSC .
K.-M. Huang, H. Tsukamoto, Y. Yong, H.-L. Chiu, M. T. Nguyen, T. Yonezawa and Y.-C. Liao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 25095–25100 RSC .
J. Perelaer, B. J. de Gans and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2101–2104 CrossRef CAS .
A. Scandurra, G. F. Indelli, N. G. Sparta, F. Galliano, S. Ravesi and S. Pignataro, Surf. Interface Anal., 2010, 42, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ye, L. Jun, L. Kun, W. Hu, C. Ping, D. Ya-Hui, C. Zheng, L. Yun-Fei, W. Hao-Ran and D. Yu, Org. Electron., 2017, 41, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Ionkin, B. M. Fish, Z. R. Li, M. Lewittes, P. D. Soper, J. G. Pepin and A. F. Carroll, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 606–611 CAS .
D. P. Chen, L. Zhao, H. W. Diao, W. B. Zhang, G. Wang and W. J. Wang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 2657–2664 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Lim, Y. S. Lee, S. H. Choa, D. Y. Lee, L. S. Park and S. Y. Nam, Int. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 9623620 Search PubMed .
Y. Kim, G. Kim and J. Lee, Microelectron. Eng., 2010, 87, 839–842 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, H. Y. Xiang, S. Shen, Y. Q. Li, J. De Chen, H. J. Xie, I. A. Goldthorpe, L. S. Chen, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12796–12805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Lu, J. Lin, K. Liu, S. Z. Yue, K. K. Ren, F. R. Tan, Z. J. Wang, P. Jin, S. C. Qu and Z. G. Wang, Acta Mater., 2017, 130, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Magdassi, A. Bassa, Y. Vinetsky and A. Kamyshny, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2208–2217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wu, Y. N. Li, P. Liu, S. Gardner and B. S. Ong, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4627–4632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li and M. F. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 290, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, D. Paeng, H. K. Park and C. P. Grigoropoulos, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9807–9814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, T. G. Kim, S. Y. Kim, Y. Jo, S. S. Lee, K. Kim, B. H. Ryu, J. U. Park, Y. Choi and S. Jeong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4714–4723 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Yao and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2345–2352 RSC .
H. Kang, E. Sowade and R. R. Baumann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1682–1687 CAS .
J. T. Wu, S. L. C. Hsu, M. H. Tsai, Y. F. Liu and W. S. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15599–15605 RSC .
Z. C. Liu, Y. Su and K. Varahramyan, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 478, 275–279 CrossRef CAS .
T. Araki, T. Sugahara, J. T. Jiu, S. Nagao, M. Nogi, H. Koga, H. Uchida, K. Shinozaki and K. Suganuma, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11192–11197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Butovsky, I. Perelshtein, I. Nissan and A. Gedanken, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5794–5799 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Xue, Z. C. Liu, Y. Su and K. Varahramyan, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kang, H. J. Park, S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, K. C. Yu, Y. Kim and J. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15214–15222 CAS .
K. Yang, C. Freeman, R. Torah, S. Beeby and J. Tudor, Sens. Actuators, A, 2014, 213, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, H. Kim and H. J. Yoo, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packaging, 2010, 33, 196–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Chuang, J. R. Windmiller, P. Santhosh, G. V. Ramirez, M. Galik, T. Y. Chou and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2511–2518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Russo, B. Y. Ahn, J. J. Adams, E. B. Duoss, J. T. Bernhard and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3426–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hubler, B. Trnovec, T. Zillger, M. Ali, N. Wetzold, M. Mingebach, A. Wagenpfahl, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1018–1022 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Z. Z. He, Y. X. Gao and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1786 CrossRef .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, R. Sondergaard and M. Jorgensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1348–1353 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Helgesen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 68–71 CrossRef .
M. Hösel, R. R. Søndergaard, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2013, 15, 995–1001 CrossRef .
N. Gupta, K. D. M. Rao, R. Gupta, F. C. Krebs and G. U. Kulkarni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8634–8640 CAS .
X. N. Ho, C. K. Cheng, R. L. S. Tan and J. Wei, J. Mater. Res., 2015, 30, 2271–2278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Martin-Yerga, A. Perez-Junquera, D. Hernandez-Santos and P. Fanjul-Bolado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 22633–22637 RSC .
D. A. Pardo, G. E. Jabbour and N. Peyghambarian, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1249–1252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wu, Y. N. Li and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4202–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Noguchi, T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 253507 CrossRef .
J. J. Liang, K. Tong and Q. B. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5986–5996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fukuda, Y. Takeda, Y. Yoshimura, R. Shiwaku, L. T. Tran, T. Sekine, M. Mizukami, D. Kumaki and S. Tokito, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4147 CAS .
K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602736 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, B. Lee, S. Yang, I. Byun, I. Jeong and S. M. Cho, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 473–478 CrossRef .
L. N. Song, A. C. Myers, J. J. Adams and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4248–4253 CAS .
D. Y. Shin, Y. Lee and C. H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 6112–6118 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Z. Xiao, Z. Y. Zhang, S. Lang and Y. Tao, Int Symp Ant Tech,  2016 Search PubMed .
T. Bjorninen, J. Suikkola, L. Ukkonen and M. Mantysalo, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2016, 465–466 Search PubMed .
Z. F. Akl and T. A. Ali, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2017, 314, 1865–1875 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Jadav, V. V. Umrania, K. J. Rathod and B. A. Golakiya, LWT-Food Sci. Technol., 2018, 88, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim and S. B. Jung, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 06FD14 Search PubMed .
O. D. Renedo, M. A. Alonso-Lomillo and M. J. A. Martinez, Talanta, 2007, 73, 202–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. T. Li, D. W. Li and Y. T. Long, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 734, 31–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhang, X. Y. Zhang, Z. Q. Xin, M. M. Deng, Y. Q. Wen and Y. L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6714–6718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Li, Y. L. Wu and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3266–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Magdassi, M. Grouchko, O. Berezin and A. Kamyshny, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1943–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maattanen, P. Ihalainen, P. Pulkkinen, S. X. Wang, H. Tenhu and J. Peltonen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 955–964 Search PubMed .
J. A. Sadie and V. Subramanian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6834–6842 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3057–3062 RSC .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9254–9261 CAS .
H. Lu, J. Lin, N. Wu, S. H. Nie, Q. Luo, C. Q. Ma and Z. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 093302 CrossRef .
T. Ohlund, A. K. Schuppert, M. Hummelgard, J. Backstrom, H. E. Nilsson and H. Olin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18273–18282 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Wu, Y. N. Li and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1862–1863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hong and S. Wagner, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2000, 21, 384–386 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Rozenberg, E. Bresler, S. P. Speakman, C. Jeynes and J. H. G. Steinke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 5249–5251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gamerith, A. Klug, H. Scheiber, U. Scherf, E. Moderegger and E. J. W. List, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3111–3118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chung, J. Lee, H. Song, S. Kim, J. Jeong and Y. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 153110 CrossRef .
P.-C. Wang, C.-P. Chang, M.-J. Youh, Y.-M. Liu, C.-M. Chu and M.-D. Ger, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2016, 60, 555–563 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Khan, F. J. Pavinatto, M. C. Lin, A. Liao, S. L. Swisher, K. Mann, V. Subramanian, M. M. Maharbiz and A. C. Arias, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1004–1013 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sowade, H. Kang, K. Y. Mitra, O. J. Weiss, J. Weber and R. R. Baumann, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11815–11826 RSC .
J. Perelaer, R. Jani, M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny, S. Magdassi and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3993–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perelaer, R. Abbel, S. Wunscher, R. Jani, T. van Lammeren and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2620–2625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Perelaer, C. E. Hendriks, A. W. M. de Laat and U. S. Schubert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165303 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Niittynen, R. Abbel, M. Mantysalo, J. Perelaer, U. S. Schubert and D. Lupo, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 556, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meier, U. Loffelmann, D. Mager, P. J. Smith and J. G. Korvink, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 1626–1630 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aminuzzaman, A. Watanabe and T. Miyashita, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 931–938 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Lee, S. Kim, S. B. Jung, N. V. Myung and Y. H. Choa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5908–5913 CAS .
J. H. Song, Y. T. Kim, S. Cho, W. J. Song, S. Moon, C. G. Park, S. Park, J. M. Myoung and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702625 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Wu, R. D. Wang, H. X. Yu, G. J. Li, K. X. Xu, N. C. Tien, R. C. Roberts and D. C. Li, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 690–695 RSC .
M. G. Kang and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1391–1396 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. G. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378–4383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang, M. S. Kim, J. S. Kim and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4408–4413 CrossRef CAS .
J. van de Groep, D. Gupta, M. A. Verschuuren, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and A. Polman, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11414 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Ko, I. Park, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, A. P. Pisano, C. K. Luscombe and J. M. J. Frechet, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1869–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, H.-Y. Xiang, S. Shen, Y.-Q. Li, J.-D. Chen, H.-J. Xie, I. A. Goldthorpe, L.-S. Chen, S.-T. Lee and J.-X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12796–12805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Wang, P. Y. Yi, L. F. Peng, X. M. Lai and J. Ni, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2017, 16, 687–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Ok, H. S. Youn, M. K. Kwak, K. T. Lee, Y. J. Shin, L. J. Guo, A. Greenwald and Y. S. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 223102 CrossRef .
S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2304–2310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, S. Yuan, L. N. Liu, X. F. Qiu, H. B. Gong, X. P. Yang, C. C. Li, Y. F. Hao and B. Q. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5375–5384 CAS .
H. G. Im, S. H. Jung, J. Jin, D. Lee, J. Lee, D. Lee, J. Y. Lee, I. D. Kim and B. S. Bae, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10973–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Du, T. Wan, B. Qu, F. Y. Cao, Q. R. Lin, N. Chen, X. Lin and D. W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20762–20770 CAS .
C. H. Wu, J. T. Jiu, T. Araki, H. Koga, T. Sekitani, H. Wang and K. Suganuma, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 01LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. Lee, D. Y. Kim, T. G. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. S. Al-Deyab, H. W. Lee, J. S. Kim, D. H. Yang, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700075 CrossRef .
H. C. Chu, Y. C. Chang, Y. Lin, S. H. Chang, W. C. Chang, G. A. Li and H. Y. Tuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13009–13017 CAS .
T. Yamada, K. Fukuhara, K. Matsuoka, H. Minemawari, J. Tsutsumi, N. Fukuda, K. Aoshima, S. Arai, Y. Makita, H. Kubo, T. Enomoto, T. Togashi, M. Kurihara and T. Hasegawa, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Chen, P. B. Wan, H. J. Xu and X. M. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17865–17871 CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Yin, S. K. Song, S. Cho, D. J. You, J. Yoo, S. T. Chang and Y. S. Kim, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3077–3091 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Lin, S. M. Chen, J. N. Yu, K. Wang, D. Luo, X. W. Sun and X. H. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 624, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, J. Yeo, G. Kim, D. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, P. Lee and S. H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Kong, J. S. Varsanik, S. Griffith and J. M. Jacobson, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. – Process., Meas., Phenom., 2004, 22, 2987–2991 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, D. J. Hwang, J. Chung, S. Ryu, C. P. Grigoropoulos and D. Poulikakos, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 093102 CrossRef .
J. Kwon, H. Cho, H. Eom, H. Lee, Y. D. Suh, H. Moon, J. Shin, S. Hong and S. H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11575–11582 CAS .
M. Lee, Y. Ko, B. K. Min and Y. Jun, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Patil, S. A. Pawar, J. H. Kim, P. S. Patil and J. C. Shin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 680–690 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Alshammari, F. L. M. Sam, L. J. Rozanski, C. A. Mills, M. R. Alenezi, M. J. Beliatis, K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, J. M. Underwood and S. R. P. Silva, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1600561 CrossRef .
S. Pirsalami, S. M. Zebarjad and H. Daneshmanesh, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 4707–4715 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hsu, H. Wu, T. J. Carney, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yang, E. C. Garnett, M. Li, L. B. Hu and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5150–5156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Hsu, S. Wang, H. Wu, V. K. Narasimhan, D. S. Kong, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2522 Search PubMed .
J. Jang, B. G. Hyun, S. Ji, E. Cho, B. W. An, W. H. Cheong and J.-U. Park, NPG Aisa Mater., 2017, 9, e432 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, J. G. Ma, H. Y. Xu, X. D. Xue and Y. C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3581–3591 RSC .
J. Park, B. G. Hyun, B. W. An, H. G. Im, Y. G. Park, J. Jang, J. U. Park and B. S. Bae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20299–20305 CAS .
S. B. Singh, Y. B. Hu, T. Kshetri, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4198–4205 RSC .
J. Kim, J. Kang, U. Jeong, H. Kim and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3176–3181 CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Zhang, T. Bessho, J. Sang, H. Hirahara, K. Mori and Z. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 303, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Chen, H. L. Lin, I. G. Chen and C. Kuo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9479–9485 CAS .
H. T. Chen, H. L. Lin, C. Kuo and I. G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7675–7682 RSC .
X. Yang, X. Hu, Q. Wang, J. Xiong, H. Yang, X. Meng, L. Tan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26468–26475 CAS .
N. Matsuhisa, D. Inoue, P. Zalar, H. Jin, Y. Matsuba, A. Itoh, T. Yokota, D. Hashizume and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Hyun, S. Lim, B. Y. Ahn, J. A. Lewis, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12619–12624 CAS .
I. E. Stewart, M. J. Kim and B. J. Wiley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1870–1876 CAS .
Y. Akiyama, T. Sugiyama and H. Kawasaki, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1700259 CrossRef .
M. Kanzaki, Y. Kawaguchi and H. Kawasaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20852–20858 CAS .
C. J. Han, B.-G. Park, M. Suk Oh, S.-B. Jung and J.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9986–9994 RSC .
K. Ankireddy, T. Druffel, S. Vunnam, G. Filipič, R. Dharmadasa and D.
A. Amos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11128–11137 RSC .
W. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Jiu, C.-F. Li, C. Chen, D. Hu, Y. Goya, Y. Wang, H. Koga, S. Nagao and K. Suganuma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1155–1164 RSC .
J. H. Park, S. Han, D. Kim, B. K. You, D. J. Joe, S. Hong, J. Seo, J. Kwon, C. K. Jeong, H.-J. Park, T.-S. Kim, S. H. Ko and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701138 CrossRef .
P.-H. Jung, Y. D. Kim, Y. H. Sung and H. Lee, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1600908 CrossRef .
T.-B. Song, Y. Chen, C.-H. Chung, Y. Yang, B. Bob, H.-S. Duan, G. Li, K.-N. Tu and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2804–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, P. Lee, H. B. Lee, S. Hong, I. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, T.-S. Kim, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4171–4176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Z. Wang, Q. Ye, J. He, X. Nie, G. He, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, P. Tao and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20483–20490 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Huang, C. F. Guo and Z. Ren, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1090–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gong, D. T. Lai, Y. Wang, L. W. Yap, K. J. Si, Q. Shi, N. N. Jason, T. Sridhar, H. Uddin and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19700–19708 CAS .
H. Oh and M. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2016, 176, 110–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Jun, B.-K. Ju and J.-W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7505–7514 CAS .
J. H. Park, G. T. Hwang, S. Kim, J. Seo, H. J. Park, K. Yu, T. S. Kim and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603473 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hui, Y. Liu, W. Guo, L. Li, N. Mu, C. Jin, Y. Zhu and P. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 285703 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, J. Jiu, T. T. Nge, Y. Aso and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .

          G. O. Mallory and J. B. Hajdu, Electroless plating: fundamentals and applications, William Andrew,  1990 Search PubMed .
A. Brenner and G. E. Riddell, J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand., 1947, 39, 385–395 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Hsueh, Y. C. Huang, R. M. Ho, C. H. Lai, T. Makida and H. Hasegawa, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3041–3046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Flis and D. Duquette, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Narayanan, S. Selvakumar and A. Stephen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 172, 298–307 CrossRef .

          C. R. Shipley Jr., US Pat., US3011920A,  1961 Search PubMed .
R. Agarwala and V. Agarwala, Sadhana, 2003, 28, 475–493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molenaar, M. Holdrinet and L. vanBeek, Plating, 1974, 61, 238–242 CAS .
Y. Shacham-Diamand and V. M. Dubin, Microelectron. Eng., 1997, 33, 47–58 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bindra and J. Roldan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 2581–2589 CrossRef CAS .
F. Delaunois, J. Petitjean, P. Lienard and M. Jacob-Duliere, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2000, 124, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Ayturk and Y. H. Ma, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 330, 233–245 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gorbunova, M. Ivanov and V. Moiseev, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1973, 120, 613–618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lelental, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1973, 120, 1650–1654 CrossRef CAS .

          R. N. Rhoda and R. F. Vines, US Pat., US3486928A,  1969 Search PubMed .
L. Schoenberg, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1571–1576 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kulyk, S. Cherevko and C.-H. Chung, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-C. Liu, Q.-G. He, P.-F. Xiao, B. Liang, J.-X. Tan, N.-Y. He and Z.-H. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 82, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, X. Luo, H. Zhuang, W. Li and B. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2003, 57, 3987–3991 CrossRef CAS .

          F. A. Ludwig and C. L. Helber Jr., US Pat., US4550036A,  1985 Search PubMed .
Y. Okinaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1973, 120, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vorobyova, S. Poznyak, A. Rimskaya and O. Vrublevskaya, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2004, 176, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .

          A. R. Burke, W. V. Hough and G. T. Hefferan, US Pat., US4142902A,  1979 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Yang, T. Yao, H. Han and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shu, B. Grandjean, E. Ghali and S. Kaliaguine, J. Membr. Sci., 1993, 77, 181–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liao and Z.-K. Kao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5109–5113 CAS .
Z.-Y. Xi, Y.-Y. Xu, L.-P. Zhu, Y. Wang and B.-K. Zhu, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 327, 244–253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Garcia, J. Polesel-Maris, P. Viel, S. Palacin and T. Berthelot, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2096–2102 CrossRef CAS .
O. Azzaroni, Z. Zheng, Z. Yang and W. T. Huck, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Guo, Y. Yu, Z. Xie, X. Liu, X. Zhou, Y. Gao, Z. Liu, F. Zhou, Y. Yang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3343–3350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Yan and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5508–5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan, X. Wei, L. Chen, H. Zhen, H. Zhou and S. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4926–4934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Y.-Q. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Tao and Y.-F. Liu, Opt. Commun., 2016, 362, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Schlesinger and M. Paunovic, Modern electroplating, John Wiley & Sons, 5th edn,  2011 Search PubMed .

          M. Paunovic and M. Schlesinger, Fundamentals of electrochemical deposition, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
D. Weng and U. Landau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2598–2604 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Wang, N. Li, H. L. Hu and Y. C. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 480–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kulkarni, K. Elangovan and K. H. Reddy, i-Manager's J. Mech. Eng., 2012, 2, 53 Search PubMed .
S. Sinha-Ray, Y. Zhang and A. L. Yarin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 215–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kiruthika, R. Gupta, K. D. M. Rao, S. Chakraborty, N. Padmavathy and G. U. Kulkarni, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2089–2094 RSC .
Q. Peng, S. Li, B. Han, Q. Rong, X. Lu, Q. Wang, M. Zeng, G. Zhou, J. Liu, K. Kempa and J. Gao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600095 Search PubMed .
S. An, H. S. Jo, D. Y. Kim, H. J. Lee, B. K. Ju, S. S. Al-Deyab, J. H. Ahn, Y. Qin, M. T. Swihart and A. L. Yarin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7149–7154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Hussain and M. M. Hussain, Small, 2016, 12, 5141–5145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. An, Y. Il Kim, S. Sinha-Ray, M. W. Kim, H. S. Jo, M. T. Swihart, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6076–6084 RSC .
X. Chen, W. Guo, L. Xie, C. Wei, J. Zhuang, W. Su and Z. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37048–37054 CAS .
M. Mohl, A. Dombovari, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and K. Kordas, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13710 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jang, H. G. Im, J. Jin, J. Lee, J. Y. Lee and B. S. Bae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27035–27043 CAS .
T. Hwang, J. S. Oh, J. P. Hong, G. Y. Nam, A. H. Bae, S. I. Son, G. H. Lee, H. K. Sung, Y. Lee and J. D. Nam, Carbon, 2012, 50, 612–621 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Huh, H. J. Jeon and C. W. Ahn, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1401–1408 CrossRef .
F. Han, J. Li, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, W. Huang, G. Zhang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10167–10175 RSC .
J. S. Oh, T. Hwang, G. Y. Nam, J. P. Hong, A. H. Bae, S. I. Son, G. H. Lee, H. K. Sung, H. R. Choi, J. C. Koo and J. D. Nam, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 521, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Su, M. Y. Zhang, Y. H. Chang, P. Zhai, N. Y. Hau, Y. T. Huang, C. Liu, A. K. Soh and S. P. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5577–5584 CAS .
Y.-H. Liu, J.-L. Xu, S. Shen, X.-L. Cai, L.-S. Chen and S.-D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9032–9041 CAS .
Y.-H. Liu, J. Xu, X. Gao, Y. Sun, J.-J. Lv, S. Shen, L. Chen and S.-D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2534–2543 CAS .
A. Carlson, A. M. Bowen, Y. Huang, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5284–5318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Segev-Bar and H. Haick, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8366–8378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ko, M. Kwon, W. K. Bae, B. Lee, S. W. Lee and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 536 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Yan, H. Hu, X. Zhou, R. Guo, X. Liu, Z. Xie, Z. Huang and Z. Zheng, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 2170–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Min, Y. Lee, S. H. Kim, C. Park and T. W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3681–3689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jo, S. An, J.-G. Lee, H. G. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, NPG Aisa Mater., 2017, 9, e347 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Yokus, R. Foote and J. S. Jur, IEEE Sens. J., 2016, 16, 7967–7976 CrossRef .
S. Y. Ji, C. M. Ajmal, T. Kim, W. S. Chang and S. Baik, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 165301 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Plovie, Y. Yang, J. Guillaume, S. Dunphy, K. Dhaenens, S. Van Put, B. Vandecasteele, T. Vervust, F. Bossuyt and J. Vanfleteren, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1700032 CrossRef .
A. D. Valentine, T. A. Busbee, J. W. Boley, J. R. Raney, A. Chortos, A. Kotikian, J. D. Berrigan, M. F. Durstock and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703817 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Skylar-Scott, S. Gunasekaran and J. A. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 6137–6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lessing, A. C. Glavan, S. B. Walker, C. Keplinger, J. A. Lewis and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4677–4682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahajan, W. J. Hyun, S. B. Walker, J. A. Lewis, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1841–1847 CAS .
X. Liu, H. Chang, Y. Li, W. T. Huck and Z. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 529–535 CAS .
X. Wang, H. Hu, Y. Shen, X. Zhou and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3090–3094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Lee, J. H. Lee, S. An, D. Y. Kim, T. G. Kim, S. S. Al-Deyab, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6677–6685 CAS .
S. Choi, J. Park, W. Hyun, J. Kim, J. Kim, Y. B. Lee, C. Song, H. J. Hwang, J. H. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6626–6633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, H. G. Zhang, R. R. Wang, X. Wang, H. T. Zhai, T. Wang, Q. H. Jin and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32925–32933 CAS .
N. S. Jang, K. H. Kim, S. H. Ha, S. H. Jung, H. M. Lee and J. M. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19612–19621 CAS .
M. C. Zhang, C. Y. Wang, X. P. Liang, Z. Yin, K. L. Xia, H. Wang, M. Q. Jian and Y. Y. Zhang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700193 CrossRef .
C. L. Kim, J. J. Lee, Y. J. Oh and D. E. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 152, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Ji, W. W. He, K. Wang, Y. X. Ran and C. H. Ye, Small, 2014, 10, 4951–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Kwon, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, H. Cho, J. Shin, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4744–4751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. An, E. J. Gwak, K. Kim, Y. C. Kim, J. Jang, J. Y. Kim and J. U. Park, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 471–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Zhai, R. R. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Cheng, L. J. Shi and J. Sun, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3924–3936 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Hammock, A. Chortos, B. C. Tee, J. B. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5997–6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Pharr and G. A. Salvatore, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9614–9635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen and Q. Pei, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11239–11268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heikenfeld, A. Jajack, J. Rogers, P. Gutruf, L. Tian, T. Pan, R. Li, M. Khine, J. Kim, J. Wang and J. Kim, Lab Chip, 2017, 18, 217–248 RSC .
K. Y. Chun, Y. Oh, J. Rho, J. H. Ahn, Y. J. Kim, H. R. Choi and S. Baik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 853–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Zhang, G. Zheng, K. Dai, C. Liu and C. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7035–7042 RSC .
N. N. Jason, W. Shen and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16760–16766 CAS .
S. Gong, D. T. H. Lai, B. Su, K. J. Si, Z. Ma, L. W. Yap, P. Guo and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400063 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wöhrle and D. Meissner, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129–138 CrossRef .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burroughes, D. Bradley, A. Brown, R. Marks, K. Mackay, R. Friend, P. Burns and A. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum and J. E. Moser, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, M. Kim, I. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4541–4548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Alzoubi, M. M. Hamasha, S. Lu and B. Sammakia, J. Disp. Technol., 2011, 7, 593–600 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li and Z. Suo, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2007, 44, 1696–1705 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, M. Jørgensen, R. R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, J.-E. J. Rubingh, R. Andriessen, C.-C. Fan, P. W. Blom, S. C. Veenstra and J. M. Kroon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel and F. C. Krebs, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 16–34 CrossRef .
H. Zheng, Y. Zheng, N. Liu, N. Ai, Q. Wang, S. Wu, J. Zhou, D. Hu, S. Yu, S. Han, W. Xu, C. Luo, Y. Meng, Z. Jiang, Y. Chen, D. Li, F. Huang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1971 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Yu, I. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. Jo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6032–6040 RSC .
K. Tvingstedt and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2893–2897 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, T. Kim, S. Cho, Y. Lee, A. Choe, B. Walker, S. J. Ko, J. Y. Kim and H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7933–7942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, W. J. Potscavage Jr and B. Kippelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 054507 CrossRef .
S. Choi, Y. Zhou, W. Haske, J. W. Shim, C. Fuentes-Hernandez and B. Kippelen, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Kim, Y.-C. Nah, Y.-Y. Noh, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3814–3819 CrossRef CAS .
J.-d. Li, P. Zhang, Y.-h. Wu, Y.-s. Liu and M. Xuan, Microsyst. Technol., 2009, 15, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miura and H. Honma, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 169, 91–95 CrossRef .
K. Li, H. Zhen, L. Niu, X. Fang, Y. Zhang, R. Guo, Y. Yu, F. Yan, H. Li and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7271–7278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, D. Wang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mao, Q. Meng, A. Ahmad and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700535 CrossRef .
Q. Huang, L. Liu, D. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Huang and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6802–6808 CAS .
Y. Yang, Q. Huang, L. Niu, D. Wang, C. Yan, Y. She and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606679 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701736 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Dongrui Wang
	Dongrui Wang is currently working in Prof. Zijian Zheng's group at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University as a visiting researcher. He received his BEng (2003) and PhD (2009) in polymer science and engineering from Tsinghua University (China). After a postdoctoral stay at the same university, he joined University of Science and Technology Beijing (China) as an Associate Professor in 2011 and was promoted to full Professor in 2016. His research interest involves electroactive soft matters, flexible materials and devices for electrochemical energy storage, and high-performance composites.

Yaokang Zhang
	Yaokang Zhang received his BSc degree from Renmin University of China in 2013. Currently, he is a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zijian Zheng at Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest focuses on the fabrication of solution-processed flexible electronic devices.

Xi Lu
	Xi Lu is currently a PhD candidate at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include fabrication approaches and applications of flexible and stretchable electronic materials.

Zhijun Ma
	Zhijun Ma received his BSc in science and technology of optical information from Wuhan University of Technology (China) in 2005, and PhD in materials science and engineering from Zhejiang University (China) in 2011. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at South China University of Technology from 2011 to 2014. He is currently an Associate Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology. Presently, he is also a postdoctoral fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include composite fibers with photonic/electronic functionalities, photonic/electronic nanomaterials.

Chuan Xie
	Chuan Xie obtained his BEng (2014) and MSc (2017) in polymer science and engineering from Sichuan University in China. He is currently a PhD candidate of the Institute of Textiles and Clothing at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include flexible electrode materials and cell configuration for energy storage such as lithium batteries.

Zijian Zheng
	Zijian Zheng is currently Full Professor at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interest includes surface and polymer science, nanolithography, flexible and wearable materials and devices. He received his BEng. in Chemical Engineering at Tsinghua University in 2003, and PhD in Chemistry at the University of Cambridge in 2007. He is elected as a Founding Member of The Young Academy of Sciences of Hong Kong.

 	Fig. 1  Number of publications sorted by year with the key words “wearable electronics” and “flexible electronics” indexed in the Web of Science in Dec. 2017.	 


Ag	6.30 × 107	510a	0.014
Cu	5.96 × 107	6.7a	1
Au	4.10 × 107	40070a	0.00011
Al	3.50 × 107	2.0a	2
Ni	1.43 × 107	11.1a	0.14
Pd	1.0 × 107	32408a	0.000035
Pt	9.43 × 106	28260a	0.000037
Carbon (graphite)	2.0 × 105	25b	0.0008
PEDOT/PSSc	2.0 × 104	167000b	0.000000013


Density (g cm−3)	1.39	1.36	1.42	∼1.4	0.95–0.98	1.0–1.3

T
g

 (°C)	110	155	360	—	—	—

T
m

 (°C)	255	269	—	—	—	—
CTEc (ppm °C−1)	17	13	20	—	>150	>100

Y

 (GPa)	5	5	2.5	1–2	<0.01	<0.01
Ultimate elongation (%)	90	85	80	5–15	50–500	300–800
Surface roughness (nm)	∼30	∼15	∼30	50–100	—	—

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Typical evaluation methods for mechanical properties of soft metal electrodes. (a) Schematic illustration of the bending test. (b) Images of a Cu nanowire-based elastic electrode under different bending stages. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration (top) and a practical example (bottom) of the stretching test. The photos showing the stretchable metal electrode under its initial and stretched stages are reproduced with permission.29 Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration (left) and a practical example (right) of the peeling test. The photo shows the peeling test of a Ag nanowire transparent electrode from the PET substrate by using Scotch tape.30	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the chemical approaches for fabricating SMEs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Metallic building blocks. (a) TEM image of AgNPs with an average diameter of 20 nm and optical image of concentrated AgNP aqueous ink (inset) used for SME printing. Reproduced with permission.1 (b) SEM image of AgNWs with an average diameter of 94.5 nm and the insert shows the optical image of the AgNW dispersion. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of ultrathin single crystalline AuNWs with high-aspect ratio and the insert shows the optical image of AuNWs dispersion, and (d) high-resolution TEM image of an individual single crystalline ultrathin AuNW shows [111] lattice planes and the diameter around 2.5 nm. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) FESEM image of ultralong CuNWs with 90–120 nm in diameter and the insert shows optical image of CuNWs in mother liquor. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright © 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Methods for the growth of ultra-long NWs. (a) Synthesis processes of very long AgNWs through the successive multistep growth (SMG) method and (b) SEM pictures of AgNWs by the SMG method after 1 and 7 times growth. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic process of R2R production of transparent silver nanofiber (AgNF) network electrodes and (d) the corresponding SEM images of the as prepared AgNF network in different magnifications (scale bars: 10 μm and 2 μm and 300 nm from left to right). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the ultralong AgNF by an electrospining and stretching method. (f) Optical images of the cracked PVP sacrificial layer and disconnected AgNFs according to stretching rate of 12.5, 25, 37.5, and 50 cm s−1, respectively. (g) AgNF length as a function of stretching rate. Scale bars are 100 μm. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the printing processes of the fabrication patterned SMEs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Metal electrodes prepared by different processing techniques. (a) The resolution of typical printing techniques. (b) Transparent electrode of PET with embedded Ag networks prepared by the nanoimprinting technique with a feature size of ∼3 μm. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible and stretchable CuNW transparent conductive film prepared by the electrospinning template method with a feature size of ∼140 nm. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Inkjet-printed flexible Au electrode arrays showing a minimum feature size of 62 μm. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Stencil printed elastic conductor with a width of ∼500 μm. The scale bars are 5 mm (grey) and 2 cm (black) respectively. Reproduced with permission.223 (f) A piece of polyimide film with screen printed silver patterns, the width of silver line could be as low as 22 μm. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society. (g) Conductive electronic devices and optical images of bendable silver electrode arrays prepared by direct writing. The line width is 620 μm. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of coating and spinning processes for the fabrication of SMEs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Post-treatment strategies of the fabrication of SMEs. (a) The microstructural evolution of the printed silver microelectrodes treated with different temperatures from 150 to 550 °C. Reproduced with permission.1 (b) SEM and HRTEM images of AgNW network electrodes after laser nano-welding treatment, which show the well-connected junction spots. The successful local laser nano-welding at NW junctions guarantees both good electrical conductivity and mechanical compliance of the Ag NW transparent electrodes under large mechanical bending. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the moisture treatment process for capillary-force-induced cold welding of AgNWs and the mechanism of capillary interaction between two particles connected with a liquid bridge, and SEM images of an AgNW before and after moisture treatment. Scale bars are 200 nm and 1 μm. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society. (d and e) SEM images of AgNW electrodes before and after mechanical pressing at 25 MPa for 5 s. Reproduced with permission.242 (f) SEM images of a pristine AgNW network before nanosoldering and a AgNW/PEDOT:PSS hybrid film after nanosoldering. The inset scale bars are 1 μm and 500 nm respectively. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni, φ0 = −0.025 V
H2PO2− + H2O → H2PO3− + 2H+ + 2e−, φ0 = 0.05 V

 	Fig. 10  Electroless metal deposition methods on different substrates. (a) Schematic diagrams of the metallization process through inkjet-printed or pen-written activating patterns followed by electroless copper plating. Reproduced with permission.268 Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of electroless metallization of photoresist-patterned surfaces coated with polydopamine. Photoresist (blue) was removed before silver metallization (left) or after copper metallization (right). Reproduced with permission.271 (c) Localized ligand induced electroless plating (LIEP) process. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright © 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim (d) Schematic illustration of polymer-assisted metal deposition (PAMD). Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) PAMD with P(MBP-co-METAC). Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


Ni	NiCl2	Sodium citrate	NaH2PO2	
244

NiCl2	Ethylenediamine	NaBH4	
255

NiCl2	Gluconic acid	DMABa	
256



Pt	Na2Pt(OH)6	Ethylamine	N2H4	
257



Cu	CuSO4	Potassium sodium tartrate	HCHO	
258

CuSO4	EDTAb	DMABa	
259



Ag	AgNO3	NH4OH	Glucose, tartaric acid	
260

AgNO3	NH4OH	Potassium sodium tartrate	
261

NaAg(CN)2	NaCN	DMABa	
262



Au	KAu(CN)2	KCN	KBH4	
263

KAu(CN)2	Sodium citrate	NaH2PO2	
264

KAuCl4	—	CH3OCH2CH2N(CH3)2:BH3	
265

Msolutionz+ + ze− → Mlattice

 	Fig. 11  Electrodeposition methods on different pretreated flexible substrates. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for copper electroplated wire for transparent conducting electrodes CuEW-TCEs. (b) SEM images CuEW-TCEs. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the electrospinning process used to fabricate the core–shell-structured carbon/metal hybrid mesh (CS-CMHM) films, and SEM images of PAN precursor nanofibers (upper left), carbon nanofibers after heat treatment of the PAN precursor (middle left), CS-CMHMs (down left), which were fabricated by electroplating Au on the surface of the carbon nanofiber templates, and CS-CMHMs at various magnifications (right). Reproduced with permission.293 (d) The relationship of resistance variation with the electrodeposition time (upper left) and the SEM images of Ni@GPUS with different electrodeposition times: 1 min, 3 min, 5 min, 7 min and 9 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission.294 Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


AgNPs	PI	3D direct writing	Thermal	23	12–350	0.083	1.66@5, 1000 cycles	—	—	
1

AgNPs	PI	Stencil printing	Thermal	22	3	0.018	2.5@2, 1000 cycles	—	—	
224

AgNPs	paper	Direct writing	Thermal	620	20	0.0022	4.2@0.5, 10000 cycles	—	—	
131

AuNPs	PEN	Inkjet printing	Thermal	62	∼1	0.32	∼0@5, 1000 cycles	—	—	
173

AuNPs	PET	LbL deposition	—	—	∼0.2	0.23	0.04@1.5, 10000 cycles	—	—	
302

CuNPs	PI	Blade coating	Thermal	—	2	0.25	0.063@15, 1000 cycles	—	—	
226

Cu	PET	Electroless plating	—	∼100	∼0.12	0.4	0.2@0.1, 4000 cycles	—	—	
274

Cu	Cotton	Electroless plating	—	—	—	0.2	2.5@5, 1000 cycles	—	—	
303

AgNPs + flakes	Fluorine rubber	Stencil printing	Thermal	500	30	0.054	—	5.6@400	—	
223

AgNWs	PDMS	Filtration + transfer	Thermal	—	—	9	—	∼6@460, 200 cycles	90	
67

AgNWs	PET	Meyer rod coating	Chemical	—	—	8	0.05@5, 100 cycles	
	65	
201

AgNWs	PDMS	Filtration + transfer	Photonic	—	—	9	∼0@2, 10000 cycles	
	89	
66

AgNWs	PET	Spin coating	Photonic	—	—	5	0.5@4.75, 100000 cycles	
	90	
240

AgNFs	PET	Blow-spinning	Photonic	—	—	15	∼0.05@4, 2000 cycles	
	94	
92

Au	PET	Electroless plating	—	∼0.9	∼0.47	∼0.22	∼0@3.87, 1000 cycles	
	90	
304

CuNWs	PET	Meyer rod coating	Thermal	—	—	25	0.3@2.5, 1000 cycles	
	85	
305

CuNFs	PDMS	Electroless plating	—	—	—	15.6	∼0@10, 2000 cycles	∼0@25, 800cycles	82	
222

Cu mesh	PDMS	Electroplating	—	—	—	0.31–0.42	∼0@5, 1000 cycles	3.6@580%	41–97	
286

Cu mesh	PET	Electroplating	—	—	—	0.058	0.1@1.3, 1000 cycles	
	90	
306

Cu mesh	PET	Electroplating	—	2–30	2–15	0.52	
	
	87	
285


 	Fig. 12  Fabrication of a flexible circuit with the 3D printing technique. (a) Top: Direct writing of AgTPU ink through a 200 μm nozzle (scale bar 200 μm); bottom: microprocessor chip picked by an empty nozzle (scale bar 2 mm). (b) A flexible circuit consisting of a rigid microprocessor, resistor, capacitor, and LED connected by printed AgTPU electrodes. (c) 3D printed LED devices with the inset showing the interface of the LED with the AgTPU electrodes. (d) Current–voltage curves of the LED device shown in (c) at various tensile strains. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright (2017) John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Wearable heaters based on Ag nanofibers. (a) Optical images of electrospun Ag nanofibers on polymer substrates. The scale bars are 5 mm and 20 μm in the left and right figures, respectively. (b) SEM image of the Ag nanofiber network (scale bar 1 μm) with the inset showing one single Ag nanofiber (scale bar 200 nm). (c) Infrared images of the Ag nanofiber-based heater under various applied voltages (scale bar 3 cm). (d) Temperature evolution of the heater when the voltage increases stepwise from 0.5 to 4.5 V. (e) Temperature response of the heater as a function of time operated at 4.5 V. (f) Schematic illustration of the wearable heater integrated with a controller unit and a wireless operation module which can connect with a smartphone via Bluetooth. (g) Image of the wearable heater with a wristband-type wireless operation device (scale bar 2 cm). (h) The temperature as a function of time for the automatically programmed stretchable wearable heater. Reproduced with permission.214	 

 	Fig. 14  Piezoresistive pressure sensors. (a) Sandwich type sensor based on AuNWs. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature. (b) A μm-thin and highly stretchable strain sensor based on a stretchable latex rubber with flexible black gold nanowire patches (left), and the resistance change of the strain sensors as a function of time with different gestures (right). Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schemes, performance, and images of wearable strain/pressure sensors fabricated by hybrid 3D printing. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright © 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  Typical SMEs and their application in optoelectronic devices. (a) An Ag/Ni hybrid mesh-type transparent conductive electrode for QLEDs. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (b) Capillary-assisted solution printing process of highly aligned AgNW arrays as transparent electrodes for OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.351 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (c) Cu electrode arrays on PET prepared through electroless deposition and their applications in OSCs. Reproduced with permission.357 Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Wearable electrochemical energy storage devices. (a) Yarn-type supercapacitor fabricated on Ni coated cotton yarns. Reproduced with permission.23 (b) Fabric-type supercapacitor using Ni-coated cotton as current collectors and multi-walled CNT and reduced graphene oxide as the active materials. Reproduced with permission.364 Copyright (2014) John Wiley and Sons. (c) Wearable lithium-ion battery integrated into clothes. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
