Sunlight-activated graphene-heterostructure transparent cathodes: enabling high-performance n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction photovoltaics   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE00548E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00548E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2085-2092Sunlight-activated graphene-heterostructure transparent cathodes: enabling high-performance n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction photovoltaics†

        
          
            Po-Hsun 
            Ho
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei-Chen 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Ting 
            Liou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ya-Ping 
            Chiu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Siang 
            Shih
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Chi 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pao-Yun 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min-Ken 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hsuen-Li 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chi-Te 
            Liang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Chun-Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      *ad
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: chunwei@ntu.edu.tw
bDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei 116, Taiwan
cDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
dTaiwan Consortium of Emergent Crystalline Materials (TCECM), Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan
Received 
      17th February 2015
    , Accepted 6th May 2015First published on 18th May 2015AbstractCompared to widely-reported graphene-based anodes, the task of obtaining a stable graphene-based cathode is generally more difficult to achieve because n-type graphene devices have very limited thermal and chemical stabilities, and are usually sensitive to the influence of the ambient environment. This work developed a novel “sunlight-activated” graphene-heterostructure transparent electrode in which photogenerated charges from a light-absorbing material are transferred to graphene, resulting in the modulation of electrical properties of the graphene transparent electrode caused by a strong light–matter interaction at graphene-heterostructure interfaces. A photoactive graphene/TiOx-heterostructure transparent cathode was used to fabricate an n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell, achieving a record-high power conversion efficiency (>10%). The photoactive graphene-heterostructure transparent electrode, which exhibits excellent tunable electrical properties under sunlight illumination, has great potential for use in the future development of graphene-based photovoltaics and optoelectronics.
Introduction
Graphene exhibits excellent carrier transport because of its unique two-dimensional energy dispersion. In addition, a single-layer graphene shows high transparency with 97.7% transmittance,1,2 making it a candidate for transparent electrode applications with the potential to replace the conventional indium tin oxide (ITO). One advantage of using graphene as a transparent electrode compared to ITO is that graphene exhibits tunable electrical properties such as conductivity, work function, carrier type (n or p), and concentrations that can be modulated through doping. Typically, the task of obtaining a stable graphene-based cathode with low work function and excellent conductivity is generally more difficult to achieve compared to the widely-reported graphene-based anodes,3,4 because n-type graphene devices have very limited thermal and chemical stabilities, and are usually sensitive to the influence of the ambient environment.5
Recently, significant progress in p-graphene/n-Si Schottky junction solar cells in which graphene functions as an anode has been demonstrated, achieving promising efficiencies of 10–14%.6–9 By contrast, the performance of n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells in which graphene functions as a cathode is still quite low, showing an efficiency of <0.1%10,11 because of the difficulty in obtaining an effective n-graphene transparent cathode with a suitable doping level and an appropriate interface with p-Si. Most researchers have fabricated graphene transparent electrodes with tunable electrical properties using chemical doping by either incorporating substitutional dopants into carbon lattices or adsorbing surface charge dopants such as organic molecules,12–15 inorganic nanoparticles,16,17 and thin films18,19 on a graphene surface. Here, we would like to demonstrate a new concept of a “photoactive” graphene-heterostructure transparent electrode in which photogenerated charges from a light-absorbing material are transferred to graphene, resulting in the modulation of electrical properties of the electrode caused by a strong light–matter interaction at graphene-heterostructure interfaces. The photoactive graphene-heterostructure transparent electrode is particularly interesting when its electrical properties can be directly modulated through sunlight illumination in photovoltaic applications, resulting in a significant improvement in power conversion efficiencies.
Strong light–matter interactions in graphene-based heterostructure devices have recently shown unique physical phenomena and device functionality, resulting in controllable p- or n-doping processes under light illumination.20–25 For example, photoinduced modulating doping in graphene/BN heterostructures, where the dopants were separated from the conducting channel, resulted in a controllable n-type transport behavior of graphene with the preservation of high mobility under light illumination.23 A hybrid graphene–PbS21,22 quantum dot device exhibited p-type transport behavior when the optically excited holes in quantum dots were transferred to graphene, yielding an ultrahigh photodetection gain.22 In addition, a graphene/WS2/graphene van der Waals heterostructure showed a promising photovoltaic effect with high quantum efficiency because of the strong coupling between layered constituents.26 Photoinduced doping of graphene under light illumination is advantageous because it is more controllable and reversible than chemical doping. In this work, a “sunlight-activated” graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent cathode was proposed and used to fabricate a high-performance n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell that achieved a record-high power conversion efficiency of >10% because of unique photo-induced charge transfer at graphene/TiOx heterostructure interfaces. The breakthrough of fabricating high-performance n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells has a great impact on the development of graphene-based photovoltaics because graphene could act as both an anode and a cathode with tunable electrical properties and excellent stability.
Results and discussion
The TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell consists of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent cathode that is formed by spin coating a thin TiOx layer on top of graphene, and a p-Si substrate for light harvesting is present underneath graphene as shown in Fig. 1(a). Solution-processable inorganic TiOx thin films, which are amorphous and transparent with a large energy gap, have recently been used as efficient electron-donating agents to fabricate stable n-type graphene transistors because of their inherent oxygen vacancies.19,27 The band gap values of TiOx were found to be stoichiometrically dependent on the composition of O/Ti28 (ESI†). Fig. 1(b) shows the normalized absorption spectrum of the TiOx (x = 1.9) thin film used in this study and the dark line is the solar irradiation spectrum under air mass 1.5 global (A.M. 1.5) conditions. When incident photon energies are higher than the band gap of TiOx at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm, photogenerated charges from the TiOx thin film are expected to transfer to graphene, resulting in photoinduced doping at the graphene/TiOx interface. The near-ultraviolet (UV) light absorption of the TiOx film ensures that most of the sunlight can be transmitted through the graphene/TiOx transparent electrode to the underneath p-Si substrate, resulting in efficient light harvesting. The spectral match between TiOx absorption and solar irradiation implies that the graphene/TiOx heterostructure film can act as an effective “photoactive” transparent electrode under sunlight illumination without sacrificing the light harvesting efficiency.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic image of a TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell consisting of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent cathode and a p-Si substrate. (b) Normalized absorption spectrum of the TiOx thin film (red) and solar irradiation spectrum under A.M. 1.5 illumination conditions (black). 
High-quality CVD graphene thin films were grown to fabricate graphene/TiOx heterostructure films for transistors and transparent electrodes. TiOx thin films were deposited through spin coating and had a smooth surface with a roughness of approximately 0.30 nm. Depending on whether a film was used as a top or bottom transparent electrode, two possible configurations of graphene/TiOx heterostructure thin films are proposed: the first corresponds to the top configuration and consists of a graphene film covered with a thin TiOx layer (TiOx/graphene), and the second corresponds to the bottom configuration and consists of a graphene film transferred on a precoated TiOx thin film (graphene/TiOx). These two different configurations are applicable when they are used as the top or bottom electrodes of devices respectively. Fig. 2(a) shows the optical transmittances of the as-grown monolayer graphene and the monolayer graphene covered with a 20 nm TiOx thin film. The TiOx/graphene film shows high transparency with an optical transmittance of approximately 96.0% at 550 nm, comparable to the as-grown monolayer graphene with a transmittance of approximately 97.3%. The inset of Fig. 2(a) shows the photographic image of the TiOx/graphene heterostructure transparent electrode transferred onto a glass substrate. To further investigate the photo-induced doping response in the TiOx/graphene heterostructure, a graphene transistor, which comprised a device structure of TiOx(20 nm)/graphene/SiO2/Si by spin coating a TiOx thin film on top of graphene, was fabricated to measure its transport behavior under light illumination. Fig. 2(b) shows the gate-voltage (VG)-dependent current of the device in the dark and under illumination. For comparison, an as-grown graphene transistor deposited on SiO2/Si was fabricated, which exhibited a typical p-type transporting behavior with a positive Dirac point at 24 V because of the adsorption of oxygen or residual impurities during the transfer.29,30 After the TiOx layer was deposited on graphene, an intrinsic n-type doping effect on the graphene transistor with a negative Dirac point at −58 V was observed because of inherent oxygen deficiencies.19 In addition, the inherent oxygen deficiencies of a non-stoichiometric amorphous TiOx thin film typically act as effective hole-trapping centers in gap states.25 When incident photon energies are higher than the band gap of TiOx, photoexcited electron–hole pairs are generated; the holes are trapped in the gap states, and electrons in the conduction band (CB) of the TiOx film are transferred to graphene according to the band alignment.25 The continual shift of the Dirac points toward negative VG with an increase in the irradiation time indicated that electron concentrations in the graphene transistor increased with illumination by using a 365 nm light emitting diode (LED) (10 mW cm−2). These processes reached a saturated level with a Dirac point at approximately −156 V when the device was illuminated for over 5 min because the trapped states of the TiOx film were completely filled. The transistor device subjected to photoinduced doping also exhibited a long recovery time even when the illuminated light was switched off because of the trapped charge (ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) Transmission spectra of graphene and TiOx/graphene heterostructure films. (b) Gate-dependent current–voltage characteristics of a TiOx/graphene transistor under illumination (365 nm, 10 mW cm−2) with various illumination periods. (c) Sheet resistances of pristine graphene and graphene/TiOx heterostructure before and after illumination (black dot, left). The corresponding work function values measured using a Kelvin probe force microscope are also shown in this figure (red star, right). (d) Surface potential mapping images of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure film measured in the dark (bottom) and under light illumination (top). 

Fig. 2(c) shows the sheet resistances and work functions of pristine graphene, graphene/TiOx, and graphene/TiOx under light illumination. Here, the bottom configuration of the graphene/TiOx heterostructure fabricated by transferring graphene to a precoated TiOx thin film (20 nm) on a glass substrate was used for measurement. Both the resistance and work function of the photoactive graphene/TiOx film were measured while the sample was under light illumination for >5 min (365 nm LED, 10 mW cm−2) to ensure that the photoinduced doping of the graphene/TiOx film reached a saturated level. The sheet resistances of the as-grown graphene, graphene/TiOx, and graphene/TiOx under light illumination were 900, 449, and 300 Ω □−1, respectively, and the corresponding work functions measured using a Kelvin probe force microscope were 4.70, 4.41, and 4.27 eV. The results show good agreement with the observed trend of increasing carrier concentrations and a negative shift of Dirac points of the graphene transistor under light illumination (Fig. 2(b)). For the graphene/TiOx film without light illumination, the decreased sheet resistance and work function compared with those of pristine graphene are mainly attributed to intrinsic n-type doping by using the efficient electron-donating agent TiOx because of inherent oxygen vacancies.16 For the graphene/TiOx film under light illumination, the further decreased sheet resistance and work function are mainly attributed to photoinduced doping at the graphene/TiOx heterostructure, where photogenerated electrons in the CB of the TiOx film are transferred to graphene, resulting in an increased electron concentration and a raised Fermi level of graphene. Substantial photoinduced doping at the graphene/TiOx heterostructure is further evident from the work function mapping image, revealed using the scanning Kelvin probe force microscope, of graphene deposited on a TiOx thin film when it was measured in the dark and under light illumination. The decreased work function of the graphene/TiOx thin film under light illumination compared to that without illumination was clearly observed (Fig. 2(d)). The remarkable photodoping response of the modulation of electrical properties of graphene caused by the near-UV absorption of TiOx suggests that the graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent film has great potential for use in photovoltaic applications because it can simultaneously exhibit strong photoinduced doping on graphene and preserve its high transparency in the visible-near infrared region under sunlight illumination.
Before we used the photoactive graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent electrode in an n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell, the formation of a native oxide layer at the interface between graphene and p-Si had to be addressed. For a graphene/Si Schottky junction, the formation of a thin native oxide between graphene and Si is usually inevitable. The interface between Si and SiO2 usually consists of a large amount of hole traps, which are well-known in Si-based metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) device technology,31,32 and the interface traps at a native oxide layer greatly affect photocurrent transport. The influence of interface traps at the native oxide layer on the performance of an n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell is found to be greater than that on a p-graphene/n-Si Schottky junction solar cell due to different directions of photocurrent in these two systems (ESI†). For the conventional fabrication of a graphene/Si device, a buffer oxide etchant (BOE) is usually used to remove the native oxide layer to obtain a fresh Si surface before graphene is transferred. However, because contamination of graphene with water or residual impurities during the transfer is usually inevitable, the native oxide layer between graphene and Si can grow further. Accordingly, we used a post-BOE treatment technique to eliminate the native oxide between graphene and Si by dropping a small amount of a BOE on the graphene/Si Schottky junction device (Fig. 3(a)). The BOE solution penetrated the defect sites of graphene and etched the native oxide layer between graphene and Si. The modified-BOE treatment could also be an effective method for removing oxygen contaminants on graphene33 and carbon nanotubes,34 which may result in p-type doping. Fig. 3(b) shows the current–voltage characteristics of the graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells before and after the post-BOE treatment. The as-transferred graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell without the post-BOE treatment exhibited a low power conversion efficiency of ∼0.1%, with an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.20 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 2.98 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.169. By contrast, the device after post-BOE treatment exhibited a significant improvement in photovoltaic performance, showing a higher power conversion efficiency of 2.2% with VOC of 0.35 V, JSC of 19.1 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.331. Therefore, removing the native oxide layer at the graphene/p-Si interface is a crucial factor for improving the device performance. However, the device showed considerable degradation when it was annealed (150 °C) under ambient conditions for 30 min, indicating that the native oxide layer grows further if the device is exposed to ambient air. The effect of the native oxide thickness on the device performance of a graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell is shown in the ESI.† Therefore, an encapsulated layer that can prevent a device from degrading because of contamination with oxygen or water is necessary for extending the device stability. Because TiOx has been reported to be an effective encapsulated layer on graphene for preventing contamination with water and oxygen,19 the top TiOx layer of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell functions not only as an efficient photodoping material that modulates the electrical properties of graphene but also as an encapsulated layer that prevents the formation of a native oxide layer.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of a graphene/p-Si Schottky junction device with post-BOE treatment. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of a graphene/p-Si Schottky junction device before and after post-BOE treatment. The degradation of the device after annealing at ambient air for 30 min was also shown. 

Fig. 4(a) shows the device structure of an n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell that consists of the photoactive TiOx (20 nm)/graphene transparent cathode and the light-absorbing material p-Si. Fig. 4(b) shows the dynamic current–voltage characteristics of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell under simulated A.M. 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) for various measurement durations. For comparison, the performance of the referenced graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell subjected to post-BOE treatment without coating of the TiOx layer is shown. The duration of measurement performed to obtain each current–voltage curve was maintained at approximately 1 min. The TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell device showed an intriguing phenomenon; a gradual enhancement in the power conversion efficiency was observed as the illumination time increased. According to the first measured current–voltage curve, the device showed an enhanced power conversion efficiency of 4.6% with VOC of 0.40 V, JSC of 26.2 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.443. The device exhibited a continual increase in VOC and FF when it was under illumination for up to 4 min, whereas there was no significant variation in JSC. The power conversion efficiency of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell reached a saturated power conversion efficiency of 8.2% after 4 min of illumination, exhibiting VOC of 0.48 V, JSC of 26.9 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.634. No further increase in the power conversion efficiency was observed when the device was illuminated for a longer time because the trapped states of TiOx were completely filled. The evolution of the power conversion efficiency of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell as the illumination time increased is also shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of a TiOx/graphene/Si Schottky junction solar cell. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of a TiOx/graphene/Si Schottky solar cell as a function of illumination time up to 5 min. The device reaches a saturated performance after 4 min of illumination. (c) Band diagrams of the built-potentials Vbi and Vphotoactivebi of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells consisting of the as-deposited TiOx/graphene and photoactive TiOx/graphene cathodes. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters derived from J–V measurements of an n-graphene/p-Si Schottky solar cell. The solar cell parameters of the devices are analyzed from Fig. 4(b) and 5(c). The detailed photovoltaic parameters are open circuit voltage, VOC, short circuit current, JSC, fill factor, FF, and power conversion efficiency (PCE)




 

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Post-BOE (Gr only)
0.35
19.1
32.6
2.2


TiOx/Gr 1 min
0.40
26.2
44.3
4.6


TiOx/Gr 2 min
0.45
26.4
51.6
6.1


TiOx/Gr 3 min
0.47
26.6
60.2
7.5


TiOx/Gr 4 min
0.48
26.9
63.4
8.2


PMMA/TiOx/Gr
0.48
34.3
63.6
10.5




The promising value of 8.2% achieved by the n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell indicates that the photoactive TiOx/graphene thin film functions as an effective transparent cathode, compared to that without coating the TiOx layer. The considerably enhanced power conversion efficiency and increased VOC and FF of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell are mainly attributed to the unique photoinduced doping effect of the graphene/TiOx heterostructure under light illumination. First, the intrinsic n-type doping of the TiOx thin layer acts as an electron-donating agent, increasing the electron concentration and the Fermi level of graphene. In the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell under sunlight illumination, substantial photoinduced doping results in the transfer of photoexcited electrons from TiOx to graphene as the TiOx thin layer absorbs near-UV light with wavelengths <400 nm. At this stage, the electron concentrations and Fermi levels of graphene further increase because of photoinduced charge transfer at the graphene/TiOx interface, resulting in increased built-in voltages at the graphene/p-Si junction (Fig. 4(c)). The corresponding Schottky barrier heights of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si device were also found to be increased with illumination (ESI†). This explains the systematic increase in the VOC of the device when it was under simulated solar illumination. In addition, the improved FF of the device under illumination is mainly attributed to the increased carrier concentration of graphene, resulting in a decreased sheet resistance. Accordingly, the graphene/TiOx heterostructure thin film acts as a photoactive transparent cathode with tunable doping levels and work functions, enabling the n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell to achieve high performance as a result of unique photoinduced charge transfer at the graphene/TiOx heterostructure interface.
Because a pristine Si substrate usually has a high reflectance (>30%), the device performance of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell could be further optimized by using an antireflection technique to enhance the light-trapping efficiency of the device. Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) was recently reported to be an effective antireflection material in carbon-based/Si Schottky junction solar cells.35Fig. 5(a) shows the device structure after an antireflection PMMA thin layer was deposited on the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell. The optimized thickness of the PMMA layer was calculated to be approximately 70 nm using the Frenel equation (ESI†). Fig. 5(b) shows the reflection spectra (400–1100 nm) of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell before and after the PMMA antireflection layer was deposited. Before being coated with the PMMA layer, the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell showed a slightly lower reflectance compared with that of a pristine Si substrate. After the PMMA layer was deposited on the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell, the reflectance of the device was substantially reduced to approximately 10% at 500–800 nm. The PMMA/TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell with the antireflection coating showed a high power conversion efficiency of 10.5% with VOC of 0.48 V, JSC of 34.3 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.636 (Fig. 5(c)). The increased JSC of the device was mainly because of the increased light trapping efficiency achieved by using the antireflection technique. In addition, both PMMA and TiOx thin films are effective encapsulated layers that prevent the formation of a native oxide layer at the graphene/Si Schottky junction. Although TiOx is a good encapsulated layer which may prevent the device from being exposed to oxygen and water,19 the thickness of TiOx is too thin to block all possible contamination in the atmosphere (ESI†). The device consisting of a double encapsulated layer (TiOx + PMMA) shows excellent air stability as demonstrated in Fig. 5(d). The device exhibited satisfactory stability, with >80% of the original power conversion efficiency after 10 days of exposure under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of a PMMA/TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell, where PMMA was used as an antireflective coating layer. (b) Reflection spectra of pure p-Si, TiOx/graphene/p-Si, and PMMA/TiOx/graphene/p-Si. (c) Device performance of a TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell with and without PMMA antireflective coating. (d) Stability test of the devices with and without an encapsulated layer when it was exposed to ambient air. 
Conclusion
In summary, we developed a novel photoactive graphene-heterostructure transparent electrode, where the carrier concentrations and work functions of graphene can be modulated through light illumination. The photoactive graphene transparent electrode is particularly unique in the photovoltaic applications when sunlight acts as a modulating source for the electrical properties of graphene. The sunlight-activated graphene/TiOx heterostructure thin film acts as an effective graphene transparent cathode that enables the n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells to exhibit high performance, achieving a record-high efficiency of >10% for the first time. It is worth noting that although the power conversion efficiency of the n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell at the current stage is still lower than those of p-graphene/n-Si Schottky junction solar cells (where graphene acts as an anode), the breakthrough of discovering the sunlight-activated graphene-heterostructure transparent cathodes can also be applied in other photovoltaic systems which require a stable graphene-based transparent cathode consisting of low work function and excellent conductivity. The self-encapsulated, sunlight-activated transparent electrode with tunable electrical properties under solar irradiation showed great potential for use in the development of graphene-based photovoltaics and optoelectronics.
Experimental
Use of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) for the growth of graphene on a Cu foil
A polycrystalline Cu foil (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc.) was placed on a hot wall furnace consisting of a 1 inch fused silica tube. The furnace was then heated to 1000 °C. Typically, a reduction process was conducted in a H2 flow for ∼40 min prior to the introduction of CH4. With the H2 flow, CH4 was then introduced for graphene growth with a flow rate of H2/CH4 of 2/35 sccm. After a growth time of 30 min, CH4 was then shut off and the system was cooled in a H2 or Ar flow to reach room temperature. The whole procedures were conducted at low pressure (typically at ∼500 mTorr during the growth stage). The as-grown graphene films were transferred using the conventional PMMA transfer technique. TiOx was synthesized via sol–gel procedures according to our previous article.28 For the bottom configuration of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure, the TiOx precursor solution was first spin-cast on a substrate to form a thin film, followed by hydrolysis processes at 80 °C. Subsequently, the CVD-graphene film was transferred on the pre-coated TiOx substrate using the PMMA transfer method. For the top configuration of a TiOx/graphene heterostructure, the TiOx precursor was directly spin-cast on the as-transferred graphene film, followed by hydrolysis processes.
Fabrication of n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells
A p-type silicon wafer (1–10 Ω cm) with 300 nm thermal oxide was used for fabricating n-graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells in this work. The Cr/Au contacts were defined at the front side of the Si wafer using the conventional photolithography technique. Subsequently, the backside of the SiO2 layer was first removed by a buffered oxide etchant (BOE) with HF:NH4F (1:6) to expose the surface of silicon, and then was evaporated with gold to form an ohmic contact at the backside of the Si wafer. The top patterned Cr/Au electrodes were utilized as masks for etching the front side of SiO2 through the BOE process and the working area of the device is defined using an effective square window of 3 × 3 mm2. Subsequently, the as-grown graphene film was transferred through the PMMA method. The post-BOE treatment was performed by dropping the BOE on the working window for 3 min to etch the native oxide under graphene. Subsequently, a TiOx thin film was spin-cast on the device to fabricate a TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell. For the antireflective coating, PMMA (MicroChem 950 PMMA A6) diluted with chloroform (PMMA 20 vol% in chloroform) was spin-cast (8000 rpm) on the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell to form an antireflective and also an encapsulated layer.
Optical and electrical characterization of devices
The transmission spectra were recorded using a UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer (JASCO, V-570). Sheet resistances of graphene and CFG were characterized using a Keithley 2400 source meter equipped with a conventional four-probe station. The work function values of graphene samples were determined by using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) (Innova, Vecco Inc.). Current–voltage characteristics of the solar cell devices were measured using a Keithley 2410 source meter under an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 from a solar simulator (Newport Inc.) using the A.M. 1.5 filter. The field-effect transistor was fabricated on a heavily doped silicon wafer with thermally grown 300 nm silicon dioxide. After transferring graphene on the SiO2/Si substrate, the source and drain electrodes (Au/Cr) were fabricated by utilizing thermal evaporation through a shadow mask with a channel length of 100 μm and a channel width of 1 mm. TiOx was then spin-cast on top of the graphene transistor for further measurement. The optically illuminated gate-dependent conductivities of the device were measured (Keithley 6487 and 2410 for the source–drain and the gate, respectively) in a probe station chamber (Linkam FDCS 196) at room temperature under vacuum conditions of 10−3 Torr, coupled with a 365 nm LED (Mightex). The optical reflectances of the n-graphene/p-Si photovoltaic devices were measured using a Hitachi U-4100 various-angle optical spectrometer.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan (Project No. 103-2119-M-002-021-MY3 and 102-2119-M-002-005) and Taiwan Consortium of Emergent Crystalline Materials (TCECM).
References
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, S. Chang, M. Smith, S. Gradecak and J. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1581 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, F. Xie, P. Lin and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Shi, H. Li, L. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Li, Y. Shang, S. Wu, X. Li, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu, Y. Fang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1776–1781 CAS .
C. Xie, X. Zhang, K. Ruan, Z. Shao, S. S. Dhaliwal, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15348–15354 CAS .
K. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7715–7721 RSC .
P.-H. Ho, Y.-T. Liou, C.-H. Chuang, S.-W. Lin, C.-Y. Tseng, D.-Y. Wang, C.-C. Chen, W.-Y. Hung, C.-Y. Wen and C.-W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1724–1729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Behura, S. Nayak, I. Mukhopadhyay and O. Jani, Carbon, 2014, 67, 766–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohammed, Z. Li, J. Cui and T.-P. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 302 CrossRef PubMed .
D. B. Farmer, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, V. Perebeinos, Y.-M. Lin, G. S. Tulevski, J. C. Tsang and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 388–392 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Chen, D. C. Qi, X. Y. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10418–10422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wei, N. Liu, H. R. Lee, E. Adijanto, L. Ci, B. D. Naab, J. Q. Zhong, J. Park, W. Chen, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1890–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, K. Berke, M. Lemaitre, Z. Nasrollahi, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and B. R. Appleton, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 425701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Kim, A. Reina, Y. Shi, H. Park, L.-J. Li, Y. H. Lee and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 285205 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, G. Dong, M. Fang, F. Wang, H. Lin, W.-C. Yen, K. S. Chan, Y.-L. Chueh and J. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5417–5421 RSC .
I. Khrapach, F. Withers, T. H. Bointon, D. K. Polyushkin, W. L. Barnes, S. Russo and M. F. Craciun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2844–2849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-H. Ho, Y.-C. Yeh, D.-Y. Wang, S.-S. Li, H.-A. Chen, Y.-H. Chung, C.-C. Lin, W.-H. Wang and C.-W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6215–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chen, Y.-Y. Lu, F.-Y. Shih, P.-H. Ho, Y.-F. Chen, C.-W. Chen, Y.-T. Chen and W.-H. Wang, Carbon, 2013, 63, 23–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, L. Gan, Y. Cao, Q. Wang, L. Qi and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2715–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ju, J. VelascoJr, E. Huang, S. Kahn, C. Nosiglia, H.-Z. Tsai, W. Yang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Crommie, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, S. Xu, Z. Wu, N. Wang, M. M. T. Loy and S. Du, Small, 2013, 9, 3031–3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-H. Ho, S.-S. Li, Y.-T. Liou, C.-Y. Wen, Y.-H. Chung and C.-W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 282–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1941–1944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Yeh, S.-S. Li, C.-C. Wu, T.-W. Shao, P.-C. Kuo and C.-W. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 125, 233–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, L. Liu, S. Berciaud, Y.-J. Yu, H. Liu, P. Kim, G. W. Flynn and L. E. Brus, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4944–4951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, B. A. Sperling, I. Calizo, G. Cheng, C. A. Hacker, Q. Zhang, Y. Obeng, K. Yan, H. Peng, Q. Li, X. Zhu, H. Yuan, A. R. Hight Walker, Z. Liu, L.-m. Peng and C. A. Richter, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9144–9153 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Do Thanh and P. Balk, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1797–1801 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Lenahan and P. V. Dressendorfer, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 3495–3499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-W. Shin, H. M. Lee, S. M. Yu, K.-S. Lim, J. H. Jung, M.-K. Kim, S.-W. Kim, J.-H. Han, R. S. Ruoff and J.-B. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7781–7788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J.-S. Huang, S. Nejati, L. McMillon, S. Huang, C. O. Osuji, N. Hazari and A. D. Taylor, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6179–6184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, J. Di, Z. Yong, B. Sun and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4140–4143 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00548eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic image of a TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell consisting of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure transparent cathode and a p-Si substrate. (b) Normalized absorption spectrum of the TiOx thin film (red) and solar irradiation spectrum under A.M. 1.5 illumination conditions (black).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Transmission spectra of graphene and TiOx/graphene heterostructure films. (b) Gate-dependent current–voltage characteristics of a TiOx/graphene transistor under illumination (365 nm, 10 mW cm−2) with various illumination periods. (c) Sheet resistances of pristine graphene and graphene/TiOx heterostructure before and after illumination (black dot, left). The corresponding work function values measured using a Kelvin probe force microscope are also shown in this figure (red star, right). (d) Surface potential mapping images of a graphene/TiOx heterostructure film measured in the dark (bottom) and under light illumination (top).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of a graphene/p-Si Schottky junction device with post-BOE treatment. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of a graphene/p-Si Schottky junction device before and after post-BOE treatment. The degradation of the device after annealing at ambient air for 30 min was also shown.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of a TiOx/graphene/Si Schottky junction solar cell. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of a TiOx/graphene/Si Schottky solar cell as a function of illumination time up to 5 min. The device reaches a saturated performance after 4 min of illumination. (c) Band diagrams of the built-potentials Vbi and Vphotoactivebi of the TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cells consisting of the as-deposited TiOx/graphene and photoactive TiOx/graphene cathodes.	 

Post-BOE (Gr only)	0.35	19.1	32.6	2.2
TiOx/Gr 1 min	0.40	26.2	44.3	4.6
TiOx/Gr 2 min	0.45	26.4	51.6	6.1
TiOx/Gr 3 min	0.47	26.6	60.2	7.5
TiOx/Gr 4 min	0.48	26.9	63.4	8.2
PMMA/TiOx/Gr	0.48	34.3	63.6	10.5

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of a PMMA/TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell, where PMMA was used as an antireflective coating layer. (b) Reflection spectra of pure p-Si, TiOx/graphene/p-Si, and PMMA/TiOx/graphene/p-Si. (c) Device performance of a TiOx/graphene/p-Si Schottky junction solar cell with and without PMMA antireflective coating. (d) Stability test of the devices with and without an encapsulated layer when it was exposed to ambient air.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00548e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
