Advances in constructing silver nanowire-based conductive pathways for flexible and stretchable electronics  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR02475F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR02475F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 11484-11511Advances in constructing silver nanowire-based conductive pathways for flexible and stretchable electronics

        
          
            Yuanhang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shun 
            Duan
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Hong 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a
aVirginia Commonwealth University, Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering, BioTech One, 800 East Leigh Street, Richmond, VA 23219, USA. E-mail: hzhao2@vcu.edu;  Fax: +1 804-827-7030;   Tel: +1 804-827-7025
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Key Laboratory of Biomedical Materials of Natural Macromolecules (Beijing University of Chemical Technology), Ministry of Education, Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
Received 
      5th May 2022
    , Accepted 11th July 2022First published on 1st August 2022AbstractWith their soaring technological demand, flexible and stretchable electronics have attracted many researchers’ attention for a variety of applications. The challenge which was identified a decade ago and still remains, however, is that the conventional electrodes based on indium tin oxide (ITO) are not suitable for ultra-flexible electronic devices. The main reason is that ITO is brittle and expensive, limiting device performance and application. Thus, it is crucial to develop new materials and processes to construct flexible and stretchable electrodes with superior quality for next-generation soft devices. Herein, various types of conductive nanomaterials as candidates for flexible and stretchable electrodes are briefly reviewed. Among them, silver nanowire (AgNW) is selected as the focus of this review, on account of its excellent conductivity, superior flexibility, high technological maturity, and significant presence in the research community. To fabricate a reliable AgNW-based conductive network for electrodes, different processing technologies are introduced, and the corresponding characteristics are compared and discussed. Furthermore, this review summarizes strategies and the latest progress in enhancing the conductive pathway. Finally, we showcase some exemplary applications and provide some perspectives about the remaining technical challenges for future research.Yuanhang YangYuanhang Yang is a fourth-year graduate student from the department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) in the United States. He received a bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Qingdao University and a master's degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Beijing Institute of Petrochemical Technology in China. His current research area is developing soft electronics and medical devices via 3D printing technology, including ink formulation, printing process, post treatment and surface functionalization.Shun DuanProf. Shun Duan graduated from Qingdao University of Science and Technology in China, majoring in pharmaceutical engineering/English, with a bachelor's degree of engineering and a bachelor's degree of arts. In 2014, he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with a Ph.D. degree majoring in materials science and engineering. From 2019 to 2020, he worked at Virginia Commonwealth University as a research scholar. His main research interest is antibacterial materials, which combines active polymerization with natural polymers. In 2021, he was granted as a recipient of the National Science Foundation of China for Excellent Young Scientists.Hong ZhaoDr Hong Zhao is currently an associate professor in the Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). She received her Ph.D. degree in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Rutgers University. Before joining VCU in 2014, she worked at the Xerox Research Center, Webster, for about 8 years. Zhao's research areas are highly interdisciplinary, including surface science and surface engineering, transport and self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles, and development of printing processes (e.g., inkjet printing, direct ink writing, electrohydrodynamic printing) for printed functional devices, such as stretchable electronics, magnetic devices, and medical devices.
1. Introduction
Over the past few years, flexible and stretchable electrodes have attracted intensive attention due to the increasing demand of the electronics market.1–7 They have been widely explored in diverse fields, such as wearable electronics, display and lighting devices, and energy storage devices, which have a profound influence on current society and human living. For instance, organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) have enabled curved displays, contemporary lighting panels, and electronic books, given the flexibility of the substrate. Thus, conventional paper may be replaced in the future, saving natural resources and providing a better vision experience to the customer. Wearable sensors can monitor human health conditions in real time, which greatly relieves the workload of doctors, facilitates telediagnosis, and develops self-awareness and self-monitoring for patients. Thus, there is no doubt that our daily life is being comprehensively changed with the invention of flexible and stretchable electrodes.
As the core component, the quality of flexible and stretchable electrodes largely determines the device performance. Thus, preparing a reliable electrode is one of the most important steps to form a high-performance device. However, it is challenging for the conventional approaches of fabricating flexible electrodes to meet the requirements of electrical and mechanical properties for large-scale applications, owing to the limitations of materials and manufacturing methods.
It is known that indium tin oxide (ITO) is widely applied as the basic material of conventional flexible electrodes because of its conductivity and optical transparency in recent years.8 But the main ingredient of ITO, indium, is very expensive and scarce, which means that it is difficult to widely use ITO in engineering fields.9–11 Furthermore, an ITO film is very brittle and can strongly absorb UV light.12 Therefore, it is not appropriate to integrate the ITO component into flexible electrodes in certain situations.8 In addition, the traditional manufacturing process for ITO-based flexible electrodes is sophisticated. It not only has to proceed in a vacuum environment, but also requires high processing temperatures. All of these points mean that it is prohibitively costly and challenging to produce flexible devices on a large scale.13 Thus, it is crucial to develop innovative materials and processes for flexible and stretchable electrodes to cater for the increasing demand.
In this review, we systematically introduce several strategies and approaches for fabricating conductive electrodes for flexible and/or stretchable electronics. First of all, suitable conductive materials for those electrodes are briefly summarized with an emphasis on silver-based nanomaterials. Secondly, different strategies for constructing the conductive network for stretchable devices are surveyed, e.g., the unidirectional and multidirectional stretchable devices. This review also highlights recent research efforts in promoting the performance of conductive networks through physical and chemical routes. Finally, we showcase some representative applications of flexible/stretchable conductors and provide our perspective in this field. This review does not focus on the synthesis and preparation of the conductive materials; rather, we thoroughly review various strategies for enhancing the conductive pathways with the purpose of inspiring research in utilizing these strategies or their combination in various fabrication processes for flexible and stretchable electronics.
2. Nano-conductive materials for stretchable and flexible electronics
Nano-conductive materials play an important role in many fields involving soft-wearable devices, displays, and flexible medical devices,14etc. The electric pathways can be formed by a percolation network through the contacting joints of nano-conductive materials. Suitable materials not only enable ultra-conductivity, but also provide excellent flexibility and stretchability. To date, commonly used conductive materials comprise graphene, reduced graphene oxide (rGO), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), copper/silver nanoparticles (CuNPs and AgNPs), copper/silver nanowires (CuNWs and AgNWs), silver flakes (AgFs), and so on (Table 1). Due to their superior conductivity, high transmittance, and excellent flexibility, silver-based materials have been extensively explored as a suitable alternative candidate for next-generation flexible electrodes.15–17 Various morphologies of silver nanomaterials, such as 0-D silver nanoparticles (AgNPs),18–20 1-D silver nanowire (AgNWs),21–23 and 2-D silver flakes (AgFs),24–26 have been employed in the flexible/stretchable devices.
Table 1 Characteristics of different conductive materials




Name
Description
Performance
Application
Ref.


Electrical performance
Optical transmittance
Mechanical behavior




ITO
0.12 μm thickness
11 Ω sq−1
90%
Brittle
Flat flexible electrodes

87



Conventional ITO
50.5 Ω sq−1

88



Graphene
30 nm thickness
460 Ω sq−1


Flexible
Solar cells

89



Printing film < 20 nm in thickness
5 kΩ sq−1–1 MΩ sq−1
>80%
Organic PV cells

90



rGO
rGO/metal film
18 Ω sq−1
80%
Flexible
Optoelectronic devices

91



PPy/cellulose
1.7 Ω sq−1


Stable
Paper-based devices

92



CNT
0.0% Nitrogen-doped CNT
3.6 × 10−3 Ω sq−1




Possibly in energy storage

93



7.4% Nitrogen-doped CNT
5.5 × 10−3 Ω sq−1










CuNP
Inkjet printing, sintered at 250 °C
0.88 Ω cm




LED

94



CuNW
Purified CuNW
35 Ω sq−1
81%
Stable
Electrode

95



AgNP
Direct writing, annealing, AgNP ink with 71 wt% solids
1.22 × 10−4–3.64 × 10−5 Ω cm
94.1%


Large-area electronics

96



Screen printing, AgNP on PU
1.64–2.85 Ω sq−1


Flexible & stretchable
Wearable sensors

97



AgNW
AgNW/MM/PET
0.668 Ω sq−1
91.25%
Reliable
Electrodes

98



AgNW/metal
0.754 Ω sq−1
90.3%
Stable
Electrodes

99



AgNW/ZnO
11 Ω sq−1
90%


Solar cell

100



AgNW/ATO
18 Ω sq−1
76–82%
Flexible
Solar cell

101



ATO/AgNWs/ATO
7.1 Ω sq−1
85.7%
Flexible & stable
Wearable electrodes

102



AgNF
PEDOT:PSS/AgNFs/NOA 63 hybrid
2.12 Ω sq−1
84.65%
Ultra-flexible
Supercapacitor device

103



PANI/AgF/TPU
1.26 × 10−5 Ω m


Flexible
Flexible heater

104





2.1 AgNPs
As 0-D silver nanomaterials, AgNPs in general are not a good candidate for stretchable electrodes because of their high percolation threshold, and large particle-to-particle contact resistance. They have been used in flexible electronics where minimum deformation would not damage the electrical conductivity.27–29 However, for large bending and stretching deformations, AgNPs tend to form cracks and electrical conductivity is significantly deteriorated.30 As a result, they are usually employed as a decoration material to enhance the performance of electrodes.31–35 This can not only increase the electron transfer rate, but also offers an ultra-catalytic activity.31,36 When deposited as a conductive coating layer on a stretchable polymer substrate, the metal nanoparticles experienced the stress-induced nanoparticle reorganization upon deformation, maintaining high electrical conductivity.37 Conventional methods to synthesize AgNPs include electrical arc discharge,38–40 photoreduction,41,42 and chemical reduction,43–46etc. Among them, the chemical reduction method is the most common way in which silver nitrate generally is used as the metal precursor, and the reducing agents of glucose, trisodium citrate, hydroxylamine hydrochloride, and hydrazine hydrate are selected.47–49 By redox reactions, AgNPs are generated. In the past few years, various green synthetic methods have been proposed, such as polysaccharide, Tollens, irradiation, and biological routes, etc.50 Silver nanoparticles have been used to decorate GO and/or rGO nanocomposites, facilitate nanowire sintering, and prepare conductive inks, etc.51–55 Mo et al. introduced methods to prepare flexible and printed electronics using AgNPs-based inks with an emphasis on moderate sintering to enhance the conductive performance of the printed devices. These AgNP-based inks can be utilized to prepare transparent conductive film, thin film transistors, biosensors, radio frequency identification, and stretchable electronics.56 Progress in the synthesis of AgNPs encourages exploration in expanding the application of AgNPs. For example, in addition to the electrical property, another benefit of silver nanomaterials is their antibacterial property, which is very attractive for wearable electronics.57–59
2.2 AgNWs
AgNWs are one of the most widely used silver-based materials by virtue of high optical transmittance, superior electrical conductivity, and excellent mechanical property. To synthesize AgNWs of high quality, various approaches have been employed involving the polyol method,60,61 modified-polyol method,62,63 and single-pot synthesis method,64etc. The growth of AgNWs is generally achieved by reducing silver nitrate (AgNO3) in the presence of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in ethylene glycol (EG). Key parameters to regulate the synthesis process include reaction temperature, AgNO3 concentration, PVP molecular weight, and salt mediator type, etc.65,66 Sonntag et al. investigated the effect of reaction temperature between 135 °C and 150 °C on the growth of silver nanowires, and proved that longer AgNWs are easier to form when the process is proceeded at higher temperatures.67 Hemmati et al. summarized that low AgNO3 concentration is prone to produce AgNPs, and too high a concentration may produce complex nanostructures rather than 1D AgNWs due to the high concentration of seeds.66 Recent reports have revealed that ultra-thin and long AgNWs with large aspect ratios have been successfully prepared.68–70 AgNW inks have been formulated for gravure printing, screen printing and inkjet printing to fabricate flexible transparent conductive films and patterns.71 With these advances, AgNWs have been widely used to fabricate functional flexible/stretchable devices, such as electronic skin, solar cells, touch screens, and optoelectronic devices.72–77
2.3 AgFs
AgFs have been adopted in fabricating flexible and/or stretchable conductive electrodes even though their application is not as wide as other silver-based materials. They possess high aspect ratios, which endow the conductive structure with good flexibility and stretchability. Compared with other Ag-based materials, AgFs have a higher thermal stability. Thus, they can be used in high-temperature environments, e.g., photovoltaic applications and ceramic tapes.78 To date, there are several methods to prepare AgFs, including electrochemical synthesis,79 PVP-mediated galvanic replacement synthesis,80 and biosynthesis,81etc. Generally, the dimension of synthesized AgFs is within tens of micro-meters. Given their size scale and good conductivity, AgFs are considered as a good candidate for forming conductive composites for screen printing and 3D printing processes. Matsuhisa et al. developed an elastic conductor ink comprising AgFs, a fluorine rubber and a fluorine surfactant, which directs the formation of surface-localized conductive networks leading to high conductivity and stretchability in the screen-printed conductors.82 Lei et al. proposed adopting AgFs as the conductive filler to prepare 3D-printed circuits. The thermal stability, excellent volume resistance, and strong adhesion of the printed sample have been demonstrated by a series of comparison experiments.83 Yoon et al. provided a threshold of mass ratio between AgF and different polymers to improve electrical conductivity. Furthermore, a self-wiring effect was identified during this printing process because of the phase separation of conductive ink, leading to concentrated AgFs in the core of the printed threads.84 Recently, some researchers have attempted to apply AgFs in other fields. For example, Lee et al. used AgFs in the screen printing process, and proved that the addition of AgF can improve the mechanical stability of the printed sample.85 Ding et al. mixed AgFs and hydrogel to prepare conductors which showed large stretchability and good cyclic durability.86
3. Strategies for constructing conductive pathways in flexible and stretchable electronics
Silver-based materials form conductive pathways during the deposition process, which is essential in functional devices including but not limited to electrodes, interconnects, and sensors. When external deformation is applied (e.g., stretch, compression, bending or twisting) the conductive pathway changes. For sensors, it leads to a varying resistance thereby converting mechanical deformations into electrical signals. To date, a wide spectrum of Ag nanomaterial-based devices have been developed. According to the stretch direction the devices are capable of, they can be divided into unidirectional and multidirectional devices.
3.1 Unidirectionally stretchable devices
The unidirectionally stretchable devices show an excellent stretching capacity in a certain direction. They are usually composed of 1D fibers or pre-stretched flat substrate combined with AgNW-based conductive materials as shown in Fig. 1a and b.105,106 The 1D fibers include threads made of conductive nanocomposites or natural nonconductive fibers treated with conductive coatings. The fiber electrodes, as a fundamental building block, can be directly integrated into clothes and textiles for textile-based electronics, considering their light-weight, flexible, and weavable characteristics.107–109 The pre-stretched devices display a periodic wrinkled structure, which endows the AgNW network with high conductivity, reliability, and mechanically tunable properties under different strain conditions. When the electrodes are stretched along the pre-strained direction or longitude direction of the meandering patterns, the resultant deformation tends to “straighten” the tortuous paths while the local conductive network remains intact, leading to minimal impact on electrical conductivity.110 Because of these characteristics, the unidirectionally stretched devices are viewed as having great potential as a component of practical wearable electrodes where deformation in one specific direction is dominant.111–114
 Fig. 1  (a) A conductive fiber during a stretching process. Reprinted from ref. 112, Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier; (b) a pre-stretched flat substrate combined with Ag conductive material. Reprinted from ref. 128, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license; (c) illustration of the wet spinning process. Reprinted from ref. 115, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License; (d) illustration of the dry spinning process. Reprinted from ref. 129, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) illustration of the thermal drawing process. Reprinted from ref. 125, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License; (f) illustration of the dip coating process. Reprinted from ref. 130, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial license. 
Researchers have demonstrated several techniques to fabricate 1D fiber electrodes, such as the direct spinning method, dip coating method, physical deposition and chemical reduction, etc. In a direct spinning method, AgNWs are simply mixed with elastomeric matrix to form electronic yarns; rearrangement of the AgNWs towards the fiber surface due to the interaction between the AgNWs and coagulation solvents leads to high electrical conductivity of the fiber.115 Based on the processing environment, the direct spinning method can be further divided into wet spinning method, dry spinning method, and thermal drawing method. In the wet spinning method, the polymeric solution is injected into a coagulation bath at a suitable rate. Subsequently, AgNW-based conductive fibers can be prepared by directly pulling them out of the bath as shown in Fig. 1c. As a scalable production technique in industry, the wet spinning method has been widely adopted in research laboratories as well.116–122 In the dry spinning method, polymer in a volatile solvent is spun in the air-ambient condition to directly form fibers (Fig. 1d),123 where no additional solvent is involved to coagulate the polymer solution, and no electrical field is needed, compared with the traditional electrospinning technique.124 The spun fibers have been stitched into gloves to realize a smooth human–machine operation.115 In the thermal drawing method, a preform is fed into a furnace where materials soften or melt, and an external force is applied to extract functional filaments. A fast-drawing process can be realized (Fig. 1e),125,126 which features low cost and large scalability. As a matter of fact, hundreds of kilometers of optical fibers are typically produced by the thermal drawing process. Up to now, thermal drawing has been employed to produce flexible electronic fibers using various metals and nanocomposite materials, elastomers and liquid metals,127 with potential applications in smart textiles, robotics, and medical implants, etc.
The dip coating method is also widely adopted to fabricate unidirectional stretched devices due to its simple process, and being a cost-efficient and mature technique.131 The process involves immersing an elastic yarn into AgNW dispersion and adhering the AgNWs onto the yarn (Fig. 1f).130 Several factors determine the structure and performance of the AgNW deposition, including the dip coating cycle times, coating speed, and the concentration of the AgNW dispersion.132 Generally, these yarns decorated with AgNWs exhibit not only an ultra-high sensitivity to external deformation, but also long-term cycling stability.133–135 Taking advantage of the merits, the conductive fibers have been applied to prepare smart windows, implantable devices, smart clothes, and so on.132,136–138 Recently, physical deposition and chemical reduction methods have also been demonstrated as possible routes to prepare conductive fibers. For instance, Hwang et al. have coated AgNW-wound micrometer-scaled PET fiber mats via an ultrasonic spray method. This has significantly improved the mechanical durability and electrical stability of the devices.139
3.2 Multi-directionally stretchable devices
The unidirectionally stretchable devices cannot respond to multi-directional deformations, to some extent limiting their application fields. With the advancement of technology, several multi-directionally stretchable devices have been demonstrated. Based on the physical structure of the conductive network, the multi-directionally stretchable devices can function based on 2D planar patterns or films and 3D constructed networks.

3.2.1 2D conductive network. 
Common methods to construct a 2D AgNW network are summarized in Fig. 2 and Table 2, comprising drop casting, spin coating, bar coating, vacuum filtration and transfer coating, spray coating, patterning and printing, etc.
 Fig. 2  Different methods to fabricate AgNW networks.61,140–144 Reprinted from ref. 61, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License; reprinted from ref. 140, Copyright (2014), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; reprinted from ref. 145, Copyright (2016), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license; reprinted from ref. 146, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. Reprinted from ref. 147, Copyright (2019), with permission from American Chemical Society. Reprinted from ref. 148, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. 
Table 2 Methods to prepare planar AgNW networks and the corresponding characteristics




Method
Materials and processes
Substrate
Property
Characteristic
Ref.




Drop casting
AgNW/polyimide (PI) film
Glass
Resistance ∼20 Ω sq−1
Simple steps, likely uneven distribution

147



Transmittance ∼83%


AgNWs, ultra-long ∼50 μm
PET
Resistance ∼20 Ω sq−1

180



Aspect ratio > 1000
Transmittance ∼90%


Spin coating
Hot lamination process
Polycarbonate (PC) film
Resistance ∼12.5 Ω sq−1
Uniform distribution, tunable thickness

181



Transmittance ∼94.5%


AgNWs, diameter ∼52 nm
PET film
Resistance ∼54 Ω sq−1

182



Aspect ratio ∼1000
Transmittance ∼92%


AgNW/ZnO composite film
PET film
Resistance ∼9 Ω sq−1

152



Transmittance ∼92%


AgNWs decorated with cobalt nanoparticles
Thermoplastic PI film
Resistance ∼52 Ω sq−1

183



Transmittance ∼94%


Mayer-rod coating
AgNWS, diameter ∼40 nm
Insulator surface
Resistance ∼30 Ω sq−1
Large area, good alignment

184



Length ∼25 ± 5 μm


TiO2-coated AgNW film
PET film
Resistance ∼80 Ω sq−1

185



Diameter ∼10 nm
Transmittance ∼75%


Length ∼80 μm


AgNWs with diameter ∼500 nm
Polycarbonate (PC) film
Resistance ∼12.1 Ω sq−1

186



Length ∼10 μm
Transmittance ∼89.5%


Hydrogen chloride (HCl) treatment
PET film
Resistance ∼175 Ω sq−1

187



Transmittance ∼75%


Vacuum filtration and transfer
AgNWs with diameter ∼60 nm
Self-adhesive PET substrate
Resistance ∼13 Ω sq−1
Tunable thickness, small-scale fabrication

188



Length ∼10 μm
Transmittance ∼67%


AgNWs with diameter ∼20–70 nm
PET film
Resistance ∼4.95 Ω sq−1

189



Length ∼120 μm
Transmittance ∼81%


AgNWs with diameter ∼90 nm
Mixed esters of cellulose membranes
Resistance ∼50 Ω sq−1

190



Length ∼10 μm
Transmittance ∼85%


AgNWs with diameter ∼200–250 nm
PDMS film
Resistance < 1.0 Ω sq−1

191



Length ∼20–30 μm
Cell viability ∼90%


Spray coating
AgNWs with diameter ∼25 nm
Glass
Resistance ∼10 Ω sq−1
Tunable thickness, large area coverage, various substrates

160



Length ∼90 μm
Transmittance ∼87.4%


Spraying distance ∼12 cm
Organic p-i-n type solar cells
Resistance ∼10.7 Ω sq−1

160



Moving speed ∼1.5 cm s−1
Transmittance ∼84.3%


Spraying pressure ∼200 mbar


AgNWs with diameter ∼50 nm
PI substrate
Resistance ∼4.64 Ω sq−1

192



Length ∼20 μm
Transmittance ∼87.3%


Printing
AgNWs with diameter ∼81 ± 30 nm
AgNW/CNF screen printed on PET
Resistance ∼12 ± 5 Ω sq−1
Custom-designed patterns, potential for large-scale production

193



Length ∼37 ± 19 μm
Transmittance ∼74.8%


AgNWs with diameter ∼25 ± 5 nm
AgNW EHD jet printed on a PET film
Resistance ∼45 Ω sq−1

174



Length ∼20 ± 5 μm
Transmittance ∼90%


AgNWs with length ∼30 μm
AgNW ink directly printed on silicone
Strain-sensing range 10%–50%; Gauge factor ∼100

194



Aligned AgNWs


Printing speed ∼40 mm s−1
AgNW screen printed on a PET film
Resistance ∼0.72 Ω sq−1

195



Printing angle ∼45°
Roughness ∼2.7 to 1.1 μm


AgNWs with diameter ∼20 nm
AgNW ink inkjet printed on a PET film
Resistance ∼13 or 23 Ω sq−1

196



Length ∼2 to 5 μm
Transmittance ∼81.9% or 83.1%




Drop casting preparation is realized by directly casting the AgNW dispersion onto a target substrate surface, followed by solvent drying.143,145,146 The AgNW network density depends on the concentration of the dispersion and amount of drops cast in the area.147 In addition, the substrate largely influences the coating morphology fabricated by drop casting.148 This method is simple and efficient, but it has the limitation in practice that uneven distribution occurs due to the coffee ring effect, which may need special consideration.149,150 The non-uniform distribution of AgNWs likely brings out varying film thickness, which results in the issue that different local sites show different electrical resistance. To overcome this issue, Eslamian et al. demonstrated that by treating the substrate with ultrasonic vibration, the non-uniform distribution of AgNWs can be improved during the drop casting process.151
Spin coating is widely used in the laboratory environment. The preparation is a consecutive process involving dropping the AgNW dispersion onto a flat substrate, spreading the droplet into a thin wet film at a specific rotation speed, and producing a solid film after solvent evaporation.152,153 The AgNW network performance is regulated by substrate, spinning fluid, and rotation speed and time, etc. The characteristics of the spinning fluid (such as viscosity, volatility, surface tension, and solid concentration), and the substrate roughness and surface energy, determine the fluid's spreading and evaporation rate, which significantly affects the final thickness and morphology of the coating.1 The rotation speed is inversely proportional to the coating thickness.154 Too fast a rotation speed tends to produce a broken conductive pathway due to ultra-thin coatings, whereas a low rotation speed can lead to uneven formation of the conductive network because of possible AgNW aggregation.
The Mayer-rod coating technique has been used to prepare transparent conductive coatings.155 The formation process includes dispersing a solution or dispersion onto a substrate, followed by using a Mayer-rod to spread it out to form a uniform coating. The coating thickness can be determined by the line diameter and the Mayer-rod interval. The concentration of the AgNW dispersion can be used to regulate the electrical performance of the coating. In addition, the coating density is also controlled by the number of coating cycles. It is worth noting that the evaporation rate in the Mayer-rod coating process is usually much faster than that in drop casting. The reason is due to the thin wet film generated by the Mayer-rod coating method, which can suppress some undesirable phenomena, e.g., the coffee ring effect. An additional merit of this coating method is that the AgNWs become self-aligned under the shear stress during the coating process. The aligned AgNW assembly can enhance the wire-to-wire contacts and reduce the contact resistance between AgNWs that will be discussed later.
The vacuum filtration & transfer (VFT) technique has been employed to prepare transparent and stretchable electrodes.156–158 Typically, three steps are involved: (1) filtering the AgNW suspension by a filter; (2) fabricating the AgNW network on the filter surface; and (3) transferring the network to an elastic substrate. In the first step, the pore size of the filter is generally selected to be about 30 μm, considering the dimension of the AgNWs. In the second step, the density of the AgNW network is determined by the concentration and the amount of AgNW dispersion. In the third step, a strong adhesion can be achieved because the AgNW network is completely embedded in the polymer. Furthermore, the flexibility and stretchability of electrodes are controlled by using various substrate materials, such as Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), Polyethylene oxide (PEO), and Polyacrylamides (PAM), etc. Compared with other methods, VFT demonstrates minimal waste of AgNWs in constructing a conductive network. However, the disadvantage is that the film area is limited by the filter area.
To prepare a 2D conductive network by the spray coating method, an electrostatic sprayer or an airbrush is adopted.159,160 Under an electric field or compressed air, the AgNW suspension is broken into fine droplets, precipitating on a target substrate. During this process, a series of parameters play an important role in constructing the AgNW network, such as substrate temperature, spraying pressure, and scanning rate, etc. The substrate temperature can be used to regulate the evaporation rate, which affects the AgNW distribution. Spraying pressure influences the droplet size and the coating uniformity. Scanning rate directly determines the amount of AgNW deposition that is proportional to the conductive pathway. The spray coating technique can fabricate AgNW networks on curved and irregular surfaces. In addition, it allows a homogeneous and large-area AgNW network thanks to its scalable coating process and capability of including multiple spraying nozzles. To better utilize these merits, it is expected that this technique could be combined with roll-to-roll processing to achieve large-scale production.
As a feasible approach to fabricating flexible and stretchable electrodes out of rigid materials, patterning has attracted many researchers’ attention.161,162 Various kinds of electrode shapes can be formed through additive deposition and subtractive removal processes by applying stencil masks and etch masks, respectively.163–165 Typically, electrodes have been patterned into fractal-shaped serpentine geometry, and Kirigami designs (such as cuts and folds) to render the desirable stretchability.166,167 Similar to the wavy structures (or wrinkled structures) on the pre-strained substrates, the meandering patterns on solid substrates, or Kirigami designs, enhanced the stretchability while maintaining the electrical contacts in the conductive network. Won et al. employed the Kirigami method to make patterned electrodes. The designed pattern imparts excellent elasticity to the ultrathin colorless-polyimide electrode with tensile strain up to 400%. Meantime, through more than 10000 cycles of stretching, the electrode exhibits good reversibility and 80% optical transparency.168 Chou et al. compared the electrical performance of straight-line and serpentine-line patterned AgNW electrodes. The results show that although its initial resistance is 7 times higher than that of straight line, the maximum strain of serpentine line is 5 times larger than its counterpart at the electrical disconnection. Furthermore, after 100 cycles of stretching with 1% strain, the resistance change of the serpentine line (without PDMS backing layer) is only one-fifteenth of the resistance change of the straight-line one. Therefore, the serpentine line electrodes showed remarkable electrical stability.169
Printing technology also attracts significant attention for fabricating flexible and stretchable devices due to the advantage that it can directly pattern and construct the devices without any masks and templates. The commonly used printing technologies include inkjet printing,170–172 electrohydrodynamic (EHD) printing,173,174 aerosol jet printing,175,176 and screen printing,177,178etc. Generally, these printing methods consist of three steps: (1) preparing a printable ink; (2) developing a printing process; followed by (3) optional post-printing treatments. However, each printing technique has a different focus and requirements regarding the ink formulation and printing process. Inkjet printing deposits diluted AgNP inks or AgNW inks on flexible or stretchable substrates through piezo-actuated nozzles or thermal bubble ejectors. It can generate custom-designed patterns, and can easily integrate different materials into conductive layers. EHD printing uses an electric field to actuate the ink ejection, where electric charges accumulate near the surface of the ink meniscus at the nozzle tip. A droplet is ejected when the Coulomb force overcomes the surface tension and ink cohesion force. It has the advantage of printing viscous inks and utilizing small nozzle sizes. When operating in the cone-jet mode, the size of ejected droplets is much smaller than the corresponding nozzle size due to the necking effect, which has the potential to realize high-resolution printing. It also has been combined with direct ink writing to print AgNW patterns.179 Aerosol jet printing is evaluated as a strong competitor of the printing methods mentioned above. Numerous tiny droplets are generated in an atomizer and focused by a sheath gas when the aerosol is delivered to the printing nozzle. Screen printing, as a mass printing technique, is performed by using a squeegee to press a conductive ink through a stencil and print on the substrate. Different from other printing methods, screen printing is a contact printing process with a pre-patterned screen; usually the ink is highly viscous polymer composites with conductive materials. Although it is classified as 2D planar films in this review, the polymeric electrodes fabricated by screen printing usually possess larger thickness. In addition, direct ink writing can also generate 2D patterns; however, we will focus on employing it to construct 3D conductive structures through layer-by-layer deposition in the next section.


3.2.2 3D conductive network. 
In addition to 2D planar conductive networks for flexible/stretchable electrodes, AgNW networks can be constructed through out-of-plane morphology or 3D arrangements.
One effective way to build a 3D conductive network is through 3D extrusion printing, or direct ink writing (DIW). As an additive manufacturing (AM) technique, it can realize rapid prototyping by continuously stacking the sequential layers. This printing technique is viewed as a promising route to prepare various functional devices, such as electronics and energy storage devices.197–199
The printing process is straightforward in that the ink is directly extruded from the printing nozzle under compressed air and deposited through layer-by-layer means. However, the challenge is to develop a printable and reliable conductive ink formulation. Specifically, this requires a shear-thinning property to facilitate the extrusion printing process, a thixotropic property to quickly recover the viscosity when the stress is removed (i.e., when the thread is extruded and deposited).200 A typical example of conductive ink for 3D printing through DIW is shown in Fig. 3a. The ink is composed of AgNWs, GO, and Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) mixed with distilled water, where functional NWs are used as the base materials to integrate with GO to form a viscous and thixotropic paste. As a viscosity modifier, the incorporation of GO enhances the ink printability through thickening and stabilizing the ink formulation, as well as endowing the system with good mechanical toughness.201 Yoon et al. prepared a conductive ink by mixing AgF, PDMS, Ecoflex, and MIBK solvent. By changing the mass ratio of AgF and polymer matrix, an excellent conductivity of 85.91 S cm−1 (for conductive composites) was obtained on the 3D-printed structure.84 Also, the AgF concentration gradient is realized by adopting a polymer mixture instead of a single one. The reason is that the lower viscosity PDMS polymer diffuses out of the polymer composite during the drying process (Fig. 3b),84 which concentrates the AgFs inside and simultaneously forms an insulating barrier around the printed structures. In addition, Lei et al. have demonstrated 3D printing conductive filaments through fused deposition modeling, that are made from composites of AgFs and saturated polyester and polyvinyl butyral. These works verified that 3D printing is an efficient and green way to construct flexible and stretchable electrical devices.83
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of preparing conductive ink for 3D printing. Reprinted from ref. 201, Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier; (b) direct printing the conductive ink with gradient concentration on the cross-section. Reprinted from ref. 208, Copyright (2019), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (c) immersing the 3D structured sample into AgNW suspension. Reprinted from ref. 202, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. (d) AgNPs deposited on 3D printed structures. Reprinted from ref. 20, Copyright (2021), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (e) graphene deposited on 3D printed structure. Reprinted from ref. 207, Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier. 
However, a key challenge does exist for the 3D printing process through direct ink writing. Due to the intrinsic low surface tension of most liquid elastomers, the conductive fillers are easily wrapped and separated from other filler materials during ink mixing. Therefore, a large amount of conductive materials (e.g. ∼70–80 wt% or higher) needs to be incorporated in order to form a conductive path in the printed composite conductors.
An alternative method is to modify a 3D flexible substrate or template with conductive materials. This involves depositing conductive materials on a 3D porous structure to form multiple conductive pathways, as depicted in Fig. 3c. Then, the change of contacts among the conductive pathway upon deformation can transform into electrical responses to realize sensing purposes.202 Different from the method of 3D printing of composite ink, the conductive layer coats the pre-formed 3D structures to form the conductive pathway. Li et al. selected a 3D polyurethane (PU) sponge onto which AgNWs were deposited through the dip coating method. Dopamine coating was carried out to enhance the adhesion between the AgNWs and sponge substrate. The fabricated structure showed a high electrical conductivity of more than 27.78 S cm−1.203 Similarly, Jesuraj et al. prepared an AgNW stretchable electrode on a wavy microprism-mediated PU substrate. The resistance of the electrode remains stable under parallel uniaxial stretching and perpendicular stretching.204 Sun et al. constructed a pressure sensor by depositing an AgNW network on a natural rubber latex foam (NRLF). The sensor shows not only a high electrical conductivity, but also an ultra-flexibility and repeatability.202 Wei et al. immersed a cotton sheet into an AgNW suspension several times to obtain a flexible pressure sensor. The results showed that the resistance of the cotton sheets was inversely related to the dip-coating cycle. The formed pressure sensor displayed ultra-sensitivity, fast response, and high stability.205 Chen et al. added nano-fillers in the ink formulation, which served as rheology modifier and sacrificial templates. Those filler particles were removed by acid etch to obtain hierarchically porous structures. Through a dipping–drying process, CNTs were deposited onto the printed models which enabled not only adjustable mechanical property, but also provided an ultra-sensitivity and high resistance recoverability.206 We include this reference here although CNTs instead of silver materials were employed. However, the principle can be applicable for the latter.
The 3D templating method is very effective in constructing conductive networks; however, poor adhesion between the conductive layer and polymer matrix can be an issue under certain conditions. On the other hand, directly 3D printing the Ag/polymer composites requires a significant amount of silver materials to form the conductive pathway. Based on these reported works, a new method is proposed to utilize 3D printing and water-induced polymer swelling to fabricate 3D wrinkled stretchable sensors.20,207 In this method, soluble powders and commercial silicone polymers are selected to formulate the printing ink which is 3D printed to form custom-designed patterns and structures. The printed patterns are soaked in an aqueous solution, where a dramatical swelling is created under the action of osmotic pressure as the doped powder is released. A conductive layer is then deposited on the swollen patterns via liquid processing. Finally, wrinkled conductive structures are formed upon the removal of residual water in the swollen samples, as shown in Fig. 3d and e. The prepared stretchable sensors possess hierarchical wrinkled structures on the 3D printed patterns, rendering outstanding electrical performance.
Additionally, we briefly summarize the mechanical properties of Ag-based flexible and stretchable devices in some recently published works in Table 3. It is worth noting that the mechanical property is highly dependent on the structure of the device and the polymer matrix with which the AgNW network is integrated.
Table 3 Comparison of mechanical property among different AgNW-based electrodes




Materials
Fabrication method
Structure
Maximum stress
Maximum strain
Ref.




Ecoflex 50, AgNWs
Mold, swelling, solution deposition
Hierarchical wrinkled structure
0.3 MPa
470%

209



PUA, MXene, AgNWs
Spray coating
Multiscale layer structure
11.2 MPa
471%

210



Leather, AgNWs
Vacuum-assisted filtration
Hierarchical structure
16.7 MPa
66.9%

211



PET, AgNWs, Graphene
Slot-die roll-to-roll coating
Multiscale layer structure
15 MPa
30%

212



Nano-fibrillated cellulose, AgNWs
Lipase treatment, Meyer-rod coating
Cellulose structure
80 MPa
8%

213



Vanillin based vitrimers, AgNWs
Vacuum filtration, lamination
Sandwich structure
0.6 MPa
200%

214






4. Enhancement in the electrical conductivity of AgNW networks
Because of its unique 1-D structure, the AgNW network shows superior electrical reliability for flexible/stretchable devices when compared with 0-D AgNPs and 2-D AgNFs. The characteristics are attributed to the fact that excellent conductivity is preserved within each individual AgNW. Meanwhile, a conductive pathway is constructed as AgNWs contact each other. The 1-D shape of AgNWs facilitates maintaining the electrical contacts among the network upon deformation. This section reviews several methods to enhance the conductive network by effectively increasing the contacts among the AgNW networks.
4.1 Morphology and controlled assembly of AgNWs
As briefly discussed in section 2.1, various methods have been employed to synthesize AgNWs. Each approach tends to produce AgNWs with different characteristics, such as length, diameter, surface treatment, which have a great impact on the conductivity of the network.215 Marus et al. have studied the relationship between the conductivity/transmittance and the AgNW length. Combined with simulation and experiment results, they drew the conclusion that longer AgNWs lead to a lower sheet resistance and a higher transmittance in a non-linear relationship. For example, the films formed from AgNWs with average length of 30 μm and 90 μm have the transmittance of 76% and 82% at the same sheet resistance, respectively.216 The relationship between the dimension of AgNWs and electrical and optical performance is summarized in Fig. 4a–d. The AgNWs with longer length and larger diameter tend to have a higher transmittance and lower sheet resistance under the same coverage density. Furthermore, the area coverage of silver nanowires (in some cases, printing passes) affects electrical property and transparency, or the figure of merit, which is the ratio of optical transmittance to sheet resistance.217 Bergin et al. investigated the influence of the dimensions of AgNWs on the transmittance and sheet resistance of a random nanowire network. They concluded that when the diameter of individual AgNWs is larger than 50 nm, increasing diameter promotes the electrical conductance to optical extinction ratio. When the diameter of AgNWs is less than 50 nm, however, the opposite is true.218 For a given transmittance, decreasing nanowire diameter increases the number density of nanowires, therefore leading to improved conductivity. Hamans et al. have numerically studied the relationship between the optical properties and the shape of the cross-section of AgNWs. The colloidal AgNWs with pentagonal cross-section showed the characteristic double extinction peak, while AgNWs with a simple cylindrical cross-section displayed the single extinction peak. The outcome can assist in assessing the yield of AgNW syntheses, and in selecting the suitable geometry for improving performance in optical applications.219 In addition, Wang et al. inferred that lower sheet resistance and 90–97.5% transmittances can be realized by reducing the PVP layer thickness on the AgNW surface without any post-treatment.220
 Fig. 4  (a) AgNW film model with different lengths on substrate. Reprinted from ref. 216, Copyright (2017), with permission from CC BY license; (b) transmittance and sheet resistance of AgNW film with different lengths. Reprinted from ref. 216, Copyright (2017), with permission from CC BY license; (c) AgNW film model with different diameters on substrate. Reprinted from ref. 221, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license; (d) transmittance and sheet resistance of AgNW film with different diameters. Reprinted from ref. 221, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license. 
Additionally, the conductivity of an AgNW network can be enhanced by controlling the AgNW assembly process (Fig. 5a).222 This can be attributed to the shortening of the effective path of electron transport, reduction of the electrical percolation threshold, and increase in the contact area among the aligned AgNW assembly. Xu et al. indicated that the resistance of the AgNW network is certainly related to the orientation angle of NWs, and an electronic transport anisotropy of 10 times was exhibited on the aligned AgNWs while maintaining low resistance in all directions.223 Takemoto et al. drew the similar conclusion that more aligned AgNWs tend to possess lower sheet resistance when compared with randomly distributed AgNWs.224 Thus, in this section, several methods to achieve aligned AgNW distribution to enhance the conductivity of the AgNW network are reviewed.
 Fig. 5  (a) Resistance of random AgNWs and aligned AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 222, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) schematic diagram of AgNW alignment during the Mayer-rod coating process. Reprinted from ref. 225, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) schematic diagram to form aligned AgNWs during the capillary printing process. Reprinted from ref. 222, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) AgNW alignment during the LB process. Reprinted from ref. 233, Copyright (2003), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) process schematic of AgNW alignment during the dip coating process, Reprinted from ref. 239, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (f) schematic diagram of an AgNW oriented by the electric field. Reprinted from ref. 243, Copyright (2019), with permission from AIP Publishing; (g) schematic diagram of magnetic field-aligned AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 251, Copyright (2015), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence. 
Mayer-rod coating is a common method to align the AgNWs, in which a wire-wound metering rod is dragged over the AgNW suspension on the substrate surface (Fig. 5b). The combined interaction between shear stress alignment and potential electrostatic pinning (through substrate treatment) produced highly aligned AgNWs on the substrate along the coating direction.225 Dong et al. prepared aligned-AgNW networks by Mayer coating followed by substrate stretching to obtain the maximum alignment order of up to 0.97.226 Chen et al. fabricated a roller-induced AgNW network that showed low sheet resistance, high optical transmittance, and ultra-bending stability.227 Yang et al. prepared cross-aligned AgNW networks by performing multiple times of bar coating in various directions. The crossed-alignment and multi-stacking structure promote the conductivity correspondingly.228
With the capability of producing custom-designed complex patterns and the potential for large-scale production, various printing techniques have been employed to obtain AgNW alignment during the printing process, such as capillary printing,222 gravure printing,229 inkjet printing,230 electro-hydrodynamic jet (EHD) printing,231etc. In these processes, the alignment of AgNWs is mainly realized under the action of capillary or shear forces (Fig. 5c).222,224 Here, we take EHD printing as an example. Parameters, such as printing speed, AgNW concentration, and ink viscosity, determine the morphology and electrical property of the printed structures. Cui et al. pointed out that a fast printing speed tends to produce a highly oriented AgNW network.179 Li et al. compared the AgNW/PEO composites with different weight ratios, and proved that the EHD-printed samples with a ratio of 90:10 possessed excellent electrical property thanks to the aligned AgNW network formed during printing.232
The Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly is a low-cost and useful technique to arrange the AgNWs networks at the air–liquid interface, usually followed by dip coating to transfer the assembled NWs to a substrate as shown in Fig. 5d.233,234 Under the action of uniaxial compression, NWs spread at the interface gradually form an aligned and close-packed NW layer.235 Zhu et al. employed a modified LB assembly approach to fabricate aligned NWs. In the method, a spinning rod was designed to form a spinning Langmuir film to align the zinc oxide NWs under shear. They also studied the effect of surfactant on the quality of aligned NWs, which enhances the shear flow to further improve the alignment of NWs.236 Duan et al. demonstrated that a heating water-bath can assist the assembly of AgNWs by introducing convective flow to bring the AgNWs to the air–water interface. Significant enhancement in the AgNW alignment was obtained as compared with that in the absence of the convective flow.237 Shi et al. fabricated hybrid films of GO and AgNWs using the LB assembly method, and indicated that addition of GO not only enhances the adhesion between AgNWs and substrate, but also facilitates the release of silver ions to fight bacteria.238 In view of their superior antibacterial property and optical property, the AgNW hybrid films could be very promising for the next-generation multi-functional films, which will be reviewed in detail in section 4.3.
Although the conventional dip coating method usually cannot render alignment of nanomaterials, some researchers modified the dip coating process to realize the shear-induced alignment of AgNWs, as shown in Fig. 5e. When the substrate is pulled up, the relative movement between the substrate and suspension brings out the shear force that controls the AgNWs’ orientation.239 The modified dip coating process is accompanied by fast evaporation of solvents and immobilization of the aligned AgNWs. Pu et al. prepared aligned AgNWs by withdrawing PET substrate from AgNW ethanol suspension. They found out that the ratio of length and diameters (L/D) has an influence on the alignment order of AgNWs, where the ones with small and medium values more easily produce the aligned AgNWs because of their good dispersion and rigidity in nature.240 In addition, coating speed can regulate the alignment of AgNWs in the dip coating process. Shin et al. utilized a heat-assisted dip coating (to accelerate solvent drying) to achieve the aligned AgNWs. Higher temperature facilitates the solvent evaporation and correspondingly the AgNW pinning and alignment. They further studied the effect of withdrawal speed on the degree of alignment, and drew the conclusion that the maximum alignment appears at 1 mm s−1 by comparing the orientation of AgNWs under various speeds.241 Their explanation is that the withdrawal speed can regulate the deposition thickness that has a crucial influence on pinning the AgNWs.
Some researchers proposed obtaining highly oriented AgNWs by using an external electric field, leveraging the properties of material polarization and dispersion in a low dielectric solvent.242 Driven by dielectrophoresis, the AgNWs align themselves along the applied electric field as shown in Fig. 5f.243 In the electrokinetic assembly process, the degree of alignment of AgNWs is determined by the electric field strength, frequency, and electrode geometric dimensions.244–246 Regarding the electric field-induced transport, Farain et al. mentioned that it is necessary to select a suitable suspension medium with low conductivity and high viscosity to employ a large electric field in order to obtain controllable movement of AgNWs.244 Wang et al. indicated that a higher order value of alignment is prone to appear at high frequency (1 MHz) than at low frequency (10 kHz) with the same electric field magnitude.246 Arenas-Guerrero et al. investigated the effect of electric field frequency on the orientation of AgNWs in DNA semidilute suspensions. They noticed that a low-frequency AC electric field (e.g., 1 Hz) can facilitate the formation of highly oriented AgNWs under the assistance of orderly DNA coils formed by the application of an electric field.247
In addition, magnetic field-assisted assembly has been used to obtain highly ordered AgNWs. The nonmagnetic AgNWs need further modification to respond to the external magnetic field. One approach is to decorate the AgNWs with Fe3O4 by a co-precipitation method before the assembly process.248 The magnetic properties of the decorated AgNWs can be regulated by the number of magnetic nanoparticles.249,250 When applying an external magnetic field, the Fe3O4-coated AgNWs can be aligned along with the applied magnetic field as shown in Fig. 5g. It has been demonstrated that a highly ordered NW film possessed superior conductivity and transparency when compared with those randomly deposited films.251
4.2 Modifying a conductive network
In the AgNW network, the sheet resistance mainly arises at contact areas between nanowires. Pham et al. have employed conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) to determine the nanoscale electrical resistivity for a single AgNW to be about 12.35 μΩ cm. Meanwhile, the electrical resistances of two types of nanojunctions are also evaluated, which are much higher than that of single nanowires.252 Furthermore, a clear quadratic behavior is observed which may be related to the quadratic increase in the nanojunction density throughout the conducting nanowire network, confirming that the electrical resistance is primarily determined by the junctions. Shaw et al. used c-AFM to study the current spreading in the bilayer rGOX/AgNW conductive pathway. Compared with the pristine AgNW network, the rGOX/AgNW composite manifested an obvious reduction (24%–36%) in sheet resistance while maintaining high optical transparency. The significant increase in the macroscopic conductivity is attributed to the nanoscale rGOx-mediated conductive “bridges” formed between AgNWs.253 Reducing the contact resistance is crucial to enhance the conductivity of the network. Herein, the methods for contact resistance reduction are classified into three categories including heat-induced welding, chemically induced welding, and optically induced welding.

4.2.1 Heat-induced welding. 
Heat-induced welding uses high temperature to melt NWs to reduce the contact resistance. Depending on the heat source, heat-induced welding can be further classified into thermal annealing, electrical sintering, and electron beam welding, etc.
Thermal annealing has been applied as a simple and effective way to reduce the sheet resistance of the AgNW network.254–257Fig. 6a shows the morphology changes before and after a thermal welding process. With increase of temperature, the nanowire contact area increases in a certain temperature range.258 Bardet et al. reported a continuous decrease of sheet resistance when the annealing temperature increases as shown in Fig. 6b.259 Generally, in the low-temperature range, the resistance drop is caused by desorption of residues and degradation of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). With increasing of temperature, the resistance drop slows down. When the temperature reaches the thermal annealing temperature, e.g., above 200 °C, the electrical resistance further reduces because more sintered junctions form. Rayleigh instability of AgNWs appears at a temperature exceeding 325 °C, which degrades the conductive pathway leading to a rapid increase in the electrical resistance of the AgNWs.257,260 In addition, it has been reported that a higher annealing temperature is required to effectively reduce the electrical resistance as the diameter of AgNWs increases.261 Finally, the annealing duration also has an important effect on the thermal welding. Although sufficient time is needed to melt and fuse the joint contacts, a prolonged annealing time is detrimental to the AgNW network because of the appearance of pathway interruption.
 Fig. 6  (a) Morphology of AgNW before and after the thermal annealing welding process. Reprinted from ref. 258, Copyright (2019), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) resistance of AgNW film with continuous thermal rate. Reprinted from ref. 259, Copyright (2021), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution License; (c) current density varying with contact morphology by Finite-element simulation. Reprinted from ref. 265, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) and (e) morphology and electrical property before and after the electrical welding process. Reprinted from ref. 262, Copyright (2014), with permission from Springer Nature; (f) illustration of the electron beam process. Reprinted from ref. 267, Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society; (g) relationship between sheet resistance and irradiation time. Reprinted from ref. 268, Copyright (2015), with permission from Springer Nature; (h) comparison between thermal annealing and electron beam welding. Reprinted from ref. 267, Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society; (i) morphologies of AgNW film after different irradiation times. Reprinted from ref. 268, Copyright (2015), with permission from Springer Nature. 
The electrical sintering technique modifies the AgNW network by controlling the current-assisted Joule heat to enhance the network conductivity.262–264 Local Joule heating is produced at a high current density region near wire–wire contacts. The surface diffusion-induced electro-migration in these regions facilitates continued atomic movement and removal of surface ligands, which welds the poorly contacted AgNWs and reshapes the conductive pathway. More than 7 orders of magnitude reduction in contact resistance have been obtained as a result of the electrical welding treatment.265 To elucidate the relationship of current density with respect to the wire–wire contact shape, researchers computed the distribution of current density at various contact morphologies by finite element simulation. The results showed that the electrical current crowding was reduced with increase of contact area between AgNWs (Fig. 6c). At the same time, the current density was proved to uniformly distribute through the contact area.265 Vafaei et al. further indicated that current welding not only reduces the contact resistance, but also ensures the stability of corresponding resistance.262 As shown in Fig. 6d and e, a good linear relationship between voltage and current was obtained after the current welding process. Recently, a novel electrical sintering was demonstrated in which the charged droplets of an AgNW dispersion were concurrently sprayed and self-welded to form the AgNW network. With the deposition of the charged droplets, the electric charges flow through the entire conductive network, which brings out an electrical current. Due to the contact resistance between AgNWs, Joule heating is produced and the welding of AgNWs spontaneously occurs.266
Electron beam welding is another type of heat-induced welding. The specific welding process is described in Fig. 6f. High-energy electrons were generated and accelerated between the cathode and the anode in a vacuum chamber. They transferred energy onto the surface of AgNWs through irradiation. As a result, the contact points between nanowires were fused, causing a stable conductive joint structure.267 Unlike other heat-induced welding techniques, the electron beam welding can avoid some detrimental issues, e.g., requirement of heating the entire AgNW network in the thermal welding process and a large variation in electrical resistance usually produced during the electrical sintering process due to the nonuniformity of the network and welding current. In Fig. 6h, researchers compared thermal welding and e-beam welding of AgNWs contacts.267 Considering that the energy was transferred by accelerated electrons, and a fast-thermal gradient was formed in the melting process, it was possible to form enhanced and localized re-solidification among the AgNWs. Hong et al. studied the influence of irradiation time on the resistance of the AgNW network.268 As irradiation time increased, the sheet resistance clearly decreased. However, when irradiation time exceeded 120 seconds, the corresponding resistance reached a plateau, almost remaining constant (Fig. 6g). The morphologies of the AgNW network at different irradiation durations (Fig. 6i) supported the change in sheet resistance upon irradiation.


4.2.2 Chemical welding. 
Chemical welding is totally different from the physical heat-induced welding techniques above. On the one hand, no external energy is required to fuse/weld the contact joints on the conductive network.8 On the other hand, chemical welding often proceeds in the liquid condition.269 It is realized by incorporating additional reagents to enhance the contacts of the AgNW network. Depending on the working mechanisms, chemical welding can be further classified into halide welding, electroless welding, and electroplating welding, etc.
Halide welding is realized by soaking an AgNW film into a sodium halide solution for a certain period of time (Fig. 7a).270 Considering that oxygen molecules and halide ions generally dissolve in the solution, the Ag+ can be produced by redox reaction as follows:O2 + 2H2O + 4Ag ↔ 4Ag+ + 4OH−
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the halide welding process. Reprinted from ref. 270, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) schematic diagram of silver ions deposition during the welding process. Reprinted from ref. 270, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) sheet resistance variation of AgNWs before and after FeCl3 treatment. Reprinted from ref. 277, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (d) electroless welding of AgNW in silver–ammonia solution. Reprinted from ref. 141, Copyright (2016), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (e) morphologies and sheet resistance difference between the electroless welded samples and untreated samples. Reprinted from ref. 141, Copyright (2016), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (f) schematic diagram of the electroplating process of AgNW networks. Reprinted from ref. 275, Copyright (2022), with permission from Springer Nature; (g) morphology of AgNWs coated with Ni shell. Reprinted from ref. 275, Copyright (2022), with permission from Springer Nature; (h) SEM images of pure AgNW and Ni-coated AgNW. Reprinted from ref. 276, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature; (i) schematic diagram of the AgNWs connected by a Ni bridge. Reprinted from ref. 276, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature. 
With the halide ions as the catalyst, the dissolved Ag+ is redeposited by an autocatalytic reduction onto the AgNW network. Because the electrostatic potential near the contact area is much higher than that of other sites on the AgNW surface, Ag+ tends to deposit near the junction regions.270,271 Therefore, a strong fusion between nanowires is realized to enhance the conductivity of the AgNW network as shown in Fig. 7b.
Generally, the halide ions are considered as catalyst during the chemical welding. However, they seem to have an additional role in their interaction with AgNWs. A recent report showed that the chloride ion in halogen can also remove the insulating polymer layer on the AgNW surface.272 As a stabilizing and capping agent, PVP is usually used in the synthesis of AgNWs. As a result, the PVP is absorbed on the surface of the synthesized AgNWs by an oxygen atom of the carboxylate group, which limits the conductivity of the AgNW network. Given a stronger interaction between Cl− and AgNW, Cl− can replace the carboxylate group.272 Upon detachment of PVP from the AgNW surface, AgNWs are prone to assemble together, which is driven by the fact that the PVP vacancy sites have a less repulsive force. Thus, under the action of the aforementioned chemical welding, the conductivity of the AgNW networks is possibly further enhanced, because bare AgNWs directly contact each other without any PVP layer blocking at the contact interface. The enhanced electrical properties due to chemical welding treatment are shown in Fig. 7c.
Electroless welding is different from halide welding, where it replaces the halide solution with a silver ammonia and glucose mixture solution.141 In this case, the reduced-AgNPs in the mixture solution can disperse across the entire network structure. Because AgNPs favorably deposit near the junction sites,273 the contacts of AgNW joints are enhanced to achieve the electroless welding. The electroless welding process is described in Fig. 7d. A reduction of more than 50% in the resistance has been obtained on the electroless-welded AgNW film compared with the untreated AgNW film (Fig. 7e).
Electroplating welding, on the other hand, involves an electrical current to reduce the metal ions to metals,274 which has been employed to enhance the conductivity of AgNW network. The electroplating welding technique has been broadly adopted in the industrial roll-to-roll process due to the advantages of being cost efficient and simple.8 Typically, the electroplating welding system is composed of power source, cathode, anode, and electrolyte. To enhance its conductivity, the AgNW film is selected as cathode (Fig. 7f).275 When an electrical current is applied, the metal ions in the electrolyte are reduced at the surface of the cathode, so that the AgNW film is wrapped by the reduced metal particles and the contact area among the AgNWs increases. Using the electroplating method, a Ni shell layer is evenly plated onto the surface of silver nanowires as shown in Fig. 7g.275 Supported by the SEM images (Fig. 7h), a nickel ions bridge joining mechanism is proposed in which the reduced nickel atoms fill the gaps between the AgNWs (Fig. 7i).276 In this case, the sheet resistance of nickel-decorated AgNW networks dropped up to 99%.


4.2.3 Optically induced welding. 
Optically induced welding is an effective method to enhance the AgNW network conductivity, which transfers the light energy to resonant heat energy to weld the AgNW joints.278–280 In this process, a hot spot is produced at the contact point resulting in the fusing together of nanowires (Fig. 8a). As the irradiation duration extends, the contact area increases, and the sheet resistance decreases correspondingly.281 The influencing factors during the optical welding process are summarized as follows.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of UVA-induced welding of AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 283, Copyright (2019), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (b) heat generation at a connection point with varying light wavelength. Reprinted from ref. 285, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society. 
First of all, a light source, e.g., arc lamp, laser, flash light, or multiple light sources, is crucial to control the welding process. The resultant conductivity varies depending on the irradiation from different light sources.282 For example, the sheet resistance of the AgNWs network reduced by almost three orders of magnitude from 105 Ω sq−1 to 102 Ω sq−1 within 2 minutes of illumination from an ultraviolet A (UVA) lamp.283 After the exposure of a xenon flash light (pulse duration of 660 μs) at energy density of 10.3 J cm−2, the sheet resistance of AgNW films dropped by 84.1% from 120 Ω sq−1 to 19 Ω sq−1.279 Welded only by white intense pulse light (IPL) from a xenon lamp, the resistance of the AgNW films decreased by 25.5%. However, under the near-infrared radiation (NIR)-assisted IPL welding system, the resistance of the AgNW films dropped by 54.8%.284
Secondly, wavelength can also lead to a different welding effect. Jang et al. selected the plasmatic flash light as the light resource, and simulated the generation of hot spots at different wavelengths by COMSOL. The results showed (Fig. 8b) that with the increasing of light wavelength, the heat generated by absorbing the light energy gradually shifted from the junction area to the bottom and top layer. Taking advantage of this characteristic, a suitable wavelength can be selected to ensure the hot spot is concentrated around the contact sites. As a result, the AgNW network can be welded under the action of surface plasmon effect.285
Thirdly, the irradiation condition also influences the welding process.286 Jiu et al. proved that the sheet resistance of the AgNW network decreases with the increase of the light intensity within a specific range. Furthermore, the reduction trend gradually slows down until the light intensity exceeds a threshold value.287 Chung et al. demonstrated a combined light irradiation strategy to weld AgNWs, with pre-treatment to remove the organic binder using UV light and the main welding step using flash white irradiation. The irradiation time of the pre-treatment affects the final sheet resistance of the AgNW film. The optimal condition of lowest sheet resistance was achieved by combining 60 seconds of UV pre-treatment and the main flash irradiation. As the UV irradiation time extends, the AgNWs are gradually embedded in the substrate, which nullifies the contribution of the flash white irritation.282

4.3 Hybridization
By mixing with other functional materials, the mechanical properties and conductivity of the AgNW network can be improved and new functionality enabled. Typically, the corresponding functional materials comprise carbon-based conductive materials, metal conductive materials, oxide materials, and conductive polymers, etc.

4.3.1 AgNW–conductive layer hybrid. 
One common hybridization has been formed between AgNWs and carbon-based materials. Carbon-based materials have excellent mechanical property, although their conductivity is inferior to that of silver-based materials. Hybridization can promote not only long-term stability (Fig. 9a), but also electrical conductivity when compared with pure AgNW or carbon-based materials (Fig. 9b and c). Mo et al. reported that by combining Ag grids with CNT coatings, the sheet resistance decreased by 23.98% when compared with the pure Ag grids films. They further indicated that the filling areas between the Ag grids and interconnecting the silver materials with the CNT coating are the primary reasons for the significantly improved conductivity of the hybrid film.288 Kwon et al. introduced MWCNTs to decorate the Ag flakes. The addition of the Ag–MWCNT mixture in the nitrile butadiene rubber (NBR) matrix dramatically promoted the conductivity and shielding effect of the original samples. The method is meaningful for researchers to design flexible EMI-shielding materials.289 In the hybrid films, carbon-based materials not only fill the void space among AgNWs but also provide structural support.290,291
 Fig. 9  (a) Mechanical flexibility of AgNW/graphene hybrid film. Reprinted from ref. 295, Copyright (2021), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) sheet resistance varying with bending cycle. Reprinted from ref. 294, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) the sheet resistance of different samples versus time when exposure to air condition for 60 days. Reprinted from ref. 277, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (d) illustration and SEM images of AgNW network and AgNW/SWCNT hybrid structures. Reprinted from ref. 294, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society. 
There are several factors affecting the properties of hybrid AgNW–carbon films. Firstly, the performance is closely related to the film structure. The most common type is the sandwich structure in which the AgNWs are wrapped by carbon materials.292 It renders good thermal oxidation stability of the AgNW network by reducing the area exposed to air.293 In addition, a post treatment can improve the performance of hybrid films. For instance, plasmonic welding enhances the junction between AgNWs. Meanwhile, it leads to a tight adhesion between AgNWs and carbon-based materials (Fig. 9d). Therefore, the sheet resistance of hybrid film significantly decreases. At the same time, the sheet resistance also keeps stable with long-term bending cycles.294


4.3.2 AgNW–oxide hybrid. 
Hybridizing oxides and AgNWs to enhance the conductive network has also been adopted in recent studies. Depending on the oxide type, the methods can be further divided into AgNW–metal oxide hybrid and AgNW–non-metal oxide hybrid. For this kind of hybrid, additional functionalities besides electrical property are usually sought, e.g., thermal, mechanical and optical properties.
The classical AgNW–metal oxide composites include AgNW–ZnO (zinc oxide) hybrid and AgNW–TiO2 (titanium dioxide) hybrid. Among them, the AgNW–ZnO composites exhibit superior flexibility, thermal and electrical stabilities,296–300 while the bare AgNW network is prone to damage or disconnect caused by local melting at a high temperature or a voltage ramp.296 ZnO-coated AgNWs possess an excellent thermal stability even exceeding 500 °C, owing to the hindered silver atomic diffusion in the presence of the thin oxide layer and improvement of the electrode interfaces.296 Furthermore, since the bare AgNW network involves a large fraction of void space, the gap can be effectively filled by the ZnO buffer layer as shown in Fig. 10a.301,302 It not only collects the charge carrier, but also reduces the surface roughness.296 Go et al. further reported a decrease in resistance of more than 50% by adding 7 wt% ZnO.303 Given these merits, the AgNW–ZnO composite is considered to possess great potential for flexible electronics, transparent heater, and photovoltaic devices.296–298,300
 Fig. 10  (a) Illustration and SEM images of AgNW film coated with ZnO. Reprinted from ref. 302, Copyright (2014), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) schematic diagram of preparing a TiO2-coated AgNW network. Reprinted from ref. 307, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) sheet resistance of different samples changing with time under different temperature condition. Reprinted from ref. 304, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) morphology of rGO-coated AgNW film. Reprinted from ref. 310, Copyright (2012), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) sheet resistance of rGO-coated AgNW films varying with time. Reprinted from ref. 310, Copyright (2012), with permission from American Chemical Society. 
AgNW–TiO2 composites also attract researchers’ attention. Given the cost benefit and the technology development, sol–gel processing was employed to coat the TiO2 layer onto the AgNW network.304,305 Comparing with the pure AgNW film, the TiO2-coated AgNW film generally shows lower resistance, higher optical property, superior thermal and chemical stability, and structural durability.304–309 Sohn et al. explained that the electrical performance is possibly promoted from two aspects including welding AgNW junctions via mechanical nano-pressing of TiO2 on the surface of AgNWs and forming strong adhesion between TiO2 and AgNWs through molecular interaction (Fig. 10b).307 Song et al. studied the thermal stability of AgNW–TiO2 films as shown in Fig. 10c. As the temperature exceeded 250 °C, the resistance of the bare AgNW film quickly increased whereas the value of TiO2-coated AgNW film had no significant change, indicating the contribution of the TiO2 layer to the excellent thermal stability.304 Chen et al. proved that the TiO2 layer effectively blocks the substrate from contact with the electrolyte, which limits the chemical corrosion of the AgNWs. Meantime, the photovoltaic and surface durability of AgNWs are significantly improved.306
The AgNW–non-metal oxide hybrid mainly refers to the AgNW–rGO mixture. It is notable for its superior thermal oxidation and chemical stability, owing to the excellent gas barrier property of the rGO film when it is coated on the AgNW film.310 In addition, the sheet resistance of AgNW–rGO reduced by more than 50% when compared with the pristine AgNW film.311 The possible reason is that rGO enhances the adhesion between AgNWs as illustrated in Fig. 10d. Furthermore, with the increasing of temperature, the conductivity advantage of AgNW–rGO became more obvious. For instance, as the temperature exceeded 70 °C, the sheet resistance of pure AgNW film was always higher than that of AgNW–rGO film even though the initial resistance value was the same. Especially, when the exposure time reached 192 hours, the pure AgNW network resistance increased 3-fold, whereas the resistance of the AgNW–rGO film increased less than 1.5-fold, as shown in Fig. 10e.310 The difference is credited to the thermal oxidation stability, where the existence of rGO effectively hinders the oxidation of AgNWs.


4.3.3 AgNW–polymer hybrid. 
Excellent properties of AgNW-based hybrid electrodes can be realized by mixing AgNW and various conductive polymers. AgNW endows the hosting polymer with novel properties. Meantime, the AgNW–polymer composite retains the characteristics of the polymer matrix to a certain extent, such as elasticity, resilience, durability, stiffness, and mechanical strength, etc. Generally, the voids in the AgNW network are filled with the polymer during the hybridizing process. The filled polymer assists in alleviating some intrinsic defects of the AgNW network, such as poor interconnection between NWs and large surface roughness of AgNW films.312–314 Yun et al. demonstrated that the roughness of pristine AgNW film decreases by 78.2%, and root mean square roughness drops by 73.62% after mixing poly(3,4-ethylenediowythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with AgNWs.315 The integration of AgNW networks in a thin elastomeric layer has been commonly used to enable mechanical stability and stretchability, particularly for stretchable and wearable devices. Liu et al. showed that under the fixation of PDMS, the AgNW network can endure ∼100% stretching, ∼315° twisting, and ∼5 mm bending radius without obvious conductivity loss.316 Additionally, the presence of AgNWs assisted the host polymer to increase the optical contrast, enhance the switching speed, and to improve the electrical conductivity in electrochromic devices. Lee et al. constructed a highly stretchable conductive fiber via embedding AgNWs and AgNPs in a styrene–butadiene–styrene (SBS) elastomeric matrix. The formed sample exhibited outstanding electrical conductivity (σ0 = 2450 S cm−1), superior stretchability (900% elongation), and a wide range of strain sensing.121 Zhang et al. compared the electrochromic polymer (ECP)/AgNWs composite films with the pure ECP film, and demonstrated that the optical contrast increased by 75% and 50% at initial and after 90 cycles, and the electrochemical impedance of the ECP/AgNWs composite film was always lower than that of the corresponding pure ECP film.317 In some cases, a small amount of AgNWs was incorporated into the polymer matrix as fillers or additives. Moreno et al. adopted a simple solution mixing method to prepare AgNWs/PC nanocomposites, and the thermal stability of polycarbonate was improved significantly. Moreover, with 0.04 wt% loading of AgNWs, the composites became conductive. As the loading reached 4.35 wt%, the resistance dropped by eight orders of magnitude.318

5. Applications
Up to now, various AgNW-based flexible/stretchable devices have been developed for sensing, display, medical and energy applications. It is worth noting that only some representative examples are mentioned in this section of the review for the sake of brevity. Readers who are particularly interested in the various applications of nanomaterial-enabled devices can refer to the review papers.319–324 One pioneering work in 2013 reported spectral transmittance of up to 97.9% obtained on a solution-processed AgNW network.325 The figure of merit, which is taken as the ratio of optical transmittance to electrical sheet resistance, became very close to that of ITO. This discovery was employed to fabricate transparent film heaters.325 Another seminal work reported highly flexible, stretchable and sensitive strain sensors based on the composite of AgNW network and elastomer in a sandwich structure.326 Considering the high sensitivity and fast electrical response, the strain sensors were integrated into wearable devices to detect human finger motion and a smart glove device to control an avatar.326 In 2015, a novel organic solar cell was fabricated by utilizing highly flexible and transparent electrodes based on consecutively stacked layers of conductive polymer and AgNWs.327 The new solar cells have significantly enhanced the power conversion efficiency and mechanical stability. In 2018, a AgNW-based flexible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) was formed in a single hot-pressing step, whose performance can match that of ITO-based OLED devices.328 In 2021, a novel composite (thermochromic powders hybridized with AgNWs) was employed to construct displays and touch sensors with excellent electrical and chromatic properties.329 Recently, a hierarchical porous AgNW network was developed for breathable electronics through photonic sintering with low sheet resistance and excellent mechanical durability.330 AgNW-based devices have been widely applied in many diverse fields. We will briefly review them in the four categories of wearable sensors, flexible heaters, touch screens, and lighting and display devices (Fig. 11a–e).331–335
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of transparent Ag electrode. Reprinted from ref. 334, Copyright (2019), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) diagram of wearing a flexible sensor on human's wrist. Reprinted from ref. 332, Copyright (2016), with permission from Springer Nature; (c) AgNW film prepared heater showing a high flexibility. Reprinted from ref. 335, Copyright (2020), with permission from Springer Nature; (d) prototype schematic of a touch screen by adopting AgNW film. Reprinted from ref. 331, Copyright (2011), with permission from IOP Publishing; (e) fabricating a flexible OLED by using AgNW network. Reprinted from ref. 333, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature. 
5.1 Wearable sensors
Wearable sensors quantitatively measure the shape change or deformation under stress in response to physical motions and contacts.336–339 They play an important role in monitoring human health and keeping track of biological behavior and movements. Depending on their specific application fields, wearable sensors can be further classified into strain sensors, pressure sensors, and electrochemical sensors. Their sensing performance is usually evaluated with parameters such as stability, response time, sensitivity, and range of detection, etc.12
In recent years, significant progress has been made in the development of AgNW-based wearable sensors. Take the pressure sensor as an example. In 2015, Joo et al. fabricated a AgNW-embedded PDMS pressure sensor based on a capacitive sensing mechanism that exhibited sensitivity of more than 3.8 kPa−1 and response time less than 150 ms.340 Later, Shuai et al. prepared a pressure sensor comprising elastomeric composites and embedded AgNWs, and obtained a high sensitivity of 2.94 kPa−1. It is remarkable that the improvement has not compromised other features, e.g. detection limit, response time, and flexibility, and the sensor exhibited good reproducibility even during 1000 loading/unloading cycles.341 In 2017, Quan et al. constructed a flexible pressure sensor with a sandwich structure. They demonstrated that the micro-structured pressure sensor exhibited higher sensitivity (1.1 kPa−1), lower detection limit (1 Pa), and faster response time (<1 s) when compared with sensors without the micro-structure.342 In 2019, Mao et al. demonstrated a pressure sensor assembled from AgNW-coated PDMS micropillar sheets. Although its pressure sensitivity is moderate (20.08 kPa−1), the sensor response is highly reproducible for more than 10000 cycles.343 At present, considering these advances, it is possible to promote the application of wearable sensors to more fields, such as robotic systems, flexible electronic skins, and advanced biomedical devices, etc.
5.2 Flexible heaters
A flexible heater can transfer electrical energy into thermal energy by using the Joule heating mechanism.344–346 The performance is usually evaluated by electrical resistance, optical transmittance, operational stability, heating voltage, temperature rise and heating time, etc.347 Flexible heaters have been adopted to defog and defrost mirrors and smart windows.344,348 Recently, the research trend about flexible heaters has gradually shifted towards wearable electronics.13 Lan et al. prepared a AgNW-based heater for transparent thermotherapy pads. The heater increased the temperature to 74 °C within 20 seconds at 5 volts using Joule heating. In addition, the corresponding optical and mechanical properties and electrical conductivity remained stable even after 10000 bending cycles.349
5.3 Lighting devices and displays
The AgNW conductive network is also widely used to prepare lighting devices. A representative example is OLED devices that can emit light under an applied electric field. The devices can be fabricated by a solution process, such as coating and printing, which has the potential to manufacture large-area displays.350 The AgNW-based OLEDs have attracted researchers’ attention due to their excellent electroluminescent performance. In the OLED system, several different functional layers are generally included, such as anode layer, injecting layer, transport layer, cathode layer, and emitting layer. The electrons and holes are separately injected from the anode and the cathode to the emitting layer. Subsequently, they are bound together under the Coulomb force to form excitons. Finally, the exciton radiation transition emits photons and releases energy.351 Considering that the AgNWs or their composite are often chosen as the anode layer in the devices, reducing the sheet resistance of AgNWs is crucial to facilitate the charge transport. In addition, the surface roughness largely influences the characteristics of OLED, due to the charge carrier injection.1 With these considerations, Lee et al. used an intense pulsed light to weld the interconnected AgNWs in 500 μs, and effectively reduced the roughness of the AgNW film. The resultant lower surface fluctuation lessens the possibility of electrical shortages in OLEDs.333 Yun et al. hybridized the AgNWs film with PEDOT:PSS to reduce the surface roughness. The treatment not only alleviated the non-uniformity in the electrical performance, but also reduced the electrical shortages among the AgNWs.315 Lian et al. applied various intensities of mechanical pressure on the surface of AgNW film to investigate the welding effect of the wire junctions. They demonstrated that the sheet resistance dropped sharply to 3 Ω sq−1 and the roughness of AgNWs film decreased from 21.4 nm to 4.8 nm when pressed at 12 MPa. The change conspicuously improved the optoelectronic performance of the OLED device.352
5.4 Touch screens
As demand for electronic devices such as laptops, smart phones, and automatic kiosks is growing rapidly, the touch screen application will have a large market all over the world in the coming years. Considering its mechanical property, optical transmittance, and adhesion to substrate, the AgNW network is viewed as a potential candidate for touch screens. At present, the main issues limiting the development of AgNW-based touch screens are the large surface roughness and the compromise of electrical conductivity and optical transmittance. A highly cross-aligned AgNW network could be a possible solution utilizing minimum conductive materials to achieve comparable electrical performance.225 The majority of research work in this area has been demonstrated at small scale and in research laboratories. To address the issue, Chen et al. developed a dynamic continuous process to make large-scale flexible transparent conductive films and touch screens. In their approach, new additives were adopted to regulate the dynamic process to stabilize and distribute the AgNWs, and to enhance wetting, spreading, adjustment, and drying of the wet film. Under their efforts, a large flexible film (0.5 m × 10 m) and a touch screen of 32 inches were achieved.353 This work paves the way to realizing the commercialization of AgNW-based flexible devices.
6. Summary and perspective
This review systematically introduces the approaches to form AgNW-based conductive pathways for flexible and stretchable electronics according to their deformation response direction, e.g., unidirectionally and multi-directionally responsive electrodes. Various processing methods are surveyed, and the corresponding merits and limitations are discussed. Subsequently, we review several ways to enhance the conductive network, e.g., regulating the assembly of AgNWs, modifying conductive networks physically and chemically, and selecting suitable hybridization. These treatments have effectively reduced the resistance between contact points and shortened the conductive pathway, which significantly enhanced the electrical property of the AgNW-based electrodes. We finally discussed some common applications of AgNW-based devices. These devices reveal great unique advantages and value proposition in wearable sensors, and flexible lighting devices and displays. In summary, this review provides up-to-date advancements in the development of AgNW-based flexible and stretchable electronic devices, which can assist and inspire researchers to leverage these technological advances in their research work for AgNW-based devices and other functional devices.
In the future, more research effort should be made to improve the stretchability of AgNW-based devices in all directions, i.e., omnidirectional stretchability. This can be achieved through careful design of the AgNW network, alignment, patterning, in-plane and out-of-plane structures.354 For specific applications, safety, comfort, and sustained operation of the devices are worthy of consideration. Especially, for the flexible electronics employed in detecting epidermal biopotential signals, some characteristics, such as self-adhesion, self-healing, being breathable, and shape retention, are highly desirable, which have great positive influence on long-term operation. In order to realize commercialization of AgNW-based devices, two aspects should be particularly focused on: (i) the capability to print functional materials with well-controlled assembly and morphology, and (ii) stability of the flexible/stretchable devices. New printing techniques should be developed to pattern and integrate silver nanomaterials with other functional materials, and to implement post treatments with a potential for large-scale fabrication. Silver nanomaterials are known to be prone to oxidization. The fundamental failure mechanisms of the AgNW conductive pathway over cyclic deformation are very complicated and still under investigation,342 and may involve mechanical fatigue, Joule heating, material degradation through oxidation, or a combination of these factors. Fundamental studies and experimental approaches to promote long-term stability should be considered, especially through collaboration of university and industrial sectors. It is believed that an increasingly wider range of applications and greater commercial potential of AgNW-based flexible and stretchable devices will be developed in the coming years.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Jeffress Trust Awards Program in Interdisciplinary Research (The Thomas F. and Kate Miller Jeffress Memorial Trust, Bank of America, Trustee) and Virginia Microelectronics Consortium (VMEC).
References
H. Sohn, C. Park, J.-M. Oh, S. W. Kang and M.-J. Kim, Materials, 2019, 12, 2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jung, H. Cho, R. Yuksel, D. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kwon, P. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong and H. E. Unalan, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20356–20378 RSC .
Y. J. Tan, H. Godaba, G. Chen, S. T. M. Tan, G. Wan, G. Li, P. M. Lee, Y. Cai, S. Li, R. F. Shepherd, J. S. Ho and B. C. K. Tee, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Song, X. Bo, J. Min, O. S. Pak, L. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Tu, A. Kogan, H. Zhang, T. K. Hsiai, Z. Li and W. Gao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Song, J. Li, S. M. Won, W. Bai and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 590–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-B. Zhu, B. Li, D.-D. Yang, C. Liu, S. Feng, M.-L. Chen, Y. Sun, Y.-N. Tian, X. Su and X.-M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Ke, P. W. Guo, C. Y. Pang, B. Tian, C. S. Luo, H. P. Zhu and W. Wu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 1901097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Y. Cui, X. Liu, G. Liu and F. Shan, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100634 CrossRef .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lee, J. Min, P. J. Jesuraj, H. Hafeez, D. H. Kim, W. H. Lee, D. K. Choi, J. H. Cha, C. M. Lee and M. Song, Microelectron. Eng., 2019, 206, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mustonen, D. Mackenzie and H. Lipsanen, Front. Optoelectron., 2020, 13, 91–113 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Y. Deng, P. Yi, L. Peng, X. Lai and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwon, Y. D. Suh, J. Lee, P. Lee, S. Han, S. Hong, J. Yeo, H. Lee and S. H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7445–7461 RSC .
B. Tian, Y. Fang, J. Liang, K. Zheng, P. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Liu, Z. Huang and C. Cao, Small, 2022, 18, 2107298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ibrahim, J. O. Akindoyo and M. Mariatti, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2021, 7, 100395 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Song, L. Shi, N. Wen, Z. Wu, C. Sun, D. Jiang and Z. Guo, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2021, 11, 323–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 3493–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vural, A. M. Behrens, O. B. Ayyub, J. J. Ayoub and P. Kofinas, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 336–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Hua, B. He, P. Chang, M. Du and Y. Liu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 262, 117923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Duan and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lim, Y. Shin, J. Jung, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and D.-H. Kim, APL Mater., 2018, 7, 031502 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, B. Xu and J. Hou, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 39, 2315–2329 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hao, S. Wang, H. Xu, X. Zhang, J. Xue, S. Liu, Y. Song, Y. Li and J. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130840 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohammed Ali, D. Maddipatla, B. B. Narakathu, A. A. Chlaihawi, S. Emamian, F. Janabi, B. J. Bazuin and M. Z. Atashbar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 274, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Claypole, J. Claypole, L. Kilduff, D. Gethin and T. Claypole, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, L. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. He, W. Zhang, J. Zhao, D. Lu, J. He, H. Zhu, Y. Gong, L. R. Zheng, Y. Wang, Z. Li and Y. Qin, IEEE Sens. J., 2021, 21, 12255–12268 CAS .
A. T. Jafry, H. Lee, A. P. Tenggara, H. Lim, Y. Moon, S.-H. Kim, Y. Lee, S.-M. Kim, S. Park, D. Byun and J. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 282, 831–837 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kant, K. Shrivas, V. Ganesan, Y. K. Mahipal, R. Devi, M. K. Deb and R. Shankar, Microchem. J., 2020, 155, 104687 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, M. Jung, B. Kim, J. Kim, K. Shin, O.-S. Kwon and S. Jeon, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 301–307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Htwe, W. Chow, G. Suriati, A. Thant and M. Mariatti, Synth. Met., 2019, 256, 116120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baccarin, M. A. Ciciliati, O. N. Oliveira, E. T. G. Cavalheiro and P. A. Raymundo-Pereira, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 114, 110989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kolya, T. Kuila, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Composites, Part B, 2019, 173, 106924 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, M. Zhou, L. Wang, Z. Huang and Y. Chu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 833, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. AlAqad, A. M. Abulkibash, O. C. S. Al Hamouz and T. A. Saleh, Chem. Data Collect., 2017, 11, 168–182 CrossRef .
J. Huang, M. Zhao, Y. Hao, D. Li, J. Feng, F. Huang and Q. Wei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2000840 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fekry, S. A. Abdel-Gawad, R. H. Tammam and M. A. Zayed, Measurement, 2020, 163, 107958 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, J. Zhu, B. Yeom, M. Di Prima, X. Su, J.-G. Kim, S. J. Yoo, C. Uher and N. A. Kotov, Nature, 2013, 500, 59–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashkarran, M. Ahadian and M. H. Nezhad, EPJ Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 10601 CrossRef .
H. H. Rashed, Eng. Technol., 2016, 34, 295–301 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Zou, L. Liu, H. Tong, Y. Li, H. Bai and A. Wu, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 3375–3387 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kshirsagar, S. S. Sangaru, M. A. Malvindi, L. Martiradonna, R. Cingolani and P. P. Pompa, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 392, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Q. Ge, F. Xu, X. Qu, H. Fu and J. Sun, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 775, 145897 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Khan, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, A. Y. Obaid and A. O. Al-Youbi, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 82, 513–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Li and X. Zeng, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 494, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee and S. Koo, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2011, 17, 762–766 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Lokman, M. F. M. Rusdi, A. H. A. Rosol, F. Ahmad, S. Shafie, H. Yahaya, R. M. Rosnan, M. A. A. Rahman and S. W. Harun, Optik, 2021, 244, 167621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Qiao, J. Chen and S. Ding, Colloids Surf., A, 2005, 256, 111–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Guzmán, J. Dille and S. Godet, Int. J. Mater. Metall. Eng., 2008, 2, 91–98 Search PubMed .
M. V. Cañamares, J. V. Garcia-Ramos, J. D. Gómez-Varga, C. Domingo and S. Sanchez-Cortes, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8546–8553 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Sharma, R. A. Yngard and Y. Lin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 145, 83–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Nayak, S. S. Ramamurthy and J. K. K. Kumar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 252, 123302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, W. Xu, W. Yi and Y. Peng, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 291, 23–31 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Naqvi, A. K. Srivastava, M. M. Kulkarni, A. M. Siddiqui and P. K. Dwivedi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 887–895 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fu, C. Yan, L. Ren, X. Zeng, G. Du, R. Sun, J. Xu and C.-P. Wong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 177, 118–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barmpakos, C. Tsamis and G. Kaltsas, Microelectron. Eng., 2020, 225, 111266 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mo, Z. Guo, L. Yang, Q. Zhang, Y. Fang, Z. Xin, Z. Chen, K. Hu, L. Han and L. Li, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Zhang, C. Gao and Y. Wu, Composites, Part B, 2021, 224, 109213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liao, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, F. Zhu, C. Jiang, Q. Liu, Z. Cheng, G. Dai, G. Wu and L. Wang, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 1469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fan, J. Si, X. Xu, L. Chen, J. Chen, C. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Wu, J. Tian, X. Chen, X. Mou and X. Cai, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 257, 117636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Araki, J. Jiu, M. Nogi, H. Koga, S. Nagao, T. Sugahara and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 236–245 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gebeyehu, T. F. Chala, S.-Y. Chang, C.-M. Wu and J.-Y. Lee, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16139–16148 RSC .
T. Zhao, R. Sun, S. Yu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhou, H. Huang and R. Du, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 366, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Darmanin, P. Nativo, D. Gilliland, G. Ceccone, C. Pascual, B. De Berardis, F. Guittard and F. Rossi, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 395, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Castro and J. B. Cooper, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 507, 119569 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, Y. W. Kim, J. E. Kim, S. W. Yoon, T. Y. Kim, J.-S. Noh and K. S. Suh, Acta Mater., 2015, 83, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hemmati, M. T. Harris and D. P. Barkey, J. Nanomater., 2020, 2020, 9341983 Search PubMed .
L. Sonntag, F. Eichler, N. Weiß, L. Bormann, D. S. Ghosh, J. M. Sonntag, R. Jordan, N. Gaponik, K. Leo and A. Eychmüller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 9036–9043 RSC .
A. Madeira, D. T. Papanastasiou, T. Toupance, L. Servant, M. Tréguer-Delapierre, D. Bellet and I. A. Goldthorpe, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 3804–3808 RSC .
J. W. Shin, H.-R. Lim, H.-B. Cho, Y.-T. Kwon and Y.-H. Choa, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 8442–8451 RSC .
X. M. Wang, L. Chen, E. Sowade, R. D. Rodriguez, E. Sheremet, C. M. Yu, R. R. Baumann and J. J. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Z. Zhou, Y. Wang and J. Li, Coatings, 2020, 10, 865 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Choi, B.-C. Kang and T.-J. Ha, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 184, 113231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, X. Chen, F. Qiao, Y. Rui, D. Gu, H. Yu, J. Hou, F. Chen, F. Liu and Y. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2021, 288, 129348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J. Yang, W. Gao and H. Bai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, Y.-F. Liu, Y.-G. Bi, X.-L. Zhang, D. Yin, J. Feng and H.-B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 12423–12437 RSC .
A. Kumar, M. O. Shaikh and C.-H. Chuang, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sharma, N. M. Nair, G. Nagasarvari, D. Ray and P. Swaminathan, Flexible Printed Electron., 2022, 7, 014009 CrossRef .
H. M. Cronin, Z. Stoeva, M. Brown, M. Shkunov and S. R. P. Silva, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21398–21410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mazur, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 400–403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, P. Zhu, G. Li, Z. Cui, C. Cui, K. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Chen, G. Zhang and R. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8382–8390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaviya, J. Santhanalakshmi and B. Viswanathan, Mater. Lett., 2012, 67, 64–66 CrossRef CAS .
N. Matsuhisa, M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Yokota, H. Jinno, K. Kuribara, T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–11 Search PubMed .
Z. Lei, Z. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Xu, D. Wang, Y. Shen, W. Feng, Z. Zhang and H. Chen, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 180, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Yoon, Y. Oh, S. H. Kim, J. Choi, Y. Hwang, C. H. Park and B. K. Ju, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900363 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Lee, K.-H. Jung, K. D. Min, B.-G. Park and S.-B. Jung, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 53, 13–18 CrossRef .
S. Ding, Z. Jiang, F. Chen, L. Fu, Y. Lv, Y. Qian and S. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27572–27577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hilal and J. I. Han, Synth. Met., 2018, 245, 276–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aleksandrova, N. Kurtev, V. Videkov, S. Tzanova and S. Schintke, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 145, 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 237 Search PubMed .
T. Qiu, B. Luo, M. Liang, J. Ning, B. Wang, X. Li and L. Zhi, Carbon, 2015, 81, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, Y. Jiao and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3819–3831 RSC .
J. D. Wiggins-Camacho and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19082–19090 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, Y. Seo, J. Choi, T. Kim, J. Cho, S. Kim and D. Kim, Scr. Mater., 2010, 62, 258–261 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Hashimi, R. T. Ginting, S. X. Chin, K. S. Lau, M. A. N. M. Nohan, S. Zakaria, C. C. Yap and C. H. Chia, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20, 205–211 CrossRef .
B. Y. Ahn, D. J. Lorang and J. A. Lewis, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2700–2702 RSC .
S. Yoon and H.-K. Kim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 384, 125308 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shinde, D.-J. Lee, B.-J. Kim and H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 685, 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shinde, K. Mallikarjuna, J. Noh and H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 660, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, P. Prasher and J. Kim, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2018, 16, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jon, G. Sin, G. Kim, G. Jong and J. Ri, Synth. Met., 2020, 262, 116286 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, H. Zheng, X. Li and S. Yu, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 4344–4350 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Singh, T. Kshetri, T. I. Singh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, S. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Hang, J. Wen and Y. Tian, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 27373–27383 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, X. Guan, X. Wang, Y. Li, E. Chalmers and X. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801547 CrossRef .
K. N. Amba Sankar and K. Mohanta, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 1970–1978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, J. Jiang, S. Yoon, K.-S. Kim, J.-H. Kim, S. Park, S.-H. Kim and L. Piao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2093–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-E. Shin, J. Y. Cho, J. Yeom, H. Ko and J. T. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31051–31058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Deng, R. Ouyang, R. Zheng, Z. Jiang, H. Bai and H. Xue, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105866 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Cai, X. Li, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, Mater. Des., 2019, 181, 107982 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Kim, J.-J. Lee, Y.-J. Oh and D.-E. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 152, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shi, T. Wang, L. Shi, J. Li, R. Wang and J. Sun, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100610 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, H. Sun, J. Cheng, J. Myong, H. M. Mehedi, G. Bhat and B. Yu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 315, 112174 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gong, C. Hou, Y. Guo, J. Zhou, J. Mu, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 673–683 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, S. Choi, J. I. Jang, S. K. Seol, J. S. Woo, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, K.-J. Baeg and G.-W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9300 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Granero, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, J. M. Razal, G. G. Wallace and M. in het Panhuis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 955–962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, E. Du, X. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. He, Y. Ye, J. Wang, B. Tang and X. Wang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 230, 118031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Y. Jia, Y. Niu, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, P. Li, M. Zhu and Q. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 51, 434–441 CrossRef .
H.-S. Yang, Y.-M. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jang, J. H. Youk, B.-S. Lee and W.-R. Yu, Polymer, 2020, 202, 122641 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, J. Zhou, Y. Xin, R. Tao, G. Jin and G. Lubineau, Polymer, 2019, 177, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. Shin, S. Lee, J. Seo, J. Lee, S. Son, H. J. Cho, H. Algadi, S. Al-Sayari and D. E. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3114–3121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Huang, X. Lu, Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, J. Li and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9673–9679 RSC .
Z. Yang, F. Dou, T. Yu, M. Song, H. Shi, X. Yao, L.-Y. Xu, J.-H. He, J. Cao and L. Zhang, Results Phys., 2019, 14, 102347 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, D. Dong, S. Gong, L. Brassart, Y. Wang, T. An and W. Cheng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800462 CrossRef .
W. Yan, C. Dong, Y. Xiang, S. Jiang, A. Leber, G. Loke, W. Xu, C. Hou, S. Zhou, M. Chen, R. Hu, P. P. Shum, L. Wei, X. Jia, F. Sorin, X. Tao and G. Tao, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 168–194 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Cai and Q. Gao, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2014, 214, 802–810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, T. Nguyen-Dang, A. G. Page, W. Yan, T. Das Gupta, G. M. Rotaru, R. M. Rossi, V. D. Favrod, N. Bartolomei and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707251 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-H. Ko, H.-J. Kim, S.-M. Lee, T.-W. Kim and H.-K. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46739 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, D. Dong, Y. Wang, S. Gong, T. An, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42612–42620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, S. Park, T. J. Richner, A. Derry, I. Brown, C. Hou, S. Rao, J. Kang, C. T. Moritz, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1600955 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hu, X. Xu, J. Miao, O. Gidron and H. Meng, Materials, 2018, 11, 184 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lian, H. Yu, M. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Li, F. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Tai, Y. Liao and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8399 RSC .
J.-H. Pu, X. Zhao, X.-J. Zha, L. Bai, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15913–15923 RSC .
G.-J. Zhu, P.-G. Ren, H. Guo, Y.-L. Jin, D.-X. Yan and Z.-M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23649–23658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, F. Xiu, Z. Zhou, C. Ban, T. Ye, Y. Ding, J. Liu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1472–1476 RSC .
W.-R. Huang, Z. He, J.-L. Wang, J.-W. Liu and S.-H. Yu, iScience, 2019, 12, 333–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, R. Wang, J. Sun and L. Gao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3887–3895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chatterjee, J. Tabor and T. K. Ghosh, Fibers, 2019, 7, 51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hwang, W.-J. Song, J.-G. Han, S. Bae, G. Song, N.-S. Choi, S. Park and H.-K. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1870042 CrossRef .
B. G. Compton and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5930–5935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, H. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Zheng, Y. Zhao, X. Kong, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Kong and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7167–7172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Yang, D. Du, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 2803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, R. S. Carmichael and T. B. Carmichael, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31210–31219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Oh, J. S. Oh and G. Y. Yeom, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jeong, Y. Noh, S. H. Ko and D. Lee, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 174, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, W. Xu, F. Xu, W. Shen and W. Song, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 116405 CrossRef .
X. Guo, X. Liu, J. Luo, Z. Gan, Z. Meng and N. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24953–24959 RSC .
C. Zhao, L. Xing, J. Xiang, L. Cui, J. Jiao, H. Sai, Z. Li and F. Li, Particuology, 2014, 17, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and T. Si, Sens. Actuators, A, 2017, 264, 188–194 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Fox, A. A. Schropp, T. Joseph, N. Azim, Y. Y. Li Sip and L. Zhai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 7628–7639 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eslamian and F. Zabihi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 462 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Lan, J. Wang, R. Zhu, Z. Yang, D. Ding, G. Tang, K. Wang, Q. Su and E. Xie, Phys. E, 2016, 76, 88–94 CrossRef .
X. Guo, C. W. Guo, C. Wang, C. Li and X. M. Sun, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 670 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, H. Zhang, S. Shi, J. Xu, X. Qin, Q. He, K. Yang, W. Dai, G. Liu and Q. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4636–4674 RSC .
S. Zhang, X. Liu, T. Lin and P. He, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 18702–18709 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, Q. Xu, Q. Huang, R. Tan, W. Shen and W. Song, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2016, 32, 158–161 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Hu, P. Zhao, P. He, H.-Y. Mi, Z. Guo, C. Liu and C. Shen, Composites, Part A, 2021, 147, 106472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-N. Song, L.-C. Jia, G.-J. Zhong, L. Xu, D.-X. Yan, J. Lei and Z.-M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 3307–3315 RSC .
T. Kim, A. Canlier, G. H. Kim, J. Choi, M. Park and S. M. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 788–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Selzer, N. Weiß, D. Kneppe, L. Bormann, C. Sachse, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmüller, K. Leo and L. Müller-Meskamp, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2777–2783 RSC .
K. Shin, J. S. Park, J. H. Han, Y. Choi, D. S. Chung and S. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Pan, T. L. Yang, S. Y. Wang, C. K. Yen, S. P. Ju, C. W. Hung and Y. L. Shiue, Opt. Mater., 2018, 77, 55–66 CrossRef CAS .
E.-H. Cho, J. Hwang, J. Kim, J. Lee, C. Kwak and C. S. Lee, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 26095–26103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yoo, Y. Kim, C. J. Han, M. S. Oh and J.-W. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Um, Y. Lee, T. Kim, S. Lim, H. Lee, M. Ha, Z. Khan, S. Kang, M. P. Kim, J. Y. Kim and H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32154–32162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Q. Liu, K. Bi, Z. Shu, Y. Zhang and H. Duan, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2019, 5, 54 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Yu, X. P. Hao, C. W. Zhang, S. Y. Zheng, M. Du, S. Liang, Z. L. Wu and Q. Zheng, Small, 2021, 17, 2103836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K.-J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chou, Y. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6269–6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hassan, J. Bae and C. H. Lee, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9254–9261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, K. N. Al-Milaji and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4528–4536 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yang, Y. S. Lee, Y. Jang, D. Byun and S.-H. Choa, Microelectron. Reliab., 2016, 65, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Park, M. H. Lee, B. Hwang, S. H. Kim and S. Lim, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
P. Laurent, S. Stoukatch, F. Dupont and M. Kraft, Microelectron. Eng., 2018, 197, 67–75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tu, S. Yuan, H. Zhang, P. Wang, X. Cui, J. Wang, Y.-Q. Zhan and L.-R. Zheng, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 174905 CrossRef .
D. Hu, W. Zhu, Y. Peng, S. Shen and Y. Deng, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1113–1119 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Chlaihawi, B. B. Narakathu, S. Emamian, B. J. Bazuin and M. Z. Atashbar, Sens. Bio-Sens. Res., 2018, 20, 9–15 CrossRef .
Z. Cui, Y. Han, Q. Huang, J. Dong and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6806–6811 RSC .
S.-H. Tseng, L.-M. Lyu, K.-Y. Hsiao, W.-H. Ho and M.-Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5593–5596 RSC .
S. Yu, X. Li, L. Zhao, M. Wu, Q. Ren, B. Gong, L. Li and H. Shi, Synth. Met., 2020, 267, 116475 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 565, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sharma, J.-S. Kim and A. Sharma, Microelectron. Eng., 2019, 205, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. S. Albano, M. H. Boratto, O. Nunes-Neto and C. F. O. Graeff, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Lee, D. Lee, J. S. Yoo, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Nano Converg., 2016, 3, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Junaidi, K. Triyana, Harsojo and E. Suharyadi, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater.
Sci. Eng., 2017, 202, 012055 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Liu and X. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 75–75 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Lee, B.-C. Huynh-Nguyen, E. Ko, J. H. Kim and G. H. Seong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 224, 789–797 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, X. Yang, D. Du, Y. Zhao and Y. Wang, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 295 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Feng, K. Wang, M. Qian, Y. Chen and Z. Sun, J. Nanomater., 2011, 2011, 935218 Search PubMed .
R. R. Kisannagar, P. Jha, A. Navalkar, S. K. Maji and D. Gupta, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 10260–10265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wan, H. He, S. Zeng, J. Du, Z. Wang, H. Gu and J. Xiong, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 325302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hoeng, A. Denneulin, N. Reverdy-Bruas, G. Krosnicki and J. Bras, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 394, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Lu and Y.-C. Liao, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, W. Y. Lai, F. Feng and W. Huang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, K. Wang, K. Lin, H. Xie, X. Zhang and J. Li, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 7719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qian, L. Li, M. Gao, H. Yang, Z. Cai, B. Chen, Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103885 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, M. Kaur, D. Yun and W. S. Kim, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10897–10904 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Shi, X. Li, Y. Sun, J. Zhu, Q. Pei, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20096–20107 RSC .
Z. Zhu, S. Z. Guo, T. Hirdler, C. Eide, X. Fan, J. Tolar and M. C. McAlpine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707495 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sun, S. Liu, X. Shi, C. Lai, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122641 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and Z. Du, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 945 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Zhu, Y. Wu, J. Wang, T. Zhang and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 62905–62912 RSC .
P. J. Jesuraj, C. Shi, D. H. Kim, H. Hafeez, J. C. Lee, W. H. Lee, D. K. Choi, Z. Zou, J. Xiao, J. Min, M. Song, C. S. Kim and S. Y. Ryu, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 065227 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, S. Chen, Y. Lin, X. Yuan and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 935–943 RSC .
Q. Chen, P. F. Cao and R. C. Advincula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800631 CrossRef .
Y. Yang and H. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 577, 151895 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Yoon, Y. Oh and S. H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900363 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Duan, W. Xiao and H. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, A, 2022, 343, 113653 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Xu, D. Wang, X. Lu and A. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 434, 134751 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, X. Xiang, L. Shao, Y. Zhang and J. Gu, Angew. Chem., 2022, 61, e202200705 CAS .
S.-F. Tseng and C.-C. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 151060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Liu, X. Ji, G. Yang and J. Chen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 284, 119193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Z. Cheng, S. Gao and H. Shi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2022, 279, 125730 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. V. Kiran Kumar, C. wan Bae, L. Piao and S.-H. Kim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2944–2949 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marus, A. Hubarevich, R. J. W. Lim, H. Huang, A. Smirnov, H. Wang, W. Fan and X. W. Sun, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Nair, K. Daniel, S. C. Vadali, D. Ray and P. Swaminathan, Flexible Printed Electron., 2019, 4, 045001 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bergin, Y.-H. Chen, A. R. Rathmell, P. Charbonneau, Z.-Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1996–2004 RSC .
R. F. Hamans, M. Parente, A. Garcia-Etxarri and A. Baldi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 8703–8709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Jiu, T. Araki, M. Nogi, T. Sugahara, S. Nagao, H. Koga, P. He and K. Suganuma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2015, 7, 51–58 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Marus, A. Hubarevich, W. Fan, H. Wang, A. Smirnov, K. Wang, H. Huang and X. W. Sun, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 035201 CrossRef .
S. Kang, T. Kim, S. Cho, Y. Lee, A. Choe, B. Walker, S.-J. Ko, J. Y. Kim and H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7933–7942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, D. Ge, G. A. Calderon-Ortiz, A. L. Exarhos, C. Bretz, A. Alsayed, D. Kurz, J. M. Kikkawa, R. Dreyfus, S. Yang and A. G. Yodh, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6438–6448 RSC .
A. Takemoto, T. Araki, Y. Noda, T. Uemura, S. Yoshimoto, R. Abbel, C. Rentrop, J. van den Brand and T. Sekitani, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 37LT03 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, S. Kang, A. Pandya, R. Shanker, Z. Khan, Y. Lee, J. Park, S. L. Craig and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, N. M. Abukhdeir and I. A. Goldthorpe, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 485302 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-R. Chen, C.-C. Hong, T.-M. Liou, K. C. Hwang and T.-F. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16662 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, G. Liu, S. Han, W. Cao, H. Chen, J. Lu and H. D. Shieh, J. Disp. Technol., 2015, 11, 625–629 CAS .
Q. Huang and Y. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 15167 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Al-Milaji, Q. Huang, Z. Li, T. N. Ng and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3289–3298 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Wang, M.-W. Chang, Z. Ahmad and J.-S. Li, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2016, 35, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, K. Kim, H. Oh, H. C. Moon, S. Nam and S. H. Kim, Org. Electron., 2019, 69, 190–199 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bian, L. Meng, M. Zhang, L. Chen and H. Liu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 1816–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, J. Huang and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, Y. Lai, V. Nguyen and R. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11976–11980 RSC .
S.-K. Duan, Q.-L. Niu, J.-F. Wei, J.-B. He, Y.-A. Yin and Y. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8106–8112 RSC .
L.-F. Shi, J.-Z. Liu, J.-H. Yang, L.-F. Cai, L.-Y. Shi and H.-X. Qiu, New Carbon Mater., 2017, 32, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choi, M. G. Shin, Y. Jung, D. H. Kim and J. S. Ko, Micromachines, 2020, 11, 156 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pu, W. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Chen, J. Chen, H. Zhang, B. Mi, L. Wang and Y. Ma, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 100725–100729 RSC .
M. G. Shin, C. J. Choi, Y. Jung, J. H. Choi and J. S. Ko, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 035101 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Wang, X. Zhang, E. Majidi, K. Nedelec and B. D. Gates, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2607–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Farain, A. Esfandiar and A. Z. Moshfegh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 013102 CrossRef .
K. Farain, A. Esfandiar and A. Z. Moshfegh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 063101 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, W. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Han, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Sun and J. Guo, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2378 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Chen, L. Liu, N. Xiang and Z. Ni, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 025301 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Arenas-Guerrero, V. Delgado Á, S. Ahualli and M. L. Jiménez, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 591, 58–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, K. Wang and M. Zhan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16027–16039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, G.-W. Huang, X.-J. Shen, H.-M. Xiao and S.-Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4879–4884 RSC .
N. Li, G.-W. Huang, H.-M. Xiao and S.-Y. Fu, Composites, Part A, 2015, 77, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
O. Trotsenko, A. Tokarev, A. Gruzd, T. Enright and S. Minko, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7155–7161 RSC .
S. H. Pham, A. Ferri, A. Da Costa, M. S. Mohan, V. D. Tran, D. C. Nguyen, P. Viville, R. Lazzaroni, R. Desfeux and P. Leclère, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 2200019 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Shaw, A. Perumal, D. D. Bradley, P. N. Stavrinou and T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 195501 CrossRef .
L. He and S.-C. Tjong, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang, Y. An, H. Lee, E. Lee, S. Becker, Y.-H. Kim and H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Choo and T. W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giusti, D. Langley, M. Lagrange, R. Collins, C. Jiménez, Y. Bréchet and D. Bellet, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 11, 785–795 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, F. R. Poblete and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17836–17842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bardet, D. T. Papanastasiou, C. Crivello, M. Akbari, J. Resende, A. Sekkat, C. Sanchez-Velasquez, L. Rapenne, C. Jiménez, D. Muñoz-Rojas, A. Denneulin and D. Bellet, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Langley, M. Lagrange, G. Giusti, C. Jiménez, Y. Bréchet, N. D. Nguyen and D. Bellet, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13535–13543 RSC .
M. Lagrange, D. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Jiménez, Y. Bréchet and D. Bellet, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17410–17423 RSC .
A. Vafaei, A. Hu and I. A. Goldthorpe, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 6, 293–300 CrossRef .
J. S. Woo, J. T. Han, S. Jung, J. I. Jang, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, K.-J. Baeg and G.-W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4804 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Khaligh, L. Xu, A. Khosropour, A. Madeira, M. Romano, C. Pradére, M. Tréguer-Delapierre, L. Servant, M. A. Pope and I. A. Goldthorpe, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 425703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Song, Y. Chen, C.-H. Chung, Y. Yang, B. Bob, H.-S. Duan, G. Li, K.-N. Tu, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2804–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seong, I. Chae, H. Lee, V. D. Nguyen and D. Byun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 7629–7633 RSC .
J. Kim, Y. S. Nam, M. H. Song and H. W. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20938–20945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Hong, S. K. Oh, T. K. Kim, Y.-J. Cha, J. S. Kwak, J.-H. Shin, B.-K. Ju and W.-S. Cheong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, T. Zhao, W. Jiang, X. Yu, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, H. Zheng, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 508–516 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, Y. Kim, S. Cheon, G.-R. Yi and J. H. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30779–30785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-P. Chen and Y.-C. Liao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19856–19860 RSC .
Z. Hui, Y. Liu, W. Guo, L. Li, N. Mu, C. Jin, Y. Zhu and P. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 285703 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shen and R.-H. Yao, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2016, 33, 037801 CrossRef .
S. C. Lin, C. W. Chang and Y. C. Liao, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, J. S. Kim, S.-R. Choi, Y.-H. Kim, D. H. Kim, J.-G. Kim, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Cho, Nano Converg., 2022, 9, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Tian, C. Hang and C. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5260 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chu, K. Wang, J. Tao, S. Li, S. Ji and C. Ye, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 533 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Yang, H. Choi, D. S. Lee, C. G. Choi, S. Y. Choi and I. D. Kim, Small, 2015, 11, 1293–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, G. T. Hwang, S. Kim, J. Seo, H. J. Park, K. Yu, T. S. Kim and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603473 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-S. Liu, T. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Zheng, Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, L. Chen, Y. Chen, B.-R. Yang, Y. Luo and Z. Chen, Nano Res., 2021, 15, 2582–2591 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, C. Liang, X. Sun, J. Zheng, J. Duan and X. Zhuang, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Chung, S.-H. Kim and H.-S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, J. Lu, T. Zhao, X. Yu, Q. Jiang, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, R. Sun and C. Wong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 6, 1801635 CrossRef .
W.-H. Chung, Y.-R. Jang, Y.-T. Hwang, S.-H. Kim and H.-S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17725–17737 RSC .
Y.-R. Jang, W.-H. Chung, Y.-T. Hwang, H.-J. Hwang, S.-H. Kim and H.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24099–24107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiu, M. Nogi and T. Sugahara, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23561 RSC .
J. Jiu, T. Sugahara, M. Nogi, T. Araki, K. Suganuma, H. Uchida and K. Shinozaki, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11820–11828 RSC .
L. Mo, J. Ran, L. Yang, Y. Fang, Q. Zhai and L. Li, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 065202 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kwon, R. Ma, U. Kim, H. R. Choi and S. Baik, Carbon, 2014, 68, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Stapleton, R. A. Afre, A. V. Ellis, J. G. Shapter, G. G. Andersson, J. S. Quinton and D. A. Lewis, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2013, 14, 035004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Goak, T. Y. Kim, D. U. Kim, K. S. Chang, C. S. Lee and N. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 510, 145445 CrossRef CAS .
B.-T. Liu and H.-L. Kuo, Carbon, 2013, 63, 390–396 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, H. Lee, Y. Ahn and Y. Lee, Carbon, 2015, 81, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Y. Woo, J. T. Kim, B. Y. Lee and C.-S. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10974–10980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hwang, Y. H. Hwang, K. W. Choi, S. Lee, S. Kim, S. J. Park and B.-K. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 10499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khan, V. H. Nguyen, D. Muñoz-Rojas, S. Aghazadehchors, C. Jiménez, N. D. Nguyen and D. Bellet, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19208–19217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, W. Shen, Q. Huang, Y. Yang, R. Tan, K. Zhu, N. Dai and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3750–3755 RSC .
S. You, Y. S. Park, H. W. Choi and K. H. Kim, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 55, 01AE14 CrossRef .
X. Chen, G. Xu, G. Zeng, H. Gu, H. Chen, H. Xu, H. Yao, Y. Li, J. Hou and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, P. Cai, W. Xu, R. Tan, W. Shen, Z. Wang, G. Chen, J. Huang, X. Fang and W. Song, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 4743–4751 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nam, M. Song, D.-H. Kim, B. Cho, H. M. Lee, J.-D. Kwon, S.-G. Park, K.-S. Nam, Y. Jeong, S.-H. Kwon, Y. C. Park, S.-H. Jin, J.-W. Kang, S. Jo and C. S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4788 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Song, J. H. Park, C. S. Kim, D.-H. Kim, Y.-C. Kang, S.-H. Jin, W.-Y. Jin and J.-W. Kang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1370–1379 CrossRef CAS .
M. Go, B. Hwang and S. Lim, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2019, 34, 1605–1611 CrossRef CAS .
T.-B. Song, Y. S. Rim, F. Liu, B. Bob, S. Ye, Y.-T. Hsieh and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24601–24607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Giesz, E. Mackiewicz, J. Grobelny, G. Celichowski and M. Cieślak, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 177, 397–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Chen, C. M. Fan, J. Y. Wu and T. L. Lin, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2009, 56, 1244–1249 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sohn, S. Kim, W. Shin, J. M. Lee, H. Lee, D.-J. Yun, K.-S. Moon, I. T. Han, C. Kwak and S.-J. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2688–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, Y. Li, M. Plissonneau, J. Li, J. Li, R. Chen, Z. Tang, L. Pautrot-d'Alençon, T. He, M. Tréguer-Delapierre and M.-H. Delville, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14136–14136 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Tian, C. Hang, Y. Liu, S. Wang, M. Qi, H. Zhang and Q. Peng, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2456–2466 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6410–6414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, W. Li, J. Jiu and K. Suganuma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 732–740 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Nair, J. K. Pakkathillam, K. Kumar, K. Arunachalam, D. Ray and P. Swaminathan, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1000–1010 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. N. Entifar, J. W. Han, D. J. Lee, Z. R. Ramadhan, J. Hong, M. H. Kang, S. Kim, D. Lim, C. Yun and Y. H. Kim, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 116–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Kim, E.-J. Lee, J.-T. Lee, D.-K. Hwang, W.-K. Choi and J.-Y. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64428–64433 RSC .
H. J. Yun, S. J. Kim, J. H. Hwang, Y. S. Shim, S.-G. Jung, Y. W. Park and B.-K. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Liu, B. C. Pan and G. S. Liou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2633–2639 RSC .
W. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Zhu, X. Wu, Y. Wang, Q. Wang and C. Hu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109919 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreno, N. Navascues, M. Arruebo, S. Irusta and J. Santamaria, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 275603 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yao, P. Ren, R. Song, Y. Liu, Q. Huang, J. Dong, B. T. O'Connor and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, P. Swetha and Y. Zhu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tan, C. Jiang, Q. Li, S. Bi and J. Song, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 15669–15696 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800546 CrossRef .
B. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Luo, Y. Feng and W. Wu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900922 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 187–224 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, Y. W. Kim, H. S. Lee, H. Kim, W. S. Yang and K. S. Suh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amjadi, A. Pichitpajongkit, S. Lee, S. Ryu and I. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5154–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, T. I. Ryu, K.-H. Ok, M.-G. Kwak, S. Park, N.-G. Park, C. J. Han, B. S. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. J. Son and J.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4743–4743 CrossRef .
S. Kim and B. Hwang, Mater. Des., 2018, 160, 572–577 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Nair, I. Khanra, D. Ray and P. Swaminathan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 34550–34560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jeong, S. Lee, S. Yoo, S. Park, H. Choi, J. Bae, Y. Lee, K. Woo, J.-H. Choi and S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60425–60432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Madaria, A. Kumar and C. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245201 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki and D. Kiriya, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lee, Y. Oh, J.-M. Hong, Y. W. Park and B.-K. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14170 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Kim, I. Ha, P. Won, D.-G. Seo, K.-J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-M. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, H.-K. Kim, H.-J. Kim and C.-H. Hong, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 4592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, C. J. Han, Y. Kim, B.-K. Ju and J.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10435–10443 RSC .
H. Huang, C. J. Cai, B. S. Yeow, J. Ouyang and H. Ren, Machines, 2021, 9, 186 CrossRef .
S. B. Park, J. W. Han, J. H. Kim, A. F. Wibowo, A. Prameswati, J. Park, J. Lee, M.-W. Moon, M.-S. Kim and Y. H. Kim, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2002041 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, G. Chen, L. Bi, Z. Yang, Z. Wu, M. Huang, J. Bao, W. Wang, C. Ye, J. Pan, Y. Peng and C. Ye, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 375504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Joo, J. Byun, N. Seong, J. Ha, H. Kim, S. Kim, T. Kim, H. Im, D. Kim and Y. Hong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6208–6215 RSC .
X. Shuai, P. Zhu, W. Zeng, Y. Hu, X. Liang, Y. Zhang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26314–26324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Quan, X. Wei, L. Xiao, T. Wu, H. Pang, T. Liu, W. Huang, S. Wu, S. Li and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 699, 824–831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, B. Ji, G. Chen, C. Hao, B. Zhou and Y. Tian, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3196–3205 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Lee, J.-H. Lee, S. An, D.-Y. Kim, T.-G. Kim, S. S. Al-Deyab, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6677–6685 RSC .
Z. Du, Z. Chen, J. Xu, D. Zheng, H. Zou, J. Liu and M. Wang, J. Ind. Text., 2020, 1–14 CAS .
Q. Liu, B. Tian, J. Liang and W. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1634–1656 RSC .
J. Park, D. Han, S. Choi, Y. Kim and J. Kwak, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 5731–5737 RSC .
L. Veeramuthu, B.-Y. Chen, C.-Y. Tsai, F.-C. Liang, M. Venkatesan, D.-H. Jiang, C.-W. Chen, X. Cai and C.-C. Kuo, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 35786–35796 RSC .
W. Lan, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Han, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Tang, Y. Wei, W. Dou, Q. Su and E. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6644–6651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Mayousse, C. Celle, D. Bellet and J.-P. Simonato, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 452001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Li, B. Wang, H. Hu, B. Wei and L. Yang, Micromachines, 2019, 10, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lian, D. Dong, D. Feng and G. He, Org. Electron., 2017, 49, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Guan, Y. Li, X. Yan, H. Ni and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2404–2414 RSC .
G. Lee, S. G. Lee, Y. Chung, G. Y. Bae, S. Lee, S. Ryu and K. Cho, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600158 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Yuanhang Yang	Yuanhang Yang is a fourth-year graduate student from the department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) in the United States. He received a bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Qingdao University and a master's degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Beijing Institute of Petrochemical Technology in China. His current research area is developing soft electronics and medical devices via 3D printing technology, including ink formulation, printing process, post treatment and surface functionalization.
Shun Duan	Prof. Shun Duan graduated from Qingdao University of Science and Technology in China, majoring in pharmaceutical engineering/English, with a bachelor's degree of engineering and a bachelor's degree of arts. In 2014, he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with a Ph.D. degree majoring in materials science and engineering. From 2019 to 2020, he worked at Virginia Commonwealth University as a research scholar. His main research interest is antibacterial materials, which combines active polymerization with natural polymers. In 2021, he was granted as a recipient of the National Science Foundation of China for Excellent Young Scientists.
Hong Zhao	Dr Hong Zhao is currently an associate professor in the Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). She received her Ph.D. degree in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Rutgers University. Before joining VCU in 2014, she worked at the Xerox Research Center, Webster, for about 8 years. Zhao's research areas are highly interdisciplinary, including surface science and surface engineering, transport and self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles, and development of printing processes (e.g., inkjet printing, direct ink writing, electrohydrodynamic printing) for printed functional devices, such as stretchable electronics, magnetic devices, and medical devices.


ITO	0.12 μm thickness	11 Ω sq−1	90%	Brittle	Flat flexible electrodes	
87

Conventional ITO	50.5 Ω sq−1	
88

Graphene	30 nm thickness	460 Ω sq−1	
	Flexible	Solar cells	
89

Printing film < 20 nm in thickness	5 kΩ sq−1–1 MΩ sq−1	>80%	Organic PV cells	
90

rGO	rGO/metal film	18 Ω sq−1	80%	Flexible	Optoelectronic devices	
91

PPy/cellulose	1.7 Ω sq−1	
	Stable	Paper-based devices	
92

CNT	0.0% Nitrogen-doped CNT	3.6 × 10−3 Ω sq−1	
	
	Possibly in energy storage	
93

7.4% Nitrogen-doped CNT	5.5 × 10−3 Ω sq−1	
	
	
	

CuNP	Inkjet printing, sintered at 250 °C	0.88 Ω cm	
	
	LED	
94

CuNW	Purified CuNW	35 Ω sq−1	81%	Stable	Electrode	
95

AgNP	Direct writing, annealing, AgNP ink with 71 wt% solids	1.22 × 10−4–3.64 × 10−5 Ω cm	94.1%	
	Large-area electronics	
96

Screen printing, AgNP on PU	1.64–2.85 Ω sq−1	
	Flexible & stretchable	Wearable sensors	
97

AgNW	AgNW/MM/PET	0.668 Ω sq−1	91.25%	Reliable	Electrodes	
98

AgNW/metal	0.754 Ω sq−1	90.3%	Stable	Electrodes	
99

AgNW/ZnO	11 Ω sq−1	90%	
	Solar cell	
100

AgNW/ATO	18 Ω sq−1	76–82%	Flexible	Solar cell	
101

ATO/AgNWs/ATO	7.1 Ω sq−1	85.7%	Flexible & stable	Wearable electrodes	
102

AgNF	PEDOT:PSS/AgNFs/NOA 63 hybrid	2.12 Ω sq−1	84.65%	Ultra-flexible	Supercapacitor device	
103

PANI/AgF/TPU	1.26 × 10−5 Ω m	
	Flexible	Flexible heater	
104


 	Fig. 1  (a) A conductive fiber during a stretching process. Reprinted from ref. 112, Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier; (b) a pre-stretched flat substrate combined with Ag conductive material. Reprinted from ref. 128, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license; (c) illustration of the wet spinning process. Reprinted from ref. 115, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License; (d) illustration of the dry spinning process. Reprinted from ref. 129, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) illustration of the thermal drawing process. Reprinted from ref. 125, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Public License; (f) illustration of the dip coating process. Reprinted from ref. 130, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial license.	 

 	Fig. 2  Different methods to fabricate AgNW networks.61,140–144 Reprinted from ref. 61, Copyright (2017), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License; reprinted from ref. 140, Copyright (2014), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; reprinted from ref. 145, Copyright (2016), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license; reprinted from ref. 146, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. Reprinted from ref. 147, Copyright (2019), with permission from American Chemical Society. Reprinted from ref. 148, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.	 

Drop casting	AgNW/polyimide (PI) film	Glass	Resistance ∼20 Ω sq−1	Simple steps, likely uneven distribution	
147

Transmittance ∼83%
AgNWs, ultra-long ∼50 μm	PET	Resistance ∼20 Ω sq−1	
180

Aspect ratio > 1000	Transmittance ∼90%
Spin coating	Hot lamination process	Polycarbonate (PC) film	Resistance ∼12.5 Ω sq−1	Uniform distribution, tunable thickness	
181

Transmittance ∼94.5%
AgNWs, diameter ∼52 nm	PET film	Resistance ∼54 Ω sq−1	
182

Aspect ratio ∼1000	Transmittance ∼92%
AgNW/ZnO composite film	PET film	Resistance ∼9 Ω sq−1	
152

Transmittance ∼92%
AgNWs decorated with cobalt nanoparticles	Thermoplastic PI film	Resistance ∼52 Ω sq−1	
183

Transmittance ∼94%
Mayer-rod coating	AgNWS, diameter ∼40 nm	Insulator surface	Resistance ∼30 Ω sq−1	Large area, good alignment	
184

Length ∼25 ± 5 μm
TiO2-coated AgNW film	PET film	Resistance ∼80 Ω sq−1	
185

Diameter ∼10 nm	Transmittance ∼75%
Length ∼80 μm
AgNWs with diameter ∼500 nm	Polycarbonate (PC) film	Resistance ∼12.1 Ω sq−1	
186

Length ∼10 μm	Transmittance ∼89.5%
Hydrogen chloride (HCl) treatment	PET film	Resistance ∼175 Ω sq−1	
187

Transmittance ∼75%
Vacuum filtration and transfer	AgNWs with diameter ∼60 nm	Self-adhesive PET substrate	Resistance ∼13 Ω sq−1	Tunable thickness, small-scale fabrication	
188

Length ∼10 μm	Transmittance ∼67%
AgNWs with diameter ∼20–70 nm	PET film	Resistance ∼4.95 Ω sq−1	
189

Length ∼120 μm	Transmittance ∼81%
AgNWs with diameter ∼90 nm	Mixed esters of cellulose membranes	Resistance ∼50 Ω sq−1	
190

Length ∼10 μm	Transmittance ∼85%
AgNWs with diameter ∼200–250 nm	PDMS film	Resistance < 1.0 Ω sq−1	
191

Length ∼20–30 μm	Cell viability ∼90%
Spray coating	AgNWs with diameter ∼25 nm	Glass	Resistance ∼10 Ω sq−1	Tunable thickness, large area coverage, various substrates	
160

Length ∼90 μm	Transmittance ∼87.4%
Spraying distance ∼12 cm	Organic p-i-n type solar cells	Resistance ∼10.7 Ω sq−1	
160

Moving speed ∼1.5 cm s−1	Transmittance ∼84.3%
Spraying pressure ∼200 mbar
AgNWs with diameter ∼50 nm	PI substrate	Resistance ∼4.64 Ω sq−1	
192

Length ∼20 μm	Transmittance ∼87.3%
Printing	AgNWs with diameter ∼81 ± 30 nm	AgNW/CNF screen printed on PET	Resistance ∼12 ± 5 Ω sq−1	Custom-designed patterns, potential for large-scale production	
193

Length ∼37 ± 19 μm	Transmittance ∼74.8%
AgNWs with diameter ∼25 ± 5 nm	AgNW EHD jet printed on a PET film	Resistance ∼45 Ω sq−1	
174

Length ∼20 ± 5 μm	Transmittance ∼90%
AgNWs with length ∼30 μm	AgNW ink directly printed on silicone	Strain-sensing range 10%–50%; Gauge factor ∼100	
194

Aligned AgNWs
Printing speed ∼40 mm s−1	AgNW screen printed on a PET film	Resistance ∼0.72 Ω sq−1	
195

Printing angle ∼45°	Roughness ∼2.7 to 1.1 μm
AgNWs with diameter ∼20 nm	AgNW ink inkjet printed on a PET film	Resistance ∼13 or 23 Ω sq−1	
196

Length ∼2 to 5 μm	Transmittance ∼81.9% or 83.1%

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of preparing conductive ink for 3D printing. Reprinted from ref. 201, Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier; (b) direct printing the conductive ink with gradient concentration on the cross-section. Reprinted from ref. 208, Copyright (2019), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (c) immersing the 3D structured sample into AgNW suspension. Reprinted from ref. 202, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. (d) AgNPs deposited on 3D printed structures. Reprinted from ref. 20, Copyright (2021), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (e) graphene deposited on 3D printed structure. Reprinted from ref. 207, Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier.	 

Ecoflex 50, AgNWs	Mold, swelling, solution deposition	Hierarchical wrinkled structure	0.3 MPa	470%	
209

PUA, MXene, AgNWs	Spray coating	Multiscale layer structure	11.2 MPa	471%	
210

Leather, AgNWs	Vacuum-assisted filtration	Hierarchical structure	16.7 MPa	66.9%	
211

PET, AgNWs, Graphene	Slot-die roll-to-roll coating	Multiscale layer structure	15 MPa	30%	
212

Nano-fibrillated cellulose, AgNWs	Lipase treatment, Meyer-rod coating	Cellulose structure	80 MPa	8%	
213

Vanillin based vitrimers, AgNWs	Vacuum filtration, lamination	Sandwich structure	0.6 MPa	200%	
214


 	Fig. 4  (a) AgNW film model with different lengths on substrate. Reprinted from ref. 216, Copyright (2017), with permission from CC BY license; (b) transmittance and sheet resistance of AgNW film with different lengths. Reprinted from ref. 216, Copyright (2017), with permission from CC BY license; (c) AgNW film model with different diameters on substrate. Reprinted from ref. 221, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license; (d) transmittance and sheet resistance of AgNW film with different diameters. Reprinted from ref. 221, Copyright (2018), with permission from Creative Commons CC BY license.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Resistance of random AgNWs and aligned AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 222, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) schematic diagram of AgNW alignment during the Mayer-rod coating process. Reprinted from ref. 225, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) schematic diagram to form aligned AgNWs during the capillary printing process. Reprinted from ref. 222, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) AgNW alignment during the LB process. Reprinted from ref. 233, Copyright (2003), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) process schematic of AgNW alignment during the dip coating process, Reprinted from ref. 239, Copyright (2020), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (f) schematic diagram of an AgNW oriented by the electric field. Reprinted from ref. 243, Copyright (2019), with permission from AIP Publishing; (g) schematic diagram of magnetic field-aligned AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 251, Copyright (2015), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Morphology of AgNW before and after the thermal annealing welding process. Reprinted from ref. 258, Copyright (2019), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) resistance of AgNW film with continuous thermal rate. Reprinted from ref. 259, Copyright (2021), with permission from Creative Commons Attribution License; (c) current density varying with contact morphology by Finite-element simulation. Reprinted from ref. 265, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) and (e) morphology and electrical property before and after the electrical welding process. Reprinted from ref. 262, Copyright (2014), with permission from Springer Nature; (f) illustration of the electron beam process. Reprinted from ref. 267, Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society; (g) relationship between sheet resistance and irradiation time. Reprinted from ref. 268, Copyright (2015), with permission from Springer Nature; (h) comparison between thermal annealing and electron beam welding. Reprinted from ref. 267, Copyright (2016), with permission from American Chemical Society; (i) morphologies of AgNW film after different irradiation times. Reprinted from ref. 268, Copyright (2015), with permission from Springer Nature.	 
O2 + 2H2O + 4Ag ↔ 4Ag+ + 4OH−

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the halide welding process. Reprinted from ref. 270, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (b) schematic diagram of silver ions deposition during the welding process. Reprinted from ref. 270, Copyright (2017), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) sheet resistance variation of AgNWs before and after FeCl3 treatment. Reprinted from ref. 277, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (d) electroless welding of AgNW in silver–ammonia solution. Reprinted from ref. 141, Copyright (2016), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (e) morphologies and sheet resistance difference between the electroless welded samples and untreated samples. Reprinted from ref. 141, Copyright (2016), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (f) schematic diagram of the electroplating process of AgNW networks. Reprinted from ref. 275, Copyright (2022), with permission from Springer Nature; (g) morphology of AgNWs coated with Ni shell. Reprinted from ref. 275, Copyright (2022), with permission from Springer Nature; (h) SEM images of pure AgNW and Ni-coated AgNW. Reprinted from ref. 276, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature; (i) schematic diagram of the AgNWs connected by a Ni bridge. Reprinted from ref. 276, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illustration of UVA-induced welding of AgNWs. Reprinted from ref. 283, Copyright (2019), with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (b) heat generation at a connection point with varying light wavelength. Reprinted from ref. 285, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Mechanical flexibility of AgNW/graphene hybrid film. Reprinted from ref. 295, Copyright (2021), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) sheet resistance varying with bending cycle. Reprinted from ref. 294, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) the sheet resistance of different samples versus time when exposure to air condition for 60 days. Reprinted from ref. 277, Copyright (2019), with permission from Creative Common CC BY license; (d) illustration and SEM images of AgNW network and AgNW/SWCNT hybrid structures. Reprinted from ref. 294, Copyright (2014), with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Illustration and SEM images of AgNW film coated with ZnO. Reprinted from ref. 302, Copyright (2014), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) schematic diagram of preparing a TiO2-coated AgNW network. Reprinted from ref. 307, Copyright (2018), with permission from American Chemical Society; (c) sheet resistance of different samples changing with time under different temperature condition. Reprinted from ref. 304, Copyright (2015), with permission from American Chemical Society; (d) morphology of rGO-coated AgNW film. Reprinted from ref. 310, Copyright (2012), with permission from American Chemical Society; (e) sheet resistance of rGO-coated AgNW films varying with time. Reprinted from ref. 310, Copyright (2012), with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of transparent Ag electrode. Reprinted from ref. 334, Copyright (2019), with permission from Springer Nature; (b) diagram of wearing a flexible sensor on human's wrist. Reprinted from ref. 332, Copyright (2016), with permission from Springer Nature; (c) AgNW film prepared heater showing a high flexibility. Reprinted from ref. 335, Copyright (2020), with permission from Springer Nature; (d) prototype schematic of a touch screen by adopting AgNW film. Reprinted from ref. 331, Copyright (2011), with permission from IOP Publishing; (e) fabricating a flexible OLED by using AgNW network. Reprinted from ref. 333, Copyright (2018), with permission from Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
