Introductory lecture: sunlight-driven water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction by heterogeneous semiconductor systems as key processes in artifici ...  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6FD00221H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00221H
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 11-35Introductory lecture: sunlight-driven water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction by heterogeneous semiconductor systems as key processes in artificial photosynthesis

        
          
            Takashi 
            Hisatomi
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Kazunari 
            Domen
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical System Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. E-mail: domen@chemsys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp;  Fax: +81-3-5841-8838;   Tel: +81-3-5841-1148
bJapan Technological Research Association of Artificial Photosynthetic Chemical Process (ARPChem), 2-11-9 Iwamotocho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0032, Japan
Received 
      17th October 2016
    , Accepted 7th December 2016First published on 7th December 2016AbstractBoth solar water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction using semiconductor systems have been studied as important components of artificial photosynthesis. This paper describes the various photovoltaic-powered electrochemical, photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic processes. An overview of the state-of-the-art is presented along with a summary of recent research approaches. A concept developed by our own research group in which fixed particulate photocatalysts are applied to scalable solar water splitting is discussed. Finally, a description of a possible artificial photosynthesis plant is presented, along with a discussion of the economic aspects of operating such a plant and potential reactor designs.
1. Introduction
Global energy consumption has grown at an average rate of 2.3% since 2000, reaching 17 TW in 2015 according to the BP Statistical Review of World Energy.1 It is predicted that energy consumption will continue to increase to 22 TW in 2030. Carbon dioxide emissions are also predicted to increase over the next several decades because fossil fuels will account for more than 80% of this energy. Therefore, it is imperative to develop renewable energy resources that are available on a large scale. Solar energy has attracted much interest as a sustainable and clean energy resource, because the amount of solar energy reaching the surface of the Earth, as estimated from the solar constant and the Earth’s albedo, is 1.3 × 105 TW, a value that is larger than the human energy consumption by more than three orders of magnitude. Successful harvesting of solar energy could therefore solve both energy and environmental problems and contribute to the realisation of a sustainable society. A high solar energy conversion efficiency will be necessary to produce sufficiently large amounts of hydrogen per unit surface area. However, this efficiency is just one of many essential requirements. The intensity of solar radiation is low and fluctuates over time. In addition, the regions in which solar energy is harvested are typically localised and can be distant from the regions where the energy is actually consumed. Therefore, technologies for the conversion of solar energy are important, but so are methods of storing and transporting the sunlight-derived energy. Other factors, such as cost, scalability and compatibility with existing and developing technologies, also need to be taken into account.
Since the pioneering works by Fujishima, Honda and their colleagues,2–4 solar water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction by semiconductor photocatalysts and photoelectrodes have been studied as key processes in artificial photosynthesis systems producing renewable hydrogen as a solar fuel, and in fixing carbon dioxide to synthesize valuable chemicals on a large scale. Hydrogen is both storable and transportable and can be used as a fuel for hydrogen engines and fuel cells, generating only environmentally benign water as a by-product during oxidation reactions that proceed under mild conditions. In addition, hydrogen is an important feedstock in the chemical industry. Carbon dioxide may also be converted into valuable organic chemicals both directly via photocatalytic and (photo)electrochemical reactions and indirectly via catalytic processes utilising hydrogen produced from water.5,6
This paper describes photovoltaic-powered electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic applications that can potentially be scaled up to produce artificial photosynthesis systems. Outlines of artificial photosynthesis processes, associated economic aspects and reactor designs are presented. Subsequently, the state-of-the-art regarding water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction and recent research approaches are provided, along with a review of several important literature publications7–9 that provide accurate assessments of the efficiency and activity of various systems. Finally, we present our own concept involving the fixation of particulate photocatalysts for scalable solar water splitting. This paper does not review reactions involving sacrificial reagents or external applied bias, and the more fundamental aspects of photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry, such as the physical chemistry of semiconductors and behaviours of photoexcited carriers, are not described either. Readers interested in such fundamental mechanistic aspects are encouraged to refer to several relevant textbooks.10–12
2. An overview of artificial photosynthesis

Fig. 1 presents an overview of the anticipated design of an artificial photosynthesis plant, as suggested by Maeda et al. in 2010.5 If hydrogen were to be produced in this fashion over an area of 25 km2 at a solar energy conversion efficiency of 10% in a region where the solar insolation is intense, 570 tons of hydrogen could be produced from 5100 tons of water per day. It has been estimated that tens of thousands of these solar hydrogen plants would be needed to provide one-third of the global energy requirements in 2050. For this reason, the scalability of solar hydrogen production systems is an important concern. Hydrogen is potentially storable and transportable and thus could be used in various locations and times, as desired. However, because hydrogen gas is explosive, it is also reasonable to consider converting hydrogen into liquid fuels such as alcohols, chemical hydrides and/or ammonia via catalytic reactions5,6 prior to use, as a safety precaution. The conversion of hydrogen and toluene into methylcyclohexane at hydrogen production sites has also been suggested, with the subsequent recovery of the hydrogen at the site where it is to be used, followed by recycling of the toluene.13 Methylcyclohexane and toluene are liquids at ambient temperature and toluene can be sequentially dehydrogenated and hydrogenated using present-day technology, owing to progress in the performance and understanding of dehydrogenation catalysts.14,15
 Fig. 1  Possible scheme for large-scale H2 production via solar water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The term “solar energy conversion efficiency” can have different meanings depending on the research field. As an example, in the field of photovoltaic (PV) cells, the solar energy conversion efficiency may mean the conversion efficiency of solar energy to electric energy at the maximum power point. In the field of artificial photosynthesis, PV cells are combined with external electrolysis and photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems to produce chemicals from water and carbon dioxide. Because there are efficiency losses associated with overpotential and deviations of the operational points from the maximum power points in the power-to-chemical conversion processes, it would be preferable to use a term that specifically describes the efficiency of solar energy conversion into the chemicals serving as energy carriers.
In this regard, solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency (STC) may be defined as follows:  where r, ΔGr, Psun and S are the production rate of the chemical of interest, the Gibbs energy of the reaction, the energy flux of the sunlight, and the area of the reactor. Considering the ASTM-G173 AM1.5 global tilt (AM1.5G) spectrum, which includes light that is both scattered and reflected from the surroundings, the solar energy flux is 1.0 × 103 W m−2. The specific term for the efficiency of solar energy conversion into hydrogen is the solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion efficiency, or STH.16,17 The Gibbs energy change associated with the water splitting reaction under standard conditions is +237 kJ mol−1 at 298 K, and this same amount of energy is stored in the hydrogen because one mole of hydrogen is produced from one mole of water. The Gibbs energies of carbon dioxide reduction to carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methanol (CH3OH) and methane (CH4) are +257, +270, +702 and +818 kJ mol−1, respectively, at 298 K. These values may be used for estimation of STC. It should be noted that the STC value indicates the efficiency of the reaction but does not reflect the efficiency of post-reaction processes such as product separation, purification and compression (in the case of gaseous products), storage and transportation. Nor does this value provide any information regarding the cost and scale of the system. However, it is vital to have information regarding these post-reaction processes and the costs of the related facilities to assess the practicality of using various chemical products as energy carriers and feedstocks, since the related energy and monetary expenditures can cancel out the energy and value gained by the initial reaction. Therefore, although STC values ascertained from laboratory-scale experiments are an important initial aspect of investigating a photosynthesis process, they do not necessarily establish the viability of the process.
3. Economic aspects and reactor designs
Studies of artificial photosynthesis processes must consider not only scientific advancements but also economic viability and scalability. In 2011, the United States Department of Energy (US-DOE) reported that the maximum cost of hydrogen in 2020 that would make this a viable fuel would be 2–4 USD per kg. At present, the cost target for 2020 for hydrogen generated by PEC is 5.7 USD per kg, with further reduction to 2.1 USD per kg anticipated in the more distant future. In 2008, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) of Japan suggested a similar value of 40 JPY per N m3 as a hydrogen cost target in 2020.
Sayama has stated that the unit energy cost (per MJ) of hydrogen could be a versatile and reasonable means of comparing energy produced by various means, because this cost should be the most important criterion of whether renewable energy could actually prevail in a free market.18Table 1 shows the unit energy costs of various energy resources,18 from which it can be seen that the unit energy costs of fossil fuels were 1.0–1.5 JPY per MJ in 2010, and that the unit energy costs of energy from renewable sources, such as PV, wind power and biomass are all more expensive than that of fossil fuel at present. Although the unit energy cost of fossil fuels is predicted to rise in future, significant reductions in the renewable unit energy costs are needed, especially in the case of hydrogen produced by PV-assisted electrochemical and PEC water splitting. Recently, Shaner et al. raised a similar concern.19 According to their analysis, even though remarkable STH values have been attained, PV-assisted electrochemical and PEC methods based on existing technologies will never be cost-competitive with electrolysis using electricity supplied by nuclear or thermal power coupled with carbon capture and storage technologies. Therefore, even greater advances in PEC technology and system cost reductions are needed.
Table 1 Comparison of unit energy costsa




Energy
Cost/JPY per MJ
Remark





a Adapted with permission from ref. 18.





Gasoline
1.8–2.6
In 2010


Petroleum
1.4–1.8
In 2010


Liquid natural gas
0.7–1.7
In 2010


Coal
<0.3
In 2010


Fossil fuel (average)
1.0–1.5
In 2010


Hydrogen
2.4
Target in 2020


PV
6.4–10.6
In 2013


PV
1.9
Target in 2030


PV + water-electrolysis
10.9
In 2014


Wind power
2.6–6.4
In 2010, estimated to be similar in 2030


Biomass-fired power
4.8–8.9
In 2010


Biomass-ethanol
1.7–4.3
Target




There are several options for solar water splitting utilising semiconductor technologies, such as PV-assisted electrochemical, PEC and photocatalytic water splitting, as shown in Fig. 2. In addition, PEC systems may be integrated with PV cells so that sufficient voltage can be applied between the (photo)electrodes. Similar schemes are possible in the case of carbon dioxide reduction, by replacing the hydrogen evolution reaction with the desired carbon dioxide reduction reaction. Here, it is important to utilise water as the electron donor in the carbon reduction reaction to produce chemical energy. The use of reducing reagents such as triethanolamine and methanol may enhance the apparent quantum yield (AQY) of the carbon dioxide reduction reaction and can be beneficial in terms of basic scientific research; however, these approaches are not practical as they significantly lower the STC.
 Fig. 2  Schematics of various solar-driven water splitting systems. (a) PV-assisted electrochemical water splitting, (b–d) PEC water splitting using (b) a photoanode and a counter cathode, (c) a photocathode and a counter anode, and (d) series-connected photoanode and photocathode, (e) photocatalytic water splitting via one-step excitation, and (f) photocatalytic water splitting via two-step excitation. In PEC water splitting, PV cells may be integrated into the circuit in series. 
Sayama et al. summarized the cost, complexity and efficiency of various solar energy conversion systems in the graphic shown in Fig. 3.20 Broadly speaking, PV-assisted electrolysis systems can split water more efficiently than PEC and photocatalytic systems. In terms of functions, charge separation (or photovoltage generation) and electrolysis are completely separated in such systems, and the PV cell produces a photovoltage that is greater than the water–electrolysis voltage by a suitable amount (1.23 V under standard conditions at 298 K). In such systems, the cathode and anode of an electrolyser are connected to the PV cells and produce hydrogen and oxygen, respectively. In principle, the components of this system could be individually fine-tuned for optimal performance, although in practice the components and materials required for truly efficient solar water splitting are too expensive to be cost-competitive.19 The charge separation and electrolysis functions are coupled at the semiconductor/liquid junction in PEC systems, while solely reduction or oxidation reactions occur at the surface of the photoelectrode. PEC systems may be integrated with PV cells to enhance the STH, although this approach results in a system that is closer to a costly PV-assisted electrolyser. In photocatalyst suspension systems, the charge separation and redox reactions are integrated. Following photoexcitation, the reduction and oxidation of reactants occur simultaneously on the surfaces of semiconductor particles that are typically modified with cocatalysts. Therefore, the number of system components can be reduced. One associated disadvantage is that opportunities for fine-tuning of the respective factors may be limited. The STH values of particulate photocatalyst systems are currently one order of magnitude lower than those of PV-assisted systems21 and there are only a limited number of photocatalytic systems capable of splitting water under visible light in a stable manner. Recently, an increasing number of monolithic PV-assisted electrodes without wiring, PV-assisted PEC devices, and particulate photocatalysts with semiconductor/semiconductor and semiconductor/metal junctions have been reported. The distinction between these various systems based on their functions can be ambiguous because devices such as these, which incorporate nonspontaneous reactions, all rely on the basic physics of photoexcited charge carriers in semiconductors.
 Fig. 3  Technological map showing various approaches to solar energy conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Courtesy of AIST. 
Pinaud et al. generated a technoeconomical analysis of the cost of hydrogen when produced by various types of photocatalytic and PEC systems as of 2013 (Fig. 4).22 Assuming an STH of 10% and a lifetime of 10 years for suspended photocatalysts and planar photoelectrodes, the price of hydrogen was estimated to be 1.6–10.4 USD per kg. Suspended photocatalyst systems with simple plastic bag reactors are expected to be less expensive than PEC systems and could potentially meet the target hydrogen price of 2–4 USD per kg suggested by the US-DOE; however, it is challenging to achieve both a high STH and the safe separation of hydrogen and oxygen with these devices. In contrast, PEC systems can achieve high STH values but have the associated challenge of high capital costs. Further improvement in STH as well as reductions in the costs of fabricating these devices are therefore required, in addition to demonstrations of long-term stability. Recently, Sathre et al. reported the life cycle system modelling of PEC water splitting technology, ranging from cells to modules, panels, fields and eventually a full scale facility with an area of 190 km2 producing an annual average of 1 GW of energy (based on 610 tons of H2 generated per day at the higher heating value).23 This analysis considered numerous factors, including (i) the energy embodied in the active cell materials, (ii) the energy embodied in the inactive module materials, (iii) the energy intensity associated with active cell fabrication, (iv) the energy intensity involved in the PEC module assembly, (v) the initial energy required for production of the balance of the system, and (vi) the energy required for ongoing operations and end-of-life processes. The system energy balance was determined at three different levels of energy input so as to assess the effects of various factors on the overall viability. These calculations showed that increasing the STH and extending the cell life span were the primary requirements for the net energy viability of PEC water splitting technology. Therefore, additional energy and material inputs could be allowable on an overall basis if the STH and cell life span are improved.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of four reactor types: (a) type 1 reactor cross-section showing the particle slurry contained within bags separated by an access driveway, (b) type 2 reactor cross-section showing the particle slurries contained within bag assemblies with alternating full and half size bags for O2 and H2 evolution, (c) type 3 reactor design showing the encased composite panel oriented toward the sun with buoyant separation of gases, and (d) type 4 reactor design with an offset parabolic cylinder receiver that concentrates sunlight onto a linear PEC cell. Drawings not to scale. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013. 
It is worth considering the efficiencies required from PEC and photocatalytic systems during water splitting in order to achieve a 10% STH, in terms of the AQY and the irradiation wavelength. Here, the AQY value represents the fraction of photons that are used for water splitting relative to the quantity of photons that are provided to the photocatalytic system.17,24Fig. 5 presents the relationships between STH values for photocatalytic water splitting via one-step excitation and the wavelengths of photons available in AM 1.5 radiation at different AQY values, assuming that two molecules of water are decomposed into two molecules of hydrogen and one molecule of oxygen using four photons at an AQY of unity.24 These plots demonstrate that one-step excitation water splitting at a constant efficiency using wavelengths shorter than 600, 700 and 800 nm requires an AQY of 62, 40 and 30%, respectively. In the case of semiconducting photocatalysts and photoelectrodes that absorb only UV light (λ < 400 nm), the visible portion of sunlight is not available. In addition, the majority of photon energy in the UV region is dissipated as heat such that these devices that are active solely under UV light can achieve a maximum STH of only 1.7%, even with an AQY of unity. If a two-step excitation process is considered, as occurs in Z-scheme water splitting systems (Fig. 2f), the AQY would have to double. It is therefore evident that it will be necessary to develop systems that can split water in response to irradiation by long wavelength visible and near-infrared light.
 Fig. 5  Relationships between the photocatalytic water splitting STH values and photon wavelengths at different AQYs. These data assume that two water molecules are split into two hydrogen molecules and one oxygen molecule in a four-photon process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. © 2014, Springer Science + Business Media New York. 
4. Experimental demonstrations of water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction
4.1. PV and PEC systems
PV and PEC devices and electrocatalysts for water splitting have been studied and reviewed intensively,25,26 and the STH values of various PV-assisted electrochemical and PEC water splitting processes were recently summarized by Ager et al.27 In 2014, Luo et al. reported an STH of 12.3% using two series-connected CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells placed side-by-side and connected with electrodes composed of a NiFe layered double hydroxide film immersed in a 1 M aqueous NaOH solution.28 Compared to a Pt/Ni electrode in 1 M NaOH, this layered electrode exhibited a larger overpotential during the hydrogen evolution reaction but a smaller overpotential during the oxygen evolution reaction. As a consequence, the layered electrode showed almost the same overpotential as a Pt/Ni electrode during water electrolysis using a two-electrode configuration. The series-connected perovskite solar cells generated an open circuit voltage of 2.0 V and exhibited a maximum solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency of 15.7% at approximately 1.6 V. The output voltage at the maximum power point was close to the expected operational voltage of the PV-assisted electrolyser system. This system therefore maintained a high STH, although the short lifetime of the solar cell was determined to represent a deficit. Luo et al. also employed a bipolar membrane to separate an anolyte and catholyte having different pH values, and improved the STH to 12.7%.29 The majority of non-noble metal and metal oxide electrodes dissolve in acidic aqueous solutions, and the use of a bipolar membrane in an electrolyser removes the necessity to immerse the anode and cathode in the same electrolyte solution and thus expands the range of materials that can be used and provides more opportunities to optimise the working environments of each electrode. In this work, CoP was used as the cathode for hydrogen evolution in a 0.5 M aqueous H2SO4 solution and a NiFe layered double hydroxide film was employed as the anode for oxygen evolution in a 1 M aqueous KOH solution.
In 2015, Bonke et al. reported an STH of 22.4% using GaInP/GaAs/Ge multi-junction solar cells and Ni foam electrodes in various electrolyte solutions under simulated sunlight irradiation at an intensity of 100 suns.30 Soon after, Nakamura et al. reported an STH of 24.4% in an outdoor field test using 500-fold concentrator PV modules composed of InGaP/GaAs/Ge three-junction cells combined with polymer–electrolyte electrochemical cells.31 The STH of the overall device was described as the product of four elementary efficiencies:  where Psun is the solar energy received by the PV module, Pm is the maximum power output of the PV module, Pop is the power output at the operational point, Vop and Iop are the operational voltage and current of the electrolyser, respectively, and IH2 is the current attributable to hydrogen evolution. Based on these definitions, Pop is the product of Vop and Iop. Here, ηPV, ηop, ηEC and ηF correspond to the solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency of the PV modules, the matching efficiency between the maximal power point of the PV modules and the actual operational point, the efficiency of the electrolyser associated with the overpotential of the water-electrolysis, and the faradaic efficiency of the water splitting. In this system, the three-junction solar cell yielded an ηPV of 31%, while the ηop was maximised to a value of unity by optimising the number of PV and electrochemical cells connected in series, even though the same elements were employed. Otherwise, the mismatch between the operational power point and the maximum power point would have reduced ηop, and accordingly the STH, by 40%. In contrast, the ηEC value was already close to the typical upper limit of 0.83 that can be estimated from the ratio of the standard Gibbs reaction energy to the standard reaction enthalpy at 298 K, because of the relatively small current density in a typical electrolyser. Nevertheless, it was noted that further reductions in the overpotential in the low current density region would still be beneficial with regard to the cost reduction of the polymer–electrolyte electrochemical cells. More recently, an STH reaching 30% was reported by Jia et al. using an InGaP/GaAs/GaInNAs(Sb) triple-junction solar cell yielding an ηPV of 39% and series-connected two polymer–electrolyte membrane electrolysers.32
PV-assisted electrochemical systems have also been used to explore new system configurations and to study mass transport in electrolyte solutions. Kumari et al. investigated seawater vapour (photo)electrolysis using commercial proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysers coupled with a triple-junction amorphous Si PV cell at various values of relative humidity (Fig. 6).33 At a relative humidity of 80%, representing the typical global relative humidity over the oceans (75–85%), the PEM electrolysers sustained a current density exceeding 10 mA cm−2. This value is sufficiently high in comparison to the typical photocurrent densities observed in PEC cells. The sustainable current density was found to decrease with the relative humidity because of dehydration of the membrane. Notably, this PEM electrolyser, when supplied with seawater vapour, maintained its current density for more than three days, while the same device supplied with liquid seawater did not, as the result of poisoning of the electrodes. However, the vapour (photo)electrolysis system exhibited a low faradaic efficiency of approximately 60% because of the crossover of generated oxygen across the membrane and the competing oxygen reduction reaction. In addition, the faradaic efficiency of the hydrogen evolution reaction became zero when air was used as a feed gas, because the oxygen reduction reaction at the cathode occurred more efficiently than the hydrogen evolution reaction. Kumari et al. has suggested employing a thicker membrane to suppress the gas crossover because the ion flux across the membrane surpassed the photocurrent density.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of an electrolysis cell using matched projected portions consisting of triple-junction amorphous Si (tj-a-Si) and an associated membrane electrode assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016. 
Mass transport issues have also been discussed in connection with the use of PV-assisted electrochemical systems. It is often assumed that the anodes and cathodes in PV-assisted electrochemical and PEC systems will be separated by membranes so as to individually collect the hydrogen and oxygen that are generated. However, when a membrane is included, a pH gradient is generated between the anode and cathode during the electrolysis, raising the theoretical electrolysis voltage according to the Nernst equation. As a result, the electrolyser efficiency (ηEC) is decreased. The effect of the pH gradient is expected to become especially significant as the distance between the anode and cathode is increased. Modestino et al. reported that the decrease in the efficiency of an electrolyser in a buffered neutral aqueous solution can be effectively suppressed by circulating the electrolyte solution between the anode and cathode compartments at an appropriate rate (Fig. 7).34 However, excessive circulation led to crossover of the hydrogen and oxygen being generated and so lowered the STH. It has also been reported by Bosserez et al. that flat PV-electrocatalyst assemblies are not scalable because of the long ion transport distances that are associated with scaling up.35 They analysed the ionic transport resistance loss in porous monolithic electrochemical devices based on a model simulating solar water splitting at 10% STH, comparing the effects of electrolyte concentration, pore sizes and pore intervals as controlled by laser ablation. This work found that the ohmic loss could be reduced to less than 100 mV by employing a pore spacing of 1 mm or less in conjunction with an electrolyte (KOH) concentration of 0.25 M or higher. Furthermore, it was determined that the ohmic loss across the membrane became greater than that over the surface of the membrane when the pore spacing was reduced below 1 mm. The use of thinner monolithic devices was suggested as a means of balancing the active area and the ionic conductivity. Repetition of a small base unit was also investigated during the scale-up demonstration of a PV-assisted electrochemical system by Turan et al.36
 Fig. 7  Current density plots demonstrating that a recirculating stream in an electrolyser allows the device to function stably and continuously. Without recirculation the device performance deteriorates as concentration gradients form across the cell, and ionic species are depleted in the oxygen-evolution side. The inset is a schematic representation of the parallel-plate solar hydrogen generator used in the study. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013. 
PV-assisted electrochemical systems have also been applied to carbon dioxide reduction reactions. Schreier et al. reported the reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide using three series-connected perovskite solar cells, a Au cathode and an IrO2 anode in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M aqueous NaHCO3 solution.37 The solar-to-CO energy conversion efficiency of this device exceeded 6.5% while the faradaic efficiency was 80–90%. In addition, the concurrent evolution of hydrogen took place at a faradaic efficiency of 10.5%. The net STC, considering both carbon monoxide and hydrogen production, exceeded 7%. Arai et al. reported the reduction of carbon dioxide to formate with an STC of 4.6% using a porous ruthenium complex polymer (p-RuCP) as the CO2 reduction catalyst, iridium oxide (IrOx) as the water oxidation catalyst and a triple-junction composed of amorphous silicon–germanium (SiGe-jn) as the light absorber (Fig. 8).38 This solar cell generated an open-circuit voltage of 2.1 V and the IrOx catalyst selectively oxidised water to oxygen without decomposing the resulting formate. The primary key to achieving efficient carbon dioxide reduction even in the presence of O2 was the use of a metal complex catalyst having a low overpotential for carbon dioxide reduction in conjunction with a carbon cloth that preferentially adsorbed carbon dioxide as a support for the catalyst.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP monolithic tablet-shaped device for CO2 photoreduction, and (B) time course of the generation of formate during the CO2 photoreduction reaction using IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP under simulated solar light irradiation (1 sun, AM1.5, 0.25 cm2). The IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP monolith was immersed in a single-compartment quartz reactor filled with a CO2-saturated phosphate buffer solution (pH 6.4). Reprinted from ref. 38. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In recent years, the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide into ethylene by copper electrodes has also been attracting interest.39–41 An ethylene selectivity of 60% was obtained at −0.9 V vs. RHE when using a Cu electrode treated with oxygen plasma, although a large overpotential was required.40 The data suggested that the presence of stable Cu+ species was important with regard to enhancing the ethylene selectivity while suppressing methane formation. It was also determined that the product selectivity could be significantly altered by varying both the size of and interparticle distance between Cu particles, presumably because of mass transport effects.41
PEC systems for sunlight-driven water splitting have been studied and reviewed extensively,7,22,23,25–27 and readers are encouraged to refer to these articles to obtain information regarding advancements and challenges associated with PEC systems. One recent article points out the potential systematic errors in the evaluation of PEC performance in typical experiments using an artificial light source.7 As an example, the power spectra of solar simulators cannot match the actual power spectrum of sunlight, even though the net energy flux can be adjusted to be identical. This mismatch in the power spectra directly affects the resulting STH values, and such errors become more significant in tandem configurations because such devices are based on a fine balance between the photocurrents in each absorber. In addition, the three-dimensional intensity of an artificial light source will vary significantly with position because these sources tend to be point or line light sources and do not emit parallel rays. Depending on the structures of reactors and electrodes, incident light may also be focused on or reflected into light absorbing semiconductors. Döscher et al. noted that the use of epoxy as insulation for electrodes could lead to unintentional additional illumination.7 Therefore, researchers are strongly recommended to confirm the consistency of the STH values and the IPCE spectrum using electrodes of a reasonable size. It has also been suggested that the net power or photon flux and the power spectra of solar simulators should be compared with those of the standard solar spectrum.
Most PEC systems are powered by PV cells as a means of achieving a high STH value. However, once external PV cells are integrated, PEC systems have little to no advantage over PV-assisted electrochemical systems, because PV cells directly integrated with electrolysers are able to operate more efficiently and with greater stability and reliability. The usefulness of the PEC approach hinges on whether or not PEC cells that can achieve adequate STH values without PV cells can be fabricated in an inexpensive and scalable manner. These authors’ group has studied particulate semiconductor photoelectrodes, because such systems could potentially be produced using scalable, inexpensive solution processes. In 2013, Minegishi et al. reported particle transfer as a versatile and controllable technology for efficient particulate photoelectrode fabrication (Fig. 9).42 In addition, particulate SrTiO3 photoanodes have been found to perform as efficiently as single-crystalline SrTiO3 photoanodes when obtained using a particle transfer technique.43 Particle transfer technology is also applicable to the fabrication of photoelectrodes made of standard particulate semiconductors, including narrow band gap (oxy)nitrides and (oxy)chalcogenides.42 The authors’ group has demonstrated that BaTaO2N photoanodes having an absorption edge wavelength of 660 nm and La5Ti2Cu0.9Ag0.1S5O7 photocathodes with an absorption edge wavelength of 710 nm begin to generate photocurrents attributable to oxygen evolution at +0.7 V vs. RHE and hydrogen evolution at +0.9 V vs. RHE, respectively.44,45 Because BaTaO2N photoanodes and La5Ti2Cu0.9Ag0.1S5O7 photocathodes generate photocurrents at the same electrode potential, a series connection arrangement of these photoelectrodes is capable of splitting water photoelectrochemically without any applied voltage from PV cells, exhibiting an initial STH of approximately 0.1%.45 To improve the STH of such unassisted PEC cells, it will be very important to improve the onset potential of the PEC water splitting for the respective photoanodes and photocathodes. As described further on, particle transfer technology has also been extended to the fabrication of particulate photocatalyst sheets.46–48
 Fig. 9  Schematic summarizing the particle transfer method of fabricating photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
4.2. Suspended photocatalyst systems
Kudo et al. has published a general review of water splitting by heterogeneous photocatalysts, including a discussion of the basis of photocatalytic water splitting, experimental procedures and a survey of heterogeneous photocatalyst materials.49 Fabian et al. reported that the recent progress in photocatalytic water splitting systems appears to have been primarily in terms of the apparent quantum efficiency,21 because the STH values for photocatalytic systems have been rarely reported. In fact, photocatalytic activity has been conventionally reported on the basis of gas evolution rates (often divided incorrectly by the mass of photocatalyst) as observed under specific reaction conditions, including various types and light sources having different apertures. As pointed out by Qureshi et al.,8 photocatalysis is initiated by the absorption of photons, and so the reaction conditions should be tuned such that incident photons can be used in the most efficient manner. Under such conditions, the photocatalytic reaction rate should not be dependent on the mass of the photocatalyst. Therefore, if the activity appears to be dependent on the mass of the photocatalyst, the reaction rate must be influenced by processes occurring in the dark state, such as mass transport and/or adsorption and desorption. The authors have also published catalytic and kinetic perspectives on photocatalytic water splitting, together with brief discussions of some photocatalysts.24 The apparent activation energy of photocatalytic water splitting as well as the isotope effect are relatively small and insensitive to the specific reactants when the AQY is low (which is the case for most photocatalytic reactions), presumably because the supply of photoexcited carriers to surface active sites dominates the net reaction rate.
TiO2 and SrTiO3 were first reported to be active for photocatalytic water splitting in 1980.50–52 Subsequently, various other oxide photocatalysts were found to be highly active for the water splitting reaction under UV irradiation. As an example, NaTaO3 doped with La and loaded with a NiO cocatalyst53 and Ga2O3 doped with Zn and Ca and loaded with a Rh2−yCryO3 cocatalyst54 have been shown to decompose water into hydrogen and oxygen stoichiometrically with AQY values of 56% at 270 nm and 71% at 254 nm, respectively. More recently, it was found that SrTiO3 doped with Al in the presence of a SrCl2 flux and loaded with a Rh2−yCryO3 cocatalyst shows an AQY of 30% at 360 nm.55 These photocatalysts are, however, not applicable to solar energy conversion because of their short absorption edge wavelengths. The potential of oxide semiconductor photocatalysts for solar energy conversion is generally limited by their large intrinsic band gaps.49 Accordingly, doped oxides and non-oxide materials have been studied as visible light-driven photocatalysts. Solid solutions of GaN and ZnO ((Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx)) loaded with appropriate hydrogen evolution cocatalysts have been reported to be active during the water splitting reaction under visible light of up to approximately 500 nm (ref. 5, 56 and 57) and, in 2010, the AQY for the overall water splitting at 410 nm was improved to 5.1%.5 In addition, the long-term stability of the (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) photocatalyst was studied over six months.58 This work determined that coloading of the photocatalyst with an oxygen evolution cocatalyst suppressed the deactivation of the material that otherwise results from self-oxidation by photoexcited holes. Overall water splitting under visible light irradiation was also reported in 2013 using SrTiO3 codoped with Rh and Sb and loaded with IrO2, with an AQY of 0.1% at 420 nm.59 The first report of water splitting via one-step excitation up to 600 nm was based on using LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N.60–62 As well, modification of the oxynitride surface with oxide layers so as to control redox reactions and stabilise the material was found to be vital to activating narrow band gap semiconductor materials (Fig. 10). More recently, C3N4 loaded with Pt, PtOx and CoOx was also reported to be active for water splitting under visible light, representing the first-ever metal-free semiconductor.63
 Fig. 10  Reaction mechanism for water splitting on a surface-coated photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Some particulate photocatalysts have also been applied to carbon dioxide reduction. However, the materials involved have been limited to wide band gap oxide semiconductors, such as ALa4Ti4O15 (A = Ca, Sr and Ba)64 Ga2O3(ref. 65) and some layered double hydroxides.66,67 When discussing these reactions, it is important to identify the carbon source and the electron donor. Yui et al. noted that particulate semiconductors readily adsorbed organics from the ambient atmosphere and thus careful pre-treatment is necessary to accurately investigate carbon dioxide reduction.9 In a study by this same group, the production of methane was observed over an untreated TiO2 photocatalyst because of the photo-Kolbe reaction of adsorbed acetic acid. It was also shown to be important to assess both the photocatalyst and the cocatalyst following the reaction. Pd deposited as a cocatalyst was found to have been partly oxidised to PdO during the reaction, implying that the Pd cocatalyst could also work to accept oxygen from CO2 and/or as an electron donor.
Particulate hydrogen evolution photocatalysts (HEPs) and oxygen evolution photocatalysts (OEPs) can be coupled to split water via two-step excitation, known as Z-scheme water splitting. Typically, redox couples are used to relay electrons from the OEP to the HEP via reversible redox reactions. In the Z-scheme system, photocatalysts that do not have the ability to evolve both hydrogen and oxygen can still be applied as HEPs or OEPs if they are capable of evolving either H2 or O2 from an aqueous solution containing appropriate sacrificial reagents, respectively. Therefore, the choice of photocatalytic materials can be extended.
Progress in the research of Z-scheme water splitting systems was reviewed by Maeda in 2013.68 One of the most important milestones was the demonstration of Z-scheme water splitting using heterogeneous HEP and OEP particles along with a reversible redox couple, as reported by Abe et al. in 2001.69 In this work, anatase-type TiO2 loaded with Pt and rutile-type TiO2 was used as the HEP and OEP, respectively, while the IO3−/I− redox couple was employed for the electron transfer. Subsequently, a number of Z-scheme systems capable of operating under visible light were reported. As an example, Kato et al. found an AQY value of 4.2% at 420 nm and an STH of 0.1% using a system consisting of Ru-loaded SrTiO3:Rh, BiVO4 and Fe3+/Fe2+.70 Maeda et al. reported an AQY of 6.3% at 420 nm using a system consisting of Pt-loaded ZrO2/TaON, PtOx-loaded WO3 and a IO3−/I− redox couple.71 Moreover, BaTaO2N,72 Ta3N5 (ref. 73) and Sm2Ti2S2O5,74 having relatively long absorption edge wavelengths of 660, 600 and 590 nm, respectively, have been applied to Z-scheme water splitting under visible light irradiation. However, the use of redox couples can also result in backward reactions that compete with water splitting reaction and lower the efficiency of the Z-scheme water splitting. In addition, redox mediators can shade photocatalyst particles from the incident light.
To avoid such problems arising from the use of redox mediators, redox mediator-free Z-scheme systems based on interparticle electron transfer have been developed.75 In this respect, the incorporation of reduced graphene oxide as a solid conductor has been shown to improve the water splitting rate under relatively intense illumination.76 The potential of carbon oxide reduction under visible light irradiation by Z-scheme systems has also been discussed.77 However, in this regard, the HEP and OEP particles have to acquire charges of opposite signs so that they can form aggregates based on electrostatic attraction (Fig. 11).75 The choices of photocatalytic materials and reaction solutions for use in such systems may be limited because careful adjustment of the zeta potential is required. In addition, the efficiency of interparticle electron transfer via weak physical contact is low. An alternative approach that avoids the use of redox mediators is the formation of HEP and OEP composites, and this possibility has been investigated by synthesising one of the photocatalysts in the presence of the other which is already present.78 Unfortunately, the possible photocatalytic materials that may be employed in this regard are few because the synthesis and treatment conditions for highly-active photocatalytic materials are largely incompatible. These challenges associated with conventional Z-scheme water splitting systems could potentially be addressed by the photocatalyst sheet approach described in the following section.46–48
 Fig. 11  Mechanism of water splitting using the Z-scheme photocatalysis system driven by electron transfer between H2 and O2 photocatalysts. (a) Suspension of Ru/SrTiO3:Rh and BiVO4 under neutral and acidic conditions, and (b) the photocatalytic water splitting scheme. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
5. Fixation of particulate photocatalysts for scalable water splitting
To date, photocatalytic water splitting on a laboratory scale has been studied using particulate suspensions. However, this method is difficult to scale up to the kilometre level and has other difficulties related to practical operation. It is challenging to design a cheap photocatalytic reactor that can process a large quantity of water extending over a wide area. The mass of the water alone will account for approximately one quarter of the weight of a water splitting panel, even if the water layer is only 1 cm thick.23 In addition, a significant power input is required to stir the large amount of photocatalyst suspension that would be involved, and the collection and replacement of the used photocatalyst powder in the suspension would also be difficult. Therefore, it is worth studying the fixation of particulate photocatalysts onto substrates or sheets so that they can be extended over a wide area in the form of modules or panels, as in PV and PEC applications. As discussed above, the problem of mass transport can be critical in terms of scalability if hydrogen and oxygen are produced separately.34,35 It is more efficient to evolve both hydrogen and oxygen in the same location, although engineering solutions will certainly be required to ensure safe operation of the facility given that this is a potentially explosive gas mixture.
Here we present examples of the fixation of particulate photocatalysts for one-step and two-step excitation (Z-scheme) water splitting. As described above, (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) loaded with a Rh2−yCryO3 cocatalyst acts as a photocatalyst to split water into hydrogen and oxygen under visible light irradiation.5 Therefore, it is possible to fabricate particulate photocatalyst panels simply by depositing this material onto glass substrates.79 As shown in Fig. 12, this photocatalyst, once densely fixed onto a glass substrate, exhibits much lower activity than a suspension of the same material. This is because of the inefficient penetration of water into and desorption of gaseous products from the dense particulate photocatalyst layer. The addition of hydrophilic silica particles accelerates the water splitting rate of the (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) photocatalyst panel, and this effect is increased as the particle size of the silica becomes larger. It is believed that the hydrophilic silica particles create voids among the (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) particles and thus promote the diffusion of the aqueous solution and product gas bubbles (Fig. 13).79 Accordingly, it is possible to attain photocatalytic activity comparable to powder suspension systems using a particulate photocatalyst fixed onto a planar substrate by modifying the fabrication processes. Such techniques will be useful in the future fabrication of large-scale photocatalyst applications.
 Fig. 12  Time courses of gas evolution during water splitting using a Rh2−yCryO3-loaded (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) photocatalyst under UV light irradiation from a 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 300 nm). Plates of (a) the photocatalyst only, (b) the photocatalyst blended with nanometre-sized silica, and (c) the photocatalyst blended with micrometre-sized silica, respectively, and (d) a suspension of the photocatalyst. 
 Fig. 13  Illustrations of photocatalyst panels prepared (A) without SiO2, (B) with nanometre-sized SiO2, and (C) with micrometre-sized SiO2. Brown (dark) and grey (light) particles indicate secondary particles of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) and SiO2, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 79. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Conventional Z-scheme approaches based on powder suspensions have problems associated with backward reactions involving redox mediators and inefficient electron transfer between HEP and OEP particles. To avoid these issues, the authors’ group has been developing particulate photocatalyst sheets consisting of previously prepared HEP and OEP particles embedded into conductive materials by particle transfer (Fig. 14).46–48 Photocatalyst particles attached loosely to, and thus insulated from, the conductor can be readily removed during the particle transfer process.42 As a result, photocatalyst particle layers with few grain boundaries and excellent mechanical and electric contact to the conductor can be fabricated. Notably, a number of photocatalytic materials are potentially applicable to the manufacture of such photocatalyst sheets because particle transfer is based on physical techniques and does not chemically damage the photocatalysts. The advantages of particulate photocatalyst sheet design over particulate suspensions and PEC systems as well as the challenges involved with these systems were recently reviewed.48 These photocatalyst sheets work efficiently at various pH values and even in pure water because the electron transfer between HEP and OEP particles occurs through the underlying conductive layer. The solution resistance and the concentration overpotential of such systems are reduced because hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution occur in close proximity, with spacing on the order of the particle dimensions (several micrometres at most). Therefore, photocatalyst sheets can be directly scalable without loss of the activity. However, the photocatalytic activity of such sheets drops markedly with increasing background pressure because of reverse reactions involving molecular oxygen under illumination, as well as delays in gas bubble desorption. Therefore, the suppression of these reverse reactions is required to allow the photocatalyst sheet to maintain its water splitting activity at elevated pressure. Our previous studies have shown that surface modification with oxide thin layers having a molecular sieving effect that blocks access of oxygen to active sites is effective for this purpose.47,48
 Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication of a particulate photocatalyst sheet for Z-scheme water splitting by particle transfer, and (b) a schematic of water splitting on a particulate photocatalyst sheet. HEP and OEP stand for hydrogen evolution photocatalyst and oxygen evolution photocatalyst, respectively. 

Fig. 15 shows the time course of pure water splitting using a Cr2O3/Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet under simulated sunlight, where SrTiO3:La,Rh and BiVO4:Mo worked as the HEP and OEP, respectively.47 The photocatalyst sheet split pure water into hydrogen and oxygen at the expected stoichiometric ratio in a stable manner, and the photocatalytic activity was enhanced by raising the reaction temperature from 288 to 331 K. The STH reached 1.1%, by far the highest value yet reported for water splitting using particulate semiconductor photocatalysts. Particulate photocatalyst systems such as this can be readily spread over large areas using a solution process such as printing and thus represent a viable option for the realisation of efficient solar fuel production. The SrTiO3:La,Rh and BiVO4:Mo photocatalysts used to make the sheet absorb visible light only up to 540 nm, which inevitably imposes a ceiling on the STH. Thus, in the future, we intend to employ photocatalytic materials with longer absorption edge wavelengths in conjunction with the particle transfer method.
 Fig. 15  Time courses of the water splitting reaction over a Cr2O3/Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G) at 288 K and 5 kPa (filled symbols) and 331 K and 10 kPa (empty symbols). Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. © 2016, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
6. Summary
Recent feasibility analyses and demonstrations of artificial photosynthesis, specifically PV-assisted electrochemical, unassisted PEC and photocatalytic water splitting, and of carbon dioxide reduction were reviewed. This review demonstrates that achieving an STC value above 10% will require the development of visible light-responsive semiconductors. In addition, scalability up to a facility size of at least a kilometre should be targeted. PV-assisted electrochemical approaches were shown to allow STH values exceeding 10%, although these systems are too expensive to be cost-competitive with existing energy resources. Photocatalyst suspension approaches may be fabricated inexpensively, with the proviso that their STH values lag behind those of the PV-assisted systems at present. PEC approaches fall into an intermediate category. Overall, therefore, higher STH values are associated with more expensive systems. It was shown that the direct reduction of carbon dioxide is less efficient than water splitting currently, and that balancing the STH and the cost of existing technologies does not allow the realization of artificial photosynthesis based on semiconductor systems. Thus, fundamental improvements in both STH values and cost (representing a shift toward the upper right in the technological map in Fig. 3) are needed.
The authors’ group has suggested a photocatalyst approach as a viable means of achieving efficient and scalable solar water splitting, and demonstrated a SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo photocatalyst sheet capable of splitting pure water with an STH exceeding 1.0%. Such active photocatalyst sheets are scalable in their present form. In future, the use of narrow band gap materials and the suppression of backward reactions at elevated background pressures will be required to make these systems more viable. Time-resolved, spatially-resolved and/or operand analysis may be effective tools during the design and development of materials and devices for water splitting, because particulate photocatalyst systems are by nature microscopically inhomogeneous and the water splitting reaction is driven by photoexcited carriers with finite lifetimes in non-equilibrium states.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Grants-in-Aids for Scientific Research (A) (No. 16H02417) and for Young Scientists (A) (No. 15H05494) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) and by the Artificial Photosynthesis Project of the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO).
References
BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2016, BP Statistical Review of World Energy, BP p.l.c, 1 St James’s Square, London, SW1Y 4PD, UK.
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima, K. Kohayakawa and K. Honda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 1487 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112 CAS .
H. Döscher, J. L. Young, J. F. Geisz, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 74 Search PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594 CAS .

Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production (Electronic Materials: Science & Technology), ed. R. van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .

Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, ed. H.-J. Lewerenz and L. Peter, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2013 Search PubMed .

          O. Isabella, K. Jäger, A. Smets, R. Swaaij and M. Zeman, Solar Energy: The Physics and Engineering of Photovoltaic Conversion, Technologies and Systems, UIT Cambridge,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Gretz, B. Drolet, D. Kluyskens, F. Sandmann and O. Ullmann, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1994, 19, 169 CrossRef .
Y. Okada, E. Sasaki, E. Watanabe, S. Hyodo and H. Nishijima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alhumaidan, D. Cresswell and A. Garforth, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520 RSC .
K. Sayama, Optronics, 2015, 2, 44 Search PubMed .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354 CAS .
K. Sayama and Y. Miseki, Synthesiology, 2014, 7, 79 CrossRef .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825 CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 CAS .
R. Sathre, J. B. Greenblatt, K. Walczak, I.
D. Sharp, J. C. Stevens, J. W. Ager III and F. A. Houle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 803 CAS .
T. Hisatomi, K. Takanabe and K. Domen, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 95 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Seitz, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck and P. T. F. Jaramillo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811 CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600100 CrossRef .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2791 CAS .
A. Nakamura, Y. Ota, K. Koike, Y. Hidaka, K. Nishioka, M. Suzuyama and K. Fujii, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 107101 CrossRef .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumari, R. T. White, B. Kmar and J. M. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1725 CAS .
M. A. Modestino, K. A. Walczak, A. Berger, C. M. Evans, S. Haussener, C. Koval, J. S. Newman, J. W. Ager and R. A. Segalman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 297 CAS .
T. Bosserez, L. Geerts, J. Ronge, F. Ceyssens, S. Haussener, R. Puers and J. A. Martens, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21242 CAS .
B. Turan, J.-P. Becker, F. Urbain, F. Finger, U. Rau and S. Haas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12681 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schreier, L. Curvat, F. Giordano, L. Steier, A. Abate, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Luo, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1998 CAS .
K. J. P. Schouten, Z. Qin, E. P. Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12123 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, R. Reske, A. S. Varela, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minegishi, N. Nishimura, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1120 RSC .
Y. Ham, T. Minegishi, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5011 RSC .
K. Ueda, T. Minegishi, J. Clune, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama, N. Shibata, J. Kubota, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, S. Okamura, J. Liu, Y. Shinohara, K. Ueda, T. Higashi, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3354 CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Li, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 308 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, T. Takata, T. Minegishi, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Faraday Discuss., 2017 10.1039/c6fd00184j .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
S. Sato and J. M. White, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1980, 72, 83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 543 RSC .
J. M. Lehn, J. P. Sauvage and R. Ziessel, Nouv. J. Chim., 1980, 4, 623 CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sakata, T. Hayashi, R. Yasunaga, N. Yanaga and H. Imamura, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12935 RSC .
Y. Ham, T. Hisatomi, Y. Goto, Y. Moriya, Y. Sakata, A. Yamakata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3027 CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohno, L. Bai, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asai, H. Nemoto, Q. Jia, K. Saito, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2543 RSC .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, T. Takata, K. Kumamoto, S. S. K. Ma, K. Ueda, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4544 CAS .
C. Pan, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan, L. Lin, S. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3062 RSC .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Teramura, Z. Wang, S. Hosokawa, Y. Sakata and T. Tanaka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Teramura, S. Iguchi, Y. Mizuno, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iguchi, Y. Hasegawa, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, K. Sayama, K. Domen and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 344, 339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, Y. Sasaki, N. Shirakura and A. Kudo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12327 CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Higashi, R. Abe, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1543 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, S. S. K. Ma, Y. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4144 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ma, S. Chen, Y. Kuang, S. Akiyama, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536 CAS .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 1513 RSC .
A. Xiong, G. Ma, K. Maeda, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi, T. Setoyama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 325 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Possible scheme for large-scale H2 production via solar water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 		 


Gasoline	1.8–2.6	In 2010
Petroleum	1.4–1.8	In 2010
Liquid natural gas	0.7–1.7	In 2010
Coal	<0.3	In 2010
Fossil fuel (average)	1.0–1.5	In 2010
Hydrogen	2.4	Target in 2020
PV	6.4–10.6	In 2013
PV	1.9	Target in 2030
PV + water-electrolysis	10.9	In 2014
Wind power	2.6–6.4	In 2010, estimated to be similar in 2030
Biomass-fired power	4.8–8.9	In 2010
Biomass-ethanol	1.7–4.3	Target

 	Fig. 2  Schematics of various solar-driven water splitting systems. (a) PV-assisted electrochemical water splitting, (b–d) PEC water splitting using (b) a photoanode and a counter cathode, (c) a photocathode and a counter anode, and (d) series-connected photoanode and photocathode, (e) photocatalytic water splitting via one-step excitation, and (f) photocatalytic water splitting via two-step excitation. In PEC water splitting, PV cells may be integrated into the circuit in series.	 

 	Fig. 3  Technological map showing various approaches to solar energy conversion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Courtesy of AIST.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of four reactor types: (a) type 1 reactor cross-section showing the particle slurry contained within bags separated by an access driveway, (b) type 2 reactor cross-section showing the particle slurries contained within bag assemblies with alternating full and half size bags for O2 and H2 evolution, (c) type 3 reactor design showing the encased composite panel oriented toward the sun with buoyant separation of gases, and (d) type 4 reactor design with an offset parabolic cylinder receiver that concentrates sunlight onto a linear PEC cell. Drawings not to scale. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013.	 

 	Fig. 5  Relationships between the photocatalytic water splitting STH values and photon wavelengths at different AQYs. These data assume that two water molecules are split into two hydrogen molecules and one oxygen molecule in a four-photon process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. © 2014, Springer Science + Business Media New York.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of an electrolysis cell using matched projected portions consisting of triple-junction amorphous Si (tj-a-Si) and an associated membrane electrode assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  Current density plots demonstrating that a recirculating stream in an electrolyser allows the device to function stably and continuously. Without recirculation the device performance deteriorates as concentration gradients form across the cell, and ionic species are depleted in the oxygen-evolution side. The inset is a schematic representation of the parallel-plate solar hydrogen generator used in the study. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP monolithic tablet-shaped device for CO2 photoreduction, and (B) time course of the generation of formate during the CO2 photoreduction reaction using IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP under simulated solar light irradiation (1 sun, AM1.5, 0.25 cm2). The IrOx/SiGe-jn/CC/p-RuCP monolith was immersed in a single-compartment quartz reactor filled with a CO2-saturated phosphate buffer solution (pH 6.4). Reprinted from ref. 38. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic summarizing the particle transfer method of fabricating photocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 10  Reaction mechanism for water splitting on a surface-coated photocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. © 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  Mechanism of water splitting using the Z-scheme photocatalysis system driven by electron transfer between H2 and O2 photocatalysts. (a) Suspension of Ru/SrTiO3:Rh and BiVO4 under neutral and acidic conditions, and (b) the photocatalytic water splitting scheme. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Time courses of gas evolution during water splitting using a Rh2−yCryO3-loaded (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) photocatalyst under UV light irradiation from a 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 300 nm). Plates of (a) the photocatalyst only, (b) the photocatalyst blended with nanometre-sized silica, and (c) the photocatalyst blended with micrometre-sized silica, respectively, and (d) a suspension of the photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 13  Illustrations of photocatalyst panels prepared (A) without SiO2, (B) with nanometre-sized SiO2, and (C) with micrometre-sized SiO2. Brown (dark) and grey (light) particles indicate secondary particles of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) and SiO2, respectively. Reprinted from ref. 79. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Fabrication of a particulate photocatalyst sheet for Z-scheme water splitting by particle transfer, and (b) a schematic of water splitting on a particulate photocatalyst sheet. HEP and OEP stand for hydrogen evolution photocatalyst and oxygen evolution photocatalyst, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 15  Time courses of the water splitting reaction over a Cr2O3/Ru-modified SrTiO3:La,Rh/Au/BiVO4:Mo sheet under simulated sunlight (AM 1.5G) at 288 K and 5 kPa (filled symbols) and 331 K and 10 kPa (empty symbols). Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. © 2016, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
