Carbon nanodots: synthesis, properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM34690G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34690G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24230-24253Carbon nanodots: synthesis, properties and applications

        
          
            Haitao 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhenhui 
            Kang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Shuit-Tong 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) and Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, 215123, China. E-mail: zhkang@suda.edu.cn; yangl@suda.edu.cn; apannale@suda.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-512-65880957;  Fax: +86-512-65882846
Received 
      17th July 2012
    , Accepted 28th August 2012First published on 29th August 2012AbstractCarbon nanodots (C-dots) have generated enormous excitement because of their superiority in water solubility, chemical inertness, low toxicity, ease of functionalization and resistance to photobleaching. In this review, by introducing the synthesis and photo- and electron-properties of C-dots, we hope to provide further insight into their controversial emission origin (particularly the upconverted photoluminescence) and to stimulate further research into their potential applications, especially in photocatalysis, energy conversion, optoelectronics, and sensing.Haitao LiHaitao Li is currently a PhD student in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Since 2010, he has been conducting his PhD work in FUNSOM under the supervision of Prof. Yang Liu, Zhenhui Kang and Shuit-Tong Lee. His main research interest is focused on the study of synthesis and photoluminescence of carbon dots, as well as their catalysis and energy conversion applications.Zhenhui KangZhenhui Kang is currently a Professor in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P. R. China. His main research interests are in the fields of synthetic and catalytic chemistry of nanomaterials, polyoxometalates, and quantum sized functional materials, as well as the exploring of their applications in nanocatalysis, new energy, and bio-imaging.Yang LiuYang Liu is currently an Associate Professor in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P. R. China. Her main research field is dedicated to the synthesis and assembly of morphologically unique nanostructures and nanocomposites, and the applications in catalysis and energy conversion.Shuit-Tong LeeShuit-Tong Lee is a member (academician) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and fellow of the academy of sciences for the developing world (TWAS). He is a Director of Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials, Director of College of Nano Science & Technology at Soochow University, and Director of Nano-Organic Photoelectronic Laboratory at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. His major research areas include functional nanomaterials and devices, organic electronic materials and technologies, diamond and super-hard thin film technologies.
1. Introduction
Carbon nanodots (C-dots) are a new class of carbon nanomaterials with sizes below 10 nm, first obtained during purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes through preparative electrophoresis in 2004.1 C-dots have gradually become a rising star in the nanocarbon family, due to their benign, abundant and inexpensive nature.2 Carbon is commonly a black material, and until recently was generally considered to have low solubility in water and weak fluorescence.3 The main reason why such tiny C-dots have recently attracted wide attention is because of their strong fluorescence, for which they are referred to as fluorescent carbon.
During the past few years, much progress has been achieved in the synthesis, properties and applications of C-dots, as recently reviewed by Baker et al. and Zhu et al.2,4 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements showed that carbon atoms of C-dots derived from candle soot were sp2 hybridized with no saturated sp3 carbon atoms, indicating that C-dots are conjugated systems.5,6 For their strong and tunable photoluminescence (PL) C-dots have found important and wide applications in energy and catalysis.2,4 In particular, besides normal or down-converted PL, C-dots were shown to possess excellent up-converted PL (UCPL), which enables the design of high-performance, complex catalyst systems based on C-dots for efficient utilization of the full spectrum of sunlight.2,4,7–13
Compared to traditional semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) and organic dyes, photoluminescent C-dots are superior in terms of high aqueous solubility, robust chemical inertness, easy functionalization, high resistance to photobleaching, low toxicity and good biocompatibility.2,4,14–16 As a result, much attention has also been paid to their potential applications in biological labeling, bioimaging and drug delivery.3,7,17–20 Of particular interest and significance is the recent finding that C-dots can exhibit PL emission in the near-infrared (NIR) spectral region under NIR light excitation. It should be noted that NIR PL emission of C-dots excited by NIR excitation is particularly significant and useful for in vivo bionanotechnology because of the transparency of body tissues in the NIR “water window”.15,21
Interestingly, the PL from C-dots can be quenched efficiently by either electron acceptor or electron donor molecules in solution, indicating that photoexcited C-dots are excellent electron donors and electron acceptors. The interesting photoinduced electron transfer properties of C-dots should offer exciting opportunities for light energy conversion, photovoltaic devices and related applications.22,23a C-dots can also be used as nanoprobes for sensitive ion detection.24,25
By introducing the synthesis, structure and PL properties of C-dots in this review, we hope to provide further insight into the as-yet controversial mechanism of their strong emission (particularly for UCPL), as well as to stimulate further research on the potential applications of C-dots, such as in photocatalysis, bioimaging, optoelectronics, sensors and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS, Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  C-dots with unique properties have great potential applications in bioimaging, optoelectronics, sensor, SERS, and photocatalysis. 
2. Synthesis, structure, and size control
2.1. Synthetic methods
Synthetic methods for C-dots (including carbon quantum dots (CQDs), graphene quantum dots (GQDs)) with tunable size can generally be classified into two main groups: chemical and physical methods. Chemical methods include electrochemical synthesis,8,26–29 combustion/thermal/hydrothermal/acidic oxidation,5,14,16,30–39 supported synthesis,30,40,41 microwave/ultrasonic,15,42–45 solution chemistry methods,46–53 cage-opening of fullerene,54 and so on. Physical methods include arc discharge,1 laser ablation/passivation,7,17,18,22,55–61 and plasma treatment.62

2.1.1. Chemical methods. 
2.1.1.1. Electrochemical synthesis. 
Zhou et al. achieved electrochemical synthesis of C-dots when they grew multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) from scrolled graphene layers on carbon paper by chemical vapour deposition (CVD).29 Zhao et al. produced C-dots electrochemically by oxidizing a graphitic column electrode against a saturated calomel electrode with a Pt wire counter electrode in NaH2PO4 aqueous solution.27 Chi et al. produced C-dots electrochemically from a graphite rod working electrode, a Pt mesh counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl reference electrode assembly immersed in pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution.28 A variety of carbon-based nanoparticles, including C-dots, were generated by ionic liquid (IL)-assisted electrooxidation of graphite using the water-soluble IL 1-butyl-3-methylimi-dazolium tetrafluoroborate [bmim][BF4] containing up to 90 wt% water as the electrolyte.26
Kang et al. reported an alkali-assisted electrochemical method to prepare 1–4 nm C-dots with controlled sizes.8a It can be imagined that judicious cutting of a graphite honeycomb layer into ultrasmall particles can lead to tiny fragments of graphite, yielding C-dots, which may offer a straightforward and facile strategy to prepare high-quality C-dots. Using graphite rods as both anode and cathode, and NaOH/EtOH as electrolyte, they synthesized C-dots with a current intensity of 10–200 mA cm−2 (Fig. 1). As a reference, a series of control experiments using acids (e.g. H2SO4/EtOH) as electrolyte yielded no formation of C-dots. This result indicates that an alkaline environment is the key factor, and OH− groups are essential for the formation of C-dots by this electrochemical oxidation process.
 Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of electrochemical fabrication of C-dots. 
Another facile electrochemical approach was recently reported by the same group for the large-scale synthesis of high-quality C-dots with high purity, using only pure water as an electrolyte without any other chemical additives (Fig. 2).8b The obtained C-dots feature a highly crystalline nature, excellent aqueous dispersibility, and remarkable down- and up-converted PL properties, and require no further purification. Moreover, they further demonstrated that the C-dots possess high photocatalytic activity under visible irradiation, and potential for high-efficiency complex catalyst design (see part 4).
 Fig. 2  (a) Reaction equipment for the preparation of C-dots; digital image of C-dots solution (b) before treatment, (c) after treatment; (d) DLS histogram of C-dots; (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM image of C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 8b.) 
Later, Qu et al. reported a direct electrochemical synthesis of green luminescent GQDs with a uniform size of 3–5 nm.23a They prepared GQDs by electrochemical oxidation of a graphene electrode in phosphate buffer solution. The oxygen-containing groups on the surface of GQDs enabled aqueous solubility and facilitated surface functionalization. Such GQDs produced by electrochemical oxidation were made of 1–3 graphene layers due to strong intergraphene attraction.46
2.1.1.2. Combustion/thermal/hydrothermal/acidic oxidation. 
The preparation of C-dots using a combustion oxidation method was reported by Mao et al. in 2007.5 In their synthesis, soot was collected by placing a piece of aluminium foil or a glass plate atop a burning candle, then mixed with oxidant and refluxed for 12 h to oxidize the particle surfaces. After cooling down and collection by centrifugation or dialysis, C-dots were obtained and further subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) fractionation. Ray et al. used nitric acid oxidation of carbon soot to synthesize C-dots.14 Size separation was performed in a solvent mixture (water–ethanol–chloroform) via high-speed centrifuge based separation. Tian et al. prepared C-dots by refluxing the combustion soot of natural gas in nitric acid.31 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) results showed that the C-dots exhibited an average diameter of (4.8 ± 0.6) nm and the crystalline lattices were consistent with graphitic carbons. A sample containing C-dots was obtained by starting with the soot generated during combustion of inexpensive paraffin oil in a flame.38
Pan et al. reported a hydrothermal route for cutting graphene sheets into blue luminescent GQDs.32 The obtained GQDs exhibited strong fluorescence with a quantum yield (QY) of 6.9%. Fluorescent C-dots with diameter about 2.0 nm were also prepared directly via a simple hydrothermal method by using L-ascorbic acid as a carbon source.37 Water-soluble and well-crystallized GQDs with a lateral size about 3.0 nm were also fabricated by a hydrothermal cutting method.20 The atomic force microscopy (AFM) observation of the GQDs deposited on a mica substrate shows a narrow height distribution from 1.5 to 1.9 nm, suggesting that the GQDs typically consist of 2–3 graphene layers.
Highly blue luminescent C-dots with PL QY of 31.6–40.6% were prepared by a one-step pyrolytic route from ethylenediamine–tetraacetic acid salts, and a unique emission strongly dependent on pH, solvent, spin, and excitation wavelength was observed.33
Chen et al. reported the preparation of highly photoluminescent C-dots in MAPO-44, a Mg-substituted microporous aluminophosphate molecular sieve with a chabazite structure, through thermal decomposition of the occluded template or loaded organic molecules. The resulting composite phosphors can be excited by a broad range of light in the ultraviolet region, and the emission wavelength is tunable by varying the thermal treatment condition.34
Wu et al. reported a high-yield synthesis of hydrophilic C-dots by controlled carbonization of sucrose. Green luminescent C-dots and non-luminous C-dots were effectively separated by dialysis. After surface functionalization with PEG2000N, the non-luminous C-dots emitted blue fluorescence.35
Peng et al. reported a facile one-step wet chemical synthesis of GQDs with a resin-rich surface from acidic treatment of carbon fibers (CF). Interestingly, the PL from the CF-derived GQDs can be tailored by simply choosing different reaction temperatures, which effectively produces GQDs of varying sizes.39a Similarly, Liu and Kang et al. found that a mixed acid treatment of carbon nanotubes/graphite could produce nearly identical C-dots of 3–4 nm (Fig. 3).39b During preparation, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphite were oxidized by a mixture of acids ((sulfuric acid:nitric acid = 3:1, Fig. 3A). After 24 h of refluxing, the mixture was slowly dispersed in deionized water and filtered to remove CNTs and graphite residues. The filtrate was then dialyzed against deionized water to remove excess acids, and a tan transparent liquid emitting bright yellow fluorescence under UV light (365 nm) (Fig. 3B) was obtained. The obtained solutions were rather stable in physiological solutions; they did not contain any sediments after being incubated in saline, fetal bovine serum (FBS), or FBS containing cell medium for 48 h (Fig. 3C). Notably, the C-dot solution could be stored at room temperature for as long as one year without the formation of any precipitates or the loss of fluorescence (Fig. 3C, inset).
 Fig. 3  Synthesis of C-dots from various carbon sources. (A) Schematic diagram of reactions. (B) Solutions of C-dots-S, C-dots-M, and C-dots-G under ambient (left) and UV light (right), C-dots made from MWNTs (C-dots-M), SWNTs (C-dots-S), and graphite (C-dots-G). (C) The stability of C-dots-M in different physiological solutions including water, saline (0.9% NaCl), RPMI-1640 cell medium, and fetal bovine serum. Inset: photos of C-dots-M after being stored at room temperature for 1 year taken under ambient (left) and UV light (right). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39b. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.) 
2.1.1.3. Supported synthetic procedure. 
Supported synthetic method has been widely adopted for the synthesis of monodisperse nanomaterials, involving molecular sieve, porous carbon and so on. This method has been used to produce nanosized C-dots. One such route was employed by Li et al., who used surfactant-modified silica spheres as supports to localize the growth of C-dots by blocking nanoparticle agglomeration during high-temperature treatment.40 Giannelis and co-workers described the synthesis of supported C-dots (4–6 nm) using thermal oxidation of an appropriately ion-exchanged NaY zeolite.30
Zhu et al. reported a facile approach for preparing hydrophilic C-dots by using mesoporous silica (MS) spheres as nanoreactors in an impregnation method.41 Without further treatment, the resulting highly efficient photoluminescent C-dots are monodisperse, photostable and of low toxicity, and show excellent luminescence properties. The overall synthetic procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4. First, MS spheres were prepared with N-hexadecylamine as the surfactant and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) as the precursor using ammonia as a catalyst. Subsequently, MS spheres were impregnated with a mixed solution of complex salts and citric acid. Subsequent calcination and removal of MS supports generated the nanosized hydrophilic C-dots. The key feature of this method is the employment of MS spheres as supports, which not only confines the C-dots to a narrow size distribution in the pores of MS spheres, but also prevents the aggregation of the nanosized C-dots.
 Fig. 4  Processing diagram for the synthesis of photoluminescent carbogenic dots. (Reproduced from ref. 41.) 
2.1.1.4. Microwave/ultrasonic synthesis. 
Microwave/ultrasonic technology has become a very important process in synthetic chemistry. Zhu et al. presented a facile and economical microwave pyrolysis approach to synthesize fluorescent C-dots with electrochemiluminescence (ECL) properties.42 In this synthesis, different amounts of polyethylene glycol 200 (PEG200) and saccharide were added to distilled water to form a transparent solution. The solution was then heated in a 500 W microwave oven for several minutes. With increasing reaction time, the solution changed from colorless to yellow, and finally to dark brown, which implied the formation of C-dots.
Wang et al. reported a facile and green one-step microwave synthesis of photoluminescent C-dots.45 The preparation requires a carbohydrate (glycerol, glycol, glucose, sucrose, etc.) and a tiny amount of an inorganic ion, and can be completed in just a few minutes, requiring no surface passivation reagent.
A microwave-hydrothermal synthesis of fluorescent C-dots from graphite oxide was explored by Zheng et al.43 Kang et al. described a simple synthesis of C-dots from glucose or active carbon by using an ultrasonic treatment method.15a,44 Such monodispersed water-soluble fluorescent C-dots could emit bright and colorful PL covering the entire visible-to-NIR spectral range (Fig. 5). Notably, the NIR emission of C-dots could be obtained by NIR excitation. Furthermore, the C-dots had excellent up-conversion fluorescent properties.15a
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of C-dots prepared from glucose with a diameter of less than 5 nm; (b) and (c) photographs of C-dots dispersions in water with sunlight and UV (365 nm, center) illumination, respectively; (d–g) fluorescent microscope images of C-dots under different excitation: d, e, f, and g for 360, 390, 470, and 540 nm, respectively. (Reprinted from ref. 15a, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.) 
Glucose-derived water-soluble crystalline C-dots with an average diameter as small as 1.65 nm (∼5 layers) were prepared by a facile microwave-assisted hydrothermal (MAH) method.15b This method did not require any surface passivation agents or inorganic additives; the sole reagent was glucose (sucrose or fructose) and; as shown in Fig. 6; the glucose molecules were pyrolyzed and then converted to C-dots.
 Fig. 6  Preparation of GQDs by MAH method. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
2.1.1.5. Other chemistry methods. 
For chemical approaches, solution-phase chemical methods by oxidative condensation of aryl groups have been successfully applied to produce GQDs.2,46–53 Although intramolecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation was useful for the synthesis of large polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) from dendritic arene precursors, the solubility of such GQDs was unfortunately low, and the GQDs exhibited a tendency to aggregate due to strong intergraphene attraction.2,63,64 Li et al. demonstrated the versatile synthesis of large, stable colloidal GQDs with desired sizes and structures via a new solubilization strategy.47 They found that GQDs synthesised by multiple 20, 40, 60-trialkyl phenyl groups covalently attached to the edges of the graphene moieties. The as-prepared GQDs consist of graphene moieties containing 168, 132 or 170 conjugated carbon atoms, respectively. Recently, multicolor GQDs with a uniform size of ∼60 nm diameter and 2–3 nm thickness were synthesized by using unsubstituted hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) as the carbon source,53 and these are the largest GQDs reported so far. Rhee et al. developed a synthetic method employing reverse micelles as nanoreactors to produce highly luminescent GQDs. GQDs were prepared via carbonization of glucose in reverse micelles followed by in situ surface passivation, as depicted in Fig. 7. This solution-phase chemical method offers size tunability and narrow size distribution without any impractical size separation process.65
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of synthesis of GQDs in reverse micelles: (a) formation of water-in-oil reverse micelles, (b) hydrolytic polymerization, (c) carbonization, and (d) in situ passivation by hexadecylamine. (Reproduced from ref. 65.) 
Recently, a mechanistic approach to the synthesis of a series of atomically defined GQDs by metal-catalysed cage-opening of C60 was reported by Loh et al.54 The fragmentation of the embedded molecules at elevated temperatures produced carbon clusters that underwent diffusion and aggregation to form GQDs.


2.1.2. Physical method. 
2.1.2.1. Arc discharge. 
Xu et al. isolated an unknown fluorescent carbon nanomaterial while purifying single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) derived from arc-discharge soot.1 To improve the hydrophilicity of the material, they oxidized the arc soot with 3.3 M HNO3 to introduce carboxyl functional groups, and then extracted the sediment with an NaOH solution (pH 8.4) to produce a stable black suspension. The suspension was separated by gel electrophoresis into SWCNTs, short tubular carbons, and a fast moving band of highly fluorescent material, which was composed of C-dots.4
2.1.2.2. Laser ablation/passivation. 
Sun and co-workers produced C-dots via laser ablation of a carbon target in the presence of water vapor with argon as a carrier gas at 900 °C and 75 kPa.7,17,18,22,55–61 After refluxing in HNO3 for up to 12 h and surface passivation by attaching simple organic species (PEG1500N or poly(propionylethyleneimine-co-ethyleneimine (PPEI-EI)),7,58 the acid-treated C-dots gave bright luminescence emission. Du et al. reported synthesis of fluorescent C-dots by laser irradiation of a suspension of carbon materials in organic solvent (Fig. 8).56 By selecting organic solvents, the surface states of C-dots could be modified to achieve tunable light emission. Based on control experiments, the origin of the luminescence was attributed to the surface states related to the ligands on the surface of C-dots.
 Fig. 8  One-step synthesis of C-dots in PEG200N solvent. (Reproduced from ref. 56.) 
Li et al. reported a simple laser ablation approach to prepare C-dots using nano-carbon materials as the starting material and a simple solvent as the liquid medium.60 In a typical procedure, 0.02 g of nano-carbon material was dispersed in 50 mL of solvent (such as ethanol, acetone, or water). After ultrasonication, 4 mL of the suspension was dropped into a glass cell for laser irradiation. An Nd:YAG pulsed laser with a second harmonic wavelength of 532 nm was used to irradiate the suspension. Fig. 9 schematically illustrates the experimental setup. After laser irradiation, the solution was centrifuged.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of laser ablation experimental setup. (Reproduced from ref. 60.) 
2.1.2.3. Plasma treatment. 
Gokus et al. reported that strong PL could be induced in single-layer graphene (SLG) using an oxygen plasma.66 The PL was spatially uniform across the flakes and connected to elastic scattering spectra distinctly different from those of gapless pristine graphene; Raman spectroscopy and elastic light scattering were used to monitor the structural and optical changes.67,68 Interestingly, the GO nanosheets possessed visible and near-infrared (vis–NIR) fluorescene.69 Jiang et al. described a “one-step” combined synthesis and functionalization of C-dots using an all-in-one small submerged-arc plasma reactor.62 They took advantage of the long-lived free radicals generated by a submerged-arc helium atmosphere plasma resident on the nanoparticle surfaces to supply ethylenediamine to functionalize the C-dots.

2.2. Composition and structure
The chemical composition of the purified C-dots (36.8% C, 5.9% H, 9.6% N, 44.7% O) was vastly different from that of raw candle soot (91.7% C, 1.8% H, 1.8% N, 4.4% O), having significantly higher oxygen content due in part to the presence of carbonyl groups. 13C NMR measurements showed three types of carbon signals; i.e. external CC bonds, internal CC bonds, and CO bonds. Notably, no evidence for sp3-hybridized carbon was found.5
As shown in Fig. 10a, Hu et al. reported that the selected-area electron-diffraction (SAED) results of 3 nm C-dots obtained by a laser ablation/passivation method56 revealed a ring pattern. The ratio of the squares of the ring radius is 3:8:11:16:19, implying a diamond-like structure, and the rings correspond to the {111} {220} {311} {400} {331} planes of a diamond structure. The lattice spacings varied from 0.2 to 0.23 nm, and are quite close to the (100) facet of graphite. The lattice fringes of the diffraction planes of diamond-like and graphitic carbon lie very close to one another, thus rendering unambiguous assignment difficult without other corroborating evidence.2 Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were used to determine the surface ligands of C-dots produced in PEG200N. Besides the vibrations of C–OH, C–O–C and C–H bonds in PEG, the stretching vibrations of CO (1623 cm−1) combined with the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of C–O–C (around 1300 cm−1 and 1200 cm−1) in carboxylate groups were also detected.56 For C-dots in water, three peaks at 2960 cm−1, 2876 cm−1, and 1380 cm−1 are assigned to νas(CH3), νs(CH3), and δs(CH3), respectively, which suggest that the surfaces of C-dots have methyl groups attached. CO and C–O stretching vibrations are also detected, indicating that the surfaces of C-dots are partially oxidized. Additionally, Ray et al. found that the C-dots prepared from oxidizing candle soot had 0.208 nm lattice spacings, which suggests sp3 diamond-like carbon or sp2 graphitic carbon.14 Chen et al. used 13C NMR measurements to identify the presence of sp2 carbon with signals in the d = 90–180 ppm range, while the absence of signals in the d = 8–80 ppm range showed a lack of detectable sp3 carbon.31
 Fig. 10  (a) SAED pattern of C-dots in ref. 56. (b–g) HRTEM images of typical C-dots with different diameters in ref. 8a (scale bar: 2 nm). (h) Raman spectra (λex = 633 nm), (i) C1s XPS spectra of graphite and C-dots in ref. 8b (reproduced from ref. 8b and 56, reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons). 
C-dots produced by electrochemical oxidation of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are graphitic in nature.29 Raman spectra show the characteristics of both sp2 and disordered carbon in C-dots. Zhao et al. found that the C-dots produced from electrochemical oxidation of graphite had lattice spacings of 3.28 Å (HRTEM results).27Fig. 10b–g show the HRTEM images of C-dots obtained by alkali-assisted electrochemical method, revealing the lattice spacing of 0.32 nm, which agrees well with the 〈002〉 spacing of graphitic carbon.8a C-dots synthesized by electrochemical method feature a highly crystalline nature (Fig. 2f). Raman spectra (λex = 633 nm) of C-dots and pristine graphite are shown in Fig. 10h. For graphite, three prominent peaks appear at 1345, 1570 and 2696 cm−1, corresponding to the D, G and 2D peaks, respectively. For C-dots, only D and G peaks are displayed, with no 2D peak. The intensity ratio of the D and G band (ID/IG) is a measurement of the disorder extent, and the ratio of sp3/sp2 carbon. In this case, the graphite has a weak ID/IG ratio of 0.365, but after electrochemical oxidation the C-dots showed a noticeable increase in ID/IG ratio to 1.234. Graphite oxidation initially induced structure defects in C-dots, such as oxygenated groups (C–O, CO, O–CO) in the sp2 carbon site, and then the vacant lattice sites and the sp3 carbon were produced. Raman studies of C-dots produced by the oxidation of candle soot14 and by electrochemical means26,29 also showed both the D and G bands. The ratio of the intensities (ID/IG) of these characteristic bands can be used to correlate the structural properties of the carbon. For C-dots obtained by electrochemical treatment of MWCNTs,29 the ID/IG ratio of 2 indicates nanocrystalline graphite. Fig. 10i shows the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of C1s from graphite and C-dots,8b where the peak intensity (located at about 288 eV) shows a noticeable increase, indicating more oxidation groups (C–O, CO) in C-dots, consistent with Raman results.
C-dots produced by a one-step thermal decomposition reaction of citrate salts showed XRD patterns of disordered carbon and respective passivation agents.16 The XRD pattern of C-dots made from octadecylammonium citrate shows two superimposed broad reflections: a broad one centered at 4.3 Å and a sharper peak at 4.14 Å, which are indicative of disordered carbon and densely packed alkyl groups arising from the octadecyl chains. The XRD pattern of C-dots prepared by supported method displayed a sharp, low-intensity reflection centered at d002 = 3.3 Å, which was very close to the graphite 002 lattice spacing (Fig. 11a).30 However, the XRD pattern of the hydrophilic C-dots (prepared by controlled carbonization of sucrose) in Fig. 11b showed an (002) interlayer spacing of 4.2 Å, which is larger than that of bulk graphite (3.3 Å), indicating poor crystallization.35
 Fig. 11  XRD pattern of C-dots prepared by (a) supported method and (b) controlled carbonization of sucrose. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) is a powerful tool to characterize the chemical composition and structure of carbon-based materials. Fig. 12a shows the EELS spectrum of the GQDs prepared by MAH method, and EELS spectra of C K-edge (285 eV) and O K-edge (539 eV) in the insets. The peak at 285 eV is attributed to the transition from 1s to π* state (1s → π*), and the peak at 291 eV is the transition from 1s to σ* state (1s → σ*). These are the main EELS features of sp2 bonded (CC) carbon in the K-edge region. The peak at 539 eV is caused by 1s → σ* of C–O. It indicates that GQDs were passivated with O-related functional groups. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were employed to analyze the elemental distribution of the GQDs. Fig. 12b shows the dark field image of the GQDs, while the corresponding elemental C and O mappings are shown in Fig. 12 panels c and e, respectively. Evidently, the C content was greater than the O content, and in fact the atomic ratio of C/O is 95.4/4.6, as calculated from the EDS spectrum shown in Fig. 12d.
 Fig. 12  EELS spectra, STEM image, and EDS analysis of GQDs. (a) EELS spectrum of the GQDs; the insets show the EELS spectra of C K-edge and O K-edge of the GQDs; (b) STEM image of GQDs assembled on Cu grid coated with ultrathin amorphous carbon film; (c) elemental C mapping (in blue) of the image shown in panel b; (d) EDS spectrum of GQDs; (e) elemental O mapping (in red) of the image shown in panel b. GQDs were prepared using 11.1 wt% glucose solution and 7 min microwave heating at 595 W. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Based on the above discussion, we can conclude that most C-dots consist of an amorphous to nanocrystalline core with predominantly sp2 carbon, the lattice spacings of which are consistent with graphitic or turbostratic carbon. However, some C-dots showed poor crystallization (the C-dots prepared by controlled carbonization of sucrose). In contrast to the other C-dots, all kinds of GQDs had a graphitic structure. Unless otherwise modified, oxidized C-dots generally feature carboxylic moieties at their surface, with overall oxygen contents ranging from 5–50 wt%, depending upon the experimental conditions used.2
2.3. Size control
There are few studies of size- and shape-controlled fluorescent C-dots, although they are important for understanding quantum phenomena, and for optoelectronics and biomedical applications.2,4,8 As mentioned above, C-dots are readily prepared by electrochemical cutting or thermal oxidation of graphite, however the prepared C-dots are a mixture of sizes (such as 1.2–3.8 nm), which requires complex separation methods (e.g. dialysis, chromatography, electrophoretic separation, etc) to obtain monodisperse C-dots.5,8,35 For particle size control, Kang et al. have developed a current density-controlled electrochemical method, but the size distribution of the obtained C-dots remained broad and required further separation.8

Fig. 13a shows the optical images of C-dots of four typical sizes, illuminated by white and UV light. The bright blue, green, yellow, and red PL of C-dots is strong enough to be seen with the naked eye. Fig. 13b shows the corresponding emission spectra, in which the red, black, green, and blue lines show the PL spectra for blue-, green-, yellow-, and red-emitting C-dots, respectively. The PL properties vary sensitively with C-dot size (Fig. 13c), with small C-dots (1.2 nm, center) giving UV light emission, medium-sized C-dots (1.5–3 nm) visible light emission (400–700 nm), and large C-dots (3.8 nm, center) near-infrared emission. To further confirm that and explain why these strong emissions comes from the quantum-sized graphite fragment of C-dots, Kang et al. performed theoretical calculations to investigate the relationship between luminescence and cluster size. Fig. 13d shows the dependence of HOMO–LUMO gap on the size of the graphene fragments. As the size of the fragment increases, the gap decreases gradually, and the gap energy in the visible spectral range is obtained from graphene fragments with a diameter of 14–22 Å, which agrees well with the visible emission of C-dots with diameters of <3 nm. Thus, they deduced that the strong emission of C-dots comes from the quantum-sized graphite structure instead from the carbon–oxygen surface.8a
 Fig. 13  (a) Typical sized C-dots optical images illuminated under white (left; daylight lamp) and UV light (right; 365 nm); (b) PL spectra of typical sized C-dots: the red, black, green, and blue lines are the PL spectra for blue-, green-, yellow-, and red-emission C-dots, respectively; (c) relationship between the C-dots size and the PL properties; (d) HOMO–LUMO gap dependence on the size of the graphene fragments. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.) 
Kang et al. developed a polyoxometalates (POMs)-assisted hydrothermal method for the controllable synthesis of different carbon nanostructures.36b They show that carbon nanotubes, nanobelts, and carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) can be directly prepared from active carbon powder and that the POMs used are recyclable. The POMs-assisted hydrothermal method was also used to control the size of the obtained nanocarbons.36c Significantly, the obtained CNPs are large-scale and monodisperse. The functions of POMs in CNPs formation could include the following: (1) to catalyze/promote the reaction process; (2) to effectively control the diameters of CNPs. The POMs-assisted method is potentially an excellent approach to prepare monodisperse C-dots with tunable size.
Recently, Li et al. reported the synthesis of colloidal GQDs with a uniform and tunable size through solution chemistry.47 The prepared GQDs consisted of graphene moieties containing 168, 132, and 170 conjugated carbon atoms, respectively. The synthesis was based on oxidative condensation reactions developed by Scholl, Müllen, and so on.50,51,70–72
The solution chemical method reported by Rhee and Kwon offers size tunability and narrow size distribution with minimal size separation process.65 In this approach, fluorescent GQDs were synthesized via a facile one-step carbonization of sugar in water-in-oil reverse micelles. The micelles are microemulsions of water encapsulated by surfactant molecules in an immiscible oil such as a hydrocarbon. Physically isolated from the oil phase, the water phase inside the micelle can serve as a reactor for synthesis of nano-sized materials, in which size can be regulated by the water–surfactant (S) molar ratio (w = [H2O]/[S]).73 Thus, this reaction can offer size tunability and narrow size distribution.
3. Absorbance and luminescence properties
3.1. Absorbance
C-dots typically show obvious optical absorption in the UV region, with a tail extending to the visible range (see Fig. 14A for representative spectra).2,58 Most of the C-dots, such as those prepared by laser-passivation,7,17,18,22 electrochemical oxidation,29 microwave/ultrasonic,15,42–45 or supported method,30 have an absorption band around 260–320 nm. However, the absorbance of C-dots was found to increase to longer wavelength after surface passivation with 4,7,10-trioxa-1,13-tridecanediamine (TTDDA)2 or organosilane (350–550 nm; 340–410 nm, 360 nm center, respectively).
 Fig. 14  (A) UV/Vis absorption (Abs) and PL emission spectra (recorded for progressively longer excitation wavelengths from 320 to 520 nm in 20 nm increments) of carbon dots surface-passivated with PEG1500N in water. In the inset, the emission spectral intensities are normalized. (B) Optical photograph obtained under excitation at 365 nm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.) 
3.2. PL
The classic signature of quantum confinement is the observation of size-dependent optical absorption or PL.74–76 From a fundamental and an application viewpoint, PL is one of the most fascinating features of C-dots. Studies of the optical properties of small-sized C-dots are controversial due to the exact mechanisms of PL, which remain unsettled and require further clarification. Nevertheless, some aspects are well recognized and established, and are briefly reviewed here for relevance to the design of C-based luminescent probes and photocatalysts. One interesting feature of the PL of C-dots is the clear λex dependence of the emission wavelength and intensity, whether it is due to differently sized nanoparticles (quantum effect) and/or different emissive traps on the C-dot surface, or a mechanism currently unresolved. Similarly, the requirement for surface passivation is little understood, but appears to be linked to the synthetic method. For example, only after surface passivation treatment by certain organic moieties do C-dots produced by laser ablation show bright PL emission. The resulting PL emission spectra were generally spectrally broad, ranging from the visible into the NIR, and depending upon λex.2,58 Zhao et al. claimed that the dependency of the C-dot PL on excitation wavelength is due solely to size differences rather than different emissive trap sites on similarly sized particles.27
The optical behavior may reflect not only effects from particles of different sizes in the sample, but also a distribution of different emissive sites on each C-dot.2 Mechanistically, Sun et al. attributed the PL to the presence of surface energy traps, which become emissive upon surface passivation.58 They explained that there must be a quantum confinement effect of emissive energy traps on the surface in order for C-dots to exhibit strong PL upon surface passivation, a similar effect having been observed in Si nanocrystals.77 Sun et al. reported that C-dots coated with ZnO or ZnS required further passivation by PEG1500N for PL to occur.57 However, Ag, Cu, or Pd metal nanocomposites of C-dots prepared from oxidized natural gas soot required no further passivation for observation of PL.31
Surface passivation was essential for the C-dots prepared by the supported method to attain PL emission40 (Fig. 14); the C-dots also showed λex-dependent PL emission. The authors suggested that bright and colorful PL from the C-dots might be attributed to the presence of surface energy traps that became emissive upon stabilization as a result of surface passivation. The requirement of surface passivation for PL was apparently shared by C-dots and QDs, for which the widely accepted mechanism for luminescence was the radiative recombination of excitons. The multicolor PL arises not only from C-dots of different sizes, but also from a distribution of emissive trap sites. The 1.5–2 nm C-dots also needed surface passivation to obtain a PL property, which is λex dependent.40
Hu et al.56 and Li60et al. claimed that carboxylate groups formed on the particle surface were the origin of the PL (Fig. 15a). Laser irradiation produced some carbon- and oxygen-containing radicals, and the oxygen-containing groups on the surface of the initial carbon starting material would be the origin of the PL. One factor leading to tunable performance was the different particle sizes, as similarly observed in semiconductor nanocrystals. Another factor was the different oxygen-containing groups.
 Fig. 15  PL of C-dots. (a) PL spectra of C-dots obtained at 198 mJ pulse−1 for 30 min with different excitation wavelengths increasing from 300 nm to 480 nm in 20 nm increments. The inset is the normalized PL spectra. (b) Relationship between excitation and emission wavelength of PL spectra. (c) Stability tests of PL at 450 nm excited by 380 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 60.) 
C-dots produced from MWCNTs by an electrochemical oxidation method exhibited blue PL (when excited at 365 nm).29 These C-dots also showed λex-dependent emission, but no further passivation step was required for PL to occur. Yet, another study on electrochemically synthesized C-dots did not comment on the λex dependence of PL, but also reported that no additional surface passivation was required for PL to occur.28 C-dots prepared by oxidation of candle soot contained an abundance of carbonyl groups on their surfaces, so that no further functionalization was needed for PL to occur.5,31 As shown in Fig. 16, the C-dots derived from carbohydrate and inorganic ions by a microwave method showed λex-dependent PL without further passivation.45
 Fig. 16  PL photographs of carbon dots in water under ultraviolet (330–385 nm), blue (450–480 nm), and green (510–550 nm) light excitation. (Reproduced from ref. 45.) 
Kang et al. presented definitive evidence for luminescence arising from quantum-confinement effects and size-dependent optical properties of C-dots prepared by alkali-assisted electrochemical method.8a To confirm that strong emission of C-dots came from the quantum-sized fragment of graphite, the as-synthesized C-dots were treated by hydrogen plasma to remove the surface oxygen. A series of control experiments showed no obvious change in the PL spectra of C-dots before and after hydrogen plasma. To further confirm that and explain why the strong emission comes from the quantum-sized graphite fragment of C-dots, they performed theoretical calculations to investigate the relationship between luminescence and cluster size (Fig. 13d).
C-dots produced from glucose using an ultrasonic treatment method reported by Kang et al.15a (Fig. 17) exhibited NIR emission upon excitation by NIR light. It should be noted that such NIR PL emission excited by NIR excitation is particularly significant and useful for bioapplications because of the transparency of body tissues in the NIR “water window”.
 Fig. 17  Photoluminescence spectra of CNPs under NIR excitation (emission in NIR range): (a) CNPs prepared from glucose/NaOH, (b) CNPs prepared from glucose/HCl. (Reprinted from ref. 15a, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.) 
The C-dots prepared by MAH method exhibited deep ultraviolet (DUV) emission of 4.1 eV, which was the shortest emission wavelength among all the solution-based QDs.15b The C-dots exhibited typical excitation wavelength-dependent properties as expected in C-based quantum dots. However, the emission wavelength was independent of C-dot size. The unique optical properties of the C-dots were attributed to the self-passivated layer on the surface of GQDs, as revealed by EELS.
The QY of C-dots varies with the fabrication method and the surface chemistry involved.2 C-dots (∼5 nm) produced by laser ablation had QY between 4 and 10%, depending on the excitation wavelength and the effectiveness of the reaction for surface passivation.58 C-dots (7 nm) obtained by thermal decomposition methods gave a QY of only 3%, which was virtually independent of λex.16 Smaller (4–6 nm) C-dots made by thermal decomposition on NaY supports showed a more blue-shifted emission (as expected based on quantum confinement effects) and even lower QY.30 On the other hand, the QY of C-dots was found to be dependent on surface passivation in many studies.56–58,78 C-dots from laser ablation methods passivated with PEG1500N had higher QY than those passivated with PPEI-EI.58 When coated with ZnO/ZnS and PEG1500N, the QY of C-dots (λex: 440 nm) increases to 45 and 50%, respectively.57 The enhanced QY of Zn-based coating is attributed to a secondary, more effective surface passivation in combination with the PEG passivation agent. The passivation agent also can affect the QY, such as C-dots produced in a laser ablation/passivation process.56 Interestingly, if the C-dot has a metal-containing shell or is associated with a metal-based nanostructure, it will have a higher QY.31,78
C-dots have been shown to have good photostability.8,27,58,78 For example, the C-dots produced by alkali-assisted electrochemical method show good photostability as their appearance and PL properties remain unchanged after one year of storage in air at room temperature.8a After several hours of continuous exposure to excitation, the laser scanning confocal microscopy result of C-dots showed neither blinking nor meaningful reduction in PL intensity.58 The PL intensity of C-dots (prepared by laser passivation method) decreased by only 4.5%, even after 4 h irradiation (Fig. 15c), whereas other fluorescent materials such as polystyrene nanospheres would photo-bleach within 0.5 h, indicating the good photostability of C-dots.60
Luminescence decays showed that C-dots produced by laser ablation method have multiexponential PL decays with average excited-state lifetimes of 5 ns for emission at 450 nm and 4.4 ns for emission at 640 nm (excited at 407 nm).58 The multiexponential nature of the lifetime suggests the presence of different emissive sites. The PL lifetime of C-dots obtained by a one-step sodium hydroxide-assisted electrochemical method is 6.74 ns, which is much longer than most reported C-dots.79
Some researchers reported that C-dot PL intensity is dependent on pH value.5,27,40,79 Zhao et al. found that PL intensity decreased when the pH value of the solution was higher or lower than 4.5, yet PL was totally recovered when the pH value was adjusted back to the optimal value. Meanwhile, there is a slight shift in the emission peak with pH variation. Liu et al. found the QY only showed a decrease of about 3% on going from a neutral pH value to pH 5 or 9.40 Li et al. reported that under strongly acidic or alkaline conditions, the PL is nearly completely quenched, whereas the C-dots showed the strongest emission at pH 7.0.79
Generally speaking, the mechanisms of C-dot luminescence are not fully understood. The luminescence has been tentatively suggested to arise from excitons of carbon, emissive traps, quantum-confinement effect, aromatic structures/oxygen-containing groups, free zig-zag sites and/or edge defects. However, a widely accepted mechanism for luminescence from C-dots remains unavailable and needs further investigation.
3.3. Electrochemical luminescence
As ECL is extensively used to investigate the fluorescent emission of QDs or semiconductor nanocrystals,42,80,81 so ECL studies of C-dots have aroused interest.28,42 The ECL behavior (Fig. 18) of C-dots is similar to that of other QDs such as CdSe and Si nanocrystals.42 Consequently, the ECL mechanism of C-dots was explained as follows: firstly, the oxidized state (R˙+) and the reduced state (R˙−) of C-dots was formed with the potential cycle; then the electron-transfer annihilation of the two oppositely charged carriers (R˙+ and R˙−) took place to form the excited state (R*). Finally, the excited C-dots (R*) returned to the ground state via a radiative pathway by emitting a photon. It is interesting to note that the anodic ECL intensity was larger than the cathodic value, indicating that R− was more stable than R+. Additionally, ECL response over time was relatively stable (inset of Fig. 18), which implied attractive applications in ECL sensing.
 Fig. 18  Representative ECL response (a) without and (b) with C-dots at an indium–tin oxide (ITO) electrode in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.0). Inset: anodic ECL response during a continuous potential scan, v = 0.1 V s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 42a.) 
Zheng et al. found C-dots prepared from the electrochemical oxidation of graphite exhibited ECL emission as the potential was cycled between +1.8 and −1.5 V.28 The ECL spectrum of C-dots obtained from SWCNTs82 has also been observed. Most ECL from semiconductor nanomaterials has been observed to originate from surface states and is often significantly red shifted from the PL peaks by as much as hundreds of nanometers, due to defect states in the band gap.75,83
As ECL is mainly associated with surface-state transitions in nanoparticles2 (whereas PL is more reminiscent of the core state in nanoparticle), comparison between the ECL and PL of nanoparticles is an excellent way to investigate the presence of surface traps.2,75,84,85 Based on the ECL evidence for the presence of surface trap states and the pervasive size- and λex-dependency of C-dot PL, Baker et al. postulated that C-dots feature core band gaps which are size-dependent, with the most intense PL attributable to direct recombination of electron–holes, whereas the less intense bands may be assigned to surface-state traps and phonon-assisted recombination.2,75 It would also be interesting to determine if the ECL of C-dots is size-independent.
3.4. Photoinduced electron transfer property
The PL from C-dots can be quenched efficiently by either electron acceptor or electron donor molecules in solution, namely photoexcited C-dots are both excellent electron donors and electron acceptors. These interesting photoinduced electron transfer properties should offer new opportunities in using C-dots for light energy conversion and related applications, as well as for mechanistic elucidation.22
Kang et al. reported that C-dots obtained by an alkali-assisted electrochemical method had good photoinduced electron transfer properties.12Fig. 19 show the luminescence decays (485 nm excitation, monitored with a 550 nm narrow bandpass filter) of C-dots, which were quenched by the known electron acceptor 2,4-dinitrotoluene (−0.9 V vs. NHE)) and electron donor N,N-diethylaniline (DEA, 0.88 V vs. NHE), with the observed Stern–Volmer (insets of Fig. 19a and b) quenching constants (KSV = τF°kq) from linear regression of 18.2 M−1 and 20.1 M−1, respectively. The results that the broad PL spectra of C-dots were quenched highly efficiently by either electron acceptors or electron donors clearly confirm that C-dots are excellent as both electron acceptors and electron donors.12 Based on such properties, they designed a C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 (C-dots: carbon quantum dots) photocatalyst system, which exhibit high photocatalytic activity (see application part).
 Fig. 19  Luminescence decays (485 nm excitation, monitored with 550 nm narrow bandpass filter) of C-dots in (a) 2,4-dinitrotoluene and (b) DEA. Inset: Stern–Volmer plot for the quenching of luminescence QY (485 nm excitation) of the C-dots in (a) 2,4-dinitrotoluene and (b) DEA. (Reproduced from ref. 12.) 
The photocatalytic behavior is solvent-dependent and is more efficient in polar solvents, indicating an electron transfer quenching mechanism. There are few studies about the photoinduced electron transfer property of C-dots, and further work is warranted to investigate the applications of C-dots in catalysis, solar cells, and so on.
3.5. Enhancing PL
The major drawback limiting the application of C-dots in life sciences is their relatively low QYs (often less than 10%). Thus, the preparation of C-dots with high QYs is still a challenge.
Passivation and doping are popular approaches to enhance the luminescence of C-dots. Several organic polymers and diamine compounds have been used to passivate C-dots.56,58,78 The QYs of passivated C-dots can reach 20%,18 and even 60% upon purification.86 C-dots doped with zinc salts can give high QYs of up to 50%.9 While both strategies can significantly improve the QYs of C-dots, problems still exist. The modification processes are often time-consuming and impractical on a large scale,17,57,58 and the increased size of the modified C-dots restricts their further application.31,57 New strategies, besides passivation or doping, are required to produce luminescent C-dots with high QY.
Zheng et al. offered a simple pathway to enhance the luminescence of C-dots.87 Blue luminescent reduced-state C-dots were prepared by reducing C-dots with NaBH4. The QYs of the reduced-state C-dots increased from 2% to 24% and the maximum emission wavelength shifted from 520 to 450 nm (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Graphical representation of the synthesis of reduced-state C-dots (also called CDs) with blue luminescence from original C-dots. Inset: photographs of aqueous solutions of C-dots (left) and reduced C-dots (right) recorded under UV light (360 nm) (reproduced from ref. 87). 
Interestingly, C-dots synthesized via a solvothermal route had a sensitive effect on the ultraweak chemiluminescence (CL) reaction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and sodium bisulfite (NaHSO3).88 It was found that the CL emission intensity of H2O2–HSO3− was significantly enhanced by C-dots, yielding about a 60-fold increase in CL intensity. The enhanced CL was induced by the excited-state C-dots (CD*), which were produced from the electron-transfer annihilation of positively charged C-dots (CD˙+) and negatively charged C-dots (CD˙−).
Yu et al. reported the fabrication of C-dots by laser ablation of graphite powder dispersed in PEG200.89 Notably, via the esterification of carboxylic groups on the surface of C-dots, the intensity enhancement and wavelength tuning of PL peak were realized in the as-prepared C-dots in PEG200.
3.6. Upconversion photoluminescence
UCPL is an attractive optical property of C-dots, which enables many promising applications.4 Sun et al. reported that C-dots were strongly emissive in the visible region under irradiation by an argon-ion laser (458 nm) or a femtosecond pulsed laser for two-photon excitation in the near-infrared range (800 nm).7Fig. 21 shows that the one- and two-photon luminescence images for the same scanning area of C-dots are well matched. The representative two-photon luminescence spectrum shows that such C-dots have UCPL properties. Results from further bioimaging experiments in vitro also showed the UCPL property of C-dots. Kang et al. found that C-dots prepared by an alkali-assisted electrochemical method possessed size-dependent PL and excellent UCPL properties. Fig. 22 shows the PL spectra of C-dots excited by long-wavelength light (from 500 to 1000 nm) with the upconverted emissions located in the range from 325 to 425 nm.8a They attributed the UCPL property of C-dots to a multiphoton active process similar to that reported above. Other groups also reported that C-dots prepared from different synthesis methods possessed obvious UCPL properties,15,41,44,79,90,91 and similarly attributed the properties to this multiphoton active process.
 Fig. 21  Luminescence images (all scale bars 20 μm) of the C-dots with (a) argon ion laser excitation at 458 nm and (b) femtosecond pulsed laser excitation at 800 nm; (c) is an overlay of (a) and (b). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.) 
 Fig. 22  UCPL properties of C-dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.) 
However, Li et al. held the different view that the multiphoton active process was insufficient to explain the UCPL properties of C-dots.9 The PL spectrum and digital photo of GQDs excited by a 980 nm laser showed obvious upconverted green light emission located at about 525 nm. The upconverted emission peak shifted from 390 to 468 nm on changing the excitation wavelength from 600 to 800 nm. Note that the energy difference between the upconverted emission (Em) and excitation light (Ex) was almost constant at about 1.1 eV. To further confirm that and explain how UCPL comes from the GQDs, an energy level structural model was established, in which the UCPL spectrum could be regarded as an anti-Stokes transition as demonstrated in Fig. 23(d). The energy levels of π and σ orbitals were provided by the carbene ground-state multiplicity, which is related to the energy difference (δE) between the π and σ orbitals. In this work, the energy between the excitation light and the emission light in the upconversion process was close to 1.1 eV (Hoffmann determined δE should be below 1.5 eV). When a bunch of low-energy photons excite the electrons in the π orbital, the π electrons would transition to a high-energy state such as the LUMO, and then fall back to a low-energy state. Thus, an UCPL is emitted if the electrons transition back to the σ orbital. The electrons in the σ orbital can also be excited, they only can emit normal PL (Fig. 23a and (b)). This explains why the difference between upconversion excitation and emission light is a constant energy related to the energy difference of the π and σ orbitals.
 Fig. 23  A schematic illustration of various electronic transition processes of GQDs. (Reproduced from ref. 9.) 
The UCPL properties of C-dots may provide a new way to design and synthesize novel photocatalysts (through the combination of C-dots and different nanospecies, such as ZnO, Fe2O3,WO3, Au, Cu, and Pt) for photo-assisted catalytic reactions, which are discussed below.92,93
4. Photocatalysis
Nano-photocatalysis is an exciting and important topic in nanoscience and nanochemistry. Its main objective is the design of nanocatalysts (new generation catalysts) with strong and tunable chemical activity, specificity, and selectivity.74,94–101 A good photocatalyst should be able to utilize visible and/or near UV light, and be photo-stable (against photocorrosion), inexpensive, and environment-friendly.94–101 Nanoscience research can greatly impact on the development of new and more potent catalysts via design and control of photocatalyst properties, especially in terms of band gap energy, chemical composition, and surface modification. In particular, size-controlled C-dots show tunable emissions from near-infrared to blue wavelength, making them promising candidates as photocatalysts.
Recently, Kang et al. reported the facile one-step alkali-assisted electrochemical fabrication of C-dots with sizes of 1.2–3.8 nm, which possess size-dependent PL and excellent upconversion luminescence properties.8a Exploiting the excellent optical properties of C-dots, they demonstrated the design of photocatalyst systems (TiO2/C-dots and SiO2/C-dots complex systems, Fig. 24) to harness the use of the full spectrum of sunlight (based on the upconversion luminescence properties of C-dots). They explained the photocatalytic reaction process as follows (Fig. 25). Upon illumination of TiO2/C-dots or SiO2/C-dots nanocomposite photocatalyst, the C-dots absorb visible light, and then emit shorter wavelength light (325 to 425 nm) via upconversion, which in turn excites TiO2 or SiO2 to form electron/hole (e−/h+) pairs.8,94 The electron/hole pairs then react with the adsorbed oxidants/reducers (usually O2/OH−) to produce active oxygen radicals (e.g. ˙O2−, ˙OH), which cause degradation of the dyes (methyl blue, MB).8,102–104 Significantly, when C-dots are attached to the surface of TiO2 or SiO2, the relative position of the band edge of C-dots permits the transfer of electrons to TiO2 or SiO2 surface, allowing charge separation and stabilization, but concurrently hindering recombination.105 The electrons can be shuttled freely along the conducting network of C-dots,105 while the longer-lived holes on TiO2 or SiO2 then account for the higher activity of the complex photocatalyst system.8,105
 Fig. 24  (a and b) SEM image of photocatalysts for SiO2/C-dots and TiO2/C-dots; insets show the corresponding HRTEM images; (c) relationship between MB concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: SiO2/C-dots, TiO2/C-dots, SiO2 NPs, TiO2 NPs, and C-dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.) 
 Fig. 25  Possible catalytic mechanism for TiO2/C-dots under visible light (reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons). 
Based on the same principle, Kang et al. reported a series of C-dot-based photocatalysts with excellent catalytic activity, such as C-dots/ZnO, C-dots/Fe2O3, C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4, and so on.11–13
For the C-dots/Fe2O3 composite, Kang et al. demonstrated that the Fe2O3/C-dots composites have a continuous absorption band in the range of 550–800 nm compared to the narrower band of Fe2O3 nanoparticles, suggesting Fe2O3/C-dots have a higher photocatalytic activity for the target reactions.11 The photocatalytic results for the degradation of gas-phase benzene and methanol show that Fe2O3/C-dots composites exhibit much higher activity than Fe2O3 nanoparticles alone. As naked Fe2O3 is an inefficient photocatalyst, C-dots must play an important role in the high photocatalytic activity of the Fe2O3/C-dots composites. Kang et al. explained that C-dots play three important roles in the Fe2O3/C-dots composite during the photocatalytic process. Firstly, C-dots can act as an electron reservoir to trap electrons emitted from Fe2O3 particles excited by visible light, thus reducing electron–hole recombination in the Fe2O3/C-dots composite. The oxygen radicals (O2−) would form from the combination of electrons with O2 adsorbed on the surfaces of C-dots. Under 24 h visible light irradiation in argon atmosphere, the degradation efficiency of benzene was found to be about 19% and 17% with the assistance of Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/C-dots, respectively, much lower than that observed in the air atmosphere (37% and 80%, respectively). This phenomenon also shows that O2 and C-dots indeed play an important role in the higher degradation efficiency of benzene in the air atmosphere. Secondly, the C-dots possess UCPL properties, so that they can absorb longer wavelength light and then emit shorter wavelength light via upconversion, which can in turn excite Fe2O3 to form electron–hole pairs (Fig. 26).8 Thirdly, for benzene degradation, the π–π interaction between the conjugated structure of C-dots and benzene is beneficial to the enrichment of benzene on the surface of Fe2O3/C-dots composite. The three factors together account for the enhanced photocatalytic activity of the Fe2O3/C-dots composite compared to Fe2O3 nanoparticles. Kwak and Yu reported that C-dots/mesoporous hematite (α-Fe2O3) complex photocatalysts show similar enhanced activity for photocatalytic reaction.106
 Fig. 26  Schematic model for the photocatalytic process of Fe2O3/C-dots composites under visible light (reproduced from ref. 11). 
Similarly to C-dots/Fe2O3, the C-dots/ZnO obtained by one-step hydrothermal reaction also possess high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of gas-phase benzene and methanol.13 The photocatalytic mechanism of C-dots/ZnO is shown in Fig. 27, in which the main functions of C-dots are similar to those in Fe2O3/C-dots. Firstly, C-dots were loaded on ZnO surface and formed the “dyade” structure, providing access to photo-induced charge transfer transitions under visible light irradiation. At the dyade structure, the photo-induced electron is transferred to joint charge transfer states predominately located at the C-dots, while the separated hole stays electronically and structurally near ZnO. This process can effectively hinder the electron–hole recombination, and guarantee the high reactivity of photogenerated electron and hole excited by visible light. The oxygen radicals (˙O2−) would then be formed via the combination of electrons in the conducting network of C-dots with O2 adsorbed C-dots surfaces (Fig. 27a). Secondly, the C-dots with UCPL properties can convert longer wavelength light to the shorter wavelength light, which can in turn excite ZnO to form electron–hole pairs (Fig. 27b). Thirdly, during the degradation process of benzene, the π–π interaction between the conjugated structure of C-dots and benzene enhances adsorption of benzene on the surface of ZnO/C-dots nanocomposites. The three cooperative effects are collectively responsible for the enhanced photocatalytic activity of ZnO/C-dots nanocomposites compared to bare ZnO nanoparticles.
 Fig. 27  Schematic model for the photocatalytic process of ZnO/C-dots composites under visible light (reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Kang et al. reported the fabrication and catalysis activity of Ag3PO4, C-dots/Ag3PO4, Ag/Ag3PO4 and C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 photocatalysts.12Fig. 28 shows the SEM and HRTEM images of C-dots/Ag3PO4 and C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalysts, revealing the crystalline structure of the composites. Remarkably, Ag3PO4 complex photocatalysts containing C-dots feature much enhanced photocatalytic activity and structural stability for methyl orange (MO) photodegradation. Specifically, the C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity among all the Ag3PO4-based catalyst systems. The superior activity of the complex photocatalysts is attributed to the following salient features. The C-dot layer on the surface of Ag3PO4 and Ag/Ag3PO4 particles can effectively protect Ag3PO4 from dissolution in aqueous solution. The unique photoinduced electron transfer properties of C-dots22 can protect Ag3PO4 from photocorrosion. The UCPL property of C-dots make the C-dots/Ag3PO4 and C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex systems more effective in utilizing the full spectrum of sunlight so as to enhance the photocatalytic activity. In addition, C-dots can act as an electron reservoir to hinder electron/hole recombination probability. Furthermore, in the C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst, the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of Ag particles (intense electric fields at the Ag particle surface) can further increase the formation rate of electron/hole pairs at the nearby surface Ag3PO4 particle (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 28  (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of C-dots/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst. (c) SEM and (d) HRTEM images of C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst. Insets in (b) and (d) are SEM images of typical single particle (scale bar: 200 nm) (reproduced from ref. 12). 
 Fig. 29  Schematic model for the important roles of C-dots in the high photocatalytic activity and good stability of C-dots/Ag3PO4 (reproduced from ref. 12). 
In addition, the presence of C-dots enhances the stability of the composite photocatalysts. Kang et al. studied the crystalline structures of Ag3PO4, Ag/Ag3PO4, C-dots/Ag3PO4 and C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 after MO photodegradation experiments to evaluate structural stability. The XRD patterns of Ag3PO4 and the related complex photocatalysts after 10 repeats of the MO decomposition experiments show distinct diffraction peaks of metallic silver appearing in the XRD pattern of pure Ag3PO4, indicating partial reduction of Ag3PO4 into Ag particles during MO degradation. However, no obvious crystalline structure changes could be observed in the XRD pattern of C-dots/Ag3PO4, indicating that C-dots greatly enhanced the stability of the Ag3PO4 photocatalyst. The XRD patterns also show no obvious structure changes for C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 due to photodegradation experiments compared to the corresponding samples. Furthermore, the C-dots/Ag3PO4 and C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 catalysts were investigated by recycling them in repeated MO degradation experiments, and they were found to remain stable during the repeated experiments without exhibiting any significant loss of photocatalytic activity.12
Lee et al. reported a facile ultrasonic route for the fabrication of GQDs with excitation-independent downconversion and UCPL behavior.107 They further designed the complex photocatalysts (rutile TiO2/GQD and anatase TiO2/GQD systems) to harness the full visible spectrum of sunlight based on the upconversion of the GQDs (Fig. 30). Significantly, the photocatalytic rate of the rutile TiO2/GQD complex system is ca. 9 times larger than that of the anatase TiO2/GQD complex under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation in the degradation of methylene blue. The proposed mechanism is that the upconverted PL peak of GQDs is at 407 nm (3.05 eV), which is larger in energy than the band gap of rutile TiO2 at 3.0 eV (414 nm), but smaller than that of anatase TiO2 at 3.2 eV (388 nm). Therefore, the upconversion PL emission of GQDs is energetically capable of exciting the rutile TiO2 but not the anatase TiO2 to form e−/h+ pairs.
 Fig. 30  (a) Relationship between MB concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: rutile TiO2/GQDs, CaIn2O4, anatase TiO2/GQDs, GQDs, rutile TiO2 NPs, and anatase TiO2 NPs. Schematic of photocatalytic process for (b) rutile TiO2/GQD and (c) anatase TiO2/GQD under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Based on the PL and light-sensitive photocatalytic properties of C-dots produced from a water-assisted electrochemical approach, Kang et al. designed a high-efficiency complex TiO2/C-dots catalyst.8b They performed photo-degradation of MB and photovoltaic cell tests to evaluate the visible light photo-catalytic activity of pure TiO2, C-dots and TiO2/C-dots, respectively. As shown in Fig. 31a, the as-obtained TiO2/C-dots are able to completely degrade MB within 4 h, whereas P25 and C-dots show much lower degradation efficiencies (17.5% and 29.4%), and pure TiO2 show no degradation of MB under the same irradiation conditions. Meanwhile, transient photocurrents (Fig. 31b) of TiO2/C-dots and P25 were measured under irradiation with wavelength longer than 510 nm. When irradiated with wavelengths longer than 510 nm, TiO2/C-dots show the highest photocurrent (−2.24 μA cm−2) compared to that of P25 (0 μA cm−2).
 Fig. 31  (a) Comparison of visible light-driven photocatalytic activity of pure TiO2, C-dots, TiO2/C-dots and P25 for photo-degradation of MB. (b) Transient photocurrents of the as-prepared TiO2/C-dots and P25 irradiated with the wavelength larger than 510 nm. (c) Proposed formation mechanism of dyadic structure with charge transfer-type orbital hybridizations at the surface of TiO2 and C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 8b.) 
Possible mechanisms to explain the better photocatalytic performance of TiO2/C-dots can be attributed to three features (Fig. 31c). Firstly, hybridization of C-dots with TiO2 extends the light response of TiO2 into the visible range of the solar spectrum, due to the electronic coupling between the pi states of graphite-essential C-dots and the conduction band states of TiO2. Such electronic coupling would induce a smaller nanohybrid band gap compared to pure TiO2, or new carbon energy levels in the TiO2 bandgap also leading to a smaller bandgap energy and a red shift. In addition, the up-conversion properties of the C-dots will transfer longer wavelength light into shorter wavelength emission. Consequently, light with a wider range of wavelengths, from UV to visible, can be used by the TiO2/C-dots. O2 adsorbed on the surface of the C-dots can accept e− and form O2−, and oxidize MB directly on the surface. Secondly, C-dots can combine with TiO2 efficiently to form TiO2/C-dots, which can generate a large amount of photoreactive species (O2− and ˙OH) under visible light. These photoreactive species can diffuse easily in reactants and products during the reaction because of the high surface area of the TiO2/C-dots. Thirdly, when the TiO2/C-dots photocatalysts are excited, C-dots can act as an electron reservoir to trap electrons emitted from TiO2 under irradiation, and thus hinder electron–hole recombination.
Water-soluble fluorescent N-doped C-dots (NCDs) were synthesized from a one-pot ultrasonic reaction between glucose and ammonium hydroxide. Besides strong luminescence in the visible-to-near infrared range, NCDs displayed clear UCPL properties. Moreover, the NCDs showed excellent photocatalytic properties in the photodegradation of methyl orange under visible light.91
Kang et al. prepared C-dots/Cu2O composite with protruding nanostructures on the surface by a facile one-step ultrasonic treatment. They demonstrated that this photocatalytic system could harness (near) infrared (NIR) light to enhance its photocatalytic activity based on the collective effect of the superior light reflecting ability of Cu2O protruding nanostructures and the UCPL property of C-dots (Fig. 32a and b).94b The photocatalytic process of C-dots/Cu2O composite under (N)IR light is schematically illustrated in Fig. 32c. When the C-dots/Cu2O composite photocatalyst is illuminated (Fig. 32c, (1)), the protruding nanostructures allow multiple reflections of (N)IR light among the vacant spaces between these protruding particles, which can make better use of the source light and therefore offering an improved photocatalytic activity. Additionally, C-dots can absorb (N)IR light (>700 nm), and then emit shorter wavelength light (390–564 nm) as a result of up-conversion, which in turn further excites Cu2O to form electron/hole (e−/h+) pairs (Fig. 32c, (2)).8a The electron/hole pairs then react with the adsorbed oxidants/reducers (usually O2/OH−) to produce active oxygen radicals (e.g. ˙O2, ˙OH), which subsequently cause the degradation of organic dye (MB).92–94 Significantly, when C-dots are attached on the surface of Cu2O, the relative position of C-dots band edge permits the transfer of electrons from the Cu2O surface, allowing charge separation, stabilization, and then hindering of e−/h+ pairs' recombination. The electrons can be shuttled freely along the conducting network of C-dots, and the longer-lived holes on the Cu2O then account for the higher activity of the composite photocatalyst.
 Fig. 32  (a) Up-converted PL spectra of C-dots; (b) energy distributions of up-converted emissions of C-dots located in the range from 390 to 564 nm (shown as shaded areas); (c) schematic photocatalytic mechanism for C-dots/Cu2O composite under (N)IR light irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 94b.) 
For energy saving and green environment issues, C-dots offer great potential for a broad range of applications, including biosensors, bioimaging, laser, and light-emitting diodes. They may also serve as a promising candidate for a new type of fluorescence marker, as well as high-efficiency catalyst design for applications in bioscience and energy technology.
5. Optoelectronics
Graphene has attracted tremendous research interest due to its large surface area, superior mechanical flexibility, high carrier transport mobility and good thermal/chemical stability.23b In particular, the high transport mobility and environmentally friendly properties of graphene meet the important requirements of optoelectronic devices.23c,d Apart from the conducting film and transparent anode developed previously,23e–g high mobility of graphene renders it a promising electrode and electron-acceptor material for photovoltaic device applications.23a However, the easy aggregation and the poor dispersion of 2D graphene sheets in common solvents limit its optoelectronic application. Solution-processable functionalized graphenes (SPFGs) has been developed to solve such problem,23h but their non-uniform size and shape (on a scale of several hundred nanometers and even micrometers) remains a daunting challenge for the fabrication of high-quantity photovoltaic devices, with active layer thicknesses in only nanometer scales.
To facilitate the application of graphene in nanodevices and to effectively tune the bandgap of graphenes, a promising approach is to convert the 2D graphene sheets into 0D C-dots. Apart from unique electron transport properties,23i new phenomena associated with edge effects and quantum confinement are expected from C-dots.23j Additionally, the compatible surface chemistry, excellent photostability, good solubility in polar solvents and extensive optical absorption throughout the visible and near-infrared wavelength regions render C-dots potentially useful sensitizers for photovoltaic applications.23a,108–110
Li et al. applied colloidal GQDs with green luminescence as the electron acceptor materials in conjugated polymer, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)-based thin film solar cells.23aFig. 33a and b shows respectively the schematic and the energy level alignment of a device configuration of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/P3HT:GQDs/Al, in which GQDs (c = 10 wt%) provided an effective interface for charge separation and a pathway for electron transport, as clearly evidenced by the greatly increased photocurrent as compared to the device fabricated with P3HT only (Fig. 33c). The device performance was further improved after thermal annealing, with an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.28%.
 Fig. 33  Schematic (a) and energy band (b) diagrams of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al device. (c) J–V characteristic curves for the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT/Al, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al devices after annealing at 140 °C for 10 min, single log scale. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 23a. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.) 
Yan et al. found that GQDs have high optical absorptivity and nearly optimized absorption in the visible and near IR region.4,51 Additionally, the calculated energy levels in GQDs suggested the possibility of electron injection from GQDs to large bandgap semiconductors (e.g. TiO2) upon photoexcitation and regeneration of GQDs by accepting an electron from I− (Fig. 34a). Thus, GQDs provide excellent opportunities for the development of inexpensive, high-performance GQD-sensitized solar cells by substituting GQDs for metal organic dyes as photosensitizers. As a proof-of-concept example, Yan et al. exploited GQDs with 168 conjugated carbon atoms to sensitize a nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanode and obtained a photocurrent density of 200 μA cm−2 under AM (air mass, path-length through the atmosphere relative to the vertical thickness of the atmosphere) 1.5 illumination (Fig. 34b).51 The low performance was due largely to the low affinity of GQDs to TiO2 surface since no chemical binding was formed as in conventional dye-sensitized solar cells, in which ruthenium dyes are covalently bonded to the TiO2 surface for much higher optical absorption and faster exciton dissociation.
 Fig. 34  (a) Calculated energy level alignment. (b) J–V characteristics of colloidal GQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle solar cells. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Zhu et al. studied the photon-to-electron conversion capability of GQDs under different light sources (UV or near infrared light).111 The photocurrents generated by GQDs–PEG and GQDs on ITO electrodes were measured by a three-electrode system. The GQDs–PEG photoelectrode generated considerable photocurrent with both 365 nm UV light and 808 nm NIR laser, while the pure GQD photoelectrode showed lower photocurrent than the GQDs–PEG. So the authors thought GQDs could be a new solar cell dopant material and that the light of the photon-to-electron conversion may be extended from UV to near-infrared range.4 Gupta et al. demonstrated that GQDs blended with regioregular P3HT or poly (2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4 phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) polymer resulted in a significant improvement in solar cell efficiency or organic light emitting diode (OLED) characteristics as compared to graphene nanosheets (GS) blended conjugated polymers.109
Mirtchev et al. fabricated a C-dots-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cell.108 It is known that the most effective Ru-based sensitizers contain a number of carboxylate ligands to enable coordination of the dye to the TiO2 surface as shown in Fig. 35a, and the anchoring scheme of sensitizer to TiO2 can be mimicked by surface functionalized C-dots.112 The absorption spectrum of a thin film of C-dots is shown in Fig. 35b, displaying the broad absorption throughout the visible region. An electronic bandgap of approximately 1.1 eV for an indirect transition and 3.1 eV for a direct transition was calculated using Tauc relations113a with the experimental absorption onset at approximately 800 nm, see Fig. 35b. The current–voltage characteristics of the CQD-sensitized solar cell prepared from an aqueous CQD solution under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation are shown in Fig. 35d. A short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.53 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.38 V were produced with a fill factor (FF) of 0.64 for a power conversion efficiency of 0.13%. Cells fabricated from MeOH CQD solutions and aqueous C-dots refluxed in HNO3 to ensure complete surface oxidation showed similar performance, whereas a non-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 gave an efficiency of 0.03%. Similar to the recent report of graphene dot-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells, the Jsc seems to the limiting factor on the efficiency of these cells, with both the Voc and FF values comparable to those of Ru-complex sensitized cells.51
 Fig. 35  (a) CQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle and the proposed CQD–TiO2 bonds, (b) UV–Vis–NIR absorption spectrum of CQD thin film on quartz substrate, (c) Current–voltage characteristics of CQD-sensitized solar cells prepared from a MeOH CQD solution and from an aqueous solution of C-dots refluxed in nitric acid to ensure complete surface oxidation and (d) current–voltage characteristics of aqueous CQD-sensitized solar cell. (Reproduced from ref. 108.) 
Since C-dots exhibit relatively high QY, they may be a good light converter for use in light emitting diode (LED) applications.15b,113b,c Lau et al. investigated the light converting property of C-dots deriving from glucose.15b To demonstrate white light emission via down-converting blue light, C-dots were coated onto a commercially available blue LED. As shown in Fig. 36, the uncoated blue LED emitted blue light centered at 410 nm. After coating with C-dots, the intensity of the blue light weakens, but a broad band appears at ∼510 nm. The corresponding LED with and without applied voltage are shown in the left-hand side of the inset of Fig. 36. The applied voltage and current for the LED were 2.9 V and 10 mA, respectively. The Commission International d'Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity coordinates for the blue LEDs with and without C-dots coating are shown in the right-hand side of the inset of Fig. 36. Clearly, with a C-dot layer, the CIE chromaticity coordinates of the blue LED are shifted from (0.242, 0.156) to (0.282, 0.373), demonstrating that the C-dots are capable of converting blue light into white light. The water-soluble C-dots exhibit excellent light converting properties as compared to compound-semiconductor-based QDs such as multishell-structured CdSe/ZnS/CdSZnS and CdSe/CdS/ZnS/CdSZnS QDs.
 Fig. 36  Color converter of the GQDs. Luminescence spectra of the blue LED with and without GQDs coating. Left inset: photographs of the GQD coated LED without (top) and with applied voltage (bottom). Right inset: the CIE chromaticity coordinates for the illuminating blue LED with and without GQD layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Choi et al. develop a simple solution method to prepare emissive hybrid quantum dots consisting of a ZnO core wrapped in a shell of single-layer graphene (ZnO–graphene quasi-quantum dots, ZnO–graphene QD).94c They then use these quantum dots to make a white LED with a brightness of 798 cd m−2. The strain introduced by curvature opens an electronic bandgap of 250 meV in the graphene, and two additional blue emission peaks are observed in the luminescence spectrum of the quantum dot. Density functional theory, calculations reveal that these additional peaks result from a splitting of the lowest unoccupied orbitals of the graphene into three orbitals with distinct energy levels (Fig. 37).
 Fig. 37  Photoluminescence and electroluminescence transition scheme for ZnO–graphene quasi-quantum dots. Transitions 1, 2 and 3 correspond to electron transitions from the conduction band (CB) of ZnO, LUMO + 2 and LUMO levels induced by G–Oepoxy to the valence band (VB) of ZnO, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 94c. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.) 
6. Energy and charge transfer
Carbon-based systems play a major role in industrial and technological advances.114,115a For fuel cell development or electrochemical energy storage, carbon with high surface area is instrumental in maximizing the performance of catalyst and energy systems.115b,c Increasing the surface area of carbon by fine particle dispersion or by using porous carbon has advanced the development of storage batteries and electrocatalysts for fuel cells.115c A lot of work has been devoted to the study of CNTs, graphene/GO/reduced-GO(RGO) and fullerene-based composite, especially on the energy and charge transfer research of these composites.115a,d–i For example, three specific approaches for designing nanohybrid assemblies are deposition of metal nanoparticles, anchoring semiconductor nanoparticles, and functionalization with photoactive molecules.115a,d–f
The interactions between graphene-based carbon nanostructures and excited states of molecules/semiconductor nanoparticles often involve energy and/or electron transfer. The emission of the excited molecule (or semiconductor nanoparticle) serves as an excellent probe to monitor the interactions and thus establish a quenching pathway. Brus and co-workers demonstrated efficient energy transfer from individual CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals to single- and few-layer graphene.115g The fluorescence intensity of single nanocrystals was quenched by a factor of ∼70 on single-layer graphene, and the quenching efficiency increased with the layer number (Fig. 38). Zhang et al. reported that MWCNTs enhanced the separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs produced in the ZnO-nanowires (NWs) because of the unique three-dimensional structure of the ZnO-NWs/MWCNTs heterostructure.115h The electron transfer process in this heterojunction is similar to that in the semiconductor metal composite, as indicated in Fig. 39.
 Fig. 38  Wide-field fluorescence image of individual CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals on quartz and on single-layer graphene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 115a. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) 
 Fig. 39  Schematic diagram of charge separation and transportation at the ZnO-NWs/MWCNTs heterojunction. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 115h. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.) 
Given the economical cost of graphene and the need to seek alternate materials for next-generation electronic devices, there is a significant drive within the scientific community to gain a greater understanding of the properties of C-dots and explore new applications. The potential of C-dot-based solar cells has been explored. However, photochemical and photovoltaic aspects of such nanocarbon structures are relatively less studied. They have the same core issue: energy and charge transfer in the related nanosystem.
There have been several reports highlighting improvements in the photocatalysis of C-dots/semiconductor composites and the degradation of organic compounds.8,11–13 For example, the enhanced degradation rate seen with C-dots/TiO2 as compared to that with TiO2 alone in these systems highlights the beneficial role of C-dots.8 The origin of such beneficial effects is rather indirect and not initiated by the direct absorption of light by C-dots. In particular, the carbon nanostructure facilitates dispersion of catalyst particles, improved charge separation within the C-dots/TiO2 composite, and increased concentration of organic molecules near the catalyst surface. These arguments are consistent with earlier reports that showed TiO2 deposited on adsorbent supports, such as activated carbon and graphene, can have a significant role in concentrating the pollutants from low solution-phase concentration.114,115 In addition, C-dots loaded on the semiconductor surface and forming the composite structure would provide access to photo-induced charge transfer transitions under light irradiation. At the composite structure, the photo-induced electron is transferred to joint charge transfer states predominately located at the C-dots, while the separated hole stays electronically and structurally near the wide bandgap semiconductor. This process can effectively hinder the electron–hole recombination, and guarantee the high reactivity of photogenerated electron and hole excited by visible light. Then the oxygen radicals (˙O2−) are formed by the combination of electrons in the conducting network of C-dots with O2 adsorbed on the surfaces of C-dots.8,13 Moreover, the C-dots with UCPL properties can convert the longer wavelength to shorter wavelength light, which can in turn excite wide bandgap semiconductors to form electron–hole pairs.8,11–13
Qu's group reveal energy transfer from C-dots to graphene and consequently construct a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensor which could be used for measuring the concentration of potassium ions (K+) with high selectivity and tunable dynamic range (Fig. 40).115k They design a model in which the donor (C-dots) and the acceptor (graphene) are brought into FRET proximity through specific cation–ligand complexation (Fig. 40). C-dots are covalently aminated, and graphene is noncovalently functionalized with 18-crown-6 ether (18C6E). The known tight binding of primary alkyl-ammonium with 18C6E10 will bring C-dots and graphene into appropriate proximity and hence induce energy transfer. Thereafter, the FRET process is inhibited because of competition between K+ and ammonium for 18C6E, which has high potassium selectivity.
 Fig. 40  Schematic illustration of the FRET model based on C-dots–graphene and the mechanism of K+ determination. (Reproduced from ref. 115k.) 
Notably, C-dot-based photovoltaic devices with enhanced performance have been successfully fabricated. C-dots provided an effective interface for charge separation and a pathway for electron transport, as clearly evidenced by the greatly increased photocurrent as compared to the device fabricated without C-dots.23a,51 In particular, a C-dot-decorated PEG photoelectrode can generate photocurrent with 808 nm NIR laser, and serve as a new solar cell dopant material, and the light of the photon-to-electron conversion may be extended from ultraviolet to near infrared.111 The calculated energy levels in C-dots suggested the possibility of electron injection from C-dots to wide bandgap semiconductors (e.g., TiO2) upon photoexcitation and regeneration of C-dots by accepting an electron.51
The MB–GQDs dispersed in the MEH-PPV polymer provided more electrical transport paths, which resulted in an enhancement of charge injection and hence an increase in carrier density, thus achieving a lower turn-on voltage and a much higher efficiency.109 The significant improvements provided by GQDs in solar cell efficiency or organic light emitting diode characteristics are higher than those provided by graphene nanosheets blended conjugated polymers.
Recently, Guo et al. studied the property of electron transfer quenching of the fluorescence of C-dots by nitroxide radicals.115j The fluorescence of C-dots was found to be efficiently quenched by the paramagnetic nitroxide radical. A singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) facilitating electron transfer was proposed to account for the quenching of the fluorescence of C-dots in the C-dot@TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxide free radical) conjugate, formed via electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged C-dots and the cationic 4-amino-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxide free radical (4-AT).
The study of C-dot-based energy and charge transfer properties opens up new avenues in the design of optoelectronic and light-energy conversion devices or systems.8,15b,23a,108–110 Indeed, careful design of hybrid assemblies is necessary to exploit the electronic properties of C-dots. Multifunctional C-dot-based materials with different semiconductor and metal nanoparticles can provide new pathways to design catalyst systems for light energy conversion.8,11–13,107 The abilities of C-dots in the storage and transport of electrons has yet to be exploited fully. Carefully designed C-dots composites have the potential to expand the capacity of next-generation energy storage, photovoltaic devices, and photocatalysts.
7. Bioimaging
Traditional QDs, such as CdTe and related core–shell nanoparticles, have been used in various in vitro and in vivo optical imaging experiments.116–118 As the QDs contain toxic heavy metals, their application has raised health and environmental concerns.117 Due to their excellent PL properties and low toxicity, C-dots may be an attractive candidate for bioimaging applications.2,4,119–129
Sun et al. and other groups have studied the use of C-dots in bioimaging applications.7,17,18,58 They reported the potential of C-dots passivated with PPEI-EI for two-photon luminescence microscopy using human breast cancer MCF-7 cells.7 Zhu et al. reported the bioimaging application of GQDs by incubating a solution of MG-63 (human osteosarcoma) cells with suspensions of GQDs from the stock solution with Dulbecco's phosphate buffer saline (DPBS).120 Chang et al. used pig kidney cell line (LLC-PK1 cells) to test the practicality of the as-prepared C-dots for cell imaging.127 C-dots were localized in the cell membrane and cytoplasm of LLC-PK1 cells. The C-dots were likely internalized into the LLC-PK1 cells through endocytosis.7,129 When excited at longer wavelengths (510–530 nm), red fluorescence was observed from LLC-PK1 cells that had been cultured in a medium containing 1.2 mg mL−1 C-dots for 24 h. There was no autofluorescence from cells when excited at the same wavelength. The strong PL intensity in the cells demonstrated the stability of the C-dots, confirming their strong and stable fluorescence in high ionic strength media. The cell viability was measured after cells had been treated with different amounts of C-dots (0–2.4 mg mL−1). The average cell viability was greater than 95% at a C-dots concentration of up to 1.8 mg mL−1. The results revealed that C-dots are more biocompatible than QDs.2,130
A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells were used to evaluate the cytocompatibility of the amino-functionalized C-dots obtained by hydrothermal carbonization of chitosan.124 The cell viability of the C-dots was determined by a methylthiazolteterazolium (MTT) assay.131 MTT assays of cell viability studies suggested that the C-dots exhibited low cytotoxicity and posed insignificant toxic effects. These results suggested that C-dots can be used in high concentration for imaging or other biomedical applications. C-dots were introduced into A549 cells to show their bioimaging capabilities using a confocal microscopy test in vitro. The results showed that the photoluminescent spots were observed only in the cell membrane and cytoplasmic area of the cell, but were very weak in the central region corresponding to the nucleus, indicating that C-dots easily penetrated into the cell but did not enter the nuclei. The observation is consistent with previous studies on the interaction of living cells with nanomaterials, in which genetic disruption did not occur.132 The results further confirmed the low cytotoxicity of C-dots.

In vivo optical imaging using C-dots produced by laser ablation has been demonstrated by Sun et al.17 Recently, C-dots made from MWNTs were chosen for in vivo fluorescence imaging studies by Liu and Kang et al.39b A nude mouse was subcutaneously administered with C-dots at three different locations. Various excitations including blue, green, yellow, orange, red, deep red, and NIR light with center wavelengths at 455, 523, 595, 605, 635, 661, and 704 nm, respectively, were applied during in vivo imaging of the mouse. After spectral unmixing to differentiate the background autofluorescence (green), the subcutaneously injected spots (red) on the mouse were seen in these fluorescence images under all of the different light excitations (Fig. 41). Compared to images acquired using blue (455 nm) and green (523 nm) light excitation, those taken under longer wavelength excitations (595 nm and beyond) showed much better signal-to-background separation. Although the fluorescence emission of C-dots is weaker at longer wavelengths, the tissue autofluorescence background decreased even more, resulting in an improved signal-to-noise ratio under red and NIR excitation. In vivo optical imaging at longer wavelengths is usually preferred owing to the improved photon tissue penetration and reduced background autofluorescence, especially in the NIR region. The capability of C-dots for NIR in vivo fluorescence imaging (excitation = 704 nm, emission = 770 nm) demonstrates the great potential of C-dots for use as optical nanoprobes in biomedical imaging.
 Fig. 41  
In vivo fluorescence imaging. (A) In vivo fluorescence images of a C-dots-injected mouse. The images were taken under various excitation wavelength at 455, 523, 595, 605, 635, 661, and 704 nm. Red and green represent the fluorescent signals of C-dots and the tissue autofluorescence, respectively. (B) Signal-to-background separation of the spectral image taken under the NIR (704 nm) excitation. The fluorescence of C-dots was well separated from the tissue autofluorescence background. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39b. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.) 
8. Sensor and surface-enhanced Raman scattering
Based on their excellent properties, C-dots can be designed for sensors,115k,133–139 such as biosensors for DNA,133,134 nitrite sensing,135 sensors for phosphate,136a glucose,136b α-fetoprotein136c or metal ions.137–139 For example, Li et al. reported the use of unmodified C-dots as novel and environmentally friendly fluorescence probes for the sensing of Hg2+ and biothiols with high sensitivity and selectivity. The luminescence emission of C-dots arises from the radiative recombination of excitons, similarly to QDs.140 On the other hand, Hg2+ can quench the fluorescence (FL) of QDs due to facilitation of non-radiative electron/hole recombination through an effective electron transfer process.138 The strategy inspired by these phenomena and the approach are depicted in Fig. 42. Initially, the free C-dots showed strong FL in aqueous solution. However, the FL of C-dot was quenched significantly in the presence of Hg2+ through the charge transfer process. Meanwhile, due to the strong binding preference of biothiols toward Hg2+ by forming a Hg2+–S bond,141,142 Hg2+ was removed from the surface of C-dots and thus the FL of C-dots could be recovered. Therefore, by taking advantage of the observed FL change, a facile FL sensor can be fabricated to allow sensitive detection of Hg2+ and biothiols.
 Fig. 42  Schematic illustration of detection mechanism of Hg2+ and biothiols using C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 138.) 
Au nanoparticles have been widely used as efficient enhancers for Raman scattering and this phenomenon is known as the SERS effect.143 SERS effect is recognized to be due to the excitation of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) on metal surface, which greatly increases the local E-field near the surface. SERS has found important applications in chemistry, biology and material science as an ultra-sensitive detection technique capable of identifying traces of molecules.144–146 Conventional SERS substrates are constructed by placing metal nanoparticles on planar surfaces, which thereby have a limited surface area. The replacement of planar surfaces by spatially defined nanoporous surfaces with large surface areas can adsorb more molecules for SERS signals and further improve the Raman detection sensitivity. Indeed, Jiang and coworkers147 have demonstrated that the Raman enhancement effect can be dramatically increased by replacing the planar surface with a unique nanoporous superaligned carbon nanotube film with cross stacking.
Fan et al. have assembled well-confined two-dimensional (2D) and 3D C-dos honeycomb structures148 by electrodeposition of oxygen-rich functional C-dots within the interstitial voids of assemblies of SiO2 nanospheres, followed by extraction of the SiO2 cores with HF treatment. Although made from quantum sized C-dots, the C-dot assemblies presented a solid porous framework (Fig. 43a and b), which can be used as a sacrificial template for the fabrication of new nanostructures made from other functional materials. Based on the unique honeycomb architecture of C-dots, which allows more efficient adsorption of molecules, the Au nanoparticles formed on C-dots honeycomb exhibit 8–11 times stronger SERS than the widely used Au nanoparticle SERS substrate for the sensitive detection of target molecules. This work provides a new approach for the design and fabrication of ultrasensitive SERS platforms for various detections. Shi et al. also performed similar work on C-dots or C-dots/metal composites for SERS application (Fig. 43c).149,150
 Fig. 43  SEM images of Au deposited on Si (a) and on the C-dots honeycomb structure (b), and (c) Raman spectra of 4 × 10−6 M R6G drop-cast on to a Si wafer (□), adsorbed on Au-coated Si (◇), the C-dots honeycomb on Si (△), the Au-deposited C-dots honeycomb on Si (○) and the Raman spectrum of the C-dots honeycomb on Si (☆). The inset in (b) is a TEM image of Au nanoparticles deposited on the wall of the C-dots honeycomb. Scale bars in a and b are 100 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 148.) 
9. Outlook
In this review, we have described the recent advances in the research on C-dots, focusing on their synthesis, surface functionalization, PL properties, and applications in photocatalysis, energy and sensor issues. A variety of synthesis techniques already exist for producing C-dots of different characteristics. The PL and optical properties of C-dots are both interesting and intriguing, constituting a rich and hot research topic. The potential of C-dots in the storage and transport of electrons impacted by light has yet to be exploited fully. In the future, we expect the advent of more facile and robust synthetic routes and creative applications to better realize the potential of the increasingly important C-dot materials. C-dots stand to have a huge impact in biotechnological and environmental applications because of their potential as nontoxic alternates to traditional heavy-metal-based QDs. In addition, the unique photoinduced electron transfer ability, as well as excellent light harvesting capability, make C-dots an exceptional candidate for photocatalytic and photovoltaic applications. Carefully designed C-dots composites have the potential to expand the capabilities of next-generation energy-storage and photovoltaic devices, photocatalysts and sensors. By surface and band gap modification of C-dots via functionalization or semiconductors, we can expect to design novel catalysts from C-dots for green chemistry and energy issues.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (no. 2012CB825800), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (no. 51132006, 51072126, 21073127, 21071104, 91027041), a Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of P R China (FANEDD) (no. 200929), a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project no. CityU102010), a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD), a Suzhou Planning Project of Science and Technology (ZXG2012028) and a project supported by the Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (Grant no. 11KJB150015). We also thank the Innovation Program of Graduate Students in Jiangsu Province (no: CXZZ11_0097).
Notes and references
X. Y. Xu, R. Ray, Y. L. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. G. Esteves da Silva and H. M. R. Goncalves, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2011, 30, 1327 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686 RSC .
H. P. Liu, T. Ye and C. D. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, K. G. Qu, B. L. Xu, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 908 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S. Y. Xie and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. T. Li, X. D. He, Z. H. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. L. Liu, S. Y. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. B. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Ming, Z. Ma, Y. Liu, K. M. Pan, H. Yu, F. Wang and Z. H. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9526 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580 RSC .
A. Mehta, E. J. Nelson, S. M. Webb and J. K. Holt, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 102 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Zhang, H. Ming, S. Lian, H. Huang, H. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and S. T. Lee, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10822 RSC .
H. C. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Ming, H. T. Li, L. L. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10501 RSC .
H. Yu, H. C. Zhang, H. T. Li, H. Huang, Y. Liu, H. Ming and Z. H. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1031 RSC .
S. C. Ray, A. Saha, N. R. Jana and R. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18546–18551 CAS .

  (a) H. T. Li, X. D. He, Y. Liu, H. Huang, S. Y. Lian, S. T. Lee and Z. H. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 605 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. B. Tang, R. B. Ji, X. K. Cao, J. Y. Lin, H. X. Jiang, X. M. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. J. Zeng, J. H. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Yang, L. Cao, P. G. Luo, F. S. Lu, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, M. J. Meziani, Y. F. Liu, G. Qi and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11308 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Yang, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, F. S. Lu, P. J. G. Luo, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, J. H. Liu, Y. F. Liu, M. Chen, Y. P. Huang and Y. P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18110 CAS .
Q. Li, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. L. Liu, K. Koynov, D. Q. Wu, A. Best, R. Kumar, A. Bonoiu and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12062 CAS .
D. Y. Pan, L. Guo, J. C. Zhang, C. Xi, Q. Xue, H. Huang, J. H. Li, Z. W. Zhang, W. J. Yu, Z. W. Chen, Z. Li and M. H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3314 RSC .
S. F. Lim, R. Riehn, W. S. Ryu, N. Khanarian, C. K. Tung, D. Tank and R. H. Austin, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Cao, F. S. Lu, M. J. Meziani, H. Li, G. Qi, B. Zhou, B. A. Harruff, F. Kermarrec and Y. P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3774 RSC .

  (a) Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 3078 CrossRef ; 
  (e) S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Q. Liu, Z. F. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, L. Y. Yang, N. Zhang, G. P. Pan, S. G. Yin, Y. S. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) C. O. Girit, J. C. Meyer, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, C. Kisielowski, L. Yang, C. H. Park, M. F. Crommie, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Science, 2009, 323, 1705 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. H. Lin, Z. Z. Huang, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1147 RSC .
L. Q. Liu, Y. F. Li, L. Zhan, Y. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 1342 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. X. Yang, J. Wang, A. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Zhao, Z. L. Zhang, B. H. Huang, J. Peng, M. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5116 RSC .
L. Y. Zheng, Y. W. Chi, Y. Q. Dong, J. P. Lin and B. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4564 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Y. Li, X. T. Zhou, T. K. Sham, X. L. Sun and Z. F. Ding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 744 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, V. Georgakilas and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, D. Ghosh, W. Chen, S. Pradhan, X. Chang and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2803 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Pan, J. C. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Wu, X. M. Yan and M. H. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3681 RSC .
C. Y. Xiu, Q. Gao, G. D. Li, K. X. Wang and J. S. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 13, 5859 CrossRef .
J. C. Zhang, W. Q. Shen, D. Y. Pan, Z. W. Zhang, Y. G. Fang and M. H. Wu, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 591 RSC .

  (a) L. Tian, Y. Song, X. J. Chang and S. W. Chen, Scr. Mater., 2010, 62, 883 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. H. Kang, E. B. Wang, B. D. Mao, Z. M. Su, L. Gao, S. Y. Lian and L. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6534 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. M. Pan, H. Ming, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 113 RSC .
B. Zhang, C. Y. Liu and Y. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 4411 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Vinci and L. A. Colon, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1178 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. A. Rebeca, L. H. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. B. Zhan, G. H. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Q. Tao, K. Yang, Z. Ma, J. M. Wan, Y. J. Zhang, Z. H. Kang and Z. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 281 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Liu, D. Q. Wu, S. H. Liu, K. Koynov, W. Knoll and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zong, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 764 RSC .

  (a) H. Zhu, X. L. Wang, Y. L. Li, Z. J. Wang, F. Yang and X. R. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Bae, N. Myung and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1153 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. F. Ding, B. M. Quinn, S. K. Haram, L. E. Pell, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Science, 2002, 296, 1293 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Jiang and H. X. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 6690 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) N. Myung, Z. F. Ding and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1315 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Wang, H. Z. Zheng, Y. J. Long, L. Y. Zhang, M. Gao and W. J. Bai, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3134 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, X. D. He, Y. Liu, H. Yu, Z. H. Kang and S. T. Lee, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 147 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, K. G. Qu, B. L. Xu, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2445 RSC .
J. Wang, X. Xin and Z. Lin, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3040 RSC .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Hamilton, B. Li, X. Yan and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1524 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Li and X. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2572 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, J. A. McGuire and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2679 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. S. Li and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Müeller, X. Yan, B. Dragnea and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 56 CrossRef .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, P. S. E. Yeo, C. K. Gan, P. Wu and K. P. Loh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 247 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Hu, P. K. Bai, S. R. Cao and J. Sun, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2009, 30, 1497 CAS .
S. L. Hu, K. Y. Niu, J. Sun, J. Yang, N. Q. Zhao and X. W. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 484 RSC .
Y. P. Sun, X. Wang, F. S. Lu, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, P. J. G. Luo, L. R. Gu and L. M. Veca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18295 CAS .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M.
J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. F. Wang, P. J. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. L. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gonçalves, C. G. Joaquim and E. Silva, J. Fluoresc., 2010, 20, 1023 CrossRef .
X. Y. Li, H. Q. Wang, Y. Shimizu, A. Pyatenko, K. Kawaguchi and N. Koshizaki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 932 RSC .
S. L. Hu, J. Liu, J. L. Yang, Y. Z. Wang and S. R. Cao, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 7247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Jiang, F. Chen, M. G. Lagally and F. S. Denes, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Mullen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Tomovic, V. Enkelmann and K. Mullen, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5179 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kwon and S.-W. Rhee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5256 RSC .
T. Gokus, R. R. Nalr, A. Bonettl, M. Bohmler, A. Lombardo, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Gelm, A. C. Ferrarl and A. Hartschuh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3963 CrossRef CAS .
C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, E. Lidorikis, H. Qian, H. Harutyunyan, T. Gokus, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2711 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Chen and X. P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3135 RSC .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS .
R. Scholl and J. Mansfeld, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1910, 43, 1734 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rempala, J. Kroulik and B. T. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15002 CrossRef .
M. P. Pileni, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3266 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Kang, Y. Liu and S. T. Lee, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 777 RSC .
Z. F. Ding, B. M. Quinn, S. K. Haram, L. E. Pell, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Science, 2002, 296, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ledoux, J. Gong, F. Huisken, O. Guillois and C. Reynaud, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4834 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Wilson, P. F. Szajowski and L. E. Brus, Science, 1993, 262, 1242 CAS .
H. Peng and J. Travas-Sejdic, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5563 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, H. Ming, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X. D. He, H. Huang, K. M. Pan, Z. H. Kang and S. T. Lee, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2666 RSC .
H. L. Qi, Y. Peng, Q. Gao and C. X. Zhang, Sensors, 2009, 9, 674 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, X. Q. Zou, E. Ying and S. J. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4451 CAS .
J. G. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, T. K. Sham and Z. F. Ding, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 493, 296 CrossRef CAS .
N. Myung, Z. Ding and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bae, N. Myung and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1153 CrossRef CAS .
N. Myung, Y. Bae and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1053 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Cao, S. T. Yang, F. S. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y. P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Zheng, Q. L. Wang, Y. J. Long, H. J. Zhang, X. X. Huang and R. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10650 RSC .
W. Xue, Z. Lin, H. Chen, C. Lu and J. M. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21707 CAS .
W. F. Zhang, H. Zhu, S. F. Yu and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2263 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Zhu, J. H. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Li, X. F. Wang, S. J. Tang, Q. N. Meng, Y. F. Li, C. Shi, R. Hu and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2717 RSC .
Z. Ma, H. Ming, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 861 RSC .
Z. H. Kang, C. H. A. Tsang, N. B. Wong, Z. D. Zhang and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12090 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Kang, Y. Liu, C. H. A. Tsang, D. D. D. Ma, X. Fan, N. B. Wong and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 661 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. H. Kang, C. H. A. Tsang, Z. D. Zhang, M. L. Zhang, N. B. Wong, J. A. Zapien, Y. Y. Shan and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5326 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. T. Li, R. H. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang, H. Yu, H. Ming, S. Y. Lian, S.-T. Lee and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17470 RSC ; 
  (c) D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W.-S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C.-L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 465 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. A. Tsang, Y. Liu, Z. H. Kang, D. D. D. Ma, N. B. Wong and S. T. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5829 RSC .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schlogl and S. B. A. Hamid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1628 CrossRef .
M. D. Hughes, Y. J. Xu, P. Jenkins, P. McMorn, P. Landon, D. I. Enache, A. F. Carley, G. A. Attard, G. J. Hutchings, F. King, E. H. Stitt, P. Johnston, K. Griffin and C. J. Kiely, Nature, 2005, 437, 1132 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma and P. Serna, Science, 2006, 313, 332 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turner, V. B. Golovko, O. P. H. Vaughan, P. Abdulkin, A. Berenguer-Murcia, M. S. Tikhov, B. F. G. Johnson and R. M. Lambert, Nature, 2008, 454, 981 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kovalev and M. Fujii, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2531 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Li, W. H. Ma, C. C. Chen, J. C. Zhao, H. Y. Zhu and X. P. Gao, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 261, 131 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, B. H. Gu, L. Y. Liang and W. Hamilton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, G. H. Li, S. Ciston, R. M. Lueptow and K. A. Gray, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4952 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Yu and S.-Y. Kwak, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8345 RSC .
S. J. Zhuo, M. W. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mirtchev, E. J. Henderson, N. Soheilnia, C. M. Yipc and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1265 RSC .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Zong, J. Zhang and C. Li, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 97 RSC .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Tauc, R. Grigorovici and A. Vancu, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1966, 15, 627 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Guo, C.-F. Wang, Z.-Y. Yu, L. Chen and S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2692 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, C.-Y. Liu and D.-G. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3502 RSC .
T. Torimoto, S. Ito, S. Kuwabata and H. Yoneyama, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1275 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Z. Li, C. H. Liang, J. H. Qiu, W. J. Zhou, H. M. Han, Z. B. Wei, G. Q. Sun and Q. Xin, Carbon, 2002, 40, 787 CrossRef ; 
  (c) D.-W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 379 CrossRef ; 
  (d) G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Wojcik and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6697 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) Z. Chen, S. P. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2964 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) W.-D. Zhang, L.-C. Jiang and J.-S. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16247 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9421 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) F. Lin, D. J. Pei, W. N. He, Z. X. Huang, Y. J. Huang and X. Q. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11801 RSC ; 
  (k) W. L. Wei, C. Xu, J. S. Ren, B. L. Xu and X. G. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1284 RSC .
X. H. Gao, L. L. Yang, J. A. Petros, F. F. Marshal, J. W. Simons and S. M. Nie, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 63 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hardman, Environ. Health Perspect., 2006, 114, 165 CrossRef .
J. K. Jaiswal and S. M. Simon, Trends Cell Biol., 2004, 14, 497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, W. Shi, W. Chen, X. Li and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12568 RSC .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858 RSC .
F. Wang, Z. Xie, H. Zhang, C.-Y. Liu and Y.-G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1027 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandra, P. Das, S. Bag, D. Laha and P. Pramanik, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1533 RSC .
Y. X. Fang, S. J. Guo, D. Li, C. Z. Zhu, W. Ren, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Yang, J. H. Cui, M. T. Zheng, C. F. Hu, S. Z. Tan, Y. X. Q. Yang and Y. L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 380 RSC .
P.-C. Hsu and H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3984 RSC .
Q. Qu, A. W. Zhu, X. L. Shao, G. Y. Shi and Y. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5473 RSC .
P.-C. Hsu, Z.-Y. Shih, C.-H. Lee and H.-T. Chang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 917 RSC .
M. Zhang, L. L. Bai, W. H. Shang, W. J. Xie, H. Ma, Y. Y. Fu, D. C. Fang, H. Sun, L. Z. Fan, M. Han, C. M. Liu and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7461 RSC .
C. Liu, P. Zhang, F. Tian, W. Li, F. Li and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13163 RSC .
S. J. Rosenthal, J. C. Chang, O. Kovtun, J. R. McBride and I. D. Tomlinson, Chem. Biol., 2011, 18, 10 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Li, Y. Li, Y. Q. Dang, L. J. Ma, Y. Q. Wu, G. F. Hou and L. X. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4453 RSC .
J. Jeong, M. Cho, Y. T. Lim, N. W. Song and B. H. Chung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5296 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Zhu and G. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 31 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Bai, H. Z. Zheng, Y. J. Long, X. J. Mao, M. Gao and L. Y. Zhang, Anal. Sci., 2011, 27, 243 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, W. Xue, H. Chen and J. M. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8245 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. X. Zhao, L. Q. Liu, Z. D. Liu, Y. Wang, X. J. Zhao and C. Z. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2604 RSC ; 
  (b) W. B. Shi, Q. L. Wang, Y. J. Long, Z. L. Cheng, S. H. Chen, H. Z. Zheng and Y. M. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6695 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Dai, C. P. Yang, Y. J. Tong, G. F. Xu, X. L. Ma, Y. Y. Lin and G. N. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3055 RSC .
L. Q. Liu, Y. F. Li, L. Zhan, Y. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 1342 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. H. Lin, Z. Z. Huang, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1147 RSC .
Y. Q. Dong, R. X. Wang, H. Li, J. W. Shao, Y. W. Chi, X. M. Lin and G. N. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and C. Zhu, Talanta, 2008, 75, 215 CAS .
B. Han, J. Yuan and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5569 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pu, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8211 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Stiles, J. A. Dieringer, N. C. Shah and R. R. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2008, 1, 601 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gunnarsson, E. J. Bjerneld, H. Xu, S. Petronis, B. Kasemo and M. Käll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 802 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Liu and L. P. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 074101 CrossRef .
H. H. Wang, C. Y. Liu, S. B. Wu, N. W. Liu, C. Y. Peng, T. H. Chan, C. F. Hsu, J. K. Wang and Y. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 222 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, K. Liu, J. Miao, Z. Wang, B. Tian, L. Zhang, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1747 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Fan, H. H. Cheng, C. Zhou, X. J. Xie, Y. Liu, L. M. Dai, J. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1776 RSC .
P. H. Luo, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7360 RSC .
H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Q. Fan, X. J. Xie, L. T. Qu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2237 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Haitao Li	Haitao Li is currently a PhD student in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University. Since 2010, he has been conducting his PhD work in FUNSOM under the supervision of Prof. Yang Liu, Zhenhui Kang and Shuit-Tong Lee. His main research interest is focused on the study of synthesis and photoluminescence of carbon dots, as well as their catalysis and energy conversion applications.
Zhenhui Kang	Zhenhui Kang is currently a Professor in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P. R. China. His main research interests are in the fields of synthetic and catalytic chemistry of nanomaterials, polyoxometalates, and quantum sized functional materials, as well as the exploring of their applications in nanocatalysis, new energy, and bio-imaging.
Yang Liu	Yang Liu is currently an Associate Professor in Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials and the Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices in Soochow University, P. R. China. Her main research field is dedicated to the synthesis and assembly of morphologically unique nanostructures and nanocomposites, and the applications in catalysis and energy conversion.
Shuit-Tong Lee	Shuit-Tong Lee is a member (academician) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and fellow of the academy of sciences for the developing world (TWAS). He is a Director of Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials, Director of College of Nano Science & Technology at Soochow University, and Director of Nano-Organic Photoelectronic Laboratory at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. His major research areas include functional nanomaterials and devices, organic electronic materials and technologies, diamond and super-hard thin film technologies.

 	Scheme 1  C-dots with unique properties have great potential applications in bioimaging, optoelectronics, sensor, SERS, and photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of electrochemical fabrication of C-dots.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Reaction equipment for the preparation of C-dots; digital image of C-dots solution (b) before treatment, (c) after treatment; (d) DLS histogram of C-dots; (e) TEM, (f) HRTEM image of C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 8b.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis of C-dots from various carbon sources. (A) Schematic diagram of reactions. (B) Solutions of C-dots-S, C-dots-M, and C-dots-G under ambient (left) and UV light (right), C-dots made from MWNTs (C-dots-M), SWNTs (C-dots-S), and graphite (C-dots-G). (C) The stability of C-dots-M in different physiological solutions including water, saline (0.9% NaCl), RPMI-1640 cell medium, and fetal bovine serum. Inset: photos of C-dots-M after being stored at room temperature for 1 year taken under ambient (left) and UV light (right). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39b. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Processing diagram for the synthesis of photoluminescent carbogenic dots. (Reproduced from ref. 41.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of C-dots prepared from glucose with a diameter of less than 5 nm; (b) and (c) photographs of C-dots dispersions in water with sunlight and UV (365 nm, center) illumination, respectively; (d–g) fluorescent microscope images of C-dots under different excitation: d, e, f, and g for 360, 390, 470, and 540 nm, respectively. (Reprinted from ref. 15a, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Preparation of GQDs by MAH method. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of synthesis of GQDs in reverse micelles: (a) formation of water-in-oil reverse micelles, (b) hydrolytic polymerization, (c) carbonization, and (d) in situ passivation by hexadecylamine. (Reproduced from ref. 65.)	 

 	Fig. 8  One-step synthesis of C-dots in PEG200N solvent. (Reproduced from ref. 56.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of laser ablation experimental setup. (Reproduced from ref. 60.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SAED pattern of C-dots in ref. 56. (b–g) HRTEM images of typical C-dots with different diameters in ref. 8a (scale bar: 2 nm). (h) Raman spectra (λex = 633 nm), (i) C1s XPS spectra of graphite and C-dots in ref. 8b (reproduced from ref. 8b and 56, reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 11  XRD pattern of C-dots prepared by (a) supported method and (b) controlled carbonization of sucrose. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 12  EELS spectra, STEM image, and EDS analysis of GQDs. (a) EELS spectrum of the GQDs; the insets show the EELS spectra of C K-edge and O K-edge of the GQDs; (b) STEM image of GQDs assembled on Cu grid coated with ultrathin amorphous carbon film; (c) elemental C mapping (in blue) of the image shown in panel b; (d) EDS spectrum of GQDs; (e) elemental O mapping (in red) of the image shown in panel b. GQDs were prepared using 11.1 wt% glucose solution and 7 min microwave heating at 595 W. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Typical sized C-dots optical images illuminated under white (left; daylight lamp) and UV light (right; 365 nm); (b) PL spectra of typical sized C-dots: the red, black, green, and blue lines are the PL spectra for blue-, green-, yellow-, and red-emission C-dots, respectively; (c) relationship between the C-dots size and the PL properties; (d) HOMO–LUMO gap dependence on the size of the graphene fragments. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) UV/Vis absorption (Abs) and PL emission spectra (recorded for progressively longer excitation wavelengths from 320 to 520 nm in 20 nm increments) of carbon dots surface-passivated with PEG1500N in water. In the inset, the emission spectral intensities are normalized. (B) Optical photograph obtained under excitation at 365 nm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 15  PL of C-dots. (a) PL spectra of C-dots obtained at 198 mJ pulse−1 for 30 min with different excitation wavelengths increasing from 300 nm to 480 nm in 20 nm increments. The inset is the normalized PL spectra. (b) Relationship between excitation and emission wavelength of PL spectra. (c) Stability tests of PL at 450 nm excited by 380 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 60.)	 

 	Fig. 16  PL photographs of carbon dots in water under ultraviolet (330–385 nm), blue (450–480 nm), and green (510–550 nm) light excitation. (Reproduced from ref. 45.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Photoluminescence spectra of CNPs under NIR excitation (emission in NIR range): (a) CNPs prepared from glucose/NaOH, (b) CNPs prepared from glucose/HCl. (Reprinted from ref. 15a, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Representative ECL response (a) without and (b) with C-dots at an indium–tin oxide (ITO) electrode in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.0). Inset: anodic ECL response during a continuous potential scan, v = 0.1 V s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 42a.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Luminescence decays (485 nm excitation, monitored with 550 nm narrow bandpass filter) of C-dots in (a) 2,4-dinitrotoluene and (b) DEA. Inset: Stern–Volmer plot for the quenching of luminescence QY (485 nm excitation) of the C-dots in (a) 2,4-dinitrotoluene and (b) DEA. (Reproduced from ref. 12.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Graphical representation of the synthesis of reduced-state C-dots (also called CDs) with blue luminescence from original C-dots. Inset: photographs of aqueous solutions of C-dots (left) and reduced C-dots (right) recorded under UV light (360 nm) (reproduced from ref. 87).	 

 	Fig. 21  Luminescence images (all scale bars 20 μm) of the C-dots with (a) argon ion laser excitation at 458 nm and (b) femtosecond pulsed laser excitation at 800 nm; (c) is an overlay of (a) and (b). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 22  UCPL properties of C-dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 23  A schematic illustration of various electronic transition processes of GQDs. (Reproduced from ref. 9.)	 

 	Fig. 24  (a and b) SEM image of photocatalysts for SiO2/C-dots and TiO2/C-dots; insets show the corresponding HRTEM images; (c) relationship between MB concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: SiO2/C-dots, TiO2/C-dots, SiO2 NPs, TiO2 NPs, and C-dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 25  Possible catalytic mechanism for TiO2/C-dots under visible light (reprinted with permission from ref. 8a. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic model for the photocatalytic process of Fe2O3/C-dots composites under visible light (reproduced from ref. 11).	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic model for the photocatalytic process of ZnO/C-dots composites under visible light (reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) SEM and (b) HRTEM images of C-dots/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst. (c) SEM and (d) HRTEM images of C-dots/Ag/Ag3PO4 complex photocatalyst. Insets in (b) and (d) are SEM images of typical single particle (scale bar: 200 nm) (reproduced from ref. 12).	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic model for the important roles of C-dots in the high photocatalytic activity and good stability of C-dots/Ag3PO4 (reproduced from ref. 12).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Relationship between MB concentration and reaction time for different catalysts: rutile TiO2/GQDs, CaIn2O4, anatase TiO2/GQDs, GQDs, rutile TiO2 NPs, and anatase TiO2 NPs. Schematic of photocatalytic process for (b) rutile TiO2/GQD and (c) anatase TiO2/GQD under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Comparison of visible light-driven photocatalytic activity of pure TiO2, C-dots, TiO2/C-dots and P25 for photo-degradation of MB. (b) Transient photocurrents of the as-prepared TiO2/C-dots and P25 irradiated with the wavelength larger than 510 nm. (c) Proposed formation mechanism of dyadic structure with charge transfer-type orbital hybridizations at the surface of TiO2 and C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 8b.)	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Up-converted PL spectra of C-dots; (b) energy distributions of up-converted emissions of C-dots located in the range from 390 to 564 nm (shown as shaded areas); (c) schematic photocatalytic mechanism for C-dots/Cu2O composite under (N)IR light irradiation. (Reproduced from ref. 94b.)	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic (a) and energy band (b) diagrams of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al device. (c) J–V characteristic curves for the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT/Al, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al and ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQDs/Al devices after annealing at 140 °C for 10 min, single log scale. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 23a. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Calculated energy level alignment. (b) J–V characteristics of colloidal GQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle solar cells. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) CQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle and the proposed CQD–TiO2 bonds, (b) UV–Vis–NIR absorption spectrum of CQD thin film on quartz substrate, (c) Current–voltage characteristics of CQD-sensitized solar cells prepared from a MeOH CQD solution and from an aqueous solution of C-dots refluxed in nitric acid to ensure complete surface oxidation and (d) current–voltage characteristics of aqueous CQD-sensitized solar cell. (Reproduced from ref. 108.)	 

 	Fig. 36  Color converter of the GQDs. Luminescence spectra of the blue LED with and without GQDs coating. Left inset: photographs of the GQD coated LED without (top) and with applied voltage (bottom). Right inset: the CIE chromaticity coordinates for the illuminating blue LED with and without GQD layer. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 15b. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 37  Photoluminescence and electroluminescence transition scheme for ZnO–graphene quasi-quantum dots. Transitions 1, 2 and 3 correspond to electron transitions from the conduction band (CB) of ZnO, LUMO + 2 and LUMO levels induced by G–Oepoxy to the valence band (VB) of ZnO, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 94c. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 38  Wide-field fluorescence image of individual CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals on quartz and on single-layer graphene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 115a. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic diagram of charge separation and transportation at the ZnO-NWs/MWCNTs heterojunction. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 115h. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 40  Schematic illustration of the FRET model based on C-dots–graphene and the mechanism of K+ determination. (Reproduced from ref. 115k.)	 

 	Fig. 41  
In vivo fluorescence imaging. (A) In vivo fluorescence images of a C-dots-injected mouse. The images were taken under various excitation wavelength at 455, 523, 595, 605, 635, 661, and 704 nm. Red and green represent the fluorescent signals of C-dots and the tissue autofluorescence, respectively. (B) Signal-to-background separation of the spectral image taken under the NIR (704 nm) excitation. The fluorescence of C-dots was well separated from the tissue autofluorescence background. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39b. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 42  Schematic illustration of detection mechanism of Hg2+ and biothiols using C-dots. (Reproduced from ref. 138.)	 

 	Fig. 43  SEM images of Au deposited on Si (a) and on the C-dots honeycomb structure (b), and (c) Raman spectra of 4 × 10−6 M R6G drop-cast on to a Si wafer (□), adsorbed on Au-coated Si (◇), the C-dots honeycomb on Si (△), the Au-deposited C-dots honeycomb on Si (○) and the Raman spectrum of the C-dots honeycomb on Si (☆). The inset in (b) is a TEM image of Au nanoparticles deposited on the wall of the C-dots honeycomb. Scale bars in a and b are 100 nm. (Reproduced from ref. 148.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
