Interface investigation and engineering – achieving high performance polymer photovoltaic devices    - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B925382C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B925382C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575-2598Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsInterface investigation and engineering – achieving high performance polymer photovoltaic devices†‡

        
          
            Li-Min 
            Chen§
a, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Xu§
b, 
      
        
          
            Ziruo 
            Hong
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
bSolarmer Energy, Inc., 3445 Fletcher Ave, El Monte, CA 91731, USA
Received 
      2nd December 2009
    , Accepted 12th January 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      26th February 2010
    AbstractThe contact between the polymer active layer and the electrode is one the most critical interfaces in polymer solar cells. In this article, we report the progress of interface engineering in polymer solar cell research, where the multiple functions of the interfacial materials will be discussed. The vertical composition profile in polymer:fullerene blends is an emerging topic, and the interlayer effect on the vertical phase separation and device performance will be highlighted. We also discuss the energy level alignment at the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) interface, with the aim of providing a better understanding towards the route of high efficiency polymer solar cells.Li-Min ChenLi-Min (Raymond) Chen has been a Ph.D. student in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles since 2006. He obtained his B.S. and M.S. from National Cheng Kung University (Taiwan) in 2002 and 2004, respectively. His research focuses on polymer solar cells with novel structures and processing methods as well as transparent conductor applications.Zheng XuZheng Xu is a Senior Researcher at Solarmer Energy, Inc. in El Monte, CA. He obtained his Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles in 2009, focusing on organic electronic devices and their interfaces (advisor: Prof. Yang Yang). Before he entered UCLA, he received his B.S. (2000) and M.S. (2003) in Physics at Fudan University (China). His current research focus is on polymer solar cells.Ziruo HongZiruo Hong obtained his B.S. in Chemistry from Sichuan University, 1995, and Ph.D. in physics from Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2001. He has been working on device design and mechanism study of organic electroluminescence and photovoltaics in Hong Kong, Singapore and Germany. He is currently working on polymer solar cells, especially solar cells with stacking structures, in Prof. Yang Yang's group at UCLA. His main research interest is focused on organic opto-electronics, especially light emitting devices and photovoltaic cells. He has published over 70 research papers on international journals.Yang YangOriginally from Taiwan, Prof. Yang received his Ph.D. degree in Physics and Applied Physics at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell. After working at the University of California, Riverside as a postdoctoral researcher, and in the UNIAX Corporation as a research staff member, he joined the University of California, Los Angeles in 1997. He has been a full professor at UCLA since 2002. His group is working on solution processable electronic devices, including organic and inorganic solar cells, organic LED and memory devices, and carbon-based nanomaterials. He has published more than 170 articles in peer-reviewed journals.
1. Introduction
Recent progress in polymer photovoltaics, has led to reports of power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) reaching 6–7%.1–5 In addition, the scalability and compatibility with flexible, large-area substrates affirms polymer solar cells for high throughput, low cost renewable energy alternatives to their inorganic counterparts. The advancement of record-high PCEs is driven by the synthesis of novel donor and acceptor materials, implementation of innovative interfacial materials, and adoption of revolutionary processing conditions. In the bulk heterojunctions (BHJs), the inevitable potential loss due to the energy level offset between the donor and acceptor renders the electrode contacts a critical factor to derive the net potential out of the BHJs. It is therefore necessary to establish ohmic contacts at both electrodes for efficient charge extraction, which is challenging for interfaces between organic/polymer and metals. An interface with a barrier height of a few tens of mV may result in significant charge accumulation, and thus significant recombination loss and inferior photovoltaic (PV) performance. Consequently, the interface between the BHJ and both the anode and cathode is of fundamental importance to the charge transport and extraction process, which determines the device performance and long term stability. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to elucidate and engineer the interface since the evolution of polymer solar cells. Particularly in solution-processed polymer active layers, the surface properties of the bottom interface have a substantial influence on the film morphology, while the BHJ morphology grown above can be manipulated accordingly.
In this article, we shall highlight common interfacial materials employed at the anode and cathode of polymer solar cells. An overview of the functional interlayers will be provided. Both the lateral and vertical phase morphologies are critical to the device performance, but only recently has the vertical phase morphology acquired immense attention. The vertical phase morphology is essential to the charge transport and collection process since the photoactive layer is sandwiched between the two electrodes. We will discuss the effect of the interface property on the film morphology, mainly in the vertical direction, and report methods on controlling the vertical composition gradient. The last part will focus on the energy alignment at the BHJ/electrode interfaces.
2. Interfacial materials
2.1 Functions of interfacial materials
The metal/organic interface plays an essential role in determining the overall device performance of organic electronics, and inserting a functional interfacial layer can dramatically alter the interface properties. The main functions of the interfacial layer include:

(1) Minimization of the energy barrier for charge injection and extraction. In OLED/PLEDs, the injection efficiency of carriers dramatically depends on the barrier height at the metal/organic interface, where the tunneling current is inversely proportional to the barrier height.6 In this sense, it is intuitive to lower the barrier height by engineering the interface contacts. In polymer solar cells, it is rather important to understand whether the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which relates to the built-in electric field for charge extraction, is determined by the intrinsic properties of the BHJ system (VOC1), or the choice of metal electrodes (VOC2), as illustrated in Fig. 1.7 For non-ohmic contacts, the VOC follows the metal–insulator–metal (MIM) model, which equals the work function difference of the electrodes. On the other hand, charge transfer leads to the Fermi level alignment for ohmic contacts, and the work function of the cathode and anode is pinned to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor, respectively, determining the VOC. In this case, band bending at the ohmic contact reduces the VOC (Fig. 2), whereas charge recombination at the donor/acceptor interface governs the VOC of the BHJ device.8–12 More recently, the formation of charge transfer excitons (CTEs) between the polymer and fullerene has shown strong correlation with the VOC, providing insight to its origin, as well as suggested routes to approach the theoretical VOC.11,13–16
 Fig. 1  Schematic variation of VOC with the acceptor strength (VOC1) and/or electrode work function (VOC2) in a BHJ solar cell device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7; copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics.) 
 Fig. 2  Schematic band diagram of a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) device with (a) non-ohmic and (b) ohmic contacts for electrons and holes. Before (upper image) and after contact (lower image) under short-circuit conditions. φb and ΔVb are the injection barrier height for electrons at a non-ohmic contact and the voltage loss at an ohmic contact, respectively. φM1 and φM2 are work functions of the metal contacts. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7; copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics.) 

(2) Formation of a selective contact for single types of charge carrier. Charge selectivity at the electrode interfaces is crucial to ensure effective charge extraction by blocking the charge carrier flow towards the unfavored direction. Interfacial layers of wide bandgaps can serve as an exciton-blocking layer (EBL) to eliminate the parasitic exciton quenching at the metal/organic interface.17–20 Furthermore, certain interfacial layers allow the selective transportation of either electrons or holes, such as an electron-transporting layer (ETL) with hole-blocking properties, and a hole-transporting layer (HTL) with electron-blocking properties. These functional interfacial layers can significantly improve the charge selectivity at the electrodes,21–23 and have been widely implemented in OLED/PLEDs, and excellent reviews can be found in the articles by Hung and Chen24 and Walzer et al.25

(3) Determination of the relative polarity of the devices. In principle, ITO is capable of collecting either electrons or holes since its work function (ca. 4.5–4.7 eV) lies between the typical HOMO and LUMO of common organic photovoltaic (OPV) materials. Accordingly, the polarity of ITO can be modified to efficiently collect either electrons or holes by coating with functional interlayers of different work functions.26 Device polarity is thus controlled by the relative positions of functional interlayers with various work functions, irrespective of the conducting electrodes, as shown in Fig. 3. Metals with various work functions can also be employed as either cathode or anode via selecting suitable interlayers. The versatility of ITO establishes the foundation of the inverted structure solar cell, which also exhibits the potential advantage of improved lifetime and preferred vertical composition gradient.27–29
 Fig. 3  The device structure of a polymer solar cell, where the device polarity can be controlled by the relative position of the functional buffer layers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.) 

(4) Modification of the surface property to alter film morphology. The substrate surface property is capable of manipulating the film morphology due to the surface-directed spinodal decomposition, particularly during the spin-coating process of the polymer blend films.30–32 Modifying the substrate surface property with various self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) can alter the molecular preference and arrangement at the film/substrate interface, and therefore affect the contact properties, such as barrier height and available charge transfer sites, as well as the vertical phase morphology.28,29,33,34

(5) Suppression of diffusion and reaction between the electrode material and polymer. A detrimental effect of metal ion diffusion into the organic layer is substantial leakage current.35,36 The chemical reaction at the metal/organic interface can also vary the contact properties, forming interfacial dipole barriers and defect states that pin the Fermi level. The kink/hump (s-shape) observed in certain current density–voltage (J–V) curves is speculated to arise from the interface barriers.37,38 Therefore, an inert buffer layer that prevents the diffusion and reaction at this interface is desired.

(6) Modulation of the optical field as an optical spacer. The BHJ active layer is typically sandwiched between two electrodes, where one is transparent and the other reflective. The incident light forms a standing wave inside the active layer. The optical field intensity diminishes to zero at the polymer/reflecting electrode interface, while the maximum intensity is located at a certain distance away from the reflective mirror, depending on the refractive indices and thickness of the active layer. An optically transparent spacer can redistribute the electric field and push the absorbing region away from the interface to a higher electric-field strength, which enhances the short-circuit current (JSC), as shown in Fig. 4.4,39,40 Optical spacers have been shown to be most effective for thin active layers limited by low carrier mobilities, whilst not so useful for films of optimal film thickness.41,42
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the spatial distribution of the squared optical electric-field strength |E|2 inside the devices with a structure of ITO/PEDOT/active layer/Al (left) and ITO/PEDOT/active layer/optical spacer/Al (right). (b) The current density–voltage characteristics of polymer solar cells with () and without (■) the TiOx optical spacer under AM 1.5 illumination. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39; copyright 2006, Wiley VCH.) 
2.2 Overview of interfacial materials
In the last twenty years extensive efforts have been devoted to OLED/PLED research and a variety of functional interfacial materials have been developed,24 and also successfully transferred to engineer the interfaces in polymer solar cells with promising results. This article will provide an overview of the most prominent interfacial materials in polymer solar cell applications. The interfacial materials implemented at both the cathode and anode interfaces will be separately discussed within three main categories, namely inorganic salts, inorganic semiconducting oxides, and organic and self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).

2.2.1 Cathode interlayers. 
It is preferable for the cathode interface to have a low work function contact for efficient electron extraction. While Al and Ag are the most common electrode materials, the thermal evaporation process frequently alters the quality of the metal/organic interface.43,44 The reactive hot metal atoms can lead to chemical interaction at the interface and diffusion into the organic layer.45,46 It should be noted that alternative approaches are also capable for the cathode deposition, such as spray-coating of Ag nanoparticles and transferring of Ag nanowire meshes.47,48 Lögdlund et al.49 and Antoniadis et al.50 suggested that the instability of the Al electrode is related to the Al–C bond formation, which interrupts the π-conjugated system. Therefore, other low work function metals such as Ca, Mg, and Ba, are often employed to protect the metal/organic interface, while being capped by the Al or Ag electrode.
The low work function metal Ca has been used to improve device performance since the development of polymer diodes.1,51,52 For poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) blend-based solar cells with an Al cathode, a dipole layer pointing from Al to PCBM exists at the PCBM/Al interface, which increases the charge extraction barrier and reduces the VOC.7,53 Inserting Ca between the Al electrode and the polymer forms an ohmic contact that results in a high fill factor (FF).54 The thin n-doped layer induced by Ca deposition pins the surface energy level at the polymer/metal interface, which facilitates the charge transport.55 Ca reacts with water at room temperature, while being relatively inert to molecular oxygen.56 Nonetheless, the instabilities of Ca and Mg in ambient atmosphere require combining with metals with a low permeation rate to moisture such as Al and Ag to form effective cathodes. In a recent study, low work function bilayer electrodes such as Ba/Al and Ca/Al show superior device performance than higher work function electrodes (Table 1).57
Table 1 Detailed current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for various top electrodes. Literature work function (Φ) values are listed for the metal contacting the active metal. (Reprinted from ref. 57; copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics)




Electrode
Work function (eV)

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA/cm2)
FF (%)
Normalized efficiency




Ag
4.26
403 ± 27
9.04 ± 1.16
36.6 ± 3.7
0.36 ± 0.08


Al
4.28
420 ± 15
10.02 ± 0.33
38.2 ± 2.6
0.41 ± 0.03


Mg:Ag/Ag
3.66
565 ± 6
10.30 ± 0.39
50.5 ± 2.8
0.75 ± 0.06


LiF/Al
2.9
580 ± 2
10.42 ± 0.22
57.3 ± 1.2
0.89 ± 0.03


Ca/Al
2.87
601 ± 2
10.42 ± 0.18
60.6 ± 2.1
0.96 ± 0.04


Ba/Al
2.7
600 ± 2
10.47 ± 0.36
62.2 ± 1.5
1.00 ± 0.04




Alkali metal compounds, including LiF,58–60 CsF,61 Cs2CO3,62–64 CsCl,65 as well as 8-hydroxyquinolinolato lithium (Liq)66 and other organic metal complexes,67 typically provide low work function contacts, and are commonly used as the electron injection layer in OLED/PLEDs. Alkali metal acetates also deliver similar results.68 Among these functional compounds, LiF and Cs2CO3 have found the most success in polymer solar cells.
The introduction of a bilayer cathode composed of LiF/Al and MgO/Al can enhance electron injection due to band bending of the organic layer in contact with the insulating layers.58 By inserting LiF or other compounds (oxides and halides) of group IA and IIA metals between Al and tris-8-hydroxyquinoline aluminium (Alq3), a better contact is also formed.69,70 LiF was adapted to polymer solar cells to facilitate electron extraction, and resulted in significant device improvement for the poly(2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyl-octyloxy))-p-phenylene vinylene (MDMO-PPV):PCBM blend, where the VOC and FF increased to 0.82 V and 61%, respectively.71 The function of the LiF layer was suggested to arise from either dipole formation at the Al/LiF/polymer interface70,72 or the LiF buffer protection.73 Jönsson et al. reported the thickness-dependence of LiF, where for (sub)monolayer coverage, Al deposition decomposes LiF, causing Li-doping of the organic material to yield a low work function contact,74 while thicker LiF creates a dipole layer that downshifts the work function.75 Other fluorides such as CsF,61 CaF2,69 MgF2,76 NaF,77 and KF,78,79 were also reported to exhibit similar phenomena. A comparative study between LiF, NaF, and KF showed that the variation in reverse current density is caused not only by interface modification but also by diffusion and doping of the whole organic layer, which depends on the interlayer thickness.80 NaF was suggested as an alternative choice due to the minimum thickness requirement.
Caesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) is another promising electron injection material.62–64,81,82 The function of Cs2CO3 is rather versatile and insensitive to the cathode material, where thermal evaporation or spin-coating the Cs2CO3 layer, as well as using either Al or Ag as the electrode, deliver comparable performances.82 The actual product of thermally-evaporated Cs2CO3, either doped caesium oxide or caesium carbonate molecules, has been under debate.82–87 Nonetheless, the formation of a low work function Al–O–Cs complex upon Al deposition facilitates electron extraction in polymer solar cells and electron injection in PLEDs.82 Inserting a 1 nm Cs2CO3 layer between the active layer and the Al increases both the VOC and FF.26 Chen et al. reported similar results with improvement to 3.1% PCE due to the reduced series resistance (Rs).88 A 2.1% PCE semitransparent polymer solar cell was also fabricated with a 70% transparency cathode composed of Cs2CO3 (1 nm)/Ag (7 nm)/ITO (100 nm). The device performance was further improved to 2.8% by placing a reflective Ag mirror behind the device to compensate for light loss.89 While 0.5 Å of Cs2CO3 is sufficient to lower the electron injection barrier into Alq3, a minimum thickness of 10 Å is required to convert the ITO surface to a low work function cathode for the inverted structure.85 Modification of the ITO polarity for inverted structure and their performance will be discussed in the next section.
Transparent semiconducting metal oxides such as TiO2 are commonly employed as an electron acceptor and transport material because of its processability and non-toxicity, as well as wide applications in dye sensitized solar cells and photocatalysts.90–92 TiO2 is a robust diffusion barrier against oxygen and water due to its scavenging effects originating from photocatalysis and oxygen deficiency.90,93 Relatively air-stable polymer solar cells and LEDs have been demonstrated by incorporating the TiOx layer.94Fig. 5 illustrates a device structure incorporating the TiOx layer, as well as how this layer prevents the permeation of oxygen and moisture. The flow chart also shows the preparation steps of the TiOx layer.
 Fig. 5  The device architecture with the TiOx layer, as ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/TiOx/Al. The TiOx layer functions as a scavenging layer to block the permeation of oxygen and moisture into the polymer active layer. The brief flow chart shows the preparation steps of the TiOx. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2007, Wiley VCH.) 
Generally, crystalline TiO2, either in the anatase or rutile phase, requires a heat treatment process above 450 °C that is incompatible with polymer devices. For the practical use of low cost polymer PV devices, it is essential to fabricate functional oxide layers with compatible solution processes. Kim et al. reported a low temperature sol–gel process to fabricate a titanium oxide layer (Fig. 5).39 A spin-coated precursor solution converts to a 30 nm titanium oxide film by hydrolysis in air at room temperature, and a transparent amorphous titanium oxide film was obtained after annealing at 150 °C for 10 min. XPS study revealed an oxygen-deficient TiOx film, where Ti:O = 1:1.34. The TiOx film exhibited an electron mobility approximately 1.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, and a LUMO level of 4.4 eV, close to the work function of Al, rendering it an efficient electron-transport material. The large band gap of the TiOx film (ca. 3.7 eV) is capable of blocking the holes and excitons efficiently. In addition, the TiOx layer serves as an optical spacer to spatially redistribute the light intensity inside the device (Fig. 4a).4,39,40,95 The TiOx optical spacer substantially enhances both the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and JSC (Fig. 4b) by approximately 40% compared to devices without the optical spacer and a 5% PCE was achieved in P3HT:PCBM BHJ devices. Hayakawa et al. also reported substantial device enhancement for a TiOx layer atop the active layer, but with only a small increase in JSC.22 Due to the excellent hole-blocking property of TiOx, the enhancement in shunt resistance (Rsh) and rectification ratio contributed to the improvement in both VOC and FF, while the TiOx layer also functions as a barrier against physical damage and chemical degradation. Recently, a 6.1% PCE was reported for poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole):[6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCDTBT:PC70BM) BHJ device by inserting a TiOx layer, with an internal quantum efficiency (IQE) approaching 100% around 450 nm.4 Such a high IQE value indicates the high efficiency of converting absorbed photons into charge carriers that are collected at the electrodes. However, in the case of additive incorporation, the optical spacer effect counteracts with the additive concentration, i.e. the nanoscale roughness.95
Incorporation of dopants and varying processing are common methods to modify the metal oxide properties.96–98 We reported Cs-doped TiO2 (TiO2:Cs) by mixing Cs2CO3 solution with a nanocrystalline TiO2 solution synthesized via a non-hydrolytic sol–gel process.99 Cs lowers the TiO2 work function such that the TiO2:Cs interfacial layer improves the polymer/metal contact, as well as provides excellent electron extraction and hole-blocking properties to deliver a PCE of 4.2%. The versatile functionality of the TiO2:Cs layer was also extended to PLEDs with similar improvement. Fig. 6 shows that the TiO2:Cs interfacial layer delivers better performance compared to either TiO2 or Cs2CO3 alone in both PV devices and PLEDs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a P3HT:PC70BM BHJ device with an evaporated Al cathode and different interfacial layers. (b) Current density–voltage–brightness characteristics for a PLED device with different interfacial layers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 99; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
Solution-process high efficiency polymer tandem cells using TiOx and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the interlayer were successfully demonstrated with a 6.5% PCE.100 The TiOx layer functions as the electron transport and collecting layer for the front sub-cell as well as the foundation of the rear sub-cell, where the PEDOT:PSS layer serves as the hole-transport layer (HTL). We also reported implementing pristine TiO2 and TiO2:Cs in a tandem cell based on P3HT:PC70BM and poly[(4,4′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)-4,7-diyl] (PSBTBT):PC70BM BHJs, with a PCE of 5.84%.101,102 The TiO2/PEDOT:PSS (4083) interconnecting layer behaves as a Schottky contact, where exposure to UV light increases the free carrier concentration in TiO2 which leads to efficient electron tunneling through the energy barrier.103Fig. 7a shows the necessity of UV light illumination to the TiO2 layer, where a significant hump (s-shape) was observed with the UV cutoff filter. It was also pointed out that extra care should be taken to avoid under-estimating the device area when using high conductivity materials in the interlayer, such as PH500 (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of single and tandem cells under illumination with and without a 400 nm cutoff filter. (b) A tandem cell using PH500 as an interlayer before and after defining the active area by scratching. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 102; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
Another solution-processable n-type metal oxide is ZnO, which has a high electron mobility of 0.066 cm2 V−1 s−1.104 ZnO also shows a similar optical spacer effect for thin active layers, which is less pronounced for thick films.41 This indicates that the optical spacer effect might be particularly advantageous for thin films limited by low carrier mobilities, but not for films of optimal film thickness.39,42 The first polymer tandem cell using a solution-processed interlayer was realized with a combination of ZnO nanoparticles and neutral PEDOT.105 Neutral PEDOT was used since acidic PEDOT dissolves the ZnO nanoparticles. The charge recombination at the interlayer was improved by n-doping (photo-doping) the ZnO layer by exposure to UV light,106,107 where incorporating metallic clusters also exhibits similar effects.108
Modifying the ITO surface with SAMs with permanent dipole moments can alter the work function and surface property to improve the device performance. SAMs with electron withdrawing groups increases the ITO work function, while electron donating groups reduce it.109 However, the resulting phase separation was reported to be a more dominating factor than matching the energy levels. Khodabakhsh et al. utilized SAMs to improve both hole injection and charge collection, pointing out that SAM-modified electrodes can affect the subsequent film morphology and the density of active sites for charge collection.33,110 SAMs can also be used in combination with functional metal oxides, such as TiO2 and ZnO, to further improve the interface properties. Systematic studies of modifying the TiO2/BHJ interface showed that SAMs can improve the interface via several mechanisms, including: reducing charge recombination, passivating inorganic surface states, providing additional exciton dissociation interface, and influencing the BHJ composition distribution for better charge selectivity.111,112 Alkanethiol SAMs were shown to increase the JSC for hybrid P3HT-ZnO solar cells from 0.28 to 0.42 mA/cm2 despite their insulating nature. The enhanced JSC was due to the increased crystallinity of the interfacial P3HT, which can be attributed to larger exciton diffusion length, hole mobility, or reduced electron–hole recombination rate.113–115 Interface modification with SAMs of different dipole directions and chemical bondings can significantly improve the contact properties of the ZnO/metal bilayer cathode, where stable high work function metals, such as Ag and Au, can also be used as cathodes.116,117 Modifying the ZnO surface with a benzoic acid (BA) group decorated with a negative dipole (such as –OCH3 or –CH3 end groups), which points toward the ZnO layer (away from the metal), decreases the band offset and facilitates the ohmic contact formation. A cathode with a ZnO/BA–OCH3/Al configuration exhibited a 4.2% PCE compared to 3.2% from the unmodified cathode. Modification of the ZnO with a mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) SAM further improved the efficiency to 4.6%.116
Reports on organic interfacial material in polymer solar cells have been scarce, despite their wide application in OLEDs and small molecule solar cells.25 Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) was shown to enhance the VOC up to 200 mV, possessing the similar function as LiF, but with the advantage of solution processability.118 Ionic liquid-functionalized carbon nanoparticles (ILCNs) play a similar role to lower the electron collection barrier at the cathode.119 A thin layer of alcohol/water-soluble polyelectrolyte can improve the VOC up to 0.3 V due to superposition of the interfacial dipole upon the built-in electric field.120 Alcohol-soluble polyfluorene derivatives as the cathode buffer layers also show similar device performance improvement.121,122


2.2.2 Anode interlayer. 
PEDOT:PSS has been commonly used to improve the anode contact with ITO.123 Spray deposition of a thick PEDOT:PSS layer (ca. 1.2 μm) as the top electrode has been demonstrated with a PCE of 2%.124 However, its acidic nature etches the ITO and imposes potential lifetime instability.125–127 Rutherford backscattering (RBS) studies showed that the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface is not stable, where indium diffuses into the PEDOT:PSS. XPS also confirmed the dissolution of ITO in PEDOT:PSS. Furthermore, previous studies revealed PEDOT:PSS to be an inefficient electron-blocking layer due to electron leakage at the anode.126,128
Two criteria must be taken into consideration for an efficient anodic buffer layer to replace PEDOT:PSS. The fabrication compatibility must be guaranteed to withstand the organic solvent exposure. Furthermore, the surface properties of the anodic buffer layer have a significant impact on the molecular ordering and phase separation process of the BHJ active layer, which must be considered as well. A few transition metal oxides (MoO3, V2O5, and WO3) are highly transparent and conductive, and have been successfully employed to modify the anode interface. In addition to replacing PEDOT:PSS for the ITO/polymer contact, these transition metal oxides have particularly found applications in the inverted structure polymer solar cells, since they can be easily evaporated on top of the polymer active layer. We will first discuss the hole collection properties of these transition metal oxides in the regular device structure, followed by their applications in the inverted structure.
Shrotriya et al. reported replacing PEDOT:PSS with V2O5 and MoO3 as the anodic interlayer.129Fig. 8 compares the device performance of PV devices with various anode interlayers, where optimum thicknesses of V2O5 (3 nm) and MoO3 (5 nm) exhibit comparable performances (3.2 ± 0.1% PCE) to PEDOT:PSS. An optimized metal oxide thickness is critical: too thin a layer leads to a lower VOC and leakage current due to incomplete coverage, while too thick a layer increases the series resistance (Rs) and reduces the JSC and FF. Insertion of a MoO3 interlayer improves the device performance for both small molecule and polymer solar cells.130,131 The band bending at the interface leads to enhanced hole extraction which decreases Rs, and is more pronounced for small molecules, since PEDOT:PSS already forms an excellent ohmic contact for polymer solar cells. Interestingly, the VOC of the tetraphenylporphine (H2TPP)/C60 system increased linearly from 0.57 to 0.97 V as the MoO3 thickness increased from 0 to 50 nm, which can be attributed to the enhanced built-in potential without the occurrence of Fermi lever pinning resulting from charge transfer. Furthermore, an Al/MoO3 layer has been reported as the interconnection layer in tandem cells, where the MoO3 layer (ca. 15 nm) protects the polymer active layer from subsequent solvent exposure.132 By employing MoO3 as the electron-blocking layer, the detrimental effect of the leakage current to VOC was demonstrated, where a leakage current two orders of magnitude lower doubled the VOC in small molecular solar cells.133 WO3 was reported to planarize the ITO surface and assist the ordering of P3HT.134 In addition, WO3 has been used as the hole-transport layer in combination with 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Bphen) as the electron-transport layer for a copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)/C60 device.135 The device improvement was attributed to the higher work function of WoO3, which is a better match with CuPc.
 Fig. 8  Current density–voltage characteristics of PV devices under illumination with different anode interlayers, namely, ITO only, ITO/PEDOT:PSS (25 nm), ITO/V2O5 (3 nm), and ITO/MoO3 (5 nm). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 129; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.) 
Despite successful anode interlayer alternatives, the semiconducting properties of these transition metal oxides are not yet fully understood. A recent report by Kröger et al. suggested the n-type nature of MoO3 and WO3, where hole injection results from electron extraction from the HOMO of the organic semiconductor to the conduction band (CB) of MoO3.136 Due to the various oxidation states of these transition metal oxides and their useful applications, the electronic nature of these metal oxides requires further in-depth investigation.
Insertion of a p-type NiO layer (5–10 nm thick) to replace PEDOT:PSS as the anode buffer layer can substantially enhance the P3HT:PCBM device performance to 5.2% with excellent device stability.23 NiO has a work function of 5.0 eV, and essentially forms an ohmic contact with P3HT. It functions as a hole-transport and electron-blocking layer, where holes can be efficiently collected, and the large bandgap (ca. 3.6 eV) simultaneously provides high transparency and sufficient energy barrier for electron collection. The high VOC of 0.638 V was attributed to this improved p-type NiO layer that reduces the leakage current.
Robust hole-transport layers were also introduced via an organosiloxane cross-linkable approach to replace PEDOT:PSS. Cross-linkable 4,4′-bis[(p-trichlorosilylpropylphenyl)phenylamino]biphenyl (TPDSi2) itself and blends with poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-N-[4-(3-methylpropyl)]diphenylamine] (TFB) delivered better or comparable performances in both PLEDs and BHJ solar cells due to the improved hole-injection and electron-blocking ability.128,137,138 Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) also forms a dipole at the polymer/metal interface that decreases the energy barrier and thus facilitates hole extraction.139 Sulfonated poly(diphenylamine) (SPDPA) was also shown to form an ohmic contact with P3HT and enhance its crystallinity and mobility.140


2.2.3 Inverted polymer solar cells. 
The polarity of ITO can be modified by coating with different functional interlayers to collect either electrons or holes (Fig. 3). The most common application is coating ITO with a high work function layer for hole collection, such as PEDOT:PSS. Li et al. demonstrated the ability to lower the ITO work function by an ultrathin Cs2CO3 layer such that it becomes the cathode to extract electrons.26 Other prominent examples of the inverted structure include utilizing electron-transport layers with good hole-blocking properties, such as TiOx and ZnO atop ITO.21,141 The potential interface instability is overcome by replacing the acidic PEDOT:PSS, while the cathode can be substituted with either PEDOT:PSS, which has excellent oxygen-blocking properties,142 or other high work function materials.
Using a solution-processed titanium oxide of 10 nm as the electron-selective contact and PEDOT:PSS/Au as the anode delivered an inverted cell of 3.1% PCE.21 The PEDOT:PSS solution was diluted in isopropanol and heated to 80 °C prior to spin-coating upon the hydrophobic polymer active layer. The reduced leakage current under reversed bias indicates the effective hole-blocking property of the TiOx layer. o-Xylene instead of chlorobenzene (CB) was used as the solvent and the formation of a favorable morphology with improved vertical phase separation was suggested.143 Polyoxyethylene tridecyl ether (PTE) improved the TiOx precursor wetting to form a better contact, which results in a higher FF due to reduced Rs and increased Rsh.144 Ameri et al. compared the regular and inverted structure by optical modeling, and attributed the higher EQE maximum of the inverted structure to the non-negligible absorption of the PEDOT:PSS layer.145 However, no significant “optical spacer” effect of the TiOx layer was observed in the inverted structure.
Incorporating ZnO on ITO as the cathode buffer layer with a silver anode delivers a PCE of 2.58%.141 An almost 85% EQE maximum validates the excellent IQE and charge collection efficiency. Kyaw et al. fabricated inverted cells based on ZnO and MoO3 interlayers.146 The ZnO transmittance was controlled by the crystal size, which depends on the precursor concentration.147 Relatively stable solar cells with a 3.5% PCE were obtained by using ZnO nanoparticles to modify the ITO substrate.27 Modifying the ZnO nanoparticle surface with a C60-SAM further improved the efficiency to 4.9%. The C60-SAM passivates the surface traps of ZnO, and enhances the electronic coupling at the ZnO/organic interface, which suppresses the recombination losses. It was speculated that PCBM accumulation at the C60-SAM interface benefits the high PCE since organic field effect transistor (OFET) measurements showed the accumulation of PCBM at the C60-SAM-modified interface.111
An ultrathin Ca layer was also used as the electron-transport layer to modify the ITO, while an optimum thickness of MoO3 served as the hole-transporting layer to prevent charge recombination at the Ag anode.148 Interestingly, transition from regular to inverted device was reported due to oxidation of the silver top contact, where the work function changes from 4.3 to 5.0 eV upon oxidation.149
Vanadium oxide has various oxidation states and is reported to protect the polymer active layer and suppress the backward current at the PCBM/metal interface, as well as to prevent penetration of the hot metal atoms.36,150 A 2.25% PCE inverted cell was fabricated by modifying the ITO surface with Cs2CO3, with V2O5/Al as the anode.26 Semitransparent inverted devices were formed by replacing Al with 12 nm of Au. The PCE increased to 4.2% by annealing the Cs2CO3 layer at 150 °C for 20 min, which was attributed to the heavily-doped caesium oxide formation that reduces the interfacial resistance at the cathode.87Fig. 9 shows that the device performance increases with the annealing temperature of the Cs2CO3 layer until 150 °C, which also corresponds to the variation in contact angle of the Cs2CO3-modified surface with water. The inset shows the significant enhancement upon annealing at 150 °C. The improvement is also due to the beneficial vertical composition profile of the inverted structure, which will be discussed in the next section.28,29
 Fig. 9  Device efficiency and contact angle with water of the Cs2CO3 interlayer as a function of different annealing temperatures. The inset shows the effect of annealing treatment on the EQE. Line I is the Cs2CO3 layer without annealing, and line II is after 150 °C annealing. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87; copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics.) 
Ouyang and Yang reported that by incorporating D-sorbitol into PEDOT:PSS, a transparent “electric glue” can be formed, which is capable of laminating films together both mechanically and electrically.151 Implementing the unique property of the electric glue into the inverted configuration, a semitransparent polymer solar cell based on the P3HT:PCBM blend was fabricated by the lamination process with a 3% PCE.152 This method took advantage of the solution process, which also featured self-encapsulation and provided an alternative to the roll-to-roll production. A series of alkali metal compounds were evaluated, and revealed the formation of interface dipole layers at the ITO surface, which is shown in Fig. 10. The direction of the dipole moments points from the ITO surface to vacuum that reduces the ITO work function. The amount of the work function reduction is determined by the magnitude of the dipole moment, which correlates to the VOC variation, and is proportional to the electron-donating ability of the alkali metal ions.
 Fig. 10  (a) Variation of secondary electron edge with different buffer layers on ITO, (b) scheme for the formation of dipole layer on ITO and its effect on reducing the ITO work function. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 152; copyright 2008, Wiley VCH.) 
In order to fabricate transparent top electrodes, either thermal evaporation of very thin metal layers or sputter deposition of transparent metal oxides are required.26,89,153–156 However, thin metal layers often suffer from transparency loss and low conductivity, while sputter deposition inevitably introduces damage to the polymer layer.155,157 The inverted structure based on Cs2CO3 allows the formation of transparent cathodes, such as Cs2CO3/Ag/ITO, which was deposited on flexible metal foils and yielded a ca. 3% PCE.158 Evidently, another application of transition metal oxides lies in protecting the polymer active layer during the sputtering process to form a semitransparent electrode, such as MoO3/ITO.159 Other examples include MoO3/Ag/MoO3, WO3/Ag/WO3, MoO3/Al, which are employed in tandem or multiple-stacked cells.132,153,160
An ordered heterojunction that utilizes the ordered mesoporous architecture of inorganic materials possesses the advantage of controlled nanoscale phase separation, and defined pathways without dead ends to provide straightforward charge collection.161 Coakley and McGehee demonstrated hybrid P3HT-titania ordered BHJ devices with a 0.5% PCE. Since then, nanotube arrays of TiO2 and ZnO have been implemented to assist the charge transport for P3HT:PCBM blends in inverted cells, but the performance was still inferior to most regular device structures.150,162–164 The typical small pore sizes of 10–20 nm are comparable to the exciton diffusion lengths of polymers, but result in rather random polymer chain packing instead of the high degree of π–π stacking.165 The efficiency is thus limited by the poor alignment (crystallinity), low mobility, and insufficient infiltration of the polymer. Recently, Mor et al.166 demonstrated a 4.1% PCE double heterojunction polymer solar cell via vertically oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays, as illustrated in Fig. 11. By tailoring the pore sizes of the TiO2 nanotubes, the infiltrated polymer chains self-aligned into aggregates according to the nanotube direction. It has been reported that the hole mobility can be enhanced 20 times by this vertical channel confinement-induced alignment.165 Moreover, both polymer-fullerene and polymer-TiO2 interfaces provided efficient charge separation, and the nanotube arrays prohibited charge recombination at the electrodes since simultaneous contact with both electrodes can be avoided. This double heterojunction device exhibited an EQE maximum of 80%, and a high JSC of 12.4 mA/cm2.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of the double heterojunction polymer solar cells based on TiO2 nanotube arrays. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 166; copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics.) 

3. Vertical phase separation
3.1 Vertical phase separation in polymer blends
The film morphology evolution of polymer blends is a complex interplay governed by the phase-separation process and the interaction between the polymer components and the surface and substrate interface, where the final morphology is controlled by both thermodynamic and kinetic parameters. The rapid evaporation of the solvent freezes the film morphology into a non-equilibrium state, whereas relaxation toward the equilibrium state is often prohibited by kinetic barriers. Due to the low entropy of mixing, immiscible polymer blends tend to demix (phase-separate) upon spin-coating from their parent blend solutions, while surface effects and differences in surface energies have profound effects on the composition profile.167 Surface properties have long been known to significantly impact the phase-separation morphology in binary polymer blends, while blend composition, polymer–substrate interaction, and interfacial tension all play crucial roles in determining the final film morphology.168
Theoretically, the composition in polymer blend films can be described as characteristic wave vectors q∥ and q⊥, which are parallel and normal to the substrate, respectively. When 1/q⊥ is comparable to the film thickness, vertical phase separation can be promoted by increasing q⊥ from attracting one of the blend components to the surface via modifying the chemical structures or substrate properties.30,169 Indeed, vertical-segregated blend films due to preferred interaction with the air interface and a more viscous solvent have been reported.170 In this section, vertical phase separation in conventional and conjugated polymer blends will be introduced, as well as their applications in polymer electronics. The observations of vertical phase separation in two major polymer solar cell systems will be discussed, along with the utilization of this concept.
Experimentally probing the composition of polymer blend films was made possible by advances in depth profiling and imaging techniques. A comprehensive review can be referred to the article by Krausch.171 Depth profiling techniques include forward recoil spectrometry (FReS) and nuclear reaction analysis (NRA), which are based on real space profiling, and neutron reflectivity (NR) and X-ray reflectivity (XRR), which are based on momentum space. Jones et al. showed experimentally surface-directed spinodal decomposition of a mixture of isotopic polymer poly(ethylenepropylene) (PEP) and perdeuterated poly(ethylenepropylene) (d-PEP), where preferential attraction leads to enrichment of d-PEP at the surface.30Fig. 12 shows that the surface is enriched with d-PEP, and a damped oscillation from the surface, the wavelength of which grows with the annealing time. Bruder and Brenn reported that the surface interaction can alter the spinodal decomposition process to form either a bilayer morphology or domain structures.172 Krausch et al. studied the thickness dependence of the spinodal decomposition process to the film composition, revealing interference effects from the two spinodal waves originating from the two distinct surfaces.31 Walheim et al. revealed that the topography of polymer blend films is controlled by the solvent solubility and the substrate properties.32 By properly tailoring these two parameters, either component in the immiscible polystyrene/poly(methyl methacrylate) (PS/PMMA) blend can be preferentially segregated at the substrate surface, where the film morphology can also show a complete phase inversion. Ton-That et al. reported surface enrichment of PMMA in various compositions of the PS/PMMA blend, and attributed the surface segregation to the different solubility of the polymers in the solvent and the relative dewetting of PMMA-rich domains from PS-rich phases.173 Budkowski et al. demonstrated that the solvent evaporation rate depends on the substrate surface chemistry, which changes the convection process.168 Concave and convex surface features were observed for blend films of polystyrene (PS) and polyisoprene (PI) spin-coated from toluene onto hydrophobic and hydrophilic SAM-modified substrates, respectively, while the overall morphology was similar. Böltau et al. showed that the phase-separated domains can form arbitrary structures with a concentration variation by patterning the surface with various SAMs.174 Morphology evolution was studied in situ by time-resolved small-angle light scattering and light reflectivity.175 The formation of the transient wetting layers at both the surface and substrate interfaces initiates from the vertical stratification, and the heterogeneous solvent evaporation causes a solvent concentration gradient, which leads to the interfacial (Marangoni-like) instability and eventually lateral phase separation. This film evolution process in spin-coating is illustrated in Fig. 13. Depending on the spin-coating parameters, the initial multilayer structures can either be “frozen”168 or “broken up”176 into lateral domains. Arias et al. also reported that by controlling the solvent evaporation rate, either self-stratified or lateral phase separated morphologies could be obtained.177
 Fig. 12  Volume fraction vs. depth profiles of d-PEP in an initially uniform mixture with a d-PEP volume fraction of 0.5 after aging at 35 °C for (a) 19200 s, (b) 64440 s, and (c) 172800 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 30; copyright 1991, The American Physical Society.) 
 Fig. 13  A schematic model describing the film formation during the spin-coating process, and the final film morphology. (a) After the initial spin-off stage where both polymer and solvent are removed (i), (ii), the film separates into two layers (iii) and the film thins owing to solvent evaporation only. The interface between the polymers destabilizes (iv) and the film phase-separates laterally (v), (vi). (b) An atomic force microscope image of the final morphology. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 175; copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group.) 
Besides conventional polymer blend systems, vertical phase separation has also been reported on a variety of semiconducting polymer systems, which possess important applications in organic electronics, such as LEDs and transistors. Chappell et al. utilized scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) to identify the poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene) (PFO) emission from the poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene-altbenzothi-adiazole) (F8BT)-rich domains originating from the preferential wetting of the PFO film (ca. 10 nm) at the surface.178 Kim et al. studied the film morphology of (F8BT) and poly(2,7-(9,9-di-n-octylfluorene)-alt-(1,4-phenylene-((4-secbutylphenyl)imino)-1,4-phenylene)) (TFB) blend.179 An enrichment of the low surface energy component (TFB) at both the air and substrate interfaces was observed as a result of interfacial-energy reduction. Due to the preferential wetting of the hole-transporting TFB layer at the substrate, PLEDs without a PEDOT:PSS layer with comparable efficiency were demonstrated. Higgins et al. reported the existence of a wetting layer for different composition ratio, and pointed out that a better solvent can impede its formation.180 Both the composition ratio and the casting solvent have a significant effect on the PLED device performances, and different stages of the film morphology evolution can thus be obtained by controlling the solvent evaporation rate via substrate heating.181,182
Vertical segregation was also reported in P3HT blended with other semicrystalline polymers.183 The sequential crystallization induced vertical stratification to occur in a “double-percolation-like” mechanism.184 The film morphology results from successive phase separation processes, initially in the liquid phase, followed by segregation of the solidified P3HT, which is caused by the crystallization of the matrix component. The exothermic crystallization process drives the solidified semiconducting polymer to segregate toward the surface and interface, leading to a vertically phase-separated morphology. These vertically-stratified structures are particularly beneficial for FET applications, since transport of charge carriers only takes place at the gate dielectrics interface.185 Utilizing this concept, only 3 wt% semiconducting polymer was required without compromising the performance.
By varying the substrate surface energy, PMMA can either segregate at the top surface to function as an encapsulation material or at the bottom surface as a dielectric layer.186,187 Furthermore, the PSS-rich surface in the PEDOT:PSS blend has been identified,188,189 while adding glycerol or D-sorbitol to the PEDOT:PSS solution prior to spin-coating increases the film conductivity due to aggregation of PEDOT-rich particles.151,190
3.2 Vertical phase separation in APFO-3:PCBM
The vertical phase separation plays a crucial role in the charge collection process of polymer solar cells, since the photogenerated charges must transport vertically to the sandwiching electrodes. Two polymer blend systems, namely polyfluorene and polythiophenes, blended with PCBM, have received considerable investigation regarding the vertical phase separation morphology to date.
Alternating polyfluorene copolymers (APFOs), with various donor–acceptor–donor segments, have been intensively studied for photoactive materials and achieved a PCE of 4.2%.191,192 Jönsson et al. reported surface enrichment of poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole] (APFO-3), where the surface composition for a 1:4 blend ratio of APFO-3:PCBM was 1:1.75 Dynamic secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) is an established technique to map the topographic and compositional profiles in both lateral and vertical directions, thus revealing the 3D morphology of polymer blend films.193 Björström et al. utilized dynamic SIMS and observed a multilayer structure after spin-coating APFO-3:PCBM blends in chloroform for a range of blend ratios.194 The vertical structure exhibited a four-fold multilayer morphology with APFO-3 enriched at the surface, followed by a PCBM-enriched layer underneath, then an APFO-3-enriched layer in the middle, and a PCBM-enriched (APFO-3-depleted) layer adjacent to the substrate. It was suggested that the self-stratification was due to composition waves caused by the surface-directed phase separation,30 and if enough time was allowed to reach thermodynamic equilibrium, a bilayer structure instead of the frozen four-layer structure should eventually evolve. Recently, Björström et al. compared the photovoltaic performance of the APFO-3:PCBM blend of three various device structures: a vertically homogeneous layer, a diffusive bilayer, and a spontaneously formed multilayer, as illustrated in Fig. 14A–C.195 The diffusive bilayer was formed by spin-coating PCBM dissolved in dichloromethane solution at high speed onto the polymer layer, whereas APFO-3 was partially dissolved by exposure to dichloromethane.196,197 By selecting a solvent with a desired volatility (evaporation rate), homogeneous or multilayer structures can be formed by spin-coating from chlorobenzene (CB)198 and chloroform, respectively.194 It has been reported that a homogeneous film is favored by slow evaporation and weak polymer–PCBM interaction, while rapid solvent evaporation and strong polymer–PCBM interaction leads to a lateral film structure. Interestingly, the multilayer structure shows the best performance of 3.5% PCE, with a higher JSC and FF (Fig. 14D), despite excess hole-transporting material (APFO-3) accumulating at the cathode. The improved performance can be attributed to this functional structure that can favorably absorb photons and dissociate excitons at distinct regions, as well as the beneficial effect of PCBM content on charge mobilities compared to a homogeneous blend.199–201 Efficient electron transport through a polymer-rich “skin” layer has been reported in MDMO-PPV:PCBM blends.202 This result indicates that further investigation is required to correlate the engineering of the vertical morphology to the resulting device performance. Specific interactions of the blend component with the substrate, such as the interaction between the thiophene groups and gold, might pose an additional factor on the vertical morphology, especially in the vicinity of the substrate.203
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the solar cells with active layers based on APFO-3 and PCBM with: (A) diffuse bilayer morphology, (B) spontaneously formed multilayer structure, and (C) homogenous blend morphology. (D) The corresponding J–V characteristics under white light illumination for the 3 device morphologies. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 195; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
3.3 Vertical phase separation in P3HT:PCBM
Vertical phase separation in the P3HT:PCBM system has been reported by several groups through various analysis techniques. Though the precise vertical composition profile is still under debate, the experimental results are discussed here for comparison. Kim et al. attributed the opposite device performance trend, particularly JSC, upon annealing from different solvents to the distinct morphology distribution.143 The higher boiling point of dichlorobenzene (DCB) allows more time for P3HT to segregate toward the PEDOT:PSS layer, while the faster evaporation of CB results in a more homogeneous composition. Campoy-Quiles et al. used variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) to model the vertical composition profile of P3HT:PCBM thin films, and observed a common vertically and laterally phase-separated morphology under various preparation methods (Fig. 15).34 A concentration gradient varying from PCBM-rich near the substrate to P3HT-rich adjacent to the surface was observed on both fused silica and PEDOT:PSS-coated substrates. The vertical composition profile retained a similar gradient after post-treatments, such as thermal and vapor annealing. Substrate treatment also substantially affected the vertical phase morphology. PEDOT:PSS resulted in a slightly less negative concentration gradient, while a hydrophobic hexamethyldisilazane SAM altered the vertical segregation, with P3HT accumulating at the substrate, and PCBM enriched at the air surface. It was inferred that the morphology evolution initialized from crystallization of the P3HT chains, followed by diffusion and segregation of the PCBM molecules.
 Fig. 15  Analysis of the ellipsometric data of the vertical PCBM concentration profiles in P3HT:PCBM films prepared under various conditions: (a) spin-coated on fused silica before (blue) and after (red) thermal annealing; (b) spin-coated on fused silica for 60 s at 5000 r.p.m. (blue), 3000 r.p.m. (green) and 700 r.p.m. (red); (c) spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS-coated fused silica before (blue) and after (red) vapor annealing; (d) spin-coated on fused silica (left) and on a Si wafer (with native oxide) precoated with a hydrophobic hexamethyldisilazane SAM. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 34; copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.) 
Recently, the mixture solvent systems have been intensively explored by several groups, bringing a rather clear understanding of solvent-selection rules for desirable morphology.3,5,204–206 We have investigated the role of alkanedithiols in the solvent mixtures for the P3HT:PCBM system. 1,8-Octanedithiol (OT) addition was found to preserve the P3HT crystallinity and redistribute the P3HT and PCBM phases in the blend film. XPS analysis revealed an inhomogeneous distribution (vertical phase separation) upon OT addition, where the polymer blend/PEDOT:PSS interface was enriched with PCBM. A model illustrating the effect of OT incorporation during the spin-coating process was proposed and illustrated in Fig. 16. The host solvent (DCB) has a lower boiling point (198 °C) than OT (270 °C), but a higher solubility for PCBM. As a result, the OT concentration gradually increased during the spin-coating process, with PCBM forming clusters and aggregates in the OT phase simultaneously. It has also been demonstrated that additive incorporation can alter the phase separation process for inverted BHJ cells.207
 Fig. 16  Proposed model of film evolution during the spin-coating process. Black wire: P3HT polymer chain; large black dots: PCBM; blue dots: DCB molecules; and red dots: OT molecules. (a–c) correspond to three stages in the spin-coating process when DCB is the sole solvent; (d–f) correspond to three stages in the spin-coating process when OT is added to the DCB. Note the difference of PCBM distribution in the final stage of each case, (c) and (f). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 206; copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.) 
The buried interface was further investigated by lifting-off the polymer films from the substrate by immersion in water.28 By attaching a fluorine atom on the phenyl ring of the PCBM molecule (FPCBM) provides a label to mark the PCBM distribution, as well as excluding possible effects of surface contaminants from oxygen and carbon. Furthermore, FPCBM allows the study of the polymer/PEDOT:PSS interface, which has long been hindered from elemental analysis due to the inevitable PEDOT:PSS remnant. It was shown that PCBM segregated at the substrate for both PEDOT:PSS and Cs2CO3-coated substrates. This vertical composition profile implies the intrinsic advantage of the inverted configuration, since the Cs2CO3 side (cathode) is PCBM-rich, and the Al (anode) side is P3HT-rich (Fig. 17), which should facilitate charge collection at the electrodes.26,87 Rinsing the polymer blend film surface with OT selectively dissolves the PCBM to expose the top and bottom surface topography, as shown in Fig. 18.205 The larger contrast in the phase image indicates the abundant fullerene phase of the bottom interface compared to the top surface (Fig. 18b). The vertical phase separation in the P3HT:PCBM blend film is ascribed to the lower surface energy of P3HT (γP3HT: 27 mN/m2, γPCBM: 38 mN/m2), and can be manipulated by varying the surface property/energy. The most significant PCBM accumulation occurring at the Cs2CO3-coated substrate is due to the strong charge transfer interaction between PCBM and the surface dipoles formed by Cs2CO3-coated ITO.152,208
 Fig. 17  Schematic of the inverted configuration and the vertical phase separation of the P3HT:PCBM blend. The red stripes and black dots represent the P3HT polymer chains and PCBM, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 28; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.) 
 Fig. 18  AFM topography (left) and phase (right) images of (a) top and (b) bottom surfaces of the exposed P3HT networks. The PCBM was selectively removed using OT. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 28; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.) 
Near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS) is also capable of probing the buried interface composition in polymer solar cells.209,210 NEXAFS also showed P3HT enrichment at the film surface despite the substrate treatment, whereas the amount of P3HT at the buried interface can be varied from 18% (on SiO2) to 74% (on octyltrichlorosilane (OTS)) depending on the substrate surface energy. Despite the hydrophobic SAMs could form a P3HT-enriched contact at the substrate interface, the insulating nature of the SAMs impedes the hole collection, preventing the fabrication of high performance photovoltaic cells with preferred vertical composition profile via this approach. Indeed, this vertical composition gradient would impose a charge injection barrier at the electrodes. Hole-transport layers with lower surface energy, electron-transport layers with higher surface energy, as well as the inverted configuration are expected to improve the device performance.28,29,111 By using another depth-profiling technique, namely high kinetic energy XPS, different probing depths were achieved by varying the photon energies, which revealed a PCBM-enriched layer lying 6–20 nm under a polyfluorene-enriched surface layer by tracing the characteristic satellite features of the C60 cage.211
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scattering at both narrow and wide angles have been used to study the crystalline BHJ solar cells, particularly in the P3HT:PCBM system.212–217 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)218,219 and atomic force microscopy (AFM) are commonly applied to probe the surface as well. However, these techniques only provide either localized or averaged information instead of a comprehensive view of the 3D nanoscale morphology. Recently, electron tomography has emerged as a powerful tool to characterize the 3D morphology of polymer solar cells.220 The principle is illustrated in Fig. 19c, which lies in reconstructing the 3D nanoscale morphology in TEM by taking a series of 2D projections from different angles and tilting the sample specimen with respect to the electron beam. van Bavel et al. were the first to study polymer solar cells with electron tomography to reveal the 3D nanoscale organization, where slices close to the bottom and top of the film are shown in Fig. 19(a) and (b), respectively.215 Electron diffraction showed low P3HT crystallinity with small crystals for as-cast film, while annealing treatment reorganizes the film morphology to form long P3HT nanorods. However, amorphous P3HT does not provide sufficient contrast to be differentiated from PCBM. An opposite vertical phase morphology compared to other analysis techniques was observed, with enrichment of P3HT nanorods near the anode and PCBM near the cathode for film thicknesses of 50 and 100 nm, as shown in Fig. 19(d).221 P3HT aggregates existing in the solution might sediment due to gravity, forming nucleation sites for the P3HT nanorod enrichment. Andersson et al.222 also utilized electron tomography to study the 3D nanomorphology of the APFO-3:PCBM blend system. It has been recently suggested that different types of vertical composition gradients could result from the varying film formation kinetics of different film thickness.221 In summary, complementary techniques and further understanding of the phase separation kinetics are still required to elucidate the relationship between the vertical phase separation and device performance.
 Fig. 19  Results of electron tomography: quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanorods distribution through the thickness of a thermally annealed P3HT:PCBM blend film (200 nm). Images (a) and (b) are slices taken out of the reconstructed volume of the film, with a slice (dimensions: 1700 nm × 1700 nm) located (a) close to the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top of the film. The crystalline P3HT nanorods are yellow in color. (c) The principle of electron tomography to reconstruct the 3D image of the specimen. (d) The relative area occupied by P3HT (yellow) in each slice (a, b) can thus be determined for all slices through the whole thickness of the P3HT:PCBM film. (Parts (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 215, part (c) from ref. 220 and part (d) from ref. 221; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society, and Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
3.4 Utilization of the vertical phase separation
Despite the discrepancy of the vertical composition profile from electron tomography and other techniques, a composition gradient with the anode and cathode enriched with the donor and acceptor material, respectively, is evidently beneficial for the overall device performance. Significant efforts to realize the ideal vertical morphology in polymer solar cells have emerged, and some representative examples will be discussed in the following. In essence, three main approaches were employed to induce the favorable vertical phase morphology. Altering the vertical-stratified morphology by the solvent viscosity and substrate surface property have been demonstrated by several groups. Another approach is to incorporate species into the polymer blend solution to promote the formation of a preferred electrode contact. Different fabrication processes that are independent of the phase separation process of polymer blends have also been adapted to form a bilayer or p–i–n-like morphology.
Arias et al. altered the vertical phase separation in the poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N-(4-butylphenyl)-bis-N,N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) (PFB) and F8BT blend by either controlling the solvent-evaporation rate (solvent viscosity) or modifying the substrate surface properties.177 Compared to using xylene as the solvent, a more viscous isodurene forms a vertical structure instead of lateral domains. Alternatively, using 7-OTS SAMs also formed a favorable segregation of the high-surface-energy component in the polymer blend. Fig. 20 confirmed the vertical phase separation by the observed filter effect via illumination from opposite sides of the device, where the layer adjacent to the transparent electrode partially filters the incident light.223 The asymmetric absorption due to vertical segregation resulted in a different EQE with light illuminating from different sides, where the isodurene-cast films showed a much lower EQE when illuminated from the semitransparent Al cathode. Discussions of other organic electronic applications based on the vertically-segregated polymer blends was also reported by Arias.224 Chen et al. used SAM microcontact printing (μCP) to pattern 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) SAMs on PEDOT:PSS to induce vertical segregation.225 Surface-directed phase separation was obtained with a more complete phase separation. Absorption data confirmed improved P3HT alignment accompanied with a higher hole mobility.
 Fig. 20  Normalized EQE spectra of PFB:F8BT photovoltaic devices in which the active layer is composed either by PFB:F8BT blends with lateral phase separation () or with phase separation in the vertical direction (–○–). (a) Illumination through the PEDOT electrode and (b) through a semitransparent Al electrode. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 224; copyright 1997, The American Physical Society.) 
Wei et al. incorporated a new fullerene derivative with a fluorocarbon chain (F-PCBM) into the P3HT:PCBM solution.226 F-PCBM preferentially segregates a 2 nm thick layer at the surface due to the lower surface energy fluorinated side groups.227 The high FF of 72% was attributed to the surface dipole moment induced by the F-PCBM layer, which decreased the energy barrier between the Al cathode and the PCBM. This also resembles an ideal vertical phase morphology, with the acceptor material enriched at the cathode to suppress charge recombination with the donor material. Similarly, surface-segregation of poly(dimethylsiloxane)-block-poly(methyl methacrylate) (PDMS-b-PMMA) formed by self-organization during spin-coating was demonstrated as an interfacial buffer layer.228 A nanoscale functional interlayer of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) can also be formed via vertical phase separation to modify the film surface, which reacts with Al to reduce both the interfacial barrier height and contact resistance, as well as improve the device stability.229
Several other approaches have been employed to form a bilayer device structure with interpenetrating network, such as lamination,230–232 interdiffusion,233–236 and selective dissolution.237 Wang et al. fabricated a bilayer device, where an intermixed zone with a concentration gradient was formed by spin-coating from separate solvents, namely P3HT in CB and PCBM in dichloromethane.238 Shakutsui et al. controlled the distribution of the donor and acceptor materials by evaporative spray deposition using ultradilute solution (ESDUS) to form P3HT-rich/PCBM-rich BHJ solar cells.239 The improved device performance was attributed to improved charge harvesting. Castro et al. utilized the surface-directed demixing concept on the immiscible poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV)/PS (blend system, where the guest polymer (PS) was subsequently selectively removed. An efficient donor–acceptor heterojunction was formed by spin-coating or thermal evaporating a C60 layer, with a 3-fold improvement in PCE.240
We intentionally thermally-evaporated a thin layer of PCBM on top of the P3HT:PCBM blend film to modulate the vertical composition gradient, which resembles the p–i–n structure in inorganic and small molecule solar cells.241 Upon thermal annealing, PCBM diffusion into the BHJ smoothens the top surface to increase the effective contact area as well as enrich the cathode interface with PCBM. The improved charge transport and extraction is reflected in the improved EQE over the entire absorption region. Vertical phase segregation was also observed in hybrid photovoltaics based on CdSe tetrapods and OC1C10-PPV blends by Sun et al.242 It was shown that by replacing chloroform with a higher-boiling-point solvent, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB), vertical segregation led to an improvement in charge-collection efficiency. Charge collection was more efficient even with a less efficient charge-dissociation rate due to the coarser phase separation, evidenced by the time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurement.
It is clear that vertical stratifications can be ascribed to the different solubilities and surface energies of the blend components as well as the dynamics of the spin-coating process. A volatile solvent is likely to form a more homogeneous film, while a less volatile solvent allows vertical phase separation. Upon vertical phase separation, the low surface energy component preferentially segregates at the surface or interface to reduce the overall energy. By controlling the film drying rate via solvent viscosity and spin-coating conditions as well as surface treatment, a closer to optimal, both laterally- and vertically-segregated morphology can be formed. If the vertical composition profile can be manipulated to the desired gradient, with a donor-enriched anode and acceptor-enriched cathode, efficient charge dissociation via the interpenetrating network as well as efficient charge transport along the interconnected pathway can be expected to vastly enhance the device performance.
4. Energy level alignment
One of the key issues for organic electronics is to understand the energy-level alignment at the interfaces. The interface electronic properties involving semiconducting and/or conducting molecules and polymers have been extensively investigated over the last two decades. A comprehensive review regarding the fundamental concepts of energy-level alignment at the organic/metal and organic/organic interfaces can be found by Ishii et al.44 Two other excellent articles by Hwang et al. and Braun et al. have also reviewed the updated progress in this field.243,244 Therefore, we will focus our emphasis on the recent work related to polymer photovoltaic devices.
Two different models have been proposed to describe the interfaces of the organic semiconductor and the metal/conductive substrate. When the organic molecule comes into contact with the clean metal surface, the electron wave function of the metal tails into the molecule in close proximity and broadens its energy level. As a result, an induced density of interface states (IDIS) is formed in the former energy gap of the organic molecules. In the IDIS model, the charge neutrality level (ECNL) is calculated by integrating the local density of states in the IDIS and imposing the total number of electrons up to ECNL, that equals the number of electrons in the neutral molecule. The relative position of the metal EF and the organic ECNL determines the charge redistribution across the metal/organic interface. The charge transfer forms an interfacial dipole that narrows the energy difference between EF and ECNL. However, the actual charge injection barrier also depends on the density of states around ECNL and can be described by the following two equations: ϕBn = S(ϕsub − EA) + (1 − S)ECNL(1) (2)where ϕBn is the electron injection barrier, ϕsub is the work function of the conductive substrate, EA is the electron affinity of the organic semiconductor (energy difference between vacuum and LUMO), Dis is the density of interface gap states, and δ is the effective metal–semiconductor distance.243
In contrast to organic small molecules deposited on the clean metal surface in high vacuum systems, polymer films are coated from solution to a substrate surface that is often contaminated with hydrocarbons and/or native oxides. The contamination layer physically and electronically decouples the polymer film from the continuum of the metallic electronic states.245 Consequently, vacuum level alignment (Schottky–Mott limit) holds at the polymer/conductive substrate interface and the electron injection barrier equals the difference between the substrate EF and EA of the polymer (S = 1).
In some cases, vacuum level shift is observed after polymer coating on the conductive substrate, which can be explained using the integer charge transfer (ICT) model. Although the contamination layer decouples the polymer layer from the substrate, charge transfer can still occur via tunneling as long as the contamination layer is sufficiently thin. Since the organic small molecules and conjugated polymers are soft materials, adding or withdrawing charges induces substantial electronic and geometric relaxation effects, leading to self-localized polaronic (single charge) or bipolaronic (double charge) states. These states are located in the previously forbidden band gap of the neutral molecule/polymer. The energy of the positive integer charge transfer state, EICT+, is defined as the energy required to take away one electron from the organic molecule or polymer, resulting in a fully relaxed state. The energy of the negative integer transfer state, EICT−, is defined as the energy gained by adding one electron to the organic molecule or polymer to produce a fully relaxed state. According to the ICT model, the energy level alignment of an organic/conductive substrate system with very weak interfacial interaction can be determined by the work function of the substrate (ΦSUB) and the energy of the charge transfer states of the organic material. If ΦSUB is larger than EICT+ (Fig. 21a), electrons spontaneously flow from the organic layer to the substrate, creating an interfacial dipole that down-shifts the vacuum level. This process continues until the interface dipole equals ΦSUB − EICT+ and the Fermi level is pinned to the EICT+ state at the interface. Consequently, in this condition the ΦORG/SUB remains invariant while the interface dipole changes with ΦSUB. When ΦSUB lies between the EICT+ and the EICT− (Fig. 21b), no spontaneous charge transfer occurs at the substrate–organic interface. Therefore, vacuum level alignment holds and the work function of the substrate coated with organic layer ΦORG/SUB equals ΦSUB. In the equilibrium case where ΦSUB is smaller than EICT− (Fig. 21c), an interface dipole equal to EICT− − ΦSUB is formed and the Fermi level is pinned to the CT− state at the interface. The ΦORG/SUB in this case is also independent of ΦSUB. Thus if the work function of the conductive substrates spans a sufficiently large range, a dependence between ΦSUB and the work function of the organic-on-substrate interface ΦORG/SUB with sharp transitions between the vacuum alignment (Schottky–Mott limit, EICT− < ΦSUB < EICT+ with ΦORG/SUB = ΦSUB) and Fermi level pinning (ΦSUB < EICT− or ΦSUB > EICT+ with constant ΦORG/SUB) regimes are expected, as shown in Fig. 22. However, in many experiments due to the limitation of ΦSUB, only part of this region can be observed.
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the evolution of the energy-level alignment when a π-conjugated organic molecule or polymer is physisorbed on a substrate surface when (a) ΦSUB > EICT+: Fermi-level pinning to a positive integer charge-transfer state, (b) EICT− < ΦSUB < EICT+: vacuum level alignment, and (c) ΦSUB < EICT−: Fermi-level pinning to a negative integer charge-transfer state. The charge-transfer-induced shift in vacuum level, Δ, is shown where applicable. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
 Fig. 22  General ΦORG/SUBvs.ΦSUB dependence predicted by the ICT model. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
By using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), Tengstedt et al. mapped out the energy level alignment of 4 conjugated polymers on various conductive substrates with the ΦSUB ranging from 3.8 to 6.1 eV.246 The polymers tested were P3HT, TFB, poly(9-(1-decylundecylidene)fluorine) (P10AF), and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO), which reflect a large span in ionization potentials (IPs) (Table 2). Fig. 23 shows the dependence of ΦORG/SUB on ΦSUB for the four polymers. When ΦSUB is low, the ΦORG/SUB values of all the polymers equal ΦSUB (slope = 1), indicating vacuum level alignment at the interface. For ΦSUB exceeding a certain threshold value, the ΦORG/SUB becomes substrate-independent (slope = 0), implying that the Fermi level of the substrate is pinned to EICT+. Different materials have different thresholds. The threshold value for P3HT is 4.0 eV and thus the EICT+ of P3HT can be determined as 4.0 eV, which is 0.5 eV above its HOMO. The EICT+ values of all the 4 polymers are shown in Table 2. In a similar study, we determined the IP and EICT+ to be 4.6 eV and 3.9 eV (Fig. 24).247 Different energy alignment of P3HT with conductive substrates was also reported by others.248 The difference may come from different P3HT morphology. For instance, Park et al. reported that depending on whether thermal treatment was used, the P3HT thin film adopts two different molecular orientations, parallel and perpendicular to the substrate, which result in different values of the vacuum level shift and hole-injection barrier.249 Osikowicz et al. also reported that morphology change and interfacial doping may affect the EICT+ level of P3HT and thus change the energy alignment between P3HT and the UV-ozone treated interface.250
 Fig. 23  Dependence of work function of polymer coated substrate, ΦELP/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for four studied materials, namely P3HT, TFB, P10AF, and PFO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 246; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.) 
Table 2 Estimates of essential parameters characterizing the energetics at the interface, as deduced from UPS measurements: IP, polaronic energy, and polaronic relaxation energy. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 246; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics)




ELP
IP [± 0.1 eV]
Polaronic energy [± 0.05 V]
Relaxation energy [± 0.05 V]




P3HT
4.5
4.0
0.5


TFB
5.4
4.7
0.7


P10AF
5.5
5.1
0.4


PFO
5.8
5.2
0.6




The ICT model can also be used to understand the interface of small molecules on passivated conductive substrates. Using the above method, the EICT+ of p-type small molecules can be determined.251 Generally for acceptors coated on the conductive substrates, the Fermi level of the low work function substrate is pinned to the negative integer charge transfer state of these materials and vacuum level alignment is achieved when ΦSUB exceeds certain threshold value (Fig. 25).244 Thus the EICT− of these materials can be determined. The EICT− of C60 is 4.5 eV,250 which is higher than that of PCBM shown in Fig. 24. The difference is consistent with Akaike et al., that due to the side chain effect, the IE and EA of PCBM are 0.4–0.6 eV smaller than that of C60.252
 Fig. 24  Dependence of the work function of the substrate coated with organic semiconductor, ΦORG/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for P3HT and PCBM. (Reprinted from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
The organic/organic heterojunction interface in small molecule solar cells is also important because the energy offset between the donor and acceptor materials determines the charge separation process and the upper limit for the VOC. A detailed introduction of the organic/organic interface of OLED and OPV devices can be found in a article by Armstrong et al.253 Since only weak Van der Waals interaction exists at most organic/organic interfaces, the ICT model can also be used to understand the behavior of the organic/organic heterojunctions. Take the P3HT/C60 interface as an example: because the EICT+ of P3HT (4.0 ± 0.1 eV) is smaller than the EICT− of C60 (4.5 ± 0.1 eV), electron transfer from P3HT to C60 is expected at the interface. As predicted by the ICT model, a potential of 0.5 ± 0.1 eV will build up at equilibrium to match the energy difference between the EICT+ of P3HT and the EICT− of C60. Osikowicz et al. studied the P3HT/C60 interface on aluminium (with native oxide layer), Al/AlxOy (ΦSUB = 3.3–3.7 eV), and silicon (with native oxide layer), Si/SiOx (ΦSUB = 4.4–4.9 eV) substrates. The measured dipole of (0.6 ± 0.1 eV) at the P3HT/C60 interface is in good agreement with the ICP model.250 The ICT model was also tested on the PFO/C60 and other organic/organic interfaces.254,255 It was found that both the relative position between the charge transfer states of the materials forming the interface, and their energetic position with respect to the Fermi level of the substrate is important. For example, the EICT+ of 4,4′-N,N′-dicarbazolylbiphenyl (CBP) and 4,4,4′′-tris[3-methylphenyl(phenyl)amino]triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) are (5.2 ± 0.1 eV) and (4.5 ± 0.1 eV), respectively. When the CBP/m-MTDATA stack is deposited on the PEDOT:poly(perfluoroethylenesulfonic acid) (PFESA) substrate (ΦSUB = 5.6–6.1 eV), the ICT model predicts the Fermi level alignment of the substrate with the EICT+ of CBP and m-MTDATA, resulting a 0.7 eV dipole at the m-MTDATA on CBP interface, which lowers the vacuum level to 4.6 eV (Fig. 26a). In contrast, when a smaller work function silicon Si/SiOxis used as the substructure, the ICT model predicts vacuum level alignment at both the substrate/CBP and CBP/m-MTDATA interfaces (Fig. 26b). The experimental results correspond well with the ICT model predictions.255
 Fig. 25  Dependence of the work function of molecule-coated substrates, ΦORG/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for C60 (●), TCNQ (■), and F4-TCNQ (▲). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.) 
 Fig. 26  UPS spectra and the corresponding diagrams of energy level alignment of interfaces: (a) PEDOT-PFESA/CBP/m-MTDATA; (b) Si/SiOx/CBP/m-MTDATA. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 255; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
From the ICT model, knowing the substrate work function and the ICT states in organic materials constituting a multilayered structure should enable the prediction of the energy level alignment across the organic film stack. However, flat bilayer interfaces do not exist in the blend systems and works revealing the electronic structures in BHJs are scarce.247,256 We recently used UPS to investigate the energy level alignment of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ and showed that the ICT model can also be employed to explain the results.
The EICT+ of P3HT and EICT− of PCBM were first determined using the above method. (Fig. 24) Accordingly, the energy level alignment between the P3HT (or PCBM) layer and the inert substrates can be predicted using the ICT model. The work function of PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO determined by UPS is 5.0 eV. Since this value is larger than the EICT+ of P3HT and lies between the EICT+ and EICT− of PCBM, Fermi level pinning and vacuum level alignment is expected at the PEDOT:PSS/P3HT and the PEDOT:PSS/PCBM interface, respectively. As a result, the ΦORG/SUB is anticipated to be 3.9 eV for PEDOT:PSS/P3HT (Fig. 27a) and 5.0 eV for PEDOT:PSS/PCBM (Fig. 27b), consistent with the results obtained from the secondary electron cutoffs shown in Fig. 27d. Moreover, energy alignment of PCBM/P3HT stack on PEDOT:PSS can also be predicted. Because the EICT+ of P3HT is smaller than the EICT− of PCBM, electrons will flow from P3HT to PCBM until the EICT+ state of P3HT aligns with the EICT− state of PCBM at the interface. As a result, an interface dipole of −0.4 eV forms and the vacuum level of the P3HT layer is 4.6 eV above the Fermi level (ΦORG/SUB = 4.6 eV) (Fig. 27). Fig. 27d shows the UPS spectra of different P3HT:PCBM blends spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS. From the HOMO structure (right) it can be found that the UPS signals of the blend films are dominated by the P3HT component, which is consistent with the vertical phase separation discussed previously. Moreover, the IPs calculated from the UPS spectra of the blend films are around 4.6 eV and in agreement with ref. 246 and 250. The energy level alignment of the P3HT at the top surfaces of the blend films can thus be acquired from the UPS spectra. The UPS spectra of the blend films with low PCBM concentration (5:1, 3:1) are almost identical with pristine P3HT. Therefore, the energy level alignment of P3HT at the top of the blend film is the same as on PEDOT:PSS (or on top of the PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/…/P3HT stack, as predicted by the ICT model). As the PCBM concentration increases, the UPS spectrum shifts to lower binding energy, indicating a higher work function and a shallower HOMO level. It should be noted that the energy levels obtained from the UPS spectrum of the 1:5 weight ratio blend film are almost the same as those of the P3HT layer shown in Fig. 27c. In addition, the ICT model also predicts the same results for the P3HT layer on top of the PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/P3HT/…/PCBM stack. These resemblances suggest that P3HT covers most of the bottom surface (PEDOT:PSS/blends interface) of the 5:1 blend film and PCBM dominates the equivalent region of the 1:5 blend film. The PCBM/P3HT wt ratio at the bottom surface of the 5:1 film is estimated to be about 0.25. This value is much lower than the corresponding ratio of the 1:1 film, where the ratio is estimated to be around 1.8. Campoy-Quiles et al. estimated that the PCBM concentration at the PEDOT:PSS side of the 1:1 blend film is about 65 vol%.34 Based on these data, a full coverage of PCBM at the PEDOT:PSS side can be expected in the 1:5 blend film.
 Fig. 27  Schematic energy level alignment diagrams of (a) PEDOT:PSS/P3HT, (b) PEDOT:PSS/PCBM, (c) PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/P3HT as predicted by the ICT model and (d) UPS spectra of P3HT, P3HT:PCBM, and PCBM films spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS. The PCBM concentration increases from bottom to top. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
 Fig. 28  Schematic energy level alignment diagrams of (a) Cs2CO3/P3HT, (b) Cs2CO3/PCBM, (c) Cs2CO3/PCBM/P3HT as predicted by the ICT model and (d) UPS spectra of P3HT, P3HT:PCBM, and PCBM films spin-coated on Cs2CO3. The PCBM concentration increases from bottom to top. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
The P3HT:PCBM blend films on Cs2CO3-covered ITO were also investigated and confirmed the above finding. The work function of Cs2CO3-coated ITO substrates can range from 3.05 to 3.8 eV, depending on different Cs2CO3 solution concentrations and deposition processes used. In this case, the substrate work function is determined to be 3.5 eV, which is between the EICT+ and EICT− of P3HT and smaller than the ECT− of PCBM. Therefore, vacuum alignment was found at the Cs2CO3/P3HT interface (ΦORG/SUB = 3.5 eV) (Fig. 28a) and Fermi level pinning was found at the Cs2CO3/PCBM interface (ΦORG/SUB = 4.3 eV) (Fig. 28b). The UPS spectra of different P3HT:PCBM blend films also illustrate a P3HT-rich region near the top surface. However, unlike coated on PEDOT:PSS, even the film with the lowest PCBM concentration (5:1) shows obviously different energy levels from pristine P3HT when coated on Cs2CO3. As the P3HT concentration increases, the energy level alignment of the top P3HT of the blend approaches the energy level alignment of P3HT on Cs2CO3/P3HT predicted by the ICT model (Fig. 28c). The results are consistent with previous findings where PCBM tends to accumulate at the Cs2CO3 surface.28 The P3HT/PCBM weight ratio at the bottom surface of the 5:1 film is about 2.0, which is close to the corresponding ratio (2.2) of the 1:1 film.
The interface between the organic layer and top electrode usually exhibits different energetic and charge carrier injection properties from its metal-on-organic counterpart. The atoms evaporated from a hot source often diffuse into the soft organic layer and induce significant damage. The metal atom can also react with the organic molecule/polymer and form chemical bonds, which causes local variations in both dipole energy and molecular-orbital modification, creating a distribution of injection barriers and trap energies at the electrode.244 Thus the IDIS and ICT models can not be generally applied to these systems. Interfaces formed between P3HT and vapor-deposited Na, Cu, Ag, Au, Cr, V and Ti were reported.257–259 With the exception of Au, interfacial chemical reactions were found between P3HT and all the other metals. Among them, Na, Cu and Ag react exclusively with the S atom, while Cr, V and Ti react with both the S and C atoms of the thiophene ring at higher coverages. Recently, it was found that when deposited onto the P3HT surface, Ca atoms react with defect sites or residual contamination.260,261 At a low coverage region (between 0.1 to 0.6 monolayer (ML)), the Ca atoms cleave the C–S bonds in the thiophene group below the surface and form CaS clusters. It was revealed that Ca ultimately reacts with S atoms down to a depth of about 0.3 nm, which corresponds to 1.2 × 1015 atoms of reacted sulfur atoms per cm2, or nearly five monomer-unit layers. The adsorbed Ca also forms 3D Ca clusters on the surface of the polymer at high coverages. This process predominates above 2 ML coverage and leads to the formation of a continuous Ca multilayer film beyond 11 ML coverage.260 It was also found that after depositing 1 nm of Ca, the HOMO and LUMO of the P3HT down-shifted about 0.4 eV and the electron injection barrier was estimated to be about 0.98 eV.261 However, this information has yet to provide a complete picture, since the energy level alignment between P3HT and Ca is not as critical as that of PCBM and Ca, where electron collection occurs in a typical device structure, and determines the overall performance of the P3HT:PCBM devices.
Summary and outlook
The device performance of polymer solar cells depends on the sequential processes of charge dissociation, transport, and collection. The interfacial contact plays a central role in the charge collection and vertical phase separation process. A myriad of interfacial materials to engineer the anode and cathode contacts are highlighted. The vertical phase morphology is of fundamental importance to the charge-transport process, and charge recombination can be reduced via an optimized vertical composition gradient; that is, a donor-enriched anode and an acceptor-enriched cathode. However, high performance photovoltaic cells cannot be obtained with an inferior interface contact, and tremendous efforts are made to engineer the interface at the nanoscale. A better understanding and control of the interface properties of polymer solar cells shall allow us to derive a general design rule to engineer future material systems for polymer photovoltaic application.
With recent reports on significant advancement of donor materials, record PCEs have been pushed forward from ca. 5% to over 7% within the past few years, indicating promising potential for further efficiency improvement.4,5 Though P3HT:PCBM BHJs with different morphologies have been intensively studied and well-understood with respect to electrode contact and morphological characteristics, it is a unique system which only provides limited information on the interface engineering for future improvement. Molecular engineering usually aims to achieve polymers with tunable HOMO levels and band gaps that ensure broad absorption and low potential loss. It requires different building blocks to construct copolymers which generally have lower crystallinity than P3HT. This lack of crystallinity leads to alower mobility and carrier diffusion length. Consequently, the film thicknesses and phase separation morphology are restricted in BHJ photovoltaic cells based on these copolymers, while commonly the amorphous films result in smaller carrier diffusion length and uniform distribution of donor and acceptor. It is thus more important to obtain highly selective and barrier-free charge collection via utilizing proper functional interlayers. Meanwhile, the surface effects on the polymer BHJ morphology should provide further possibility to manipulate the film evolution dynamics. Given efficient single BHJ photovoltaic cells with efficiencies approaching 10%, it is also desirable to stack BHJs with complementary absorption in tandem cells. The success in tandem structures also lies in superior interface materials and sufficient understanding of the interfacial contacts, which should help pave the route towards a double-digit efficiency.
References
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 Search PubMed .
I. D. Parker, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 1656 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, J. Kirkpatrick and P. Ravirajan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 035337 CrossRef .
B. P. Rand, D. P. Burk and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 115327 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, J. Mattheis and U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235320 CrossRef .
J. J. Benson-Smith, L. Goris, K. Vandewal, K. Haenen, J. V. Manca, D. Vanderzande, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 451 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hallermann, S. Haneder and E. D. Como, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 053307 CrossRef .
D. Veldman, Ö. Ìpek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, F. Banishoeib, I. V. Severen, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirose, A. Kahn, V. Aristov, P. Soukiassian, V. Bulovi and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 13748 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vogel, S. Doka, Ch. Breyer, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and K. Fostiropoulos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 163501 CrossRef .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coakley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef .
A. Hayakawa, O. Yoshikawa, T. Fujieda, K. Uehara and S. Yoshikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163517 CrossRef .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Hung and C. H. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2002, 39, 143 CrossRef .
K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C.-W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, N. S. Baek, J. Zou, K. O'Malley and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253301 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, L.-M. Chen, G. W. Yang, C.-H. Huang, J. H. Hou, Y. Wu, G. Li, C.-S. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. L. Jones, L. J. Norton, E. J. Kramer, F. S. Bates and P. Wiltzius, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 1326 CrossRef CAS .
G. Krausch, C. A. Dai, E. J. Kramer, J. Marko and F. S. Bates, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 5566 CrossRef CAS .
S. Walheim, M. Böltau, J. Mlynek, G. Krausch and U. Steiner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 4995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 95 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Lee, Z. Q. Gao and L. S. Hung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1404 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suemori, M. Yokoyama and M. Hiramoto, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 036109 CrossRef .
C. Uhrich, R. Schueppel, A. Petrich, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, E. Brier, P. Kilickiran and P. Baeuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2991 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, S. Sista and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094512 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. H. Lee, W. L. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, S. H. Park, S. Cowan, M. H. Tong, S. Cho, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013302 CrossRef .
J. Gilot, I. Barbu, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 113520 CrossRef .
B. V. Andersson, D. M. Huang, A. J. Moulé and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043302 CrossRef .
N. Uyeda, T. Kobayashi, K. Ishizuka and Y. Fujiyoshi, Nature, 1980, 285, 95 CAS .
H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirose, A. Kahn, V. Arisotov and P. Soukiassian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 217 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oji, E. Ito, M. Furuta, K. Kajikawa, H. Ishii, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1999, 101–103, 517 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, K. Leong and A. K.-Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 719 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lögdlund and J. L. Brédas, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 4357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Antoniadis, B. R. Hsieh, M. A. Abkowitz, S. A. Jenekhe and M. Stolka, Synth. Met., 1994, 62, 265 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, C. Zhang and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 1540 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, K. Pakbaz and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 3422 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispents, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093301 CrossRef .
J. M. Bharathan and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 3207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cros, M. Firon, S. Lenfant, P. Trouslard and L. Beck, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 251, 257 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, M. S. White, G. Rumbles, D. S. Ginley and S. E. Shaheen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053307 CrossRef .
L. S. Hung, C. W. Tang and M. G. Mason, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 152 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, G. E. Jabbour, M. M. Morrell, Y. Kawabe, B. Kippelen, N. Peyghambarian, M.-F. Nabor, R. Schlaf, E. A. Mash and N. R. Armstrong, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 2324 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Hung, R. Q. Zhang, P. He and M. G. Mason, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, 103 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Jabbour, B. Kippelen, N. R. Armstrong and N. Peyghambarian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1185 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Hasegawa, S. Miura, T. Moriyama, T. Kimura, I. Takaya, Y. Osato and H. Mizutani, in SID Int. Symp. Digest Technol. Papers,  2004, p. 154 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, G. Li, E. Wu, Q. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, T. Watanabe, K. Ueno and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 739 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yi, S. J. Kang, K. Cho, J. M. Koo, K. Han, K. J. Park, M. K. Noh, C. N. Whang and K. H. Jeong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 213502 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, J.-G. Lee and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1463 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Tao, H. Suzuki, T. Wada, S. Miyata and H. Sasabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9447 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ganzorig, K. Suga and M. Fujihira, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2001, 85, 140 CrossRef .
J. Lee, Y. Park, S. K. Lee, E.-J. Cho, D. Y. Kim, H. Y. Chu, H. Lee, L.-M. Do and T. Zyung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, Y. Park, D. Y. Kim, H. Y. Chu, H. Lee and L.-M. Do, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 173 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sacriciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. H. van Gennip, J. K. J. van Duren, P. C. Thune, R. A. J. Janssen and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 5031 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Limketkai and M. A. Baldo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 085207 CrossRef .
S. K. M. Jönsson, E. Carlegrim, F. Zhang, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3695 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee, Synth. Met., 1997, 91, 125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, J.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kwak, Y.-J. Kim and J. S. Choi, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2003, 405, 89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, Y. Park, D. Y. Kim, H. Y. Chu, H. Lee and L. M. Do, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okada, K. Okinaka, H. Iwawaki, M. Furugori, M. Hashimoto, T. Mukaide, J. Kamatani, S. Igawa, A. Tsuboyama, T. Takiguchi and K. Ueno, Dalton Trans., 2005, 1583 RSC .
E. Ahlswede, J. Hanisch and M. Powalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163504 CrossRef .
J. Huang, W. J. Hou, J. H. Li, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133509 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Z. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Briere and A. H. Sommer, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 3547 CrossRef CAS .
C.-I. Wu, C.-T. Lin, Y.-H. Chen, M.-H. Chen, Y.-J. Lu and C.-C. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 152104 CrossRef .
M.-H. Chen and C.-I. Wu, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 113713 CrossRef .
A. H. Sommer, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 1254 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Liao, L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173303 CrossRef .
F.-C. Chen, J.-L. Wu, S. S. Yang, K.-H. Hsieh and W.-C. Chen, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 103721 CrossRef .
F.-C. Chen, J.-L. Wu, K.-H. Hsieh, W.-C. Chen and S.-W. Lee, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1132 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Park, S. H. Kim, S. N. Cho and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2445 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, N. E. Coates, S. Cho, N. S. Cho, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243308 CrossRef .
J. C. Yu, J. Yu, W. Ho, Z. Jiang and L. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3808 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, Y. Lou, X. Chen, A. C. S. Samia, J. Stout and J. L. Gole, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sekine, C.-H. Chou, W. L. Kwan and Y. Yang, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1473 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Park, J.-H. Li, A. Kumar, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. H. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sista, M.-H. Park, Z. R. Hong, Y. Wu, J. H. Hou, W. L. Kwan, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 380,  DOI:10.1002/adma.200901624 .
T. Kuwabara, H. Sugiyama, T. Yamaguchi and K. Takahashi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 3766 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Roest, J. J. Kelly, D. Vanmaekelbergh and E. A. Meulenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 036801 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143512 CrossRef .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. Yang and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505 CrossRef CAS .
F. Verbakel, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 102103 CrossRef .
B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, D. Gebeyehu, P. Simon, F. Kozlowski, A. Werner, F. Li, S. Grundmann, S. Sonntag, M. Koch, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, H. Hoppe, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, I. Riedel, V. Dyakonov and J. Parisi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, J. H. Park, J. H. Lee, J. Jo, D.-Y. Kim and K. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 112111 CrossRef .
S. Khodabakhsh, D. Poplavskyy, S. Heutz, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, H. Murata and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5113 RSC .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 152111 CrossRef .
T. C. Monson, M. T. Lloyd, D. C. Olson, Y.-J. Lee and J. W. P. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Veres, S. Ogier, G. Lloyd and D. d. Leeuw, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4543 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Hwang, C. Soci, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2307 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193313 CrossRef .
H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Ceder and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1835 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Chen, J. X. Yang, J. Lu, K. K. Manga, K. P. Loh and F. R. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 133305 CrossRef .
J. Luo, H. B. Wu, C. He, A. Y. Li, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 043301 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Z. Y. Xie, C. J. Qin, Yao Qu, Y. H. Geng and L. X. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 604 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Na, S.-H. Oh, S.-S. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, G. Yu, C. Zhang, R. Menon and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 171 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Lim, S. Lee, D. J. Herman, M. T. Lloyd, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193301 CrossRef .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J. A. d. Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. Noh and S.-H. Han, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 510, 305 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Wong, H. L. Yip, Y. Luo, K. Y. Wong, W. M. Lau, K. H. Low, H. F. Chow, Z. Q. Gao, W. L. Yeung and C. C. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2788 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, P. Lee, N. R. Armstrong, A. Graham, G. A. Evmenenko, P. Dutta and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3172 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
D. Y. Kim, J. Subbiah, G. Sarasqueta, F. So, H. J. Ding, Irfan and Y. L. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 093304 CrossRef .
D. Y. Kim, G. Sarasqueta and F. So, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1452 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, W. S. X, C. Y. Jiang, A. K. K. Kyaw, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083305 CrossRef .
N. Li, B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, G. Wei and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 023307 CrossRef .
S. Han, W. S. Shin, M. Seo, D. Gupta, S.-J. Moon and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 791 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Chan, C. S. Lee, S. L. Lai, M. K. Fung, F. L. Wong, H. Y. Sun, K. M. Lau and S. T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094506 CrossRef .
M. Kröger, S. Hamwi, J. Meyer, T. Riedl, W. Kowalsky and A. Kahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123301 CrossRef .
J. Cui, Q. Huang, J. C. G. Veinot, H. Yan, Q. Wang, G. R. Hutchison, A. G. Richter, G. Evmenenko, P. Dutta and T. J. Marks, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 9958 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Hains and T. J. Marks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 023504 CrossRef .
B. Kang, L. W. Tan and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 133302 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Li, T.-C. Wen and T.-F. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4478 RSC .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef .
M. Andersen, J. E. Carle, N. Cruys-Bagger, M. R. Lilliedal, M. A. Hammond, B. Winther-Jensen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 539 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502 CrossRef .
R. Steim, S. A. Choulis, P. Schilinsky and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093303 CrossRef .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Waldauf, P. Denk, K. Forberich, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec and K. Hingerl, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 084506 CrossRef .
A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, C. Y. Jiang, G. Q. Lo, D. W. Zhao and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 221107 CrossRef .
S. O'Brien, L. H. K. Koh and G. M. Crean, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 1391 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, P. Liu, X. W. Sun, S. T. Tan, L. Ke and A. K. K. Kyaw, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 153304 CrossRef .
J. B. Kim, C. S. Kim, Y. S. Kim and Y.-L. Loo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183301 CrossRef .
K. Takanezawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 063308 CrossRef .
J. Ouyang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 415 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, E. H.-E. Wu, G. Li, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 064104 CrossRef .
T. Oyamada, Y. Sugawara, Y. Terao, H. Sasabe and C. Adachi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 1734 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Bailey-Salzman, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233502 CrossRef .
G.-M. Ng, E. L. Kietzke, T. Kietzke, L.-W. Tan, P.-K. Liew and F. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103505 CrossRef .
J. Hanisch, E. Ahlswede and M. Powalla, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2007, 37, 261 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Chen, J.-L. Wu, C.-L. Lee, W.-C. Huang, H.-M. P. Chen and W.-C. Chen, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2009, 30, 727 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, H. Flügge, T. Winkler, T. Bülow, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 243302 CrossRef .

          C. Tao, S. P. Ruan, G. H. Xie, X. Z. Kong, L. Shen, F. X. Meng, C. X. Liu, X. D. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Y. Chen,  2009, 94, p. 043311.
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Huang, C.-Y. Chou, M.-Y. Liu, K.-H. Tsai, W.-H. Lin and C.-F. Lin, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1060 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Baek, I. Seo, T.-S. Yoon, H. H. Lee, C. M. Yun and Y.-S. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Yu, A. Tsai, S. P. Tsai, K. T. Wong, Y. Yang, C.-W. Chu and J. J. Shyue, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 255202 CrossRef .
K. M. Coakley, B. S. Srinivasan, J. M. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 152111 CrossRef .
M. Geoghegan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 261 CrossRef CAS .
A. Budkowski, A. Bernasik, P. Cyganik, J. Raczkowska, B. Penc, B. Bergues, K. Kowalski, J. Rysz and J. Janik, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 4060 CrossRef CAS .
J. Genzer and E. J. Kramer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 4946 CrossRef CAS .
U. Steiner, J. Klein, E. Eiser, A. Budkowski and L. J. Fetters, Science, 1992, 258, 1126 CAS .

          G. Krausch, Mater. Sci. Eng., R,  1995, 14, v Search PubMed .
F. Bruder and R. Brenn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 624 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ton-That, A. G. Shard, D. O. H. Teare and R. H. Bradley, Polymer, 2001, 42, 1121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Böltau, S. Walheim, J. Mlynek, G. Krausch and U. Steiner, Nature, 1998, 391, 877 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Heriot and R. A. L. Jones, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raczkowska, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski, K. Sajewicz, B. Penc, J. Lekki, M. Lekka, J. Rysz, K. Kowalski and P. Czuba, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7308 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, N. Corcoran, M. Banach, R. H. Friend, J. D. MacKenzie and W. T. S. Huck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chappell, D. G. Lidzey, P. C. Jukes, A. M. Higgins, R. L. Thompson, S. O'Connor, I. Grizzi, R. Fletcher, J. O'Brien, M. Geoghegan and R. A. L. Jones, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 616 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, P. K. H. Ho, C. E. Murphy and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2861 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Higgins, S. J. Martin, R. L. Thompson, J. Chappell, M. Voigt, D. G. Lidzey, R. A. L. Jones and M. Geoghegan, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 1319 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, W. S. Wu, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 498 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, R. Stevenson, J. J. M. Halls, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo, D. Richards and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6005 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goffri, C. Müller, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, D. W. Breiby, C. P. Radano, J. W. Andreasen, R. Thompson, R. A. J. Janssen, M. M. Nielsen, P. Smith and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 950 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, R. Stevenson, J. J. M. Halls, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo, D. Richards and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6005 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Chua, P. K. H. Ho, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3400 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, F. Endicott and R. A. Street, Adv.
Mater., 2006, 18, 2900 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Qiu, J. A. Lim, X. H. Wang, W. H. Lee, M. K. Hwang and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1141 CrossRef CAS .
G. Greczynski, T. Kugler and W. R. Salaneck, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 354, 129 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Higgins, S. J. Martin, P. C. Jukes, M. Geoghegan, R. A. L. Jones, S. Langridge, R. Cubitt, S. Kirchmeyer, A. Wehrum and I. Grizzi, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2814 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, H. Kenrick, M. Chiesa and R. H. Friend, Polymer, 2005, 46, 2573 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Slooff, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, D. J. D. Moet, J. Sweelssen and M. M. Koetse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143506 CrossRef .
O. Inganäs, F. L. Zhang and M. Andersson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bernasik, J. Rysz, A. Budkowski, K. Kowalski, J. Camra and J. Jedliski, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 829 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Björström, A. Bernasik, J. Rysz, A. Budkowski, S. Nilsson, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, L529 CrossRef .
C. M. Björström Svanström, J. Rysz, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski, F. L. Zhang, O. Inganäs, M. R. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson, J. J. Benson-Smith, J. Nelson and E. Moons, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4398 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, H.-J. Prall, R. Koeppe, M. Egginger, R. Autengruber and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 073502 CrossRef .

          H.-J. Prall, R. Koeppe, R. Autengruber, M. Egginger, G. Dennler and N. S. Sariciftci, in Proc. of the Soc. of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, ed. A. Gombert, SPIE, Bellingham, WA,  2006, p. F1970 Search PubMed .
S. Nilsson, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski and E. Moons, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8291 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 082103 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, P. W. M. Blom, C. Melzer, B. de Boer, J. K. J. van Duren and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 795 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Andersson, F. Zhang and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 071108 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 269 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Björström, S. Nilsson, A. Bernasik, A. Budkowski, M. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 3906 CrossRef .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 240 CrossRef .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. H. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Kim, L. L. Tinker, B. F. Disalle, E. D. Gomez, S. Lee, S. Bernhard and Y.-L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3110 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohno and Y. Kawazoe, Scr. Mater., 2001, 44, 1579 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, D. M. DeLongchamp, D. A. Fischer, E. K. Lin, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. F. Toney, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 062117 CrossRef .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, B. H. Hamadani, L. J. Richter, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach and D. M. DeLongchamp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233303 CrossRef .
M. P. Felicissimo, D. Jarzab, M. Gorgoi, M. Forster, U. Scherf, M. C. Scharber, S. Svensson, P. Rudolf and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4899 RSC .
W. Ma, C. Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1387 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Chiu, U. S. Jeng, C. H. Su, K. S. Liang and K. H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS .
S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Drees, W. Schwinger, F. Schaffler and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
S. S. van bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, V. S and J. Loos, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5388 RSC .
S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, K. Frolic and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7396 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganäs, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Harrison, J. Gruner and G. C. W. Spencer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 55, 7831 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 103 Search PubMed .
F.-C. Chen, Y. K. Lin and C.-J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 023307 CrossRef .
Q. Wei, T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2211 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Iyengar, S. M. Perutz, C.-A. Dai, C. K. Ober and E. J. Kramer, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 1229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamakawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 511 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Chen and S.-C. Chien, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6865 RSC .
M. Granström, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Guo, S. Pyo, S.-C. Chang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakamura, C. H. Yang, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1681 CrossRef CAS .
M. Drees, K. Premaratne, W. Graupner, J. R. Heflin, R. M. Davis, D. Marciu and M. Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4607 CrossRef CAS .
M. Drees, R. M. Davis and J. R. Heflin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 165320 CrossRef .
M. Drees, R. M. Davis and J. R. Heflin, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 036103 CrossRef .
T. A. M. Ferenczi, G. J. Nelson, C. Belton, A. M. Ballantyne, M. Campoy-Quiles, F. M. Braun and D. D. C. Bradley, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 475203 CrossRef .
A. Fujii, H. Mizukami, T. Umeda, T. Shirakawa, Y. Hashimoto and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 8312 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, H. K. Kee, D.-G. Choi, J. H. Park and O. O. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 043505 CrossRef .
M. Shakutsui, T. Iwamoto, R. Maeda, T. Tsutsui and K. Fujita, Proc. SPIE, 2008, 7052, 705215 .
F. A. Castro, H. Benmansour, C. F. O. Graeff, F. Nüesch, E. Tutis and R. Hany, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, G. Li, Z. R. Hong and Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165202 CrossRef .
B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
J. Hwang, A. Wan and A. Kahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 1 CrossRef .
S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1450 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Wan, J. Hwang, F. Amy and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 47 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tengstedt, W. Osikowicz, W. R. Salaneck, I. D. Parker, Che-H. Hsu and M. Fahlman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 053502 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, L.-M. Chen, M.-H. Chen, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013301 CrossRef .
F. J. Zhang, A. Vollmer, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 606 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, J. H. Cho, D. H. Kim, Y. Jang, H. S. Lee, K. Ihm, T.-H. Kang and K. Choc, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, G317 CrossRef CAS .
W. Osikowicz, M. P. de Jong and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braun, W. Osikowicz, Y. Wang and W. R. Salaneck, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akaike, K. Kanai, H. Yoshida, J. Tsutsumi, T. Nishi, N. Sato, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 023710 CrossRef .
N. R. Armstrong, W. Wang, D. M. Alloway, D. Placencia, E. Ratcliff and M. Brumbach, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 717 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Murdey and W. R. Salaneck, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3751 CrossRef CAS .
S. Braun, M. P. de Jong, W. Osikowicz and W. R. Salaneck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 202108 CrossRef .
C.-P. Chen, T.-C. Tien, B.-T. Ko, Y.-D. Chen and C. Ting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 741 Search PubMed .
A. Lachkar, A. Selmani, E. Sacher, M. Leclerc and R. Mokhliss, Synth. Met., 1994, 66, 209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lachkar, A. Selmani and E. Sacher, Synth. Met., 1995, 72, 73 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Mikalo and D. Schmeisser, Synth. Met., 2002, 127, 273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Feng, L. Zheng, W. Zhang and J. Zhu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2009, 54, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, F. Bebensee, W. Hieringer, W. Zhao, J. H. Baricuatro, J. A. Farmer, Y. Bai, H.-P. Steinrück, J. M. Gottfried and C. T. Campbell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13498 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† This paper is part of a themed issue of Journal of Materials Chemistry on Interface engineering of organic and molecular electronics, guest edited by Alex Jen.‡ The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. FA9550-07-1-0264), Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-04-1-0434), Solarmer Energy Inc., University of California Discovery Grant, and NSF IGERT: Materials Creation Training Program (MCTP) (DGE-0114443) and the California Nano-Systems Institute (CNSI).§ Contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Li-Min Chen	Li-Min (Raymond) Chen has been a Ph.D. student in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles since 2006. He obtained his B.S. and M.S. from National Cheng Kung University (Taiwan) in 2002 and 2004, respectively. His research focuses on polymer solar cells with novel structures and processing methods as well as transparent conductor applications.
Zheng Xu	Zheng Xu is a Senior Researcher at Solarmer Energy, Inc. in El Monte, CA. He obtained his Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles in 2009, focusing on organic electronic devices and their interfaces (advisor: Prof. Yang Yang). Before he entered UCLA, he received his B.S. (2000) and M.S. (2003) in Physics at Fudan University (China). His current research focus is on polymer solar cells.
Ziruo Hong	Ziruo Hong obtained his B.S. in Chemistry from Sichuan University, 1995, and Ph.D. in physics from Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2001. He has been working on device design and mechanism study of organic electroluminescence and photovoltaics in Hong Kong, Singapore and Germany. He is currently working on polymer solar cells, especially solar cells with stacking structures, in Prof. Yang Yang's group at UCLA. His main research interest is focused on organic opto-electronics, especially light emitting devices and photovoltaic cells. He has published over 70 research papers on international journals.
Yang Yang	Originally from Taiwan, Prof. Yang received his Ph.D. degree in Physics and Applied Physics at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell. After working at the University of California, Riverside as a postdoctoral researcher, and in the UNIAX Corporation as a research staff member, he joined the University of California, Los Angeles in 1997. He has been a full professor at UCLA since 2002. His group is working on solution processable electronic devices, including organic and inorganic solar cells, organic LED and memory devices, and carbon-based nanomaterials. He has published more than 170 articles in peer-reviewed journals.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic variation of VOC with the acceptor strength (VOC1) and/or electrode work function (VOC2) in a BHJ solar cell device. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7; copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic band diagram of a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) device with (a) non-ohmic and (b) ohmic contacts for electrons and holes. Before (upper image) and after contact (lower image) under short-circuit conditions. φb and ΔVb are the injection barrier height for electrons at a non-ohmic contact and the voltage loss at an ohmic contact, respectively. φM1 and φM2 are work functions of the metal contacts. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 7; copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 3  The device structure of a polymer solar cell, where the device polarity can be controlled by the relative position of the functional buffer layers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 26; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic representation of the spatial distribution of the squared optical electric-field strength |E|2 inside the devices with a structure of ITO/PEDOT/active layer/Al (left) and ITO/PEDOT/active layer/optical spacer/Al (right). (b) The current density–voltage characteristics of polymer solar cells with () and without (■) the TiOx optical spacer under AM 1.5 illumination. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 39; copyright 2006, Wiley VCH.)	 

Ag	4.26	403 ± 27	9.04 ± 1.16	36.6 ± 3.7	0.36 ± 0.08
Al	4.28	420 ± 15	10.02 ± 0.33	38.2 ± 2.6	0.41 ± 0.03
Mg:Ag/Ag	3.66	565 ± 6	10.30 ± 0.39	50.5 ± 2.8	0.75 ± 0.06
LiF/Al	2.9	580 ± 2	10.42 ± 0.22	57.3 ± 1.2	0.89 ± 0.03
Ca/Al	2.87	601 ± 2	10.42 ± 0.18	60.6 ± 2.1	0.96 ± 0.04
Ba/Al	2.7	600 ± 2	10.47 ± 0.36	62.2 ± 1.5	1.00 ± 0.04

 	Fig. 5  The device architecture with the TiOx layer, as ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/TiOx/Al. The TiOx layer functions as a scavenging layer to block the permeation of oxygen and moisture into the polymer active layer. The brief flow chart shows the preparation steps of the TiOx. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 94; copyright 2007, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of a P3HT:PC70BM BHJ device with an evaporated Al cathode and different interfacial layers. (b) Current density–voltage–brightness characteristics for a PLED device with different interfacial layers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 99; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of single and tandem cells under illumination with and without a 400 nm cutoff filter. (b) A tandem cell using PH500 as an interlayer before and after defining the active area by scratching. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 102; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Current density–voltage characteristics of PV devices under illumination with different anode interlayers, namely, ITO only, ITO/PEDOT:PSS (25 nm), ITO/V2O5 (3 nm), and ITO/MoO3 (5 nm). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 129; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Device efficiency and contact angle with water of the Cs2CO3 interlayer as a function of different annealing temperatures. The inset shows the effect of annealing treatment on the EQE. Line I is the Cs2CO3 layer without annealing, and line II is after 150 °C annealing. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87; copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Variation of secondary electron edge with different buffer layers on ITO, (b) scheme for the formation of dipole layer on ITO and its effect on reducing the ITO work function. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 152; copyright 2008, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the double heterojunction polymer solar cells based on TiO2 nanotube arrays. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 166; copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Volume fraction vs. depth profiles of d-PEP in an initially uniform mixture with a d-PEP volume fraction of 0.5 after aging at 35 °C for (a) 19200 s, (b) 64440 s, and (c) 172800 s. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 30; copyright 1991, The American Physical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 13  A schematic model describing the film formation during the spin-coating process, and the final film morphology. (a) After the initial spin-off stage where both polymer and solvent are removed (i), (ii), the film separates into two layers (iii) and the film thins owing to solvent evaporation only. The interface between the polymers destabilizes (iv) and the film phase-separates laterally (v), (vi). (b) An atomic force microscope image of the final morphology. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 175; copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the solar cells with active layers based on APFO-3 and PCBM with: (A) diffuse bilayer morphology, (B) spontaneously formed multilayer structure, and (C) homogenous blend morphology. (D) The corresponding J–V characteristics under white light illumination for the 3 device morphologies. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 195; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Analysis of the ellipsometric data of the vertical PCBM concentration profiles in P3HT:PCBM films prepared under various conditions: (a) spin-coated on fused silica before (blue) and after (red) thermal annealing; (b) spin-coated on fused silica for 60 s at 5000 r.p.m. (blue), 3000 r.p.m. (green) and 700 r.p.m. (red); (c) spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS-coated fused silica before (blue) and after (red) vapor annealing; (d) spin-coated on fused silica (left) and on a Si wafer (with native oxide) precoated with a hydrophobic hexamethyldisilazane SAM. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 34; copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed model of film evolution during the spin-coating process. Black wire: P3HT polymer chain; large black dots: PCBM; blue dots: DCB molecules; and red dots: OT molecules. (a–c) correspond to three stages in the spin-coating process when DCB is the sole solvent; (d–f) correspond to three stages in the spin-coating process when OT is added to the DCB. Note the difference of PCBM distribution in the final stage of each case, (c) and (f). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 206; copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of the inverted configuration and the vertical phase separation of the P3HT:PCBM blend. The red stripes and black dots represent the P3HT polymer chains and PCBM, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 28; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 18  AFM topography (left) and phase (right) images of (a) top and (b) bottom surfaces of the exposed P3HT networks. The PCBM was selectively removed using OT. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 28; copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Results of electron tomography: quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanorods distribution through the thickness of a thermally annealed P3HT:PCBM blend film (200 nm). Images (a) and (b) are slices taken out of the reconstructed volume of the film, with a slice (dimensions: 1700 nm × 1700 nm) located (a) close to the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top of the film. The crystalline P3HT nanorods are yellow in color. (c) The principle of electron tomography to reconstruct the 3D image of the specimen. (d) The relative area occupied by P3HT (yellow) in each slice (a, b) can thus be determined for all slices through the whole thickness of the P3HT:PCBM film. (Parts (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 215, part (c) from ref. 220 and part (d) from ref. 221; copyright 2009, American Chemical Society, and Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Normalized EQE spectra of PFB:F8BT photovoltaic devices in which the active layer is composed either by PFB:F8BT blends with lateral phase separation () or with phase separation in the vertical direction (–○–). (a) Illumination through the PEDOT electrode and (b) through a semitransparent Al electrode. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 224; copyright 1997, The American Physical Society.)	 
ϕBn = S(ϕsub − EA) + (1 − S)ECNL	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the evolution of the energy-level alignment when a π-conjugated organic molecule or polymer is physisorbed on a substrate surface when (a) ΦSUB > EICT+: Fermi-level pinning to a positive integer charge-transfer state, (b) EICT− < ΦSUB < EICT+: vacuum level alignment, and (c) ΦSUB < EICT−: Fermi-level pinning to a negative integer charge-transfer state. The charge-transfer-induced shift in vacuum level, Δ, is shown where applicable. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 22  General ΦORG/SUBvs.ΦSUB dependence predicted by the ICT model. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 23  Dependence of work function of polymer coated substrate, ΦELP/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for four studied materials, namely P3HT, TFB, P10AF, and PFO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 246; copyright 2006, American Institute of Physics.)	 

P3HT	4.5	4.0	0.5
TFB	5.4	4.7	0.7
P10AF	5.5	5.1	0.4
PFO	5.8	5.2	0.6

 	Fig. 24  Dependence of the work function of the substrate coated with organic semiconductor, ΦORG/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for P3HT and PCBM. (Reprinted from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 25  Dependence of the work function of molecule-coated substrates, ΦORG/SUB, on the work function of bare substrate, ΦSUB, for C60 (●), TCNQ (■), and F4-TCNQ (▲). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 244; copyright 2009, Wiley VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 26  UPS spectra and the corresponding diagrams of energy level alignment of interfaces: (a) PEDOT-PFESA/CBP/m-MTDATA; (b) Si/SiOx/CBP/m-MTDATA. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 255; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic energy level alignment diagrams of (a) PEDOT:PSS/P3HT, (b) PEDOT:PSS/PCBM, (c) PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/P3HT as predicted by the ICT model and (d) UPS spectra of P3HT, P3HT:PCBM, and PCBM films spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS. The PCBM concentration increases from bottom to top. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic energy level alignment diagrams of (a) Cs2CO3/P3HT, (b) Cs2CO3/PCBM, (c) Cs2CO3/PCBM/P3HT as predicted by the ICT model and (d) UPS spectra of P3HT, P3HT:PCBM, and PCBM films spin-coated on Cs2CO3. The PCBM concentration increases from bottom to top. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 247; copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 
Footnotes
† This paper is part of a themed issue of Journal of Materials Chemistry on Interface engineering of organic and molecular electronics, guest edited by Alex Jen.
‡ The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. FA9550-07-1-0264), Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-04-1-0434), Solarmer Energy Inc., University of California Discovery Grant, and NSF IGERT: Materials Creation Training Program (MCTP) (DGE-0114443) and the California Nano-Systems Institute (CNSI).
§ Contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
