Organic photoresponse materials and devices   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15205J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15205J
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1754-1808Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsOrganic photoresponse materials and devices†

        
          
            Huanli 
            Dong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongfei 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Meng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wenping 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Organic Solids, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: huwp@iccas.ac.cn
bDepartment of Polymer Engineering, College of Polymer Science and Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, OH 44236, USA
Received 
      31st July 2011
    First published on 12th December 2011AbstractOrganic photoresponse materials and devices are critically important to organic optoelectronics and energy crises. The activities of photoresponse in organic materials can be summarized in three effects, photoconductive, photovoltaic and optical memory effects. Correspondingly, devices based on the three effects can be divided into (i) photoconductive devices such as photodetectors, photoreceptors, photoswitches and phototransistors, (ii) photovoltaic devices such as organic solar cells, and (iii) optical data storage devices. It is expected that this systematic analysis of photoresponse materials and devices could be a guide for the better understanding of structure–property relationships of organic materials and provide key clues for the fabrication of high performance organic optoelectronic devices, the integration of them in circuits and the application of them in renewable green energy strategies (critical review, 452 references).
Huanli Dong
Huanli Dong is an assistant Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She grew up in Shandong province, China. She received her PhD degree from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009 after she got her MS degree in Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Material, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. She is presently focusing on the self-assembling of molecular materials and the application of molecular materials in optoelectronic devices.
Hongfei Zhu
Hongfei Zhu grew up in Jiangsu province, China. He received his BS degree (2001) in Department of Fine Chemical Engineering, Huaihai Institute of Technology. Then he received his MS degree in the department of chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China (2004). After that, he worked as an editor for the Chinese Journal of Organic Chemistry. In 2011 he obtained his PhD degree from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He focuses on organic photoresponse materials and devices.
Qing Meng
Qing Meng is an assistant Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She grew up in Shanxi province, China. She received her BS degree (2004) in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanxi University. Then she joined the institute. In 2006, she continued her studies in the institute as a PhD candidate, and obtained her PhD degree in 2011. She focuses on the design and synthesis of new organic semiconductors.
Xiong Gong
Xiong Gong is an assistant Professor of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, the University of Akron. As a senior research scientist Xiong Gong worked in the Center of Polymers and Organic Solids at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and also held the manager position of advanced materials and devices at Cbrite Inc. He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed papers with over 3500 citations. His research interests cover semiconducting polymers and devices.
Wenping Hu
Wenping Hu is a Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD from the Institute in 1999. Then he joined Osaka University and Stuttgart University as a research fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences and Alexander von Humboldt, respectively. In 2003 he worked in Nippon Telephone and Telegraph, and then returned to the institute. He focuses on molecular electronics and has more than 180 refereed publications with about 3000 citations.
1. Introduction
Research on photoresponse materials and devices can be tracked back to the 19th century. In 1839, a French physicist, Edmund Becquerel found that when materials were exposed to light, a weak electrical current could be generated. He named this phenomenon the “photovoltaic effect”.1 In 1873, Willoughby Smith, an English electrical engineer, found the conductivity of selenium highly dependent on the light falling on it, and he published the results in Nature as “Effect of light on selenium during the passage of an electric current”.2 It is the initiation of photoconductivity. In 1887, Heinrich Hertz, a German physicist, observed that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light created electric sparks more easily. This is the so-called photoelectric effect (also called the photoemissive effect).3–5 In 1905, Albert Einstein explained the photoelectric effect successfully by quanta model (photons) wherein he theorized that the energy in each quantum of light was equal to the frequency multiplied by a constant, later called Planck's constant. A photon above a threshold frequency has the required energy to eject a single electron, creating the observed effect. This discovery led to the quantum revolution in physics and earned Einstein the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921. Since then, important applications based on the photoelectric effect have become indispensable components of our daily life such as photocells, photoconductive devices and solar cells.
Organic optoelectronic materials have attracted particular attention since the discovery of conducting polymers in the 1970s.6 Conceptually, organic materials allow chemical engineering of optoelectronic properties by molecular design, taking advantage of low cost, flexibility, low temperature processing and roll-to-roll large area producing ability. Moreover, organic optoelectronic devices exhibit high sensitivity to electrical and optical stimulus and can realize the integration of light detection, energy conversion and signal magnification, and hence have attracted the world's attention for decades.
Some exciting progress in photoresponse materials and devices has been addressed recently. For example, in April 2011, Mitsubishi Chemical reported organic solar cells with 9.2% power conversion efficiency, which provides us a bright prospect for the commercial applications of plastic solar cells.7 Gong et al. addressed organic photodetectors with better detection and unusually broader spectral response than those of inorganic counterparts.8 Here, we hope to review organic photoresponse materials and devices systematically so that a general overview of this field could be obtained by the readers quickly. The activities of photoresponse in organic materials are summarized in three effects: photoconductive, photovoltaic and optical memory effects. Correspondingly, devices based on the three effects are divided into photoconductive, photovoltaic and optical data storage devices. It is expected that this systematic analysis of photoresponse materials and devices could make a useful guide for the better understanding of structure–property relationships of organic materials and provide key clues for the fabrication of high performance organic optoelectronic devices, the integration of them for circuits and the application of them in renewable green energy strategies.
2. Organic photoresponse materials
2.1 Small molecular materials

2.1.1 Photovoltaic materials. 
The conversion of sunlight into electricity and chemical fuel has been an attractive subject since the 1970s. Inorganic semiconductors with a photovoltaic effect have been developed rapidly over the past 40 years including crystalline, multicrystalline, amorphous, and microcrystalline Si, III–V compounds and alloys, CdTe, chalcopyrite, and copper indium gallium diselenide etc.9 Photovoltaic cells of some inorganic semiconductors have been applied successfully in power supplies in remote locations (e.g. for communications and weather monitoring systems and lighting and water pumping systems used in developing countries), consumer products (e.g. for electronic calculators and garden lights) and space (e.g. for satellites and space vehicles).
Photovoltaics in organic semiconductors has recently attracted extensive attention due to the possibility of processing organic semiconductors from solution at low temperature for large area devices at low cost.10 Moreover, organic semiconductors can be deposited on various substrates including flexible plastic substrates, which opens the way for the applications of them in products with lower cost, flexibility and lighter weights. In addition, the most useful feature is that the structural versatility of organic semiconductors allows the incorporation of functionalities by molecular design.11
Generally, there are several processes in organic photovoltaic devices. First, excitons are generated in organic materials with light absorption,12–14 and then excitons will dissociate into free carriers under extra applied electric field,15 heat16 or other techniques,17 and then the free carriers migrate in the organic semiconductors and are finally collected by electrodes (as shown in Fig. 1). Therefore, the selection of organic semiconductors for photovoltaic devices needs to consider (i) the efficiency of light harvesting which requires organic semiconductors with broad absorption bands and high absorption coefficients; (ii) ideal heterojunctions for the dissociation of photogenerated excitons; (iii) ideal the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies, carrier mobility and film nanomorphology for efficient charge transfer; (iv) high stability for a long lifetime of the devices for potential applications. Finally, with the increased interest in solution processing, the solution processability has been specially highlighted recently.
 Fig. 1  The conversion process of incident light to electric current: (a) photoexcitation and exciton formation, (b) exciton diffusion, (c) exciton dissociation, (d) charge transfer and collection. 
Compared to polymer materials, small molecules possess defined molecular structure and molecular weight for convenient synthesis and purification, which greatly improves the fabrication repeatability as well as exhibiting a greater tendency to form ordered domains, affording higher charge carrier mobilities.18 With this in mind, small molecules (especially soluble small materials) have recently received considerable attention as promising alternatives to conjugated polymers in bulk heterojunction solar cells.
2.1.1.1 Porphyrins and phthalocyanines. 
Among organic semiconductors, porphyrins and phthalocyanines are two representative macrocycle systems with highly aromatic electrons (26 π electrons for porphyrins and 42 π electrons for phthalocyanines). Additionally, both of them exhibit excellent thermal and chemical stability and tunable flexibility in their electronic and optical properties and molecular packing models in the solid state through synthetic modification by judiciously incorporating functional groups (such as alkyl chains or F/Cl atoms) at the outer positions of the cavity or in the molecule cavity with an appropriate metal atom (such as Cu, Zn etc.).19,20 So the structural variety as well as their controllable electronic and optical properties have made them widely used as the active layer in organic optoelectronic devices, such as organic light-emitting diodes, organic field-effect transistors, and organic solar cells. It is worth noting that depending on the electron-donating/accepting characteristics of the incorporated substitutions, porphyrins can act as a donor or acceptor in the photovoltaic cells. In 1992, Günster et al. reported the first porphyrin-based photovoltaic device with a metal-free porphyrin as the donor, however, in that case, only around 0.03% conversion efficiency could be observed.21 After that, there was little progress made in the improvement of porphyrin-based photovoltaic devices, until 2007 when a breakthrough in the porphyrin-based photovoltaic performance was made by Sun et al.22 In their studies, liquid crystalline porphyrin derivatives (C12Por or C14Por, Scheme 1) with broad wavelength absorption, suitable energy levels matched well with the acceptors and electrodes as well as unique homeotropical alignment in films were selected as the donor materials in combination with C60/PCBM for the fabrication of bilayer and bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells. Results from experiments demonstrated clearly that with the bulk heterojunction device architecture, and through an appropriate postannealing process, the highest conversion efficiency of 0.775% with a short-circuit current density of 5.02 mA cm−2 could be obtained due to the enhanced molecular alignment as well as efficient exciton separation in the blended film.
 Scheme 1  Molecular structures of representative porphyrins and phthalocyanines used in photovoltaic cells. 
Later on, Huijser et al. reported other porphyrin-based photovoltaic cells, in which a meso-tetrakis (n-methyl-4-pyridyl) porphyrin tetrachloride derivative (H2TMPyP) was used as the acceptor.23 A bilayer solar cell constructed from H2TMPyP and a polymer donor of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) demonstrated a relatively high incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of more than 20% over a broad wavelength region, probably due to the good P3HT molecular alignment when deposited on H2TMPyP which led to stronger excitonic coupling between the donor and acceptor, indicating the importance of controlling molecular organization for high device performance. Although remarkable progress has been made for porphyrin-based solar cells, the low charge transport properties of porphyrin and its derivatives significantly limits the efficient charge transport in films for further improvement of device performance. In contrast, phthalocyanines exhibit excellent charge transport characteristics as well as a widely tunable absorption wavelength region, suggesting promising applications for them in electronic devices.12,24,25 Among them, metal–phthalocyanine derivatives, such as CuPc and ZnPc etc. attract special interest.26 The first phthalocyanine-based photovoltaic cell was reported based on a CuPc single-layer structure. Over the past years, tremendous efforts have been carried out towards the development of CuPc-based solar cells,27–30 and the recorded conversion efficiency to date for CuPc-based solar cells has reached up to 5.58%, by doping rubrene into the standard CuPc/C60 photovoltaic cells.31 By further optimizing the device structure, with a tandem cell by stacking two hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunctions together, a much higher efficiency of 5.7 ± 0.3% was achieved, which is also one of the highest conversion efficiencies reported for small molecule photovoltaics.32 Compared to planar structural phthalocyanine molecules, nonplanar phthalocyanine molecules, such as ClAlPc and TiOPc, etc. exhibit significant absorption especially in the range from 600–900 nm, in some cases, which could result in increased light absorbance and high device performance (as shown in Fig. 2).33,34 However, photovoltaic devices based on both of these two nonplanar phthalocyanine molecules did not show higher conversion efficiencies (e.g., maximum efficiency is 2.1% for ClAlPc) though with comparable current density as well as a little enhancement in the open-circuit voltage, indicating that except for the light absorption ability the conversion efficiency strongly depends on the comprehensive effect of various parameters. For more detailed progress in phthalocyanine-based photovoltaic cells, refer to the Hains et al. recent review.35
 Fig. 2  Normalized absorption spectra for ClAlPc and CuPc demonstrating long-wavelength absorption of the former, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) for a device of architecture ITO/ClAlPc/C60/BCP/Ag with an optimized ClAlPc growth rate of 0.5 Å s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. 
It is noted that up to date the devices containing phthalocyanines have always been fabricated by vacuum-deposited techniques because of the low solubility of most phthalocyanines,36,37 which significantly limits their applications in solution-processed heterojunction solar cells. In an attempt to solve this problem, Matsuo et al. reported a new concept entailing the solution precursor converting to the final insoluble active material through a thermal annealing process to realize the solution-processable fabrication.38 By virtue of the thermal conversion process from a soluble porphyrin derivative CP to a highly insoluble, crystalline tetrabenzoporphyrin (BP, Scheme 1) as donor and the variety of thermal transitions of the SIMEF (Scheme 6) as acceptor, they successfully obtained a three-layer p–i–n solar cell structure from a solution process, in which the i-layer possessed a clearly defined interdigitated structure and guaranteed the obtainment of a high conversion efficiency of 5.2%. This unique method provides us a new way to realize the solution processable fabrication, especially for those insoluble materials.
2.1.1.2 Acene-based derivatives. 
Acenes, which consist of several fused benzene rings in a linear or extended two-dimensional shape (such as graphite), are promising candidates for optoelectronic devices because of their notable coplanar π-conjugated conformation and outstanding crystalline structure facilitating the formation of highly ordered domain. As a smaller acene, anthracene and its derivatives have been attracting a great deal of research interest due to their favorable electrical characteristics, good solubility as well as good environmental stability.18,39 Actually, the first organic photovoltaic device fabricated in 1959 was based on anthracene crystals with only about 200 mV and an efficiency of 2 × 10−6 due to the absence of an ideal heterojunction for effective exciton dissociation.40 Since then, enormous efforts have been carried out in this field and significant progress was made in 1986 when the concept of the introduction of a donor–acceptor heterojunction into photovoltaic devices was proposed.41 Under the guidelines of this donor–acceptor heterojunction view, pentacene (Scheme 2), another acene material, has also been applied in photovoltaic devices as the donor in combination with C60 as the acceptor for achieving higher power efficiency. The photophysics of a bilayer of polycrystalline pentacene with C60 was first reported in 2004.42 The experiments clearly provided evidence of a very high efficiency of 2.7% due to the ultrafast photoinduced electron from pentacene to C60 in the solid state and the effective light-harvesting through the visible spectrum. Later, in order to obtain a better molecular order for pentacene, Mayer et al. further post-annealed the device at 200 °C after the fabrication of the pentacene/C60 solar cells and enhanced the device efficiency by 2 times from 0.45% to 1.07%.43 Recently, with indium tin oxide coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as the substrate, flexible photovoltaic devices based on the pentacene/C60 bilayer were also fabricated and demonstrated comparable power conversion efficiency to that on a glass substrate, indicating its potential application in large area electronic devices.44
 Scheme 2  Molecular structures of representative acene-based donors in photovoltaic cells. 
Although high efficiencies have been achieved for acene-based photovoltaic devices by vacuum deposition techniques with a multilayer structure, in these cases, exciton generation is mainly confined to a small volume within an exciton diffusion length of a single heterojuction.17 So the need for solution processable small molecules is critical for bulk heterojunction architecture with interdigitated network donor and acceptor contacts enabling additional light absorption and extensive exciton dissociation as well as high efficiency, and this has strongly stimulated further studies in this field.45–47 With anthracene as the model molecule, Marks’ group at Northwestern University and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of soluble anthracene derivatives by rational sequential structural modification at the peri-position, and successfully realized the tunability of their chemical and physical properties.47,48 They investigated in a detailed manner the effect of substituent groups on the properties of these molecules and their results clearly demonstrated that with the incorporation of carbon–carbon triple bonds at the peri-position, the molecules exhibited better film crystallinity than that with two phenylene–ethynylene units, which may be due to the decrease in steric repulsion between the plane of the substituents (benzene rings) and the plane of the anthracene for more extensive π–π stacking in the solid state.18 Electrochemical and optical absorption measurements showed that the optical onset band gaps of these anthracene derivatives range from 2.4 eV to 2.8 eV, which showed an obviously broader absorption for alkyne donors than for olefinic donors, suggesting a greater π–π structural organization in the solid state. Organic bulk heterojunction solar cells were fabricated with PCBM as the electron acceptor and the highest efficiency of ∼1.3% was achieved for the alkyne donor of A-P6t under standard AM1.5 illumination conditions. Based on the higher hetero-acene core of anthradithiophene, in 2007, Anthony et al. developed another novel soluble acene derivative as the donor material in solar cells, 2,8-diethyl-5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene (ethyl-TES-ADT).46,49 Films of this molecule showed the longest wavelength absorption maximum at approximately 550 nm and high hole mobilities of up to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. It should be noted that the films directly spin-coated from the blend of ethyl-TES-ADT and PCBM showed almost an amorphous phase, resulting in low photocurrent; however, the solvent vapor annealing process caused a reorganisation of the donor/acceptor blend into spherulites comprised of ethyl-TES-ADT crystallites. The authors further observed a direct correlation between the spherulite coverage and its device performance, and the highest conversion efficiency of 1% was reached with a short-circuit current density of 2.96 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage of 840 mV at 82% spherulite coverage.
The use of liquid crystal (LC) material in combination with a crystal network-forming material leads to stable solid-film structures with useful morphologies for optoelectronic applications. Friend, Brédas and Warman et al. have studied discotic LC materials of hexabenzocoronene (HBC) and its derivatives, which demonstrated a combination of advantageous properties, such as good solubility in common organic solvents, and high charge carrier mobility due to long range self-organized molecular order.50–52 In early 2001, Müllen and Friend et al. fabricated high efficiency photovoltaics with a diode structure based on the solution-processed blend of HBC-PhC12 donor and perylene tetracarboxdiimide (EPPTC, see Scheme 6) acceptor, in which vertically segregated EPPTC and HBC-PhC12 phases formed, yielding a large interfacial surface area for efficient photoexciton dissociation and a charge transfer vertical segregated π system.53 Under 490 nm illumination at 0.47 mW cm−2, the device based on a 40:60 blend of HBC-PhC12:PDI exhibited a short-circuit current density of 33.5 μA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage of 0.69 V with an external quantum efficiency of more than 34%. Later on, they further developed a novel technique using a flat PDMS stamp adhered to the top surface of a blend film of dodecyl-substituted HBC (HBC-C12) and EPPTC to control the film morphologies during the annealing process, which resulted in a very high flat surface with low roughness as well as greater vertical stratification of the components in the bulk. Improved device performance was achieved with an external quantum efficiency of 29.5% at 460 nm and an open-circuit voltage of 0.70 V attributed to the large crystalline domains following annealing.54 More recently, with the incorporation of dioctylfluorenyl substitutions into the hexabenzocoronene, a new series of HBC derivatives (FHBC) were synthesized by Wong et al.55,56 Their results demonstrated that compared to hexakis-substituted HBC, bis-substituted HBC compounds exhibited strong self-assembly properties in solution and could form hexagonal columnar ordering in the solid state, which are favourable for high charge transport and efficient photoexciton dissociation. Bulk heterojunction solar cells with a blend of FHBC molecules and PCBM film showed a conversion efficiency of 1.5% and a high fill factor of 0.65 (the highest recorded fill factor among small molecule solar cells to date).
Beside the above mentioned acene molecules, another unique acene derivative used as the acceptor for photovoltaics is polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon dibenzo[b,def]chrysene (DBC), which was easily synthesized through two steps from a commercial dye dibenzo[b,def]chrysene-7,14-dione source material with a high yield.57 Notably, unlike other acene materials such as pentacene,58 the absence of a reaction between DBC and PCBM in the blend films is indicative of charge separation for a higher power conversion efficiency of 2.25%, which is also the highest performing solution-processed acene-based organic solar cell.
2.1.1.3 Oligothiophene dendrimers. 
It is well known that thiophene-based π-conjugated oligomers and polymers have been widely used as the active materials in optoelectronic devices due to their excellent electronic properties with environmental and thermal stabilities and an outstanding structural crystallinity in the solid state.59 Extensive results show that low dimensional π-conjugated organic molecules are prone to form a vertical orientation with the conjugated chains standing on the substrate, which facilitates high charge transport properties in field-effect transistors.59,60 However, considering the different device structure of field-effect transistors and solar cells, such a vertical molecular orientation on the substrate is detrimental for solar cells as it strongly reduces the absorption of the incident light as well as charge transport to the electrodes.61 In 2006, Roncali et al. proposed a novel concept in which the number and positions of the substituents in the conjugated molecules realize control of the structural orientation and thus the electronic/optical properties, even isotropic characteristics independently on the device structure. Under this concept guideline, they further designed and synthesized a series of two-dimensional (2D) star-shaped and three-dimensional (3D) dendrimers for the analysis of the structure–property relationships in organic solar cells.62–64 The first example of 3D conjugated systems involves four conjugated oligothiophene chains on a central silicon node (M1, Scheme 3), which realizes isotropic electronic properties in the solid state. Bulk heterojunction solar cells with M1 (Scheme 3) as the donor in combination with PCBM as the acceptor exhibited a short-circuit current density of 1.13 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 0.30% under AM1.5 simulated irradiation at 80 mW cm−2. Although the cell performance is drastically limited by the poor absorption (main peak at 390 nm) of visible light by the donor, the importance of this result is that it confirmed the concept of 3D conjugated molecules and accelerated the further research in this field. With the twisted bithiophene as the central node, two 3D conjugated molecules (M2, M3, Scheme 3) were further synthesized and a 0.20% efficiency was obtained for a blend of molecule M3 with PCBM in bulk junction solar cells.
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of oligothiophene dendrimer donors used for photovoltaic cells. 
Sun et al. synthesized a new class of X-shaped oligothiophenes with thiophene as the central node (M4, M5, Scheme 3) based on their previous research.65 Among them, in combination with PCBM as the acceptor, the highest efficiency of 0.8% was obtained for molecule M5 with the longer conjugated substitution affording a broad absorption to 520 nm, while only 0.008% efficiency was achieved for molecule M4 with the shorter conjugated chains, suggesting device performance is strongly dependent on the molecular structural characteristics and film forming properties. This effect of arm length on the properties of star-shaped oligothiophene compounds has also been investigated by Shang et al. recently.66 They found that the state and solubility of the star-shaped oligothiophene compounds was susceptible to the arm length, thus leading to a great difference in the photovoltaic properties. Besides with thiophene as the central core, in 2006, Kopidakis et al. designed and synthesized another class of phenyl-cored thiophene dendrimers such as the four-arm dendrimer M6 (Scheme 3).67 The solar cell fabricated from a blend of molecule M6 and PCBM in a 1:4 ratio possessed an open circuit voltage of 940 mV, a short-circuit current density of 3.35 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 1.3%. A novel class of higher molecular-weight dendritic oligothiophenes have also been recently synthesized by Ma et al.68 Molecule M7 exhibits a broad absorption up to 600 nm and with a combination of PCBM in a ratio of 1:2 the solar cells demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 1.72%, which is also the highest device performance for dendritic oligothiophenes reported so far.
Summarizing these oligothiophene materials, by selecting the appropriate central node, it is possible to synthesize a series of 3D conjugated systems with isotropic electronic properties and no grain boundaries for photovoltaic applications. However, the device efficiencies reported so far for this class of materials are still very low (the highest value is 1.72%) due to (i) weak absorption of donors in the visible range (most of the absorption is less than 400 nm except for M5 and M7) and (ii) generally poor molecule crystallinity in the solid state. In any case, the validity of the concept for 3D conjugated molecules for electronic devices has been confirmed and there is much room for improvement in the device performance by judiciously incorporating the appropriate conjugated length of substituents or central cores for future development of plastic electronics.69
2.1.1.4 Donor–acceptor small materials. 
Although power conversion efficiency up to 5.7% has been achieved recently with conventional organic materials such as CuPc,32 a major issue for the study of photovoltaic materials is their low light harvesting due to the narrow absorption of the active layer compared to the real sunlight absorption region that arrives at the earth’s surface (as shown in Fig. 3).34 In order to increase the efficiency of light harvesting, the active layer should have broad absorption bands covering the main sunlight absorption region especially around 700 nm for high absorption coefficients and the further improved efficiency of organic solar cells. Incorporating acceptor moieties into molecular conjugated backbones to form donor–acceptor systems is one of the most effective approaches. Among the most popular acceptor moieties, diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) is a highly absorbing chromophoric group, which exhibits bright and strong fluorescence with exceptional photochemical, mechanical, and thermal stability. Additionally, it is easy to tune the solubility of DPP by attaching solubilizing groups such as ionic groups, or charged or neutral long alkyl chains on t-Boc at the 3,4-positions (i.e., the lactam N atoms) and/or on the 2,5-positions, and thus tune the electronic properties of the molecules.70–72
 Fig. 3  Absorbance spectra for films of CuPc and two phases of TiOPc as compared to the AM1.5 solar spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
In 2008, Nguyen et al. judiciously introduced a DPP acceptor group into the oligothiophene main chain and successfully obtained two novel low band gap small organic molecules (α,α-DH6TDPP and SMDPPEH as shown in Scheme 4).73,74 Notably, the absorption of α,α-DH6TDPP was significantly extended up to 720 nm in solution and 800 nm in films, and when SMDPPEH blended with PC71BM, the films gave spectral coverage in the whole sunlight spectrum, leading to high absorption coefficients and a large photocurrent (as shown in Fig. 4).
 Scheme 4  Molecular structures of linear donor–acceptor materials. 
 Fig. 4  The absorption of compound α,α-DH6TDPP film and solution in chloroform (a) and SMDPPEH film, PC71BM film, and SMDPPEH:PC71BM blend films as a function of blend ratio (b). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. 
Therefore, with a small modification of the substituents from α,α-DH6TDPP to SMDPPEH, the efficiency of the devices was enhanced from 2.3% to 3.0% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.75 V due to the enhanced film forming properties. It is well known that ideal HOMO and LUMO energy levels of organic materials are not only important for efficient charge collection between organic materials and electrodes, but are also critical for exciton dissociation and the build-in voltage VOC. It is believed that the different electron affinities (and/or ionization potentials) between p- and n-type materials create an energy offset at their interface, thereby driving exciton dissociation.
In 2009, Nguyen et al. further designed and synthesized another DPP-based thiophene material (DPP(TBFu)2) by using a fused benzofuran system to replace the terminal bithiophene units, in order to further tune the molecule energy level for increasing the device open-circuit voltage.75 As envisioned the obtained LUMO level of DPP(TBFu)2 (−3.4 eV) is much higher than that of PC71BM (−3.9 eV), and the 0.5 eV difference is large enough to effectively drive the charge separation after exciton formation. The bulk junction solar cells based on a blend of DPP(TBFu)2 and PC71BM (70:30 ratio) gave the best efficiency of over 4.4% with a high open-circuit voltage of 0.92 V after annealing at 110 °C for 10 min, where bi-continuous networks of donor and acceptor phase separation formed. Very recently, the value of the power conversion efficiency for DPP(TBFu)2 was increased to 5.2% with a high fill factor of 0.48 at a low light intensity of 23 mW cm−2 by further optimizing the film processing conditions.76
Another often used electron-accepting group to adjust the electronic and absorption properties of molecules is dicyanovinyl (DCV), which is commonly used as the end groups in donor systems to form conjugated A–D–A systems.77 Uhrich et al. synthesized a novel low band small molecule based on a terthiophene with DCV end groups (DCV3T-Butyl), which has a broad absorption ranging from 420 nm to 650 nm.78 With 4,4′-bis-(N,N-diphenylamino) (4P-TPD) as a p-doped transport layer, the multilayer plane junction device presented a high open-circuit voltage of 1.04 V and an efficiency of 1.63%. Further extensions of the conjugated length by adding more thiophene units (up to 7) in the chains were objectively synthesized recently.79–84 Extensive investigations demonstrated that (i) the optical band gap of the materials decreases from 2.78 eV for DCV1T to 1.68 eV for DCV7T with increasing number of thiophene units in the chain, corresponding to the red shift in the onset absorption (as shown in Fig. 5); (ii) the incorporation of side chains can not only adjust the solubility of the molecule but also the molecular organization as well as crystallinity in the solid state. Device measurements demonstrated a conversion efficiency of 2.5% for DCV5T-Ethyl, 3.4% for DCV5T-Butyl and 3.7% for DCV7T with an optimized solution-processed device structure. A much higher efficiency of 5.2% was achieved for DCV1T in the vacuum-deposited single heterojunction solar cells and approaching 6.07% was achieved for DCV6T with an optimized tandem structure in a large-area device.
 Fig. 5  Electronic absorption (a) and emission spectra (b) of the DCVnT (n = 1–5) series in dichloromethane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (DCV6T and DCV7T have wide absorptions ranging from 300 nm to 800 nm for their thin films, obtained from ref. 81.) 
Recently, other penta- and hexa-thiophenes (PhNOF-OT(n)-DCN) asymmetrically endcapped with triarylamine and DCV groups were synthesized by Zhang et al.85 The optical band gap of these molecules was reduced to 1.85 eV and bulk heterojunction solar cells based on these materials blended with PCBM exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 1.72% and an open-circuit voltage of 0.79 V. Very recently, Steinberger et al. synthesized another class of low band gap molecules based on a terthiophenes and electron-acceptor endcapped benzothiadiazole (BTDA) and thiadiazolopyridine (TDAPy) groups (BTDA3T and TDAPy3T).86 The largest absorption was at 503 nm for BTDA3T and 548 nm for TDAPy3T, and the highest device efficiency was 1.73% for BTDA3T and 3.15% for TDAPy3T, with a planar heterojunction architecture.
As mentioned in section 2.1.1.3, low-dimensional molecules based on linear π-conjugated systems generally exhibit anisotropic electronic and optical properties which poses specific problems for device fabrication. 2D or even 3D organic semiconductor materials therefore have received particular attention because of their possibilities of achievable isotropic physical properties, which are of vital importance for future large area plastic electronic devices and solar cells. This concept has been successfully performed in designing and synthesizing oligothiophene dendrimers for solar cells, which also motivates the research for 2D or 3D donor–acceptor conjugated systems.69 As one of the well-known organic semiconductors, triphenylamine (TPA) has attracted special attention because it presents us an interesting platform for the development of processable molecular glasses with isotropic electronic peroperties.87 Based on this consideration, using TPA as the donor core, many low band gap small organic materials have been successfully synthesized with three symmetric or unsymmetric D–π–A–π–D branches recently (Scheme 5).69,85,88–90 TDCV-TPA69 with three (dicyanovinyl)-thienyl branches incorporated on the TPA core has a broad absorption up to 636 nm and a narrow band gap of 1.78 eV, which led to the energy conversion efficiency of 1.85% with a high open-circuit voltage of 1.15 V. However, the solubility of compound TDCV-TPA is very poor, which significantly limits its applications in solution processable solar cells. In order to improve the solubility of this compound, very recently, they replaced one or two (dicyanovinyl)-thienyl branches with oligothiophene branches end-capped with hexyl chains and obtained two unsymmetrical compounds M8 and M9 with internal charge transfer and good solubility in common solvents. Both of them exhibited high conversion efficiency (1.80% for M8 and 2.02% for M9) with fill factors of 39% and 31%, respectively. The low fill factor suggested that except for the optimization of the electrode/material interfaces, the charge-transport properties still require further optimization. Beside these, more complex donor–acceptor conjugated systems based on TPA were also synthesized recently. Compounds G2-OT(n)-DCN presented a comparable conversion efficiency of 1.1% based on a blend of donor and PCBM acceptor with a ratio of 1:2 under AM1.5 simulated solar illumination at an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2.85 A hybrid superstructure of a donor–acceptor system compound S(TPA-BT) shows a broad absorption ranging from 440 nm to 670 nm and good film forming properties, which results in a conversion efficiency of 1.33% with a short-circuit current density of 4.18 mA cm−2 and an open circuit voltage of 0.81 V.88 More recently, Shang et al., have designed and synthesized another new 3D, star-shaped, D–A–D organic small molecule (S(TPA-BT-HTT)) with TPA as the core and donor unit, benzothiadiazole as the bridge and acceptor unit, and oligothiophene as the arm and donor unit, which exhibits not only excellent thermal stability but also a wide and strong absorption (300–700 nm for its thin film). Importantly, as high as 4.3% conversion efficiency could be obtained for the blend of S(TPA-BT-HTT) and PC71BM (see Scheme 5) without any post-treatment, which is among the highest reported values so far for solution-processed organic solar cells based on the small molecules, suggesting its potential applications as a donor material for organic optoelectronics.91
 Scheme 5  Chemical structures of star-shaped donor–acceptor molecules. 
2.1.1.5 Perylene diimide and fullerene acceptors. 
Different from donor materials, there are very few acceptor materials reported so far suitable for photovoltaic cells due to their low chemical and air stability (Scheme 6). Of them, perylene diimides (PDI) are known to date to be the most important building blocks for ambient stable n-type conjugated semiconductors due to their low-lying LUMO levels as well as their high crystallinity in spin-coated films,92 indicating the potential applications as the acceptor material for solar cells. The first organic bilayer solar cell proposed by Tang et al. was based on the CuPc donor layer and PTCBI acceptor layer, presenting a power conversion efficiency of around 1%.41 Further, Peumans et al. enhanced the efficiency value of CuPc:PTCBI based solar cells over 1.5% with a bulk heterojunction device structure.17 Another example of heterojunction solar cells based on perylene (EPPTC) as acceptor is reported by Müllen and Friend et al.53,54 Studies demonstrated that the blended film of HBC and EPPTC exhibited a unique optical absorption feature near 590 nm, suggesting a high crystallinity of the film, more than 34% external quantum efficiency near 490 nm was achieved. For more detailed studies in this field, see ref. 29.
 Scheme 6  Chemical structures of commonly used acceptors in organic solar cells. 
Beside perylene derivatives, fullerenes (Scheme 6) are the most commonly used acceptors for organic solar cells due to their high electron affinity and good availability.93,94 Among them, C60, first reported by Kroto et al. in 1985,95 is usually used as the standard acceptor material in organic photovoltaic cells, particularly in vacuum-deposited solar cells.36,37,42,82 However, because of the low solubility of C60, which significantly limits its application in solution processed electronic devices, actually, at present, the most used acceptor in organic photovoltaics is its soluble derivative, that is, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). To date, very high power conversion efficiency has been achieved based on the PCBM acceptor, such as 3.7% for small molecule-based solar cells80 and around 6.0% for polymer-based solar cells.96 Recently, another unique C60 derivative with two silylmethyl substituents (SIMEF) was designed and synthesized by Matsuo et al. with a masterful synthesis method.97 SIMEF has a LUMO level of −3.74 eV, which is 0.1 eV higher than that of PCBM and exhibits very interesting properties with diverse thermal behaviors from amorphous to crystal at 149 °C. Based on these unique thermal transition properties of the SIMEF acceptor, they further successfully fabricated a bulk heterojunction solar cell with a three-layered p–i–n columnar structure after an appropriate thermal annealing process, which exhibited a very high power conversion efficiency of up to 5.2%.38 The drawbacks of weak absorption in the visible range and a low LUMO energy level for C60 derivatives has significantly affected its contribution to obtain high light harvesting as well as high open-circuit voltages. Thus, some new soluble fullerenes with broadened absorption and a high LUMO level have been designed and synthesized. Considering C70 exhibits a broader and stronger absorption than that of C60 (as shown in Fig. 6),98 an analogue of PCBM, [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) has attracted particular interest and indeed showed obviously improved photovoltaic performance over PCBM in some cases.96,99 More recently, considering the expensive cost of PC71BM, He et al. reported a new C60 derivative, indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) with an easier synthesis, better solubility, stronger absorption (400–800 nm), and also better device performance in P3HT-based PSCs than PC61BM, indicating its prospect as a promising acceptor material for high performance photovoltaic cells.100
 Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of C60 and C70 in the range of 200–900 nm. Enhanced absorption of a wide spectral range is observed for C70 compared to C60. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. 


2.1.2 Photoconductive materials. 
In the 1980s, a large number of research activities were aimed at the development of cheaper and better organic photoconductors for xerographic photoreceptors in copiers and laser printers. Today, more than 90% of xerographic photoreceptors are made of organic photoconductors.15
In early studies, sublimed thin films of sulfur and anthracene were used as photoconductors, but their efficiencies of photogeneration are rather low because of their poor absorbance in the visible region, e.g., the quantum yield of photogeneration for anthracene was reported to be 10−4.101 The application of selenium in drums led to the development of the world's first visible-light sensitive photoreceptor.102 The quantum efficiency of photogeneration of selenium is high enough, however, the efficiency decreases sharply at wavelengths >550 nm. Hence, the improvement of the spectral response in the visible and near-IR region is the focus of selenium study.
The need for cheaper and better photoreceptors has stimulated the study of organic photoconductive materials. The first commercial organic photoconductor was based on a charge-transfer complex between poly(vinylcarbazole) and trinitrofluorenone.103 Then Eastman Kodak developed an aggregated photoconductor of a thiapyrylium salt.104 After that, phthalocyanines and metal phthalocyanines,105 especially titanylphthalocyanine (TiOPc), have resulted in tremendous progress in organic photoconductive materials because of its special high photoconductivity.106 For instance, recently, Wang et al.107 developed 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE)-stabilized TiOPc and VOPc nanoparticles (shown in Fig. 7) in stable colloids as tractable building blocks for the fabrication of photoelectric devices such as photoreceptors. The stabilization mechanism was attributed to the electrostatic repulsion between the nanoparticles and the solvation of the nanoparticle surfaces. Photoreceptors made from these solvent-stabilized MPc nanoparticles exhibited excellent xerographic properties. Schreiber et al.108 employed Azo and TiOPc as charge generation layers and TDAPB and hexa(hexylthio)triphenylene (HHTT) as charge transport materials to investigate the generation of charge carriers in the dual-layer photoreceptor. It was found that illumination of the TiOPc leads to the formation of charge-transfer excitons which subsequently dissociate into free charges.
 Fig. 7  Stabilization mechanism of DCE-stabilized MPc nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Compared with phthalocyanines, naphthalocyanines have larger and extended conjugation (Scheme 7), so that their absorptions are compatible with diode laser wavelengths for diode laser printers (750–850 nm), but the low yield of the naphthalocyanine synthesis limits their applications.109–111 Besides, the success of phthalocyanines as IR photoconductors made the naphthalocyanines unlikely candidates for further development. The synthesis of squaraines (Scheme 7) broke the yield limitations and their film absorption in the near-IR (700–850 nm) matches well to the diode lasers.112 As a versatile photoresponse material, squaraine can be applied in solar cells,113 light emitting field-effect transistors114 and photoconductive devices.115 For instance, Binda et al.116 developed light detectors based on the photoconductive effect. The authors blended the hydrazone end-capped symmetric squaraines and PCBM to obtain the fast air stable solution-processed photoconductive device. The devices demonstrated EQE in the NIR as high as 3.5% and response times of few hundreds of nanoseconds. It was found that a good balance between hole and electron mobilities was essential for high EQE and fast response speed, and that a smooth morphology was mandatory to achieve long term air stability and operation ability with no need for encapsulation. The photoconductive properties of azo compounds were reported as early as 1969 by Rau and Champ et al.117,118 and since then a huge amount of research has been carried out due to the ease of synthesis and high photoconductivity of azo compounds. Moreover, it is expected that azo pigments are adaptable to low-cost, solution processed technology, and have a wide spectral range (450 to 1800 nm) with high photoelectrical stability.119 Some recent progress in azo containing photoconductors has been made.120 Umeda et al.121,122 carried out several works in this area. They studied the photocarrier generation mechanism of layered-type organic photoreceptors containing triphenylamine-based trisazo pigment in the carrier generation layer (CGL) (Scheme 7). It was found that the photocarrier generation efficiency strongly depended upon a series of N,N-diphenyl-4-biphenylamine derivatives utilized in the carrier transport layer (CTL). They elucidated the dependence by means of the energy gap law using the energy gap of the electrochemical oxidation-potential difference between the azo pigment and the N,N-diphenyl-4-biphenylamine derivatives. This research confirmed that photocarrier generation occurs at the CGL/CTL interface and was based on photoinduced electron transfer.
 Scheme 7  Structures of naphthalocyanines, triphenylamine-based trisazo pigment, AlkSQ and GlySQ, PTAC, and other photoconductors. 
The photoconductivity of perylenes was recognized as early as the 1970s.123 The photogenerated excitons in perylene are primarily located at the interface of the charge generation layer and charge transport layer,124 which is beneficial for efficient charge dissociation and have thus attracted a considerable amount of attention.125 Recently, several groups have addressed perylene-based photoconductors.126,127 For instance, Mo et al.128 studied the influence of the length of the alkyl chains attached to the perylene skeleton (Scheme 7) on aggregation in films, which was interpreted in terms of different aggregate structures. The photosensitivity increased with decreasing length of alkyl attached to perylene and reached a maximum 90.91 mJ−1 cm2 for Per4, this being some 45 times higher than that of Per12 when exposed to white light. A more ordered and crystalline film could be formed with decreasing length of alkyl chain attached to perylene core, which is favorable for charge transport. The results offer help in the design of high-performance photoconductive materials.
Other photoconductors (Scheme 7) include the widely mentioned thiapyrylium salt, 4-14′-(dimethylamino)phenyl-2,6-diphenylthiapyrylium perchlorate, its photoconductivity was discovered by Light.104 However, this compound is sensitive from 450 to 700 nm and is beyond the applications in diode laser printers. Several approaches were applied to extend the absorbance including the synthesis of thiapyrylium salts with more double bonds, selenopyrylium salts, and telluropyrylium salts.129–131 The photoconductivity of 3,6-diphenylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dithione was first reported by Mizuguchi and Rochat in 1988.132 Some heterocyclic spiro-type molecules are also excellent photoconductors to study the photoconductive effect.133 Iwasaki et al.134 investigated the photoconductive effect of 4,4′-bis(1,2,3,5-dithiadiazolyl) (BDTDA). It was found that because of strong dimerization, the BDTDA thin film demonstrated insulating behavior with a room-temperature conductivity of approximately 10−9 S cm−1. After illumination, the photoconductivity of the material obtained an on/off gain of about 1.8 × 102. Other charge transfer complexes have been examined as organic photoconductors such as dihaloanthanthrone,135,136 epidolidione,137 trihalopyran-threnedione,138 quinacridone,139 tetrachlorothioindigo139 and azulenium dyes140etc.
In summary, a highly sensitive photoconductor not only requires less energy to generate the electrostatic images, but also enables the photoreceptor to be operated at higher speeds. Therefore, the photosensitivity and the dark conductivity (usually measured as the dark decay of the surface potential) of the photoreceptor are the first set of material parameters to be assessed.15 The materials are required to be highly stable (including thermally and photochemically stable), highly fatigue resistant, and highly photosensitive.


2.1.3 Optical data storage materials. 
Optical data storage represents a major progress in the history of information storage and the invention of rewritable media has indisputably been an essential addition to the optical storage family.141 The origins of the field date back to the 1950s, when Hirshberg developed the photochromic spiropyrans and suggested their use in data storage.142 In the 1970s, Barachevskii et al.143 demonstrated that this photochromism could be produced by two-photon excitation, and finally at the end of the 1980s Parthenopoulos and Rentzepis showed that this could lead to three-dimensional (3D) data storage.144 A wide range of physical phenomena for data reading and recording have been investigated, large numbers of chemical systems for the medium have been developed and evaluated, and extensive work has been carried out in solving the problems associated with the optical systems required for the reading and recording of data. Regarding materials, various kinds, from organic to inorganic materials, from synthetic compounds to natural biomaterials, from single-component to hybrid systems, have been examined and applied in optical data storage. Among them, organic materials, such as fulgides, spiropyrans and spirooxazines, diarylethenes, are prompting ever-increasing attention due to their low cost, simplicity, and tuning functionality by molecular design.145
2.1.3.1 Fulgides. 
Photochromism is defined as a reversible transformation in a chemical species between two forms having different absorption spectra by photoirradiation, i.e., a restorable change of structure of molecules by photoirradiation. Optical data storage using photochromic media offers advantages over magneto-optical recording with regard to speed of writing, multiplex recording capability, and low fabrication cost.146 Fulgides are probably one of the earliest organic photochromic materials, which were discovered in 1905 by Stobbe.147 He found some compounds exhibited color dependence on light, and named the derivatives of 1,3-butadiene-2,3-dicarboxylic acid and its acid anhydride as “fulgenic acid” and “fulgide”, respectively (Scheme 8). To be photochromic, fulgides should have at least one aromatic ring on the exo-methylene carbon atom, so that they form a 1,3,5-hexatriene structure that may undergo 6π-electrocyclization fashion as thermally irreversible photochromic compounds.148 The photochromism of fulgide occurs between one of the colorless open forms (the “E-form” because the geometry of the double bond connecting the aromatic ring and the succinic anhydride is usually E) and the photocyclized colored form (C-form) (Scheme 8). However, there is an additional photochemical E–Z isomerization pathway. The “Z-form”, the geometrical isomer of the E-form, is not cyclized directly by absorbing one photon to give the C-form. Therefore, E-to-Z photoisomerization, competing with the photochromic E-to-C isomerization, is an energy-wasting as well as system-complicating process in terms of the “photochromism of fulgides.”145,148
 Scheme 8  (a) Chemical structures of fulgenic acid and fulgide; (b) Photochemical isomerization among the three forms of fulgides. 
Photochromism of fulgides is a reversible photochemical electrocyclization. As a result, its color changes drastically (location of the absorption band). It requires that three conjugating double bonds are lying in an s-cis-cis-s-cis manner so that the carbon atoms that form the C–C single bond upon photoirradiation come close. Therefore, the conformation of fulgides in their ground state influences the quantum yield of photocyclization. Yokoyama et al. examined the steric influence of the alkyl group on the methylene carbon next to the furan ring,149,150 and they found when the alkyl group became larger the ring closing quantum yield upon UV irradiation became larger and the E-to-Z isomerization quantum yield became smaller. Actually, a change in the electronic state of fulgides mainly changes the position of the absorption bands of both isomers. Variation of the substituents at the photochromic center causes a remarkable change in the electronic state of the fulgides and therefore affects the absorption spectra of the compounds. Electron-withdrawing groups lead to a bathochromic shift of the absorption maximum, whereas electron-donating substituents cause a hypsochromic shift. Yokoyama et al. examined the effects of substituents on indolylfulgides,151,152 and found the introduction of electron-donating substituents such as methoxy, methylthio, and dimethylamino groups on the 5-position of the indole ring showed a remarkable shift of the absorption of the C-forms to longer wavelength. Mattay et al. synthesized a bicyclic furylfulgide and a benzofuryl fulgide with increased steric constraints153 and found structural modifications greatly influence the isomerization processes of the photochromic compounds. The modification at C-6/C-10 of the furyl backbone strongly affects the belly roll process, or even eliminates it completely. Whereas benzoannulation reduced the belly roll process (P)-Eα → (M)-Eβ, and introduction of an isopropyl group reduced the (E) → (Z) isomerization, both processes and enantiotopomerization were suppressed for the bicyclic furylfulgide (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Photochromic reaction of furylfulgides with variable substituents R at the photochromic core unit. 
Chen et al. presented a photochromic pyrrylfulgide (Scheme 10) with dicyanomethylene for multiplex-level recording.154 The photochromic pyrrylfulgide with dicyanomethylene doped in PMMA was used as four-level recording media. The photochromic pyrrylfulgide material was stable at ambient temperature, and the results of signals recorded on the material could be kept more than 3 months in ambient light and more than 1 year in the dark.
 Scheme 10  Photoisomerization of pyrrylfulgide with dicyanomethylene. 
Garavelli showed that a zwitterionic excited state and its conical intersection with S0 control the photodynamics of furyl fulgides of FF-3 and determine their remarkable photochromic properties (Scheme 11).155 A rationale was suggested for chemical modifications that preserve the stability of photoinduced charge transfer and would probably lead to compounds that mimic fulgide photochromism. This promising approach should enable the fabrication of novel efficient photochromes.
 Scheme 11  Light-driven ring-closing (E→C)/ring-opening (C→E) electrocyclic reaction of 2,5-dimethylfurylfulgide (FF-3). 
For optical data storage, fulgides are expected to have several properties, such as (1) thermal stability, (2) fatigue resistivity, (3) nondestructive readout ability, (4) high efficiency of photoreactions (large quantum yields and large molar absorption coefficients), (5) high speed of photoreactions, (6) diode laser susceptibility, (7) solubility in the polymer matrix, and so on. Those merits are the present focuses of the researchers in this field. Although some of the fulgides exhibited superb properties, in the “era of photonics” that we are approaching, further photofunctional fulgides or related derivatives which would satisfy all the requirements for each of the applications are needed.
2.1.3.2 Spiropyrans and spirooxazines. 
Fischer and Hirshberg et al.156 discovered the photochromic reactions of spiropyrans in 1952. A few years later, Hirshberg presented the concept of a photochemical binary element for a computer memory, and the possibility of obtaining a variable density optical shutter. Photochromic spirooxazine compounds are molecules containing a condensed ring-substituted 2H-[1,4]oxazine in which the number 2 carbon of the oxazine ring is involved in a spiro linkage. Photochromism of spirooxazines implies the heterolytic or homolytic cleavage and reformation of the carbon–oxygen single bond of the oxazine ring.157 The first photochromic spirooxazine compounds synthesized158 belonged to the spiroindolinonaphthoxazine ring system. Generally, they were colorless in dilute organic solvents and polymer matrices and became blue upon exposure to UV light. The photochromism of spiropyrans and spirooxazines is based on the interconversion between the closed spiro form and open planar merocyanine forms (Scheme 12). Upon UV irradiation the stable spiro form, cleavage of the Cspiro–O bond takes place through a pericyclic reaction, which is followed by unfolding of the molecule to a colored planar merocyanine form. The merocyanine form reverts back to the spiro form by spontaneous fading in the dark or by irradiation with visible light. Due to the excellent resistance to light-induced degradation, i.e., excellent fatigue resistance, spiropyrans and spirooxazines belong to the most extensively studied families of photochromic compounds.159
 Scheme 12  Photochromism of (a) spiropyran and (b) spirooxazine. 
Quantum yields of the photochromism of spirooxazines are markedly dependent on the presence of electron-donating substituents in the 6′-position on the oxazine ring and on the nature of the solvent (Scheme 13). Nonpolar and less viscous solvents give the highest yields, reaching 0.74 in the case of compound 1 in toluene.157 Replacing the methyl group on the nitrogen in the indoline part of the molecule with an isobutyl group has no effect on the quantum yield in either toluene or in a polyurethane matrix. The presence of a methoxy group in the 5′-position (compound 2) causes a shift in the thermal equilibrium between the uncolored and colored species toward the colored species.
 Scheme 13  Chemical structures of compounds 1 and 2. 
The photochromic response of spirooxazines were shown to be somewhat affected by the substituent on the indolino nitrogen.160 For example, an increased photochromic response was observed by Hovey et al. with the addition of electron-donating groups to the 4- through 7-positions of the indolino ring system. Chu found that the addition of a trifluoromethyl group to the 4- or 6-position of indolinospironaphthoxazine resulted in a similar hypsochromic shift.161
The photochromic reactions of spiropyrans and spirooxazines have been generally believed not to occur in the solid state, which is probably due to the lack of free volume in crystals required for the transformation from the spiro to merocyanine form. However, Harada et al. revealed that spiropyrans and spirooxazines, which have long been believed to be non-photochromic in the solid state, are generally photochromic in the solid state at least at low temperatures and that their photoreactivity increases greatly as the temperature is lowered.159 Boilot et al.162 found a strategy in which spirooxazine molecules were dispersed in mesoporous organized films using a impregnation technique. After impregnation by a spirooxazine solution, the photochromic response was only slightly slower when compared with mesostructured or soft sol–gel matrices, showing that methyl groups offered good environments for spirooxazines. Favaro et al. studied four compounds of spirooxazines and naphthopyrans (Scheme 14). In solution, they showed photocoloration and thermocoloration. Embedded into polymeric films, as well as in the microcrystalline phase, they have maintained their photochromic and thermochromic behavior. And the photocoloration quantum yields in PMMA were determined and found to be fairly high.163
 Scheme 14  The compounds of two spirooxazines (SO-1 and SO-2) and two naphthopyrans (NP-1 and NP-2). 
Three dimensional optical data storage is a new and important direction in the study of spiropyrans and spirooxazines. Rentzepis et al.144 demonstrated a novel 3D optical memory device that allowed fast random access of the information and extremely high bit densities. This device was based on two-photon writing, reading, and erasing of the information in a spiropyran embedded in a polymer matrix. Absorption and emission data show that two-photon writing and reading of information was feasible. The process could be envisaged as shown in Fig. 8, and used a spiropyran molecule whose merocyanine form was fluorescent. Simultaneous absorption of one photon from a (strong) 1064 nm laser beam and a second photon from a (weaker) 532 nm beam mutually focused on a certain pixel will “write” information by creating merocyanine in that pixel. This information can be read by monitoring fluorescence emission following irradiation using only the focused 1064 nm laser, as now only the merocyanine can be excited by two-photon absorption of this laser. Recorded information can be erased locally by irradiation, or entirely erased by heating.
 Fig. 8  Scheme for three-dimensional optical recording based on photochromism of spiropyran. Information is written by a two-photon absorption (532 nm + 1064 nm) of spiropyran, which leads to merocyanine formation in the volume element where absorption occurred. Reading of information is absorption of two 1064 nm photons, followed by fluorescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, Copyright 1989 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Song et al.164 presented a novel spironaphthoxazine (SOFC) molecule with a stable ring-opened photomerocyanine form by incorporating a ferrocene moiety to the parent spironaphthoxazine (Scheme 15). Two-dimensional luminescence images obtained using a confocal microscope employing fluorescence as the read-out method and three-dimensional high-density recording using two-photon technology of SOFC-poly(methyl methacrylate) films were approached, demonstrating the nice 3D optical data storage of the molecules.
 Scheme 15  Photochromism mechanism of a typical spironaphthoxazine. Left: closed form (colorless). Right: TTC; open form (colored). 
Although the examples using spiropyrans and spirooxazines in optical data storage have been studied widely, however, there remain some defects restricting the further applications of spiropyrans and spirooxazines. One is the thermally unstable open ring form, which may lead to the fading of stored data even at relatively low temperature. Moreover, for most spiropyrans, the fatigue resistance is low due to the by-reaction in the photoisomerization process. By chemical modification of the molecules these properties can be improved.165,166
2.1.3.3 Diarylethenes. 
Diarylethenes are a class of compounds that have aromatic groups bonded to each end of a carbon–carbon double bond. The simplest example is stilbene, which has two geometric isomers, E and Z (Scheme 16). Under light, these compounds can generally perform two kinds of reversible isomerizations.167 The first is E to Z isomerization, which is most common for stilbenes (and azobenzenes). The second is the 6π electrocyclization of the Z form leading to an additional bond between the two aryl functionalities and a disruption of the aromatic character of these groups.168 After the 6π electrocyclization of the Z form to the “closed-ring” form, most unsubstituted diarylethenes are prone to oxidation, leading to a re-aromatization of the π-system for phenanthrene. Although both the E–Z isomerization and the 6π electrocyclization are reversible processes, this oxidation renders the entire sequence irreversible. Thermal isomerization is also possible. In E–Z isomerization, the thermal equilibrium lies well towards the trans-form because of its lower energy (∼15 kJ mol−1 in stilbene).169 The activation energy for thermal E–Z isomerization is 150–190 kJ mol−1 for stilbene, meaning that temperatures above 200 °C are required to isomerize stilbene at a reasonable rate, but most derivatives have lower energy barriers (e.g. 65 kJ mol−1 for 4-aminostilbene). The activation energy of the electrocyclization is 73 kJ mol−1 for stilbene.
 Scheme 16  Stilbene changes between different states. Both E–Z isomerization and the 6π electrocyclization are reversible, but the oxidation renders the entire sequence irreversible. 
In general, the open-ring isomers are colorless compounds, whereas the closed-ring isomers have colors dependent on their chemical structure, due to the extended conjugation along the molecular backbone. Therefore, many diarylethenes have photochromic behavior both in solution and in the solid state. Moreover, these two isomers differ from one another not only in their absorption spectra but also in various physical and chemical properties, such as their refractive indices, dielectric constants, and oxidation–reduction potentials. These properties can be readily controlled by reversible isomerization between the open- and closed-ring states using photoirradiation, and thus they have been suggested for use in optical data storage in particular.170 Certainly, thermal irreversibility and fatigue resistance are indispensable for the application of organic optical date storage materials in memories and switches. As newcomers to the photochromic field, diarylethenes show a striking feature of resistance to fatigue. The coloration/decoloration cycle could be repeated more than 104 times in keeping with the photochromic performance.145,146
Two photochromic diarylethenes blocked by alkyl bridges in an ideal conformation for photocyclization were studied by stationary and femtosecond transient spectroscopy in order to depict the photocyclization processes: the bistable 1,2-dicyano[2.n]metacyclophan-1-ene with n = 2, abbreviated as [2.2], and its non-bistable analogue with n = 4, abbreviated as [2.4] (Scheme 17). For [2.2], a solvent-sensitive excitation wavelength threshold governing the photocyclization yield is clearly evidenced between the S1 and S2 singlet states. In the case of [2.4], for which the distance between the two reactive carbons is larger, a unique photoclosure mechanism is found and a structural effect is reported. All polarity effects are rationalized in terms of stabilization of the transient states of charge-transfer character involved in the photocyclization process.171
 Scheme 17  Diarylethenes of [2.2] and [2.4] transformation processes. 

Ortho-substitution of the aromatic units results in a stabilization against oxidation, but the closed-ring form still has a low thermodynamic stability in most cases. This problem can be addressed by lowering the aromaticity of the system. The most commonly used example are the dithienylethenes, i.e. alkenes with a thiophene ring on either side (Scheme 18). The 2-position of the thiophenes is substituted with a methyl group, preventing oxidation of the ring closed form. Often the two free α-positions on the double bond are connected in a 5 or 6-membered ring in order to lock the double bond into the cis-form. This makes the dithienylethene undergo only open–closed ring isomerization, uncomplicated by E–Z isomerization. The dithienylethenes are also of interest for the fact that their isomerization requires very little change of shape. This means that their isomerization in a solid matrix can take place much more quickly than with most other photochromic molecules. In the case of some analogs, photochromic behavior can even be carried out in single crystals without disrupting the crystal structure.
 Scheme 18  Photochromism of dithienylethene derivatives. 
On the basis of the diarylethenes of stilbenes, the following diarylethenes with thiophene rings, such as 1,2-dicyano-1,2-bis(2,4,5-trimethylthiophen-3-yl)ethene (3a) and 2,3-bis(2,4,5-trimethylthiophen-3-yl)maleic anhydride (4a) (Scheme 19) were synthesized,172 which were the first examples of thermally irreversible photochromic diarylethenes. Since then, various types of diarylethenes having thiophene, furan, indole, selenophene, and thiazole aryl groups have been prepared. Most of them show thermally irreversible and fatigue-resistant photochromic reactions.
 Scheme 19  Photochromism of compounds 3a and 4a. 
The most commonly used diarylethenes are diarylperfluorocyclopentenes.173 Symmetric and nonsymmetric diarylethenes with various heterocyclic aryl groups were synthesized by the elimination reaction of perfluorocyclopentenes with aryllithium.174 The photochromic switch has the advantages of a simple structure, very small size, power efficiency and remote control capability using light through the optical fiber. In general, the open-ring isomers of diarylethenes have absorption bands at shorter wavelengths. Upon irradiation with UV light, new absorption bands appear at longer wavelengths, which are ascribed to the closed-ring isomers. Most diarylethenes show very large spectral shifts upon photoisomerization from the open- to the closed-ring isomers. In the closed-ring isomers, π-electrons delocalize throughout the two condensed thiophene rings and further extend to the substituents. The absorption spectra of the closed-ring isomers depend on the substituents of the thiophene rings. The absorption spectra of the open-ring isomers also depend on the upper cycloalkene structures. The open-ring isomers of maleic anhydride or maleimide derivatives show spectral shifts to longer wavelengths in comparison with the perfluorocyclopentene derivatives. From the viewpoint of applications to optical memory media, it is desired to develop photochromic compounds that have sensitivity in the wavelength region 650–830 nm. The effect of substitution on the absorption maximum was examined in an attempt to develop near-infrared light-sensitive photochromic compounds. Scheme 20 summarizes the typical absorption maxima of the closed-ring isomers.172,173,175–182
 Scheme 20  Absorption maxima wavelengths of the closed-ring isomers of diarylethenes. 
Tsujioka et al.183 demonstrated an organic bistable molecular memory using bipolar photochromic diarylethene, which allowed extremely high bit densities and very low power consumption. This device was based on an isomerization reaction of a photochromic diarylethene molecule via its excited state by an electric carrier injection, not by photon absorption. For writing, electrons injected from the cathode and holes from the anode with relatively high voltage are transported to the bistable molecule layer via carrier transport layers, and they excite the bistable molecule in the closed-ring state, and then the molecule is transformed into the open-ring state and its ionization potential becomes large. For reading, only the holes or electrons flow in the organic layers because of the relatively low applied voltage and the unbalanced potential barrier heights between electrodes and organic layers. Charge stream occurs but the molecules are not excited, so the nondestructive readout is achieved by detecting the current.
Yokoyama et al.184 showed the extremely high diastereoselectivity in polar solvents for photochemical 6π electrocyclizations of diarylethenes (Scheme 21), which have two side arms that control the stereochemistry. The cyclization at a lower temperature gave an exceptional 100% diastereoselectivity. This structural modification can be applied to any diarylethene derivative possessing two alkyl groups on the bond-forming carbon atoms at both ends of the hexatriene moiety. By simply replacing the alkyl groups with 1-methoxymethoxyethyl groups having the same stereochemistry, an extremely high diastereoselective ring closure upon UV irradiation can be achieved.
 Scheme 21  Molecular structure of the bipolar diarylethene derivative used in the experiment. 
The integration of diarylethenes with nanostructures for optical data storage is a new branch of diarylethene research. A bisthienylethene-functionalized perylene diimide (BTE-PDI) photochromic dyad was synthesized for self-assembly into nanotubes by a reprecipitation method through intermolecular hydrogen bonds to form building blocks. Green emission at 520 nm originating from the DAE subunit was observed for the aggregates of vesicles and nanotubes, which could be regulated by photoirradiation with 365 nm light, suggesting the nanoaggregates to be photochromic switches.185
In the recent experiment with diarylethene molecules bridging carbon nanotube (CNT) contacts,186 the switching was also irreversible but opposite to that observed with gold contacts. With CNT contacts, the molecules switched from open to closed with UV and did not switch back with visible light irradiation. Lake et al. found the short lifetime of LUMO indicates that neither the open nor closed form of the molecule can be photoexcited into a charge-neutral excited state for any appreciable length of time preventing photochromic ring opening. Analysis of HOMO and LUMO lifetimes also suggests that photoexcitation results in oxidation of the molecules. This either reduces the quantum yield of photochromic ring closing, or it gives rise to the possibility of oxidative ring closing. Analysis of the resistance values and energy levels indicates that the HOMO energy levels of the closed isomers relevant for transport must lie within a few kBT of the CNT Fermi level.187

2.2 Polymer materials

2.2.1 Photovoltaic polymers. 
Since the first discovery of conducting polymers in the 1970s, they have attracted extensive and particular interest due to their superior solution-processability over their counterparts, such as inorganic and small materials, for promising applications in the context of flexible, low-cost and large-area optoelectronic devices.188–190 To date, the polymer photovoltaic cells have undergone remarkable progress with conversion efficiency approaching 9%, suggesting their bright future applications in solar cells.
2.2.1.1 Polyphenylenevinylenes. 
As one of the most well-known conjugated polymer materials, polyphenylenevinylenes (PPV, Scheme 22) have been widely investigated in various electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as field-effect transistors, light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells etc., due to their unique optical and electronic properties. Among them, soluble poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV) and poly[2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyl octyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV) are two representative PPV derivatives as promising materials for applications in polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. To date, improved efficiencies up to 3% have been obtained for MDMO-PPV/PC71BM blends by changing the acceptor from PC61BM to PC71BM as well as adjusting the solvent used attributed to more efficient charge separation and light harvesting, which is also the best efficiency reported so far for polyphenylenevinylenes-based solar cells.191,192 The main weaknesses that strongly limit the improvement of efficiency for PPVs are their weak absorption (only to 500 nm) and instability in ambient conditions. In order to solve these problems, efforts have been made to introduce a strong electron-withdrawing group, such as a cyano group into the polymer backbone for lowering the HOMO and LUMO energy levels. CN-PPV is one of the typical examples, which even could be used as the acceptor for the much deeper LUMO energy levels and a power conversion efficiency of 1.9% was recorded for the blend of P3HT/MEH-CN-PPV in bulk heterojunction solar cells.193 However, the fact is that although significant efforts have been made in this field for high performance photovoltaic cells based on PPVs, the efficiencies have remained at 3.0% at best so far, thus the general interest in this class of materials gradually faded especially over the past years.
 Scheme 22  Representative polyphenylenevinylenes for photovoltaic cells. 
2.2.1.2 Polythiophenes. 
Over a long time, polythiophenes, specifically poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT, Scheme 23), have attracted particular and extensive interest as the most promising material for applications in potential low-cost, large-area optical and electronic devices due to good solution-processability, high regioregularity facilitating good self-assembly in the solid state for high field-effect mobilities, as well as its excellent photovoltaic performance. Since the first incorporation of P3HT into bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells in 2002 by Schilinsky et al.,194 detailed studies by many groups have brought significant progress in this field, and to date power conversion efficiencies of about 5% have been achieved in solar cells based on P3HT/PCBM derivatives by continuously optimizing the processing conditions or using appropriate thermal annealing process.195–197
 Scheme 23  Representative polythiophenes recently used in photovoltaic cells. 
Although much progress has been made in the development of P3HT-based solar cells, further improvement in the performance of P3HT photovoltaic cells becomes very difficult due to the weak light absorption for P3HT (maximum peak at 550 nm and absorption edge up to 650 nm) and its high HOMO energy level (−4.9 eV) leading to low open-circuit voltage (around 0.6 V), and theoretical calculations demonstrated the best power conversion efficiency for P3HT/PCBM solar cells could be only up to 5.6% with assumption of 100% external quantum efficiency for all photo energies.198 Therefore, searching for new polymer materials with better performance is crucial for further achieving desired photovoltaic cells for practical applications. In spite of so many advantages for P3HT, in the beginning, researchers still paid more attention to the designing and synthesizing of polythiophene analogues of P3HT. In 2006, Sivula et al. synthesized a copolymer, poly(1-co-2) by incorporating a dihexylthiophene repeat unit in the backbone.199 Very interestingly, although poly(1-co-2) has decreased regioregularity it exhibited no lowered device efficiency (up to 4.4%) with higher thermal stability with implications of long-term performance compared to pristine P3HT-based solar cells with enhanced stable interpenetrating networks between the poly(1-co-2) donor and PCBM acceptor. Later on, Kim et al. synthesized a class of end-group modified P3HT analogues by changing the hydrogen atom to other end groups, such as bromo, hydroxyl, ethyl, or perfluoro in order to adjust the surface energy for efficient phase separation.200 Of them, P3HT-CH3 and P3HT-CF3 exhibited very high conversion efficiencies of 4.0% and 4.5%, respectively, with an optimized blend ratio with PCBM for good film morphology. Of course, enormous efforts have also been made in the synthesis of other types of polythiophene derivatives, however, the recently reported conversion efficiencies are still limited with values below 5%,201 so searching for other conjugated systems for desirable photovoltaic polymers to overcome the weakness of polythiophenes have emerged recently.
2.2.1.3 Low-band conjugated polymers. 
As we mentioned above, 53% of sunlight energy is distributed in the visible range of 380 nm to 800 nm (as shown in Fig. 3), so an ideal active layer for high efficiency solar cells should have a broad and strong absorption in this region. While the presently used fullerene electron acceptors, such as PCBM, in bulk heterojunction solar cells exhibit relatively weak absorption in this visible range.93 Thus, there is a need for broadening the acceptor component, such as polythiophenes, for further improvement in the efficiency of photovoltaic cells, that is to design and synthesize new novel low band gap organic conjugated molecules. In section 2.1.1.4, we have given a systematic summary of the development of low band gap small organic molecules. In this section, we will give a brief review on the recent outstanding progress in developing new and promising active materials, especially those that have already shown promising performance in actual polymer solar cells, or have the potential to show significantly higher efficiencies than those recently achieved.
In many studies, 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole has been proved to be one of the most important electron-deficient units that are widely used for the synthesis of low band gap conjugated polymers (Scheme 24). The most representative small band gap conjugated polymer based on 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole is copolymer PCPDTBT, which was first reported in 2006 by Mühlbacher et al.202 PCPDTBT indeed exhibited a very small band gap of 1.4 eV with an onset edge absorption of around 890 nm and a wide absorption coverage from 380 nm to 900 nm, which guaranteed its high efficiency in the following studies. In that case, the original photovoltaic cells based on the blend of PCPDTBT/PC71BM demonstrated a power conversion efficiency of 3.2% with a short-circuit current density of 10–11 mA cm−2 and an external quantum efficiency of 25%, these values were further significantly improved up to 5.5% for conversion efficiency with 16 mA cm−2 for the short-circuit current density by controlling the active layer morphologies with the octane-1,8-dithiol as an additive in the device fabrication process.203 One problem for PCPDTBT is its low open-circuit voltage limiting the further improvement for its conversion efficiency, in comparison, photovoltaic cells based on copolymer, PFDTBT as donor demonstrated a relatively high open-circuit voltage of 0.95–1.04 V but only a low conversion efficiency of 2–3%,204,205 and similar performance was also afforded for photovoltaic cells based on its structural isomer PFO-DBT.206 With benzene rings as the end-capped groups, Blouin et al. synthesized another copolymer of the same class, PCDTBT.207 With a composition of PCDTBT and PC71BM (1:4 ratio) as the active charge separating layer, a very high power conversion efficiency of 6.1% could be achieved with a 100% internal efficiency quantum by optimizing the processing conditions, which was also the highest conversion efficiency at that time.208 When the carbon atoms at the 9-position of the fluorene units of PFO-DBT were replaced with silicon atoms, a novel copolymer material (PSiF-DBT) was obtained. Very importantly, photovoltaic solar cells based on a blend of PSiF-DBT and PCBM exhibited not only a high open-circuit-voltage of 0.90 V, but also a high conversion efficiency of 5.4%, which also showed higher charge carrier mobility.209 Inspired by these results, Hou et al. further synthesized another low band gap copolymer, PSBTBT,98 which also showed a wide absorption region from 380 nm to 800 nm. Using a 1:1 blend of PSBTBT and PC71BM as the active layer yielded devices with an open-circuit voltage of 0.67 V, short-circuit current-density of 12.7 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of around 5.1%. More recently, Ong et al. designed and synthesized another copolymer of thiophene and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole, POD2T-DTBT, with a low band gap of 1.54 eV and an absorption edge of 780 nm, which exhibited not only a high field-effect mobility of around 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 but also excellent photovoltaic performance with the power conversion efficiency approaching 6.26%.210
 Scheme 24  Representative low-band gap photovoltaic copolymers based on a 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole acceptor. 
Recently, a fluorinated benzothiadiazole unit with two fluorine atoms replacing the two hydrogen atoms in the 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole moiety was also incorporated into the conjugated polymer backbone to form novel donor–acceptor copolymers. The merits of the fluorine atom compared to the hydrogen atom are its strong electron-withdrawing properties as well as its great influence on the inter- and intramolecular interactions through C–F⋯H, C⋯S as well as C–F⋯π interactions.211 Zhou et al. developed a new copolymer (PBnDT-DTffBT) based on benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BnDT) and 5,6-difluoro-4,7-dithien-2-yl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (DTffBT) moieties (Scheme 25).212 Compared to its nonfluorinated analogue, PBnDT-DTffBT exhibited a similar band gap of around 2.2 eV but decreased HOMO (−5.54 eV) and LUMO (−3.33 eV) energy levels, which resulted in an increase in the efficiency of approaching 7.2% and a high open-circuit voltage of 0.91 V.
 Scheme 25  Molecular structures of PBnDT-DTBT and PBnDT-DTffBT. 
In addition to the 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole unit, thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD) is another representative acceptor unit,213 and has also demonstrated great potential for the synthesis of high performance donor–acceptor copolymers for organic photovoltaics. For instance, Zou and Piliego have recently designed and synthesized a series of TPD-containing donor–acceptor copolymers (P1, P2, P3) with optimized molecular packing by adjusting the substituents appended to TPD that led to as high as 6.8% power conversion efficiency for P3 with a blend of PCBM in a ratio of 1:1.5.214,215 More recently, Chu and Amb synthesized another class of excellent TDP-based low band gap copolymers, P4 and P5.216,217 Compared to its carbon-bridge counterpart, the Si- or Ge-based fused bithiophene system can not only enhance the solid state ordered packing models leading to improved charge transport properties but also could result in deeper HOMO energy levels (−5.65 eV for P4 and −5.60 eV for P5) required for yielding larger open-circuit voltages, and such similar studies have already been investigated in other conjugated systems, such as fluorene units.98,209 Thin film UV absorption demonstrated that P4 gave two absorption peaks at 611 nm and 670 nm with a band gap of 1.73 eV, while in comparison P5 exhibited a red-shift absorption with peaks at 618 nm and 679 nm and an estimated band gap of 1.69 eV. With 1,8-diiodooctane as the processing additive, both of these two polymers blended with PC71BM exhibited excellent photovoltaic performance with an open-circuit voltage of 0.88 V, a short-circuit current density of 12.2 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 0.68 and the best power conversion efficiency of 7.3% for P4, and an open-circuit voltage of 0.85 V, a short-circuit current density of 12.6 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 0.68 and an average power conversion efficiency of 7.3% for P5. Additionally, the well-known diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) acceptor unit has also recently emerged as a promising candidate for use in optoelectronic applications and approaching 5.0% efficiency has been achievable for DPP-based copolymers.218,219 For example, PDPP3T was designed with unsubstituted terthiophene units between each pair of DPP units, which exhibited not only high, almost balanced charge carrier mobilities of around 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and holes but also an extended optical absorption towards the IR region with a low band gap of 1.36 eV for its thin films, seen as promising materials for photovoltaic cells. By optimizing the device processing conditions and with a small amount of 1,8-diiodooctane as an additive, the best power conversion efficiency of up to 4.7% was obtained for a blend of PDPP3T and PC71BM in a 1:2 weight ratio with an open-circuit voltage of 0.65 V, current-density of 11.8 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 0.60. Recently, furans as the alternatives to thiophene units have been also incorporated with DPP acceptor units to produce low-band gap conjugated polymers. Compared to their thiophene-based counterparts, furan-based copolymers (Scheme 26), such as PDPP2FT and PDPP3F could be readily synthesized and exhibit good solubility even with short substituents, such as 2-ethylhexyl substituents. Both of these furan-based copolymers exhibited very similar optical and electronic properties comparable to PDPP3T with a low band gap of 1.41 eV for PDPP2FT and 1.35 eV for PDPP3F, providing a high power conversion efficiency of 5.0% for PDPP2FT and around 4.0% efficiency for PDPP3F with a blend of PC71BM incorporating an optimal addition of CN additives.
 Scheme 26  Representative low-band gap photovoltaic copolymers based on thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor. 
Extensive studies have demonstrated that benzodithiophenes (BDTs) were shown to be one of the best electron-donating units due to their more conjugated systems and proper side chain patterns for enhanced solubility220 and have been copolymerized with various acceptors, such as N-alkylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione, benzothiadiazole, fluorinated benzothiadiazole, etc., leading to polymer solar cells with high power conversion efficiencies of over 6.0%.94,215 By copolymerizing the BDT donor unit with the 2,5-dibromothieno[3,4-b]thiophene acceptor, Yu and co-workers have recently synthesized a novel series of copolymers, PTBx with optimized optical and electronic properties by adjusting the substituents appended to the ester or benzodithiophene or introducing the electron-withdrawing atom fluorine in the polymer backbone (Scheme 27).96,221 Systematic studies demonstrated that all of these polymers exhibit almost identical absorption spectra with only slight changes in the absorption peaks and the onset point. The HOMO energy levels determined by cyclic voltammetry are very close with the exceptions of PTB3 and PTB4, which exhibit slightly deeper HOMO levels due to the effect of the alkoxyl side chains. By comparing PTB4 and PTB5, polymers with the same side chain patterns, it shows that the introduction of electron-withdrawing fluorine in the backbone could significantly lower the HOMO level (Table 1). Photovoltaic properties of PTB1 to PTB6 were investigated in the device structures of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer:PCBM (1:1, wt ratio)/Ca/Al and their performances were found to be largely related to the morphology induced by the effect of different side chains, and approaching 6.0% power conversion efficiency could be obtained for PTB4 after incorporating 1,8-diiodooctane as an additive in the solvent. With PC71BM instead of PCBM to extend the overall absorption, further enhancement in photovoltaic performance of up to 7.4% was achievable for PTB7-based solar cells with optimized processing conditions (chlorobenzene (CB) with 3% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) additive) (Table 2). More recently, to further extend the conjugated backbone for stronger cofacial π–π stacking, He et al. designed and synthesized another new class of copolymers, PTAT-x, based on tetrathienoanthracene and thieno[3,4-b]thiophene moieties, and a high power conversion efficiency of 5.6% was obtained for PTAT-3 based photovoltaic cells when blended with PCBM using chloroform and 1,8-diiodooctane as cosolvent.222
 Scheme 27  High performance low-band gap photovoltaic polymers based on N-alkylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor. 
Table 1 Characteristic properties of polymers and their solar cells in PTBx/PC61BM composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society




Polymers

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)





a Devices prepared from mixed solvent dichlorobenzene/diiodooctane (97/3, v/v).
b PCE value obtained after spectral correction.





PTB1
−4.90
−3.20
0.58
12.5
65.4
4.76


PTB2
−4.94
−3.22
0.60
12.8
66.3
5.10


PTB3
−5.04
−3.29
0.74
13.1
56.8
5.53


PTB4
−5.12
−3.31
0.76
9.20
44.5
3.10


PTB5
−5.01
−3.24
0.68
10.3
43.1
3.02


PTB6
−5.01
−3.17
0.62
7.74
47.0
2.26


PTB3a




0.72
13.9
58.5
5.85


PTB4a




0.74
13.0
61.4
5.90 (6.1b)


PTB5a




0.66
10.7
58.0
4.10




Table 2 Device photovoltaic parameters of DCB only, DCB with 3% DIO, CB, and CB with 3% DIO as solvents and JSC calculated from EQE spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society




 

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

J
SC (calcd) (mA cm−2)




DCB
0.74
13.95
60.25
6.22




DCB/DIO
0.74
14.09
68.85
7.18
13.99


CB
0.76
10.20
50.52
3.92




CB/DIO
0.74
14.50
68.97
7.40
14.16




Besides the above mentioned copolymers based on the classical donor and acceptor moieties, more recently, some other novel classes of copolymers have also been designed and synthesized, providing us another insight path to new high performance photovoltaic materials. For instance, Lee et al. have recently synthesized a new copolymer (PCDTTz) by introducing the thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole acceptor into the carbazole-based polymer (Scheme 28), which exhibited a band gap of 2.07 eV, field-effect carrier mobility of around 3.8 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and as high as 4.88% power conversion efficiency for its photovoltaic cells blended with PC71BM under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 irradiation in ambient conditions.223 Considering the ideal rigid and coplanar structure for the thiazolothiazole (TTz) unit, which is favorable for the extended conjugated systems and strong π-stacking, Zhang et al. recently designed another copolymer (PDTSTTz) based on the TTz acceptor.224 As expected, PDTSTTz also exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of 5.59% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.77 V, a current density of 11.9 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 0.61, largely due to the high hole field-effect mobility (3.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) for the good molecular packing in the solid state. A more complex donor–acceptor copolymer with an extended conjugated system (PECz-DTQx) has also been recently designed and synthesized by Cao and co-workers.225 By optimizing the processing conditions, the highest power conversion efficiency of 6.07% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.81 V was achievable for a blend of PECz-DTQx and PC71BM in a ratio of 1:4 wt%. Cao and co-workers recently reported another low-band-gap complex copolymer (Eg = 1.58 eV), PBDT-DTNT, which also exhibited as high as 6.0% conversion efficiency with an open-circuit voltage of 0.80 V, a current density of 11.71 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 0.61.226
 Scheme 28  Other conjugated systems of low-band gap copolymers used in photovoltaic cells. 
From the above description we can see that the use of donor–acceptor structures has recently become today's hot topic in research as an efficient strategy for obtaining low-band gap polymers and modulating their electronic properties for high performance photovoltaic cells. To date, significant progress has been witnessed in this field which has led to power conversion efficiencies as high as 7.4%, and even approaching 9.2% conversion efficiency newly recorded recently by Mitsubishi Chemical according to the Nikkei, a Japanese business daily report,7 presenting a bright future for organic solar cells.
2.2.1.4 PDI-based acceptor polymers. 
As we mentioned above in section 2.1.1.5, compared to organic donor materials, the number of acceptor materials is few and their development lags far behind that of high performance p-type organic semiconductors. Actually, the biggest drawback for most donor materials is their low electron affinity leading to low air and chemical stability in ambient conditions. The PDI unit, as the most widely investigated electron deficient system exhibits relatively high electron affinities, high electron mobilities, and excellent chemical, thermal and photo-stabilities, and is usually used as a promising building block for high performance organic acceptor materials. Besides the PDI-based small molecules, recently a great deal of effort has been expended on the design and synthesis of novel high-performance acceptor polymer materials to drive their potential applications in all-polymer organic electronics. Among them, one of the most representative example is a PDI-based polymer acceptor (Scheme 29, see P6), which was synthesized by Zhan et al., and exhibited a wide absorption range of 300–850 nm due to the strong intramolecular charge transfer of the donor–acceptor arrangement of the main chain.227 An average power conversion efficiency of over 1% was obtained under AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2 based on the blend of M10 as the acceptor and bis(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene (2TV-PT) as the electron donor (1:1, w/w), which was the most efficient all-polymer solar cell reported at that time. Encouraged by this interesting result, they further synthesized a series of copolymers based on the PDI unit with different dithienothiophene (DTT) units, and the results demonstrated that when with two DTT units (P7) the best efficiency of 1.48% was achieved.228 Later on, many other groups have also been interested in the synthesis of high performance PDI-based acceptor materials and remarkable progress has been achieved to date. Recently, Mikroyannidis et al. reported another PDI-based acceptor copolymer (P8) and achieved a power conversion efficiency of 2.3% under white light calibrated to an AM1.5 intensity of 30 mW cm−2.229 For more detailed information please refer to other reviews.230–232
 Scheme 29  Some representative PDI-based conjugated polymer acceptors used in photovoltaic cells. 


2.2.2 Photoconductive polymers. 
In contrast to the low localization energy of inorganic semiconductors such as GaAs, whose exciton binding energy is only 4 meV, organic materials generally have a low dielectric constant and a rather high exciton binding energy (typically 0.1–1.4 eV).233 The thermal energy at room temperature (kBT = 0.025 eV) is insufficient to dissociate the exciton, created in organic photoresponse materials by absorption of a photon, into free electrons and holes. Hence, it requires electrical fields that are two to three orders of magnitude higher than that of inorganic photoconductors to convert electrons from localized states into ionized states. However, photoconductive gain was observed in organic photoconductors under only a few volts of bias. The applied electrical field is much smaller than that required for achieving ionization, and hence, there must be some other mechanisms responsible for the photoconductive gain, which is still under debate.
From the chemical point of view, there are four major groups of photoconductive polymers234 (Scheme 30): (i) polymers with a saturated backbone, absorbing mainly in the UV region, showing a very weak extrinsic photoconductivity. Polyethylene is a typical photoconductor of this type. Because of their weak responsivity toward illumination, this kind of photoconductor has not been investigated much; (ii) Polymers with polynuclear aromatic moieties with large π conjugated systems incorporated in the saturated polymer backbone as pendant groups. These polymers usually absorb only short wavelength light, below 400 nm, where they are photoconductive. They act very often as carrier transport materials. There are several typical photoconductive polymers that have been investigated mostly. For instance, poly (N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK) has attracted scientists' attention since the discovery of its photoconductivity in 1965.233 In 1970, IBM company applied the PVK:TNF (2,4,7-trinitrofluorenone) charge transfer complex as photoconductors in commercial photocopiers.103 Since then, carbazole-containing polymers have undergone much progress235–238 due to their intrinsic advantages such as high thermal and photochemical stability, easy chemical modification, high charge carrier mobility etc.; (iii) Polymers with a high degree of π-conjugation in the main chain, including systems with π-conjugated pendant groups. In these polymers the absorption extends into the visible and, in some cases, into the near-infrared region, especially when certain electron acceptor groups are present. Many well-known photoconductive polymers belong to this group. For example, conjugated poly(p-phenylenevinylene)s (PPVs) and its derivatives. PPV, as the emissive layer in the first polymer based light-emitting diode applications in 1990,239 has attracted a great deal of attention. The small optical band gaps of PPV derivatives make them ideal candidates to investigate the photoconductive effect. The high photoconductive gain (>20) of arylamino-poly(p-phenylenevinylene) was attributed to the charge trapping near an injecting interface which produces an enhanced electric field at the contact and enhanced charge injection.236 Another typical PPV derivative MEH-PPV is also an ideal candidate to investigate the photoconductive effect. For instance, Campbell et al.240 observed large, bulk photoconductive gain (>100) in polymer devices with soluble MEH-PPV as the active layer. They proposed that such high photoconductive gain is probably due to the circulation of hole carriers through the device in response to electrons trapped in the polymer layer.
 Scheme 30  Four types of photoconductive polymers. 
F8T2 is another typical photoconductor in this group. O'Brien et al.241 investigated the photoconductivity of a solution-processed single F8T2 nanowire. It was found that the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the single nanowire was about 0.1%, which is comparable to the EQE of single inorganic nanowires like single InP (EQE = 0.08%) and ZnO (EQE = 0.17%) nanowires. Poly(p-phenyleneethynylene)s (PPEs) are another kind of rigid-rod conjugated photoconductor with excellent optical and electrical properties.242,243 For example, TA-PPE, a derivative of PPE with thioacetyl end groups, self-assembled with gold nanogap electrodes and demonstrated a high photoconductive effect upon light illumination.244 Newly developed photoconductors like poly [2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′] dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT),245 benzodithiophene derivative PTB7,221 also belong to this group. (iv) Polymers with a σ-conjugated backbone,246 such as poly(methyl phenylsilane), PMPSi; the extension of its π-conjugated system of the phenyl groups by attachment of chromophoric groups does not cause a detectable shift of the UV absorption band of the σ-conjugated backbone. Apart from the formylated derivative, all substituted polysilanes are much less photolabile than the original PMPSi and the partly chloromethylated PMPSi due to the strong quenching of the fluorescence by the attached chromophores.247


2.2.3 Optical data storage polymers. 
From the practical point of view, photoresponsive polymers are promising for optical data storage since they can be processed to large-scale homogeneous thin films, which are desirable for environmentally stable storage devices. The original strategy to achieve photochromic film is to disperse dyes into polymer matrixes.248 However, the concentration of the dopant in thus-obtained films must be low enough to keep the optical homogeneity.249 In order to increase the concentration of the photochromic component, a totally different strategy was adopted. Various photochromic polymers, in which the photochromic units were covalently bonded to the main chain or side chain of polymers, were designed and synthesized. Although the flexibility of some films was limited for ring-closing reactions, the concentration gradients and phase separation of films of polymers could be avoided in this way.
Many kinds of photochromic polymers have been designed and synthesized during the past decades,250–257 in which the 1,2-dithienylethene (DTE) derivatives have drawn great attention due to their outstanding fatigue resistance and thermal stabilities. Prominently, the DTE-based polymers show high photochromic activity both in solution and in solid states. Therefore, some typical DTE-based polymers are emphasised in the following introduction. Since the conformation of DTE must be kept as antiparallel for the ring-closing reaction, the DTE unit was designed as a pendant group in some polymers. There were two kinds of pendant DTE polymers: copolymers and homopolymers.
2.2.3.1 Pendant DTE copolymers. 
Several examples of DTE-based copolymers will be introduced in this section. Kim et al. synthesized DTE-based copolymer 5 (Scheme 31) by radical polymerization.258 The content of DTE component in this copolymer reached as high as 22% (wt.). The color of the homogeneous film prepared from this material could reversibly change between colorless and deep red by irradiation of UV and visible light. The refractive index of this polymer was further investigated, and a photochromic refractive index change was observed as 0.0008–0.0003. Tian et al. synthesized DTE-based copolymer 6 (Scheme 31) by coupling 2,3-bis(2,5-dimethyl-3-thienyl)-N-allyl maleic imide with methyl methacrylate (MMA), in which the content of the DTE component was less than 1%.259 The quantum yields of cyclization and ring-opening were relatively high, and the switching stability was observed for more than 200 optical cycles.
 Scheme 31  Copolymers with DTE as pendant groups and with multi-photochromic units as pendant groups. 
Further, Tian et al. designed and synthesized a novel copolymer with multi-component DTE-based photochromic groups (7, Scheme 31).260 Since there were two kinds of DTE unit in the backbone of copolymer 7, and different units turned from the ring-open state to ring-closed state under exposure of distinct light, the colorless solution of copolymer 7 in toluene turned to different colors when exposed to irradiation with different light. Besides, the spin-coated thin film of copolymer 7 also exhibited obvious photochromic behavior.
Taking different DTE units as photochromic groups, Branda et al. synthesized a series of multiaddressable copolymers 8 (Scheme 31) by ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) techniques.261 These copolymers had narrow polydispersity indexes, good thermal stabilities and low glass transition temperatures (Tg). Since each DTE group had unique absorption characteristics in ring-open and ring-closed states, the copolymers could be selectively photocyclized, and generated a wide range of colors. It was believed that these kinds of multicomponent, multiaddressable polymers were more practical for photochromic memories than doping different photoactive components into polymer matrixes.
2.2.3.2 Pendant DTE homopolymers. 
As the density of the photoactive component was greater, homopolymers had obvious advantages over copolymers, which was helpful to amplify the desired photoactive functions. Branda et al. synthesized a series of photochromic homopolymers (9a–c and 10, Scheme 32) based on 1,2-bis(3-thienyl)cyclopentenes by ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP).262,263 Polymers 9a–c could be easily processed into thin films by spin-coating techniques. Reversible photoisomerisation reactions of these polymers in both solution and films were proved to be efficient by UV/Vis studies. Besides, these polymers had low glass transition temperatures (∼−50 °C), indicating the requirements of conformational change during ring-closing reactions could be met.
 Scheme 32  Pendant and cross-linked DTE-based polymers. 
Polymer 10 (Scheme 32), a highly cross-linked analogue of polymer 9, was polymerized with catalyst by ROMP techniques. Different from 9a–c and their monomers, the photochromic properties of the cross-linked polymer 10 in solution differed from those of the corresponding monomer. Though the photochromism of polymer 10 was not inhibited by cross-linking in the sol–gel film, the photoconversion under UV light was low, which was attributed to the conformational restriction during the ring-closing process of DTE.
2.2.3.3 Main-chain DTE polymers. 
Placing photoactive groups into the main chain is another way to functionalize polymers with photochromism. It is likely to form antiparallel conformations when DTE groups are linked alone or linked with aromatic spacers in the main chain of polymers. It is supposed that the concentration of photochromic groups could be maximized without reduction of quantum yields in this way.249
Zerbi et al. synthesized the first main-chain monopolymer 11 (Scheme 33) based on DTE groups.249 The polymer exhibited higher thermal stability than that of the monomer. Impressively, the cyclization quantum yield of this polymer was high up to 86%, while its opening quantum yield at specific conditions was as low as 0.15%.
 Scheme 33  Some main-chain DTE polymers. 
Different from the connection mode above, the central ring of 1,2-bis(3-thienyl)cyclopentene was incorporated into the main chain of monopolymer 12 (Scheme 33).264 Lipophilic polymer 12a and 12b were synthesized by typical ROMP techniques, while hydrophilic polymer 12c was prepared by hydrolyzing the ester of polymer 12b with aqueous KOH. These polymers could converted between colored and colorless under irradiation, though long irradiation times would result in a little photodegradation. Polymers 12a and 12b retained their photochromic behavior in spin-coated films, indicating the conservation of photochromic properties during fabrication. Prominently, the content of the photochromic component in this main-chain polymer reached as high as 93% (wt.), which should be attributed to the versatility of the cyclopentene backbones.
Copolymer 13 is an example of fluorophore unit-containing DTE-based copolymers.260,265 Due to the reversible fluorescence changes occurring in the process of the photochromic reactions, these kinds of materials have potential as a readout method for erasable information storage. Copolymer 13 (Scheme 33),265 which was synthesized by a Wittig polycondensation reaction, showed good photoregulation of fluorescence. For the DTE unit, it was likely to form an antiparallel conformation when it was incorporated into the main chain of polymers, and its open form favoured the fluorescence of polyphenylenevinylene while its closed form quenched the fluorescence. Unfortunately, the excitation wavelength for fluorescence could be absorbed by both open and closed forms of DTE, generating fluorescence and photoisomerization at the same time, which departs from the expectation. Therefore, possessing an excitation wavelength outside the absorption region of the two forms of the photochrome is critical for data storage systems.

2.3 Hybrid (organic–inorganic) materials
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials have attracted much attention because they could take advantage of both organic and inorganic materials simultaneously to achieve high performance. For example, it was found that charge transfer rates can be remarkably accelerated when organics are chemically bound to inorganic nanocrystals upon illumination.266 It is believed that the large extinction coefficients of organic semiconductors over a wide wavelength range267 and the fast electron transport efficiency in inorganic semiconductors make the hybrid photoresponse materials ideal candidates to investigate photovoltaic, photoconductive, and optical memory effects.

2.3.1 Photovoltaic hybrid materials. 
Organic semiconductors in hybrid materials act as light absorbers to generate excitons and inorganic semiconductors act as charge transducers to transport electrons efficiently. The interface between organic and inorganic semiconductors acts as the exciton dissociation site, which will increase the voltage potential between two electrodes. The morphologies of inorganic semiconductors play critical roles in the mechanisms of charge carrier conduction and consequently, the performance of these hybrid photovoltaic devices.
Inorganic semiconducting nanoparticles are a common morphology applied in hybrid materials.268–270 Germanium (Ge) nanocrystals were employed in hybrid P3HT/Ge composites to investigate the mechanisms of exciton dissociation and carrier transport in this hybrid material.271 It is proposed that charge separation could take place efficiently at the interface of P3HT/Ge composites. While, poor electron carrier transport ability of tiny Ge nanocrystals lead to limited device performance. Electrons probably hop between nanoparticles. Tsang et al.272 tried to link these nanoparticles with 1,3-benezendithiol (BDT) cross-linked PbS nanocrystals (diameter about 4 nm). When compared with the photovoltaic cells without BDT273 as a linker between two adjacent nanocrystals, the hybrid photovoltaic cell demonstrated a 5-fold improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE). It was found that the BDT surface ligands not only passivate the PbS nanocrystals surface, but also facilitate the charge transfer in PbS nanocrystals and the C60 donor/acceptor system.
Alternative ways to circumvent the obstacle of charge transport between nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanorods or nanowires274,275 are employed to offer a large donor–acceptor interface area, continuous and minimized carrier-conducting pathways.276–278 An early work applying nanotubes in photovoltaic hybrid materials was mixing carbon nanotubes (CNT) in P3HT:PCBM.279 The current density of the device increased greatly when CNTs were introduced into the active materials; as a consequence, the PCE of the devices was improved (around 2.0%). This increase of current density may be correlated to the increase of carrier mobility because of the existence of metallic and semiconducting CNTs in the matrix. The high work function of metallic CNTs allows them to extract holes easily from the blend film to the electrodes. The semiconducting CNTs present a gap with a LUMO level accessible to extract electrons. So, it is also possible that electrons can be extracted by the semiconducting CNTs. Sadhu et al.280 improved the PCE of P3HT:PCBM to 2.5% by functionalizing the multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) with thiophene groups. The improvement in PCE is attributed to an extension of the exciton dissociation volume and charge transport properties through the nanotube percolation network in P3HT/CNT, PCBM/CNT or both phases. This is believed to be due to more efficient dispersion of the functionalized nanotubes within the photoactive composite layer.
Another effective way to improve the performance of hybrid photovoltaic cells is to employ nanorods, nanowires or other novel nanostructures that facilitate the charge transport in hybrid active materials. For instance, Huynh et al.281 investigated the influence of nanostructure length on the performance of hybrid photovoltaic devices with cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanorods/P3HT blend film as active materials. It was found that by changing the length of CdSe nanorods in the P3HT/CdSe hybrid material, electron-hopping transport might dominate in shorter nanorods, and band-conduction transport might dominate in longer nanorods. Gur et al.282 investigated the influence of inorganic nanostructure dimension on the performance of solar cells. They fabricated hybrid photovoltaic devices with 3-D dendritic CdSe nanostructures and P3HT as active materials. The dendritic nanostructure controls the dispersion of the inorganic phase in the polymer matrix, thus ensuring a large, distributed surface area for charge separation. Moreover, comparing with nanorods of CdSe, the 3-D nanostructure contains more built-in percolation pathways for transport of electrons to the anode. As a consequence, photovoltaic devices made from 3-D nanostructures demonstrated higher PCE than nanorods of CdSe.


2.3.2 Photoconductive hybrid materials. 
In photoconductive hybrid materials, the interfaces between organic and inorganic semiconductors offer sites for efficient exciton separation. Several hybrid photoconductive materials are very important in this field. (i) PVK, a classical photoconductor283 applied in commercial photocopiers, demonstrated remarkably increased photoconductivity when doped with lithium niobate (LiNbO3) nanoparticles.284 The higher the content of nanoparticles, the higher the photoconductivity of the hybrid material. The increased photoconductivity is probably due to the longer lifetime of the photogenerated holes at higher nanoparticle concentrations. The reason for the increased hole lifetime is due to more trapping sites offering electrons more nanoparticles and creation of recombination barriers at the polymer/nanoparticle interface. (ii) P3HT, a typical photovoltaic material can be used to study photoconductive effects.285 The CdTe nanoparticles capped with N-phenyl-N′-methyldithiocarbamate (PMDTC) doped in P3HT:PCBM blend film will trap electrons and favor the hole injection into the blend film, resulting in an efficiency excess of 100%. It was found that the enhanced photoconductivity of MWNT-C60-P3HT hybrid film was due to the efficient charge separation and the decreased recombination of photogenerated charge carriers in the hybrid material.286 (iii) CuPc, a typical small-molecule is also engaged in hybrid materials to study the photoconductive effect.287 Photoconductivity will be increased 2 or 3 orders of magnitude with CuPc filled into TiO2 nanotube arrays. The excitons generated in CuPc upon illumination are dissociated into free charge carriers at the interface of CuPc and TiO2 nanotubes. Then these charge carriers migrate through their respective transportation channels toward corresponding electrodes. The nanoarrays of TiO2 nanotubes can enormously increase the contact areas between CuPc and TiO2, which offers many more sites for the exciton dissociation. (iv) PbS QDs, as a typical inorganic photoconductor is also employed in hybrid photoconductive materials. For example, Osedach et al.288 demonstrated a bi-layer structure (PCBM/PbS QDs) with PbS QDs dominating in the photoconductive behavior of the device. Comparing the bilayer materials (PCBM/PbS QDs) and single layer material (PbS QDs), it was found that the bilayer structure allows for improved time response and the single layer structure is preferred for maximizing photoconductivity. (v) ZnO, a typical well-established inorganic photoconductor always plays dominating roles in hybrid photoconductors. For instance, Sofos et al.289 used the conjugated segments in surfactants as a template to control the assembly of ZnO and the surfactants and enhance the long-range ordering of hybrids. The photoconductive gain of the hybrid material was 120 at 1.2 V μm−1. The strength of the π–π interactions in preserving this lamellar nanostructure in Fig. 9 suggests the presence of conducting pathways in both the surfactant and ZnO layers, making this type of structure ideal for other applications including photovoltaics.
 Fig. 9  Morphology of lamellar hybrid nanostructure. (a) SEM (top-down) image of deposited platelets using 1-pyrenebutyric acid (PyBA), magnified in the inset. (b) SEM (cross-sectional view) image of deposited platelets using PyBA. (c) TEM image of lamellar sheets within platelets deposited using PyBA, magnified in the inset. (d) Schematic diagram of lamellar ordering composed of inorganic Zn-rich regions and bilayers of PyBA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


2.3.3 Optical data storage hybrid materials. 
Recently, a lot of attention has been focused on the optical memory effect of hybrid materials. Organic and inorganic materials play different roles in optical data storage hybrid materials. In summary, there are two major interactions between organic and inorganic materials to form hybrid materials. The first is to blend inorganic materials with organic materials to realize light information storage. Inorganic materials are employed as an electron trapper to store light information, and organic semiconductors act as a light absorber.290 Star et al.291 used an organic materials (poly((m-phenylene vinylene)-co-[(2,5-dioctyloxy-p-phenylene)vinylene]) (PmPV)) as a light sensor and an inorganic material (CNT) to investigate optical memory effect. In this device, PmPV acted as a light absorber and CNT acts as a transducer and electrode, and a charge storage reservoir to memorize light information. Chiu et al.290 blended P3HT with CdSe@ZnSe QDs to investigate optical memory effect. It can be seen from Fig. 10 LUMO and HOMO energy levels of P3HT lie above the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) edges of the CdSe and ZnSe materials, respectively. Thus, the P3HT–ZnSe interface forms an offset band heterojunction. In contrast, the CdSe core and ZnSe shell form a type-I heterojunction. Hence, both QDs and P3HT act as a light absorber to generate excitons, and charge separation occurred at the P3HT–QDs interface, and then electrons will be trapped in QDs to realize light information storage.
 Fig. 10  (a) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of the CdSe and CdSe@ZnSe QDs. (b) Energy level diagram for the CdSe and ZnSe bulk materials, P3HT, and the electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. 
The second is to stack organic and inorganic materials layer by layer to realize information recording. In this case, the interface between organic and inorganic materials plays a critical role for optical data storage. Organic materials also act as optical sensors, and inorganic materials act as dielectric materials to trap photogenerated charge carriers to realize light information storage. For instance, polythiophenes, poly(3-octylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3OT), P3HT etc. are ideal candidates to study this effect. The effect was investigated by using phototransistors with P3OT as the light sensitizer, and SiO2 or TiO2 as gate dielectrics. It was found that light information will be recorded with holes trapped in TiO2 or electrons trapped at the SiO2 surface and electrons accumulated in the P3OT.292,293 It was found that in P3OT:SiO2 hybrid material, the interplay between the type of charges in the P3OT at the SiO2–P3OT interface and the type of majority trap states in the SiO2 lead to the stabilization of the optical memory effect on SiO2 and the absence of such a permanent state on P3OT:TiO2. Leong et al.294 built a memory device with in situ synthesized gold (Au) nanoparticles in self-assembled polystyrene-block-poly-4-vinylpyridine (PS-b-P4VP) block copolymer nanodomains functioning as charge storage elements and pentacene as the light sensor. Information can be electrically programmed by holes tunneling through the PS part and trapped in Au nanoparticles and optically erased by photogenerated electrons tunneling toward and trapped in the Au nanoparticles and/or interfaces between pentacene–PS-b-P4VP.
Finally, it should be noted that the performance of organic photoresponse materials is closely related with the device physics, which is analyzed carefully in Section 3.

3. Organic photoresponse devices
3.1 Photovoltaic devices

3.1.1 Structure of photovoltaic devices. 
Typical organic solar cells are composed of a conducting ITO anode, active layers and a metallic cathode, which can be divided into four architectures: (1) single layer devices, (2) double layer devices, (3) bulk-heterojunction devices and (4) tandem devices.
(1) Single layer devices. 
The first discovery of the photovoltaic effect for organic materials in 1959 was based on anthracene crystals in a single layer device,40 and much later on organic photovoltaic cells still adopted such device structure.295,296 In such a device structure, the active layer is sandwiched between two dissimilar electrodes, that is with different work functions, ITO and other metal electrodes are generally used. In this case, the built-in potential is derived either from the difference in work function of the electrodes or from a Schottky-type potential barrier at one of the metal/organic contacts. The major issue for the single layer device is that the photovoltaic properties are strongly dependent on the nature of the electrodes or the interface contact between the electrode and organic layer, generally leading to a very low fill factor and low conversion efficiency due to the poor excitation diffusion and dissociation.
(2) Double layer devices. 
As we know, in inorganic semiconductors optical absorption results in the immediate creation of free charge carriers. However, in organic semiconductors optical absorption first results in the formation of a spatially localized electron–hole pair, i.e., a Frenkel type exciton, which is electrically neutral with a large binding energy (>0.5 eV), so that the exciton must first dissociate into free charge carriers, i.e., a critical component of organic photovoltaic cells is the design of a heterojunction for the dissociation of excitons. This concept of a heterojunction for organic photovoltaic cells was first carried out by Tang et al. in 1986 based on a two-active-layer of a CuPc donor and a PTCBI acceptor and an improved conversion efficiency of around 1% and a fill factor of 0.65 were achieved.41 And in 1993, Sariciftci et al. first applied this two-layer device structure into polymer photovoltaic cells.297 In such heterojunction architectures, the donor and acceptor materials are deposited successively layer by layer on the ITO coated glass substrate, then the metal anode is finally deposited on top of the acceptor layer. The introduction of the donor–acceptor heterojunction interface in the active layer facilitates the efficient charge separation into electrons and holes after excitation by incident light lumination, and then the free electrons and holes transfer to the metal anodes and ITO cathodes under the help of an internal electrical field, and finally form output voltage. In spite of the special requirements for deposition of donor and acceptor layers (it is difficult to control well the deposition of polymer materials layer by layer using a solution process, so that this planar heterojunction architecture has been only widely used in small molecular solar cells) up to 4.2% power conversion efficiency has been achieved in the double layer of CuPc and C60,27,37 the value of which was further enhanced to 5.58% by doping rubrene into the bilayer.31 However, in such bilayer device structure the exciton diffusion range is typically at least a factor smaller than the optical absorption depth due to the limited thickness and the small interfacial areas, thus limiting the efficiency of charge collection and leading to low power conversion efficiency.41
(3) Bulk-heterojunction devices. 
Considering the small interfacial areas and the limited thickness for exciton diffusion in double layer devices, one effective approach for the further improvement of conversion efficiency in organic solar cells is to form a bicontinuous donor–acceptor heterojunction interface in the active layer. In the 1990s, Heeger, Friend and Holmes et al. successfully realized this concept by incorporating blends of donor and acceptor polymer materials, wherein the formation of an interpenetrating network from a phase separation during spin-coating a mixture of two semiconducting polymers provided both the spatially distributed interfaces necessary for efficient charge photo-generation, and the means for separately collecting the electrons and holes.193,298,299 As shown in Fig. 11, in such a bulk-heterojunction structure, assuming there are bicontinuous heterojunction interfaces connecting to the two electrodes and forming an efficient charge transfer path, the charge generation could be located in the whole active layer, and then effectively diffuse through the high density of the heterojunction interface in the device, finally the dissociated free electrons and holes could effectively move to the electrodes through the efficient interpenetrating network paths and form the output voltage.
 Fig. 11  Schematic bulk-heterojunction architecture of photovoltaic cells. 
So far, the bulk heterojunction device has been proved to be the most successful architecture for organic photovoltaic cells and since the proposal of the bulk heterojunction concept by Heeger, Friend and Holmes,298,299 the conversion efficiency of organic solar cells has been improved markedly both for small molecule organic solar cells (up to 5% in 2005)300 and solution-processed polymer solar cells (up to 9.2% recorded by Mitsubishi Chemical in early April of this year).7
It is found that the performance of both polymer and small molecular solar cells with a mixed donor–acceptor heterojunction are strongly dependent on the microstructures of the bulk heterojunction, including the phase separation as well as the molecular orders and crystallinity in the solid state, and also the charge transport properties of the mixed layers, where the reduced charge carrier mobilities resulting from the intermixing on the molecular level may lead to the recombination of photogenerated charges and thus low conversion efficiency.300,301 To optimize the morphology of the bulk heterojunction with maximum exciton dissociation at the interface between donor and acceptor, tremendous efforts have been performed in this field in parallel to the design and synthesis of novel conjugated organic materials.96,203,302 For example, considering the disordered donor and acceptor materials that usually result in the mixed layer thus leading to low charge transport properties and poor conversion efficiency, Forrest et al. proposed a growing method for a more controlled bulk-heterojunction interface with highly crystalline organic films (Fig. 12).303 In this case, the positions and orientations of donor CuPc and acceptor PTCBI materials could be well controlled during growth by organic vapor-phase deposition (OVPD), which eliminated the contorted and resistive conducting pathways while maximizing the interface area, and thus leading to a substantial increase in power conversion efficiency (up to 2.7%) compared with the best values obtained by “random” small-molecular-weight bulk-heterojunction solar cells formed by high-temperature annealing, or planar double heterojunction photovoltaic cells using the same materials systems (only around 1.1%). Similar studies to improve the molecular order in the mixed layer have also been conducted on other small donor–acceptor systems, such as ZnPc and C60 by Pfuetzner et al.304 They found that substrate heating during evaporation of donor and acceptor materials could result in improved film morphologies and thus better charge carrier percolation pathways within the mixed layer for an increase in photocurrent and fill factor, and also enhanced conversion efficiency for photovoltaic cells (from 1.59% for an identical device fabricated at room temperature to 2.56% for devices constructed on the heating substrate). Forrest et al.17 developed a technique to use a metal cap to confine small molecular weight materials during annealing so as to form an interpenetrating donor–acceptor network. The devices showed PCE up to 1.5%, which was 50 percent higher than the best values reported for comparable p/n heterojunction bilayer devices. In another study by the same authors, by sandwiching the mixed donor–acceptor layer between the donor CuPc and acceptor C60 layers of homogeneous composition, that is a p–i–n device structure, could not only ensure a maximized heterojunction interfacial area but also reduce the charge transfer losses, so as high as 5.0% conversion efficiency has been obtained, which is also the highest conversion efficiency reported so far for small-molecular-weight bulk-heterojunction solar cells.300 From the above discussion we can see that although significant improvement has been made in small-molecular-weight solar cells, the fabrication of these devices always involves relatively expensive techniques associated with vacuum evaporation or vacuum deposition, moreover, such types of solar cell devices also often suffer from low charge transport mobilities due to the scattered effect at the grain boundaries. Therefore, solution-processable photovoltaic cells with low energy consumption and cost have demonstrated the most promising applications in large area organic electronics.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a controlled BHJ photovoltaic device structure grown on top of indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass. (b) Surface of CuPc film grown on top of ITO-coated glass by OVPD. (c) Fit of the dark J–V characteristics of the OVPD BHJ device, where the solid line is the experimental data, and the circles are a fit according to the modified ideal diode equation. (d) SEM images of the planarized surface of a PTCBI layer (500 ± 25) Å thick grown on top of CuPc needles, Inset: cross-section of the completed photovoltaic device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 303. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
As early as in 2001, Müllen and Friend demonstrated that the liquid crystal material, HBC-PhC12, can be solution processed for high performance photovoltaic cells, where the HBC-PhC12 molecules could form highly crystalline, ordered structures through self-organization for efficient photoexciton dissociation and charge transport properties.53 In the spin-coated mixed films, vertical segregation of the HBC-PhC12 donor and EPPTC acceptor materials has been produced with a large interfacial surface area. When incorporated into diode structures, an external quantum efficiency of more than 34 percent near 490 nanometres was obtained due to the effective photoexciton dissociation as well as the efficient charge transport (Fig. 13) This result has encouraged the following research in this field of solution-processed small-molecular-weight solar cells. For example, Marks et al. reported the fabrication of bulk heterojunction solar cells based on squaraine derivatives as molecular donors and PCBM as the acceptor. Solution-processed devices exhibited PCE up to 1.3% in air.113 Nguyen et al. found that solution-processed bulk heterojunction solar cells fabricated from blends of oligothiophene with a dialkylated diketopyrrolopyrrole chromophore:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester exhibited absorption and photocurrents up to 800 nm with PCE power conversion efficiency up to 3.0% under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 illumination.74 Nakamura et al. reported a solution-processable, small-molecule based fabrication process to obtain three-layered p–i–n structure solar cells in which the i-layer possessed a clearly defined interdigitated structure formed by spontaneous crystalline phase separation during thermal processing. Their device showed PCE of 5.2%, a value that ranks among the best of those reported for solution-processed small-molecule based organic photovoltaic cells.38
 Fig. 13  (a) The chemical structures of HBC-PhC12 and perylene dye molecule along with a simplified diagram of the π–π stacking configuration. The intercolumnar distance L 34 Å and cofacial distance dc 3.5 Å are indicated. An electron diffraction image was taken from a spin-coated xylene film of perylene dyes, and the densest ring of diffraction spots from crystallites corresponds to a spacing of approximately 3.5 Å. (b) HOMO and LUMO energy diagrams for HBC-PhC12 and perylene dye. Note that there is a 0.65 eV LUMO offset and a 0.07 eV HOMO offset between the two materials. (c) Tapping-mode AFM image of a film spin-coated from a 40:60 blend solution of HBC-PhC12 and perylene diimide. (d) Field-emission scanning electron microscope, SEM, image of a 40% HBC-PhC12 blend sample, imaged with the cleaved surface tilted 15° from normal to the incident electron beam (1 kV). Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Compared to small molecules, one of the best advantages for conjugated polymers is their feasible solution-processability, which makes them promising materials for potential applications in the context of flexible, low-cost, large-area, organic electronic and optoelectronic devices.188,189,305 Actually, the concept of bulk heterojunctions for photovoltaic cells was firstly realized with the blend of conjugated polymers and C60 as the active layer, in which ultrafast, reversible, metastable, photoinduced charge transfer from the conjugated polymers to C60 was observed due to the intrinsically short exciton diffusion length.298,299 The successful realization of this concept largely stimulated the following research for the development of organic photovoltaic cell performance. With this bulk-heterojunction architecture, the conversion efficiency of organic solar cells has been refreshed again and again, and to date the efficiencies of polymer solar cells have approached 7–8%,94,96,216 and even 9.2% efficiency has been recorded more recently.7 Objectively speaking, such significant progress has been driven by two main approaches: the development of new conjugated polymers and the optimization of device structures. Regarding the development of new high performance photovoltaic polymer materials we have given a systematic review in section 2.2.1, here we will mainly focus on the research from the aspect of optimizing the processing of the active layer to control the self-assembly of donor and acceptor materials in the mixed films for the formation of good phase separation as well as the obtaining of high solar cell efficiency. Over the past few years, a great amount of research effort has been focused on the classical blend system of P3HT donor and PCBM acceptor, and significant enhancement for the efficiency has been achieved from the initial 2.8%194 to the highest value of around 5.0%.196–197,307 Among the various processing approaches, thermal annealing is the most direct and effective method for controlling the morphology of the bulk heterojunction with the well-organized nanoscale phase separation of donor and acceptor to ensure the maximum exciton dissociation and device performance.196,302,306,308 More detailed studies demonstrated that during the annealing process the nanoscale organization of P3HT and the PCBM component in the blend films could be modified with increased crystallinity, or even forming the ideal interpenetrating network of fibrillar-like P3HT crystals and homogeneous nanocrystalline PCBM layer embedded together in a matrix (Fig. 14).306 The mixing structure of which is favorable for efficient charge transport and hence increased exciton diffusion and reduced recombination. By optimizing the annealing process, such as controlling the annealing temperature and annealing time, as high as 5% efficiency was achieved for P3HT:PCBM solar cells.196
 Fig. 14  BF TEM images and the corresponding schematic representation of the pristine photoactive layer (a,b) and the thermal annealed P3HT/PCBM photoactive layer (c,d). Device performance of pristine (blue) and thermally annealed (red) photoactive layers of P3HT/PCBM devices, (e) ICPE and (f) current density–voltage characteristics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Beside the thermal annealing process, additives, such as oleic acids and alkanedithiols of different lengths, like 1,8-octanedithiol, 1,6-butaneditiol etc. have also been employed as an alternative method to control the donor–acceptor morphology in bulk heterojunction materials with better molecular orders for high charge transport mobilities as well as achieving high power conversion efficiency.309,310 Inspired by the success in the improvement of P3HT:PCBM solar cells by incorporating a few volume percent of additives in the spin-coated blend solution, significant efficiency enhancement has also been achieved for other systems of polymer solar cells based on low-bandgap polymers and fullerene blends. Bazan and co-workers presented that with incorporation of a small volume of alkanedithiols in the blends, the power conversion efficiency of PCPDTBT:PC71BM photovoltaic cells was increased from 2.8% to 5.5%, while thermal annealing or controlled solvent evaporation had shown no successful enhancement in the efficiency.203 The same experimental results are also demonstrated in PTBx-based polymer solar cells by Yu et al., after using a mixed solvent system of dichlorobenzene/1,8-diiodooctane (97%:3% by volume) the conversion efficiency has been markedly increased up to 7.4% (Table 2).96
In 2006, Heeger and co-workers proposed another new architecture to further improve the efficiency of polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells through incorporating a solution-based TiO2 layer as an optical spacer between the active layer and the Al metal anode, the purpose of which is to overcome the low light absorption of the solar spectrum for P3HT (Eg is around 2 eV) in the IR region for extending light absorption and also possibly altering the charge-carrier concentration and reduce the recombination through the two additional interfaces of P3HT:PCBM/TiO2 and TiO2/Al (Fig. 15).197 A much higher conversion efficiency of 5.0% was obtained with this new architecture for P3HT:PCBM based solar cells, and the successful realization of this concept for a new device architecture has laid a very good foundation for the further development of high performance plastic solar cells through optimizing the device structure, such as with the tandem device structure.311
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure with a brief flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the TiOx layer. (b) The energy levels of the single components of the photovoltaic cell, P3HT, PCBM, TiO2. (c) Incident monochromatic photon-to-current collection efficiency spectra for the two devices with and without the TiOx optical spacer layer. (d) The current density–voltage characteristics of polymer solar cells with (circles) and without (squares) the TiOx optical spacer under AM1.5 illumination from a calibrated solar simulator with an intensity of 90 mW cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
(4) Tandem devices. 
In 2006, Koster and Scharber predicted that the ultimate efficiency of single bulk-heterojunction solar cells could only reach the values of 10% and 11% through theoretical calculations under the assumption of optimizing various affecting factors, such as the molecular energy levels (HOMOs and LUMOs), the band gap of conjugated polymer donors, balanced charge carrier mobilities etc.312,313 Although in some cases these values of conversion efficiencies for organic photovoltaic cells would meet the basic requirements for their future applications as low-cost plastic solar cells, however, these values are still much lower than that of their inorganic counterparts (15% to 20% efficiency for silicon cells, and around 15% efficiency for Cu, Ga, or Se-based cells) already existing in the market, so much higher efficiencies for organic solar cells are urgently required. It demonstrated that there are two major losses, subband-gap transmission of photons and the thermalization of the hot charge carriers, which largely limits the improvement of the efficiency of solar cells.314 To overcome these problems, one effective approach is to use the tandem architecture, where two or even four solar cells with different absorption characteristics are linked together in series or in parallel,311,315–317 to realize the use of a wider range of solar cells, the concept of which has been widely applied in inorganic solar cells and as high as 33.8% efficiency was achieved for devices based on GaInP/GaInAs/GaInAs under non-concentrated AM1.5.
Based on the studies of the tandem devices of inorganic solar cells, researchers also borrowed this concept of tandem architectures for organic solar cells to make higher efficiency plastic solar cells. The first organic tandem solar cell was reported in 1990 by Hiramoto et al. by evaporating two identical subcells on top of each other with Au-nanoclusters as the interconnecting layer between them.318 And in 2007, Heeger's group reported the first tandem polymer solar cells composed of a bottom solar cell of PCPDTBT:PCBM and a top solar cell of P3HT:PC71BM together intermediated with a TiOx sol–gel layer, and a 30% increase in efficiency has been achieved.311 To date, a large number of contributions have been made to the development of organic tandem solar cells and significant progress has been made in this field based on both small molecules and conjugated polymers, through vacuum evaporation techniques, solution-processing or from a combination of these two techiniques.319–321,32 For example, Hong and Yang322 presented tandem polymer photovoltaic cells based on the subcells of P3HT:PC71BM front cell and PSBTBT:PC71BM back cell, which were intermediated with a double layer of Al/TiO2 and PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 16). Device results measured under AM1.5 demonstrated that the tandem cell yielded a power conversion efficiency of up to 5.84% with a very large open-circuit voltage of 1.25 V due to the effectiveness of the interlayer with a metal/semiconductor contact between the conductive polymer and the semiconducting metal oxide. Another example of a polymer tandem solar cell reported recently is based on the subcells of PFTBT:PCBM front cell and pBBTDPP2:PCBM, which is also intermediated with a double layer of ZnO and pH neutral PEDOT, and finally around 4.9% efficiency has been obtained for such tandem cells.323 More recently, Riede et al. have made significant progress in the small molecule tandem solar cells based on F4-ZnPc:C60 and DCV6T:C60 subcells, and an uncertified efficiency of 6.07% has been reached under standard test conditions on a module relevant area of nearly 2 cm2.84
 Fig. 16  (a) Device configuration and (b) proposed energy level diagram of tandem solar cells containing two BHJs as subcells and TiO2/PEDOT4083 as an interconnection layer. (c) Absorbance (optical density, O.D.) of P3HT:PC70BM and PSBTBT:PC70BM BHJ films and tandem photovoltaic cells without reflective cathode. (d) J–V characteristics of a tandem and reference single cell measured under standard AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


3.1.2 Approaches for high performance photovoltaic cells. 
As we mentioned above in section 2.1.1, there are four processes in photovoltaic cells, i.e., (i) light absorption for exciton formation, (ii) exciton diffusion (iii) exciton dissociation and (iv) charge transfer and collection. The realization of each step needs to be efficient or it can directly affect the final performance of the photovoltaic devices. In the following, we will give a brief summary of the affecting factors on the performance of organic solar cells.
3.1.2.1 Harvesting the light absorption. 
Light absorption is one of the most important parameters affecting the performance of OSCs. Although semiconductors of π-conjugated systems could absorb light efficiently because of their high absorption coefficient (ca. 105 cm−1),198 most solution processed semiconducting polymers (e.g., PPVs, P3HT) with band gaps larger than 1.9 eV cover only 30% of the AM1.5 solar photon flux. Additionally, low mobility of π-conjugated systems requires the active layer to be thin (e.g., <100 nm),324–326 which results in an absorption of only ca. 60% of the incident light at the absorption maximum.325 Therefore, in order to reach high PCE, a balance should be reached between absorption of light and thickness of active materials.
The absorption of light could be optimized from two aspects, (i) active materials and (ii) device structures. (i) For active materials, adding extra materials in the donor/acceptor system or synthesizing new materials79 with wide absorption scope are general ways to improve light absorption. In small molecule based PV cells, extra materials less than 10 nm are inserted between electrodes and active materials. These extra materials will extend the light absorption of the devices.327 The absorption intensity and wavelength range of 50 nm pentacene based OSCs will be enhanced by adding another layer of 6 nm ZnPc as the second donor material.328 In polymer based PV cells, a small amount of extra materials is mixed with active materials in solution before building the PV cells. With the addition of these extra materials, Jsc will increase greatly, which is the result of extended light absorption.329 For instance, the spectral absorption of P3HT:PCBM based OSCs was extended up to 800 nm by doping alkanedithiols into the blend film.330 (ii) For device structure design, a tandem structure is always employed to extend spectral absorption,331–333 in which a wide band-gap semiconductor is used for the first cell to absorb high energy photons and a smaller band-gap semiconductor is used for the second cell to absorb low energy photons.334,335 Hadipour et al.317 fabricated a tandem cell with large band gap poly(2,7-(9,9-dioctyl)-fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole) (PFDTBT):PCBM as the bottom cell and small band gap poly{5,7-di-2-thienyl-2,3-bis(3,5-di(2-ethyl-hexyloxy)phenyl)-thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine} (PTBEHT):PCBM as the top cell. The two bulk-heterojunction sub-cells have complementary absorption maxima at λmax < 550 nm and λmax < 850 nm, respectively. It was also found that the spectral absorption could be extended from UV to the near infrared region (NIR) by employing the tandem structure with a transparent titanium oxide (TiOx) layer which separates and connects the front cell and the back cell.311 Given these two effective ways to extend spectral absorption, the structure issue is more reliable than the material one to obtain high performance devices, because one does not have to synthesize or choose proper extra materials from thousands of organic materials.
3.1.2.2 Improving exciton generation and diffusion. 
Excitons are electron–hole pairs bound by Coulomb attraction in a singlet excitonic state, which could be generated after absorbing photons with energy larger than the band gap of organic semiconductors. Because of low coupling among nearby molecules in the solid state, newly photogenerated excitons in organic semiconductors are localized in a molecule or several neighboring molecules, and are hard to diffuse to the donor/acceptor interface for dissociation. The diffusion length of excitons can be expressed with the equation L = (Dτ)1/2, where D is the diffusion coefficient and τ is the lifetime of the excitons. Considering the limited lifetime of the excitons, the accepted diffusion distance is in the region of 5–14 nm.336–341 This length is far less than the photon absorption length, i.e., organic semiconductor thickness (about 100 nm), therefore, the efficiency of devices is limited by the number of photons that can be absorbed within effective exciton diffusion range near the donor/acceptor interface. Yu et al.299 pioneered a bulk heterojunction donor/acceptor system, wherein they mixed the polymer donor and fullerene acceptor together forming an interpenetrating donor/acceptor network, and the reduced size of the polymer phase in the blend layer grants all generated excitons within the diffusion distance to the donor/acceptor interface. In this case, increasing the film thickness could enhance the light absorption without sacrificing the exciton diffusion efficiency.303,323,342–348 Additionally, in polymer bulk heterojunction PV cells, improvement of the exciton diffusion allows for larger sized polymer domains leading to an enhanced absorption and solar cell performance.
3.1.2.3 Driving efficient exciton dissociation. 
Upon reaching the donor/acceptor interface, excitons will dissociate into free charge carriers. Fig. 17 shows the electronic state diagram describing photo-induced charge carriers in organic solar cells.267 In a small-molecule based p–n bi-layer heterojunction, excitons dissociate into free charge carriers efficiently at the interface, but the area of the p–n heterojunction interface is so small that it limits the performance of devices. In order to circumvent such a limitation, Hiramoto et al.349 initiated the p–i–n structure, in which, p, i and n refer to the type of the semiconductor, p-type (donor), intrinsic absorber layer (mixed donor and acceptor) and n-type (acceptor). It turned out that the mixed interlayer created a bulk heterojunction, leading to efficient exciton dissociation.
 Fig. 17  Electronic state diagram describing the photo-induced charge-carrier formation mechanism in an organic solar cell: S0 denotes the singlet ground state of the donor or the acceptor, and S1 denotes the first singlet excited state (excitonic state). At the D/A interface, intermolecular charge transfer leads to charge-transfer (CT) states, where the hole is on donor molecule(s) and the electron is on acceptor molecule(s). CT1 is the lowest energy charge-transfer state. CT* represents excited (“hot”) levels346,350,351 of the CT/CS manifolds. The final state is a charge-separated state (CS), where the hole in the donor layer and the electron in the acceptor layer are free from one another. The ki terms indicate various competing relaxation and electron-transfer rates. Reproduction with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
However, intrinsic progress was made by bulk heterojunctions in polymer based solar cells, excitons can be dissociated efficiently at the interface of the interpenetrating donor and acceptor interfaces regardless of the unclear details of exciton dissociation. Actually, there are two opposite theories to interpret the exciton dissociation process. One believes that the built-in field between the anode and cathode is not strong enough to dissociate excitons into free charge carriers,163 and the dissociation is probably via two steps.352–354 In the first step, the exciton reaches the donor/acceptor interface, and the built-in field (relative to the HOMO of the donor (HOMOD) and LUMO of the acceptor (LUMOA)) drives it to dissociate into a geminate pair (D+/A−). Then, in the second step, the geminate pair dissociates into free charge carriers or recombines into the ground state with the help of outside forces, like an applied electric field, thermal energy, etc.355–357 However, another theory proposes that the high internal quantum efficiency achieved in active materials seems to contradict with the strongly bound electron–hole pair mentioned above.358 That is, the built-in field is probably strong enough to dissociate the exciton directly into free charge carriers. It is suggested that a minimum energy difference of 0.3 eV is required for exciton splitting and charge dissociation.359,360 Theoretically, for a specific acceptor material (i.e., PCBM), the lower the energy of HOMOD, the greater the maximum attainable VOC value,361 and the more efficient exciton dissociation. However, larger bandgap means poorer spectral overlap with the photon flux of the sun, which has a maximum at 1.8 eV (ca. 700 nm). Therefore, a compromise between absorption of light and exciton dissociation efficiency is necessary. It is found that a bandgap at about 1.5 eV362 is an optimal value for a polymer absorber. It gave a HOMOD energy of 5.4 eV corresponding to a maximum attainable VOC of 1.2 V.245
3.1.2.4 Enhancing charge carrier transport and collection. 
Free electrons and holes need to be transported and collected to produce photogenerated voltage and current. Efficient charge transportation and collection are critical for high performance devices. For charge transport, high and balanced mobility is crucial, which depends on the material itself and the microstructures of its films, i.e., the morphology of films. In the case of polymer bulk-heterojunction PV cells, the formation of interpenetrated donor and acceptor domains is critically important.363 It is experimentally identified that the phase-separated domain size as well as the percolation of both hole- and electron-conducting phases is crucial for the efficient charge carrier separation and transport and thus for the efficiency of organic solar cells. Experiments, by means of different experimental techniques, such as Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), etc., Hoppe et al., further proved this point with a blend system of MDMO-PPV:PCBM.364 As shown in the SEM cross-section images of Fig. 18(a and b), it is clearly seen that the MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend films cast from chlorobenzene solution showed a rather smooth film structure with some brighter particles of the polymer phase of MDMO-PPV, which uniformly located in the whole films, while when the blend of MDMO-PPV:PCBM was cast from toluene solution, the films exhibited some large (several hundreds of nanometres) lens shaped embedded parts consisting of PCBM, which were surrounded by the polymer-rich matrix phase. Such a difference in morphology phase separation directly determined the different pathways of charge carrier transport and thus the different device performances (as shown in Fig. 18c and d), suggesting sufficient percolation of electron and hole conducting phases is crucial for the high performance of organic bulk-heterojunction solar cells. The morphology control of active materials can also be realized by annealing, adding extra materials etc.203 Li et al.365 reported high performance polymer cells based on a bulk heterojunction of P3HT:PCBM by controlling the morphology of the active materials via an annealing process. Certainly, in order to get balanced electron and hole transportation, other ways to control the morphology of the active materials, such as by solvent, ratio of the donor/acceptor, solution concentration, and chemical structures are also under way.364 More detailed discussion about the influence of the nanoscale morphology of the donor–acceptor active layer on the polymer solar cell efficiency and the morphology controlling approaches has been addressed in section 3.1.1. In the case of small molecules based on p–n bilayer and p–i–n triple-layer solar cells, there is no continuous interpenetrating phase structure to transport free charge carriers efficiently through the thick donor and acceptor layers, which might be one of the major reasons for the low PCE of small molecules solar cells.
 Fig. 18  SEM cross-section images of MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend films cast on ITO-glass from (a) chlorobenzene and (b) toluene solution. The brighter little objects are polymer nanospheres, whereas the large inclusion in (b) is a PCBM cluster. Schematic of (c) chlorobenzene and (d) toluene cast MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend layers as active layers in the solar cell. In (c) holes and electrons find percolated pathways to reach the respective electrode. In (d) electrons and holes suffer recombination due to missing percolation. Reprinted from ref. 364, Copyright 2006 with permission from Elsevier. 
Ideal HOMO and LUMO energy levels of organic materials are not only important for efficient charge collection between organic materials and electrodes, but are also critical for exciton dissociation and the built-in voltage VOC. It is believed that the differing electron affinities (and/or ionization potentials) between p- and n-type materials created an energy offset at their interface, thereby driving exciton dissociation. The HOMO and LUMO of some representative organic solar cells materials and their energy diagrams are summarized in Fig. 19. In addition, in order to improve charge collection efficiency, the electrodes are usually modified so as to improve the contact between the active organic layer and electrodes,197,366–369 such as the modification of ITO by PEDOT:PSS,370 the insertion of a sub-monolayer of LiF,371 NiO307 between Al and the active organic layer etc.
 Fig. 19  Comparison of the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and band-gap energies of the above mentioned representative small molecule and conjugated polymer donors, acceptors as well as the work functions of electrodes used in photovoltaic cells. 

3.2 Photoconductive devices
Photoconductive devices are the photoelectric devices that exhibit a photoconductive gain with the absorption of incident photons. Photoconductive gain372 is defined as the ratio of the number of charge carriers generated in the device to the number of incident photons. An organic photoconductive device (OPD) is a large-area thin-film device formulated to optimize photogeneration and transport of charge to create an electrostatic latent image on the organic photoconductor surface, which has already been investigated a lot and are key elements of electrophotographic printers.15,16 Herein, we will focus on (1) two major fundamental processes involved in OPDs,372–374 (i) charge carrier photogeneration (CCP); (ii) charge transport to generate photoconductive gain (PG) and (2) two kinds of typical OPDs, (i) single layer OPDs; (ii) bilayer OPDs.

3.2.1 Two fundamental processes involved in OPDs. 
Two fundamental processes involved in OPDs are charge carrier photogeneration and charge transport to generate PG. The transportation of charge carriers in organic materials is probably through thermal-activated hopping. Hence, the possibility of multiple exciton generation by one photon is rather low because the photonic energy is not high enough for such excitation. According to this assumption, it is difficult to explain the fact that reported PG values are ranging from 200 to more than 104 in organic photoreceptors.375,376 In order to fully understand organic photoreceptors, a series of works on the mechanisms of CCP377 and PG378 have been carried out. In the case of CCP, there are two possible mechanisms,15,16 intrinsic377 and extrinsic.124,379,380 In the intrinsic case, light is absorbed by the photoresponse material to create excitons, which subsequently ionize into a geminate charge pair. In the extrinsic case, the excitons react with an electron donor or acceptor and the subsequent electron transfer reaction generates the geminate charge pair. Then these newly generated geminate pairs will dissociate into free charges with the aid of outside forces, like an electric field, heat, or extra materials etc. The conceptual schematic map is shown in Fig. 20. A coaxial nanotubular device formed by self-assembling of trinitro-fluorenone (TNF)–triethylene glycol chains (TEG)–hexabenzocoronene (HBC) was reported to investigate photoconductive effect.381 The coaxial nanotubular structure allowed photochemical generation of spatially separated charge carriers and a quick photoconductive response with an on/off ratio greater than 104. In contrast, microfibers consisting of a charge-transfer complex between HBC and TNF exhibited no photocurrent generation. In this case, the CCP could be considered as intrinsic. Popovic et al.124 investigated the photoconductive behavior of thin films of benzimidazole perylene 3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid coated with a tetraphenyldiamine (TPD)/polycarbonate hole transport layer. They proposed the mechanism of CCP was dominated by the extrinsic mechanism involving exciton dissociation at the interface of pigment/transport layers.
 Fig. 20  Conceptual scheme for intrinsic and extrinsic (via electron transfer with an electron donor or acceptor as shown) photo generation adapted from law. (OPC represents the organic photoconductor). 
High PG is highly desired for photoreceptors. In 1994, a PG of 10000 times was discovered in an organic perylene pigment film,378 which was attributed to the trapped holes near the organic/electrode interface resulting in the improved electron tunneling. This work provided an effective route for organic materials to be used in high photo-sensitive devices. Recently, Chen et al.285 fabricated photoreceptors with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM:CdTe/Al. It was found that the PG of the devices was as high as ∼8000% at 350 nm with a bias voltage of −4.5 V. The authors proposed that electron acceptor CdTe nanoparticles together with photo-induced trapped electrons lowered the hole injection barrier from the top electrode to the P3HT:PCBM blend film. However, an alternative mechanism was proposed by other groups.240,289 It is believed that the functioning mechanism was due to a small fraction of dissociated excitons generating deeply trapped electrons and free holes. The gain per trapped electron was determined by the number of holes passing through devices during the lifetime of those trapped electrons.


3.2.2 Two kinds of typical OPDs. 
The first commercial OPD was based on a single layer charge-transfer complex between poly(vinylcarbazole) and trinitrofluorenone developed by the IBM company in 1970.103,235 In this device, the charge-transfer complex for both CCP and charge transport are formulated into a single layer. Briefly, the OPD was charged positively in the dark and was then exposed light. Free charge carriers (electron and hole) are generated at the front surface upon illumination. The photogenerated electrons are neutralized at the front surface, the photogenerated holes migrate across the device and become neutralized also, forming electrostatic images of the original document.
Requirements for both a high quantum efficiency of CCP and a high charge mobility across the OPD for both electrons and holes make the performance of single-layer OPDs inferior to the dual-layer OPDs. In bilayer OPDs, CCP and charge transport are separated into two discrete layers, the charge-generation layer (CGL) for generating the charges and the charge-transporting layer (CTL) for transporting the charges. Illumination of the bilayer of OPDs results in the formation of e–h pairs in the CGL. The photogenerated holes inject into the CTL and migrate across the CTL to become neutralized at the photoconductor surface. Electrostatic images are then formed.

3.3 Optical data storage devices
There are three types of memory devices, electric,213–220 photonic,382–388 and opto/electro dual modes.292–293,389,390 Electric-mode controlled devices are one of the most investigated types, which is beyond this review. Photonic and opto/electro dual mode controlled devices possess a series of attractive properties such as faster processing rate, fewer side effects that spoil digital signals and the potential to increase dramatically the achievable memory density. Moreover, the integration of electric and photonic modes offers a way to combine their advantages together and to avoid their disadvantages. Optical memory effect is the impetus for the functioning of optical memory devices.

3.3.1 Photonic mode memory devices. 
In photonic mode controlled memory devices, data can be written, read, and erased in binary states with different photons such as light wavelength, polarization, and phase. One promising way to approach this target is by using photochromic materials,385–387 which can switch between two distinct isomeric states upon illumination. Yuan et al.164 described a novel photochromic spironaphthoxazine (SOFC) molecule with a much more stable open-ring photomerocyanine form by incorporating a ferrocene moiety in the parent spironaphthoxazine (Fig. 21a–c). Memory devices fabricated with SOFC could record and erase data by alternating the 365 nm and 570 nm light irradiations. Considering its inherent reversible photoisomerization and high fatigue resistance, SOFC could be proposed as a promising candidate for storage of optical information. The resolution and sensitivity was improved by incorporating photonic crystals (Fig. 21d) into the photochromic optical memory devices with photochromic material BP-BTE/coumarin-loaded PMMA film as the active material.391 The repeated “recording/erasing” process was realized by alternating the UV and Vis light. A 40-fold enhancement of fluorescence signal and a seven-fold ON/OFF ratio amplification relative to the glass was realized because of the efficient extraction and large surface areas of the photonic crystals. The results presented a feasible strategy for improving the ON/OFF ratio in the readout of the stored information and would be of great significance for developing high-contrast optical storage devices.
 Fig. 21  (a) A novel spironaphthoxazine SOFC molecule with a stable ring-opened photomerocyanine form by incorporating a ferrocene moiety to the parent spironaphthoxazine, (b) two-dimensional luminescence images obtained using a confocal microscope employing fluorescence as the read-out method, and (c) three-dimensional high-density recording using the two-photon technology of SOFC-poly(methyl methacrylate) films. Reproduction with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (d) Photonic Memory: a facile approach to amplifying fluorescent contrast by introducing photonic crystals into optical memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Another kind of strategy to realize optical data storage with photochromic molecules is to let the molecules self-assemble with inorganic nanoparticles. For instance, Klajn et al.386 fabricated optical memory “ink” with metastable Au nanoparticles (Fig. 22). The recording process would take place when the trans-azobenzene groups coating the gold nanoparticles isomerized to cis-azobenzene with a large dipole moment392 under the illumination of 365 nm UV light with an intensity of 10 mW cm−2.386 Consequently, the gold nanoparticles aggregated into superspherical (SS) assemblies393–395 to change their apparent colors. The stored images could be easily erased by intense visual light or heating at 50 °C. The authors attributed the write and erase mechanism of the ink to the changes of the dipole moment between the Au nanoparticles. They believed that the writing process was due to the rapid trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene groups of MUA upon UV irradiation (365 nm, IUV = 0.7–10 mW cm−2). As for the erasure process, the authors emphasized that the erasure was not due to the diffusion of the aggregates, which would “smear” the images, but only to their disassembly, which changed the color by weakening the electrodynamic coupling between proximal gold nanoparticles.
 Fig. 22  (a) Structural formula of trans-MUA. (b) UV irradiation of nanoparticles (here, gold) covered with a mixed monolayer of MUA and dodecylamine (DDA) causes photoisomerization of trans-MUA to cis-MUA. The cis isomer reverts to the trans form either spontaneously (slowly), upon irradiation with visible light, or by heating (both rapidly). (c) Writing into AuNP film using a light pen (IUV = 10 mW cm−2) moved over the film at 3 mm s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 386. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


3.3.2 Opto/electro dual mode memory devices. 
In opto/electro dual mode controlled memory devices their data can be written, read, and erased with the synergic functions of photons and an electric field. These devices are based on the functioning mechanism of a phototransistor.292,389,396,397 Star291 and Borghetti et al.293 combined carbon nanotubes with a photosensitive polymer to fabricate opto/electro dual mode memory devices. Charges were created upon illumination in polymers, and stored in a nanotube transducer. The read and erase functions were performed by a voltage applied across the nanotube channel. Optical memory devices with P3HT/CdSe QD as the active film could be optically programmed and electrically erased repeatedly.398 Upon illumination with white light the drain current of the device rose from 1.5 to 415 nA. And after turning off the light, the current dropped slowly and eventually settled at a metastable state of 260 nA (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Dynamic responses of the optical programming and electrical erasing of a typical P3HT/CdSe device. Light was turned on at t = 80 s and turned off at t = 90 s. A short (100 ms) negative gate voltage pulse was applied at t = 260 s to erase the memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 398. Copyright 2008 American Institute of Physics. 
The functioning mechanism of typical opto/electro dual mode memory devices was investigated thoroughly with polymer P3AT as the active material.399 Applying Vg = 60 V to make the device work in a depletion mode before illumination, upon illumination at t = 50 s, charges were generated and Id increased promptly and stayed stably at a high level (50 s < t < 100 s) (Fig. 24). This course could be considered as a writing and storing process of the opto/electro dual mode memory device. Upon termination of illumination at t = 100 s, Id decayed rapidly and stayed at a relatively higher level (100 s < t < 150 s) than the original state (t < 50 s). Such decay was due to the recombination of nearby charge carriers. This stage could be assigned as a reading process of the device. Reverted gate bias pulse Vg = −60 V was applied at t = 150 s, then upon reapplying a positive gate bias Vg = 60 V, Id decreased to its original dark current (t > 170 s). This step could be viewed as an erasing process of the device.
 Fig. 24  Memory effect in a polymer FET device at 20 K: Id(t) in depletion mode (Vg = 60 V) before photoexcitation (t < 50 s), during photoexcitation (λ = 632.8 nm) with intensity of 33 mW cm−2 (○) and after turning off light (t > 100 s). The dotted line is the extrapolated curve indicating the persistence behaviour of the device. Negative gate bias (−60 V) pulse applied at t = 150 s, and upon reapplying a positive gate bias (PGB) (60 V), the Id returns to the original dark state. The solid line indicates Id(t) in enhancement mode (Vg = −60 V) under dark conditions. The inset shows the memory effect for different durations of illumination (1 s, 10 s, 50 s, and 100 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 399. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 

3.4 Other devices

3.4.1 Photodetectors. 
Photodetectors based on organic semiconductors are proposed to afford devices with low-cost, light-weight, high efficiency and high environmental benignity, which are important for organic optoelectronic devices and circuits.8 Not only low dark current but also high photocurrents are required for fabrication of high-performance photodetectors. Photoconductive effects and photovoltaic effects are driving forces in the functioning process of photodetectors. To evaluate a photodetector, several parameters are important:400 (1) Responsivity (R in A W−1), which means the sensitivity of photodetectors to radiant energy, is defined as the ratio of produced signal current (measured in ampere) to the incident radiant power (measured in watt) (R = Jph/Llight, where Jph is the photocurrent and Llight is the incident light intensity). Responsivity is the effectiveness of a detector to convert electromagnetic radiation to electrical current or voltage. (2) Spectral response range (the range of light wavelength that the photodetector can detect), response time (the time to 63.2% of the final or steady-state value), and quantum efficiency (QE) (the ratio of photoelectrons or electron–hole pairs produced by the incident photons to the number of incident photons) are also key important parameters for photodetectors. (3) Normalized detectivity (D*), a figure of detector sensitivity, is a critical parameter for photodetectors, which is proportional to the photocurrent and is inversely proportional to the light intensity and the dark current of the devices. It can be expressed as D* = R/(2qJd)1/2 = (Jph/Llight)/(2qJd)1/2, where D* is in the unit of jones (1 jones = 1 cm Hz1/2 W−1), q is the absolute value of electron charge (1.6 × 10−19 Coulombs), and Jd is the dark current. (4) Linear dynamic range (LDR) (in dB) is another key parameter. Linearity may be stated in terms of maximum percent deviation from a straight line over a range of input radiation levels. Photodetectors are characterized by a photocurrent response that is linear with incident radiation over a wide range. Any variation in responsivity with incident radiation represents a variation in the linearity of the detector. It should be noted that the sensed spectral range401–403 of photodetectors is critical for a variety of industrial and scientific applications, including environmental monitoring, communications, remote control, day- and night-time surveillance, and chemical/biological sensing. Thus, it is necessary to investigate photodetectors in various spectral scope ranges, i.e., UV light (<400 nm), visible light (400–700 nm), IR light (>700 nm), from deep ultraviolet (DUV) to near infrared (NIR).
3.4.1.1 UV light detection. 
UV photodetectors have attracted attention in various fields such as in UV sterilization monitors, space communications, missile detection, flame and chemical sensing, heat sensing etc. Wide band-gap coverage enables some small molecules to detect UV, visible, infrared and broad-band lights. The materials with large band-gaps are suitable for UV light detection.404–407 Wu et al. fabricated a DUV (280 nm) photodetector with high responsivity (309 mA W−1) and detectivity (1 × 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1) at low bias.408 Recently, a double wavelength UV (365 nm and 330 nm) photodetector was shown with 1,3,5-tris(3-methyl phenyl-phenylamino)triphenylamine (m-MTDATA) as the donor and 1,3,5-tris(N-phenyl benzimidazol-2-yl)benzene (TPBi) as the acceptor.402 It was found that the two responses of the double wavelength UV-photodetector corresponded to the respective absorption of the donor and acceptor components. Due to the band gap limitation of polymers, few UV photodetectors of polymers have been addressed. Some polymer based hybrid p–n bulk heterojunctions showed potential in detection of UV light, in which inorganic semiconductors dominated the UV light detection, and polymers produced excitons upon illumination.409 A hybrid UV photodetector was reported with the structure of Al/ZnO nanorod:poly(9,9-dihexylfluorene) (PFH)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylene thiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PEDOT:PSS)/ITO. The spectral response of device was observed at 300–420 nm, and the device exhibited a response speed less than 200 ns.410
3.4.1.2 Visible light detection. 
The improvement of visible light photodetectors has been greatly pushed by practical requirements, and some applications such as image sensors to record the optical images for digital photographs, image scanners,411 artificial eyes412 have been applied in our daily life. Many classical small-molecule materials with an appropriate band gap to detect visible light have been addressed recently.403 A white light detector with condensed benzothiophene single ribbons via solution processing demonstrated a photoconductive gain (PG) at about 1.3 × 103, and a responsivity of 420 A W−1 was achieved at 2 × 104 V cm−1.413 The visible light wavelength can also be tuned from white light to monochromatic light by inserting proper light absorbers. Such kinds of photodetectors can screen out required monochromatic light from white light, and improve the preciseness of monochromatic light detection. For instance, a highly sensitive red light photodetector based on a CuPc/C60 bilayer structure was demonstrated by Higashi et al. (Fig. 25).414 By incorporating a 100 nm P6T layer to reduce the blue-light absorption, and a 20 nm BP3T layer between P6T and CuPc to block excitation energy transfer from P6T to CuPc, the device can realize red light detection. The optimal device showed a peak monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 51.7% at 620 nm and a specific detectivity of 4.0 × 1011 cm Hz1/2 W−1 was achieved. Most polymers have band gaps at around 2.0 eV and hence are widely used in visible light photodetectors. F8T2 nanowire photodetectors exhibited responsivity at 0.4 mA W−1 and external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of 0.1% under monochromatic illumination (405 nm).241 A photodetector with the structure of ITO/polycarbazole (PCz)/Al detected light in the visible region at 650 nm, and the device exhibited a peak detectivity (∼6 × 106 cm Hz1/2 W−1) at 0.2 V.415
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of device structure and light absorptions by each cell in a vertical stack full-color image sensor. (b) Schematic sensitivity spectra for each cell. The dashed-dotted line in panel (b) schematically depicts the compensated sensitivity curve of an R-cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 414. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. 
3.4.1.3 Near infrared light detection. 
It is a technology demand for environmental monitoring, optical data transmission, remote sensing contrast enhancement for imaging systems in foggy environments, quality control and night-time surveillance to develop photodetectors that can sense the light from near- to mid-infrared (NIR) spectra. Like InGaAs in inorganic IR detecting, organic materials with low band gaps are also ideal candidates for IR detecting. As mentioned above, small-molecule materials possess suitable band-gaps in the NIR region and have a great potential for IR detecting. For instance, Binda et al.116 developed infrared photodetectors with squaraine dyes/PCBM, which have a broad strong response extending from 600 nm to 900 nm with a peak EQE of about 3.5% at 670 nm. The authors assigned the high performance of the devices to (i) smooth morphology, which enables long term air stability without encapsulation (over one year lifetime) (ii) good balance between hole and electron mobilities, which leads to fast response speed in the range of a few hundreds of nanoseconds. Zimmerman et al.416 demonstrated a NIR photodetector with porphyrin tape molecules with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/porphyrin dimers/C60. The light detection of the device extended from near visible to deep into NIR, with a peak EQE = 6.5%, D* = (2.3 ± 0.1) × 1010 jones, and a response time of τ = 2.12 ± 0.02 ns at λ = 1350 nm. Additionally, due to the band-gap tunability offered by the quantum size effect of quantum dots, colloidal quantum dot (CQD) hybrid materials are also ideal candidates for IR detection.417 In these materials, quantum dots dominate the process of IR detection, and organic materials act as linkers, which link at the points where the surface of adjacent nanoparticles are in contact with one another. Konstantatos et al.418 reported high performance organic/inorganic hybrid NIR photodetectors (1.3 μm) with spin-coated colloidal PbS nanoparticles capped with oleic acid onto gold interdigitated electrodes, and the detectivity and responsivity were as high as 1.8 × 1013 jones and 1300 A W−1 at room temperature. This hybrid NIR detector offered the possibility of application in low cost, large device area, physical flexible devices.
3.4.1.4 Broad-band light detection. 
Detection across broad-band light419 is critical for a variety of industrial and scientific applications, including medical image sensing, telecommunications and environmental monitoring. Nowadays, separate inorganic photodetectors are required for different sub-bands ranging from UV to near infrared (NIR) wavelengths. Some small-molecule materials, CQDs and polymers with wide band-gap coverage are ideal candidates for broad-band light detection. There are two ways to realize broad-band light detection (i) tuning device parameters. For instance, An et al.420 developed a broad-band photodetector with the structure of Ag/bathocuproine (BCP)/C60/CuPc/MoO3/Al. By tuning the thickness of the hole transport layer MoO3 from 130 nm to 210 nm, the detection peak of EQE ranged from 450 nm to 630 nm. It was also found that photodetectors made from P3HT:PCBM active materials could detect light ranging from visible to infrared regions by simply tuning the active layer thickness and applied bias. The mechanisms were attributed to the absorption change derived from the change of PCBM thickness and carrier recombination change resulted from the applied bias; (ii) intrinsic properties of active materials. For example, broad-band photodetectors made from QDs with the structure of Al/PbS CQD (PbS oleate-capped colloidal quantum dots)/ITO could sense light from 400 nm to 1800 nm with peak responses at 580 nm, 750 nm, 1150 nm and 1480 nm, respectively. The highest D* was about 1.6 × 1012 jones.421 Gong et al.8 fabricated photodetectors based on broad-band (300 to 1450 nm) polymer by blending poly(5,7-bis(4-decanyl-2-thienyl)-thieno(3,4-b)diathiazole-thiophene-2,5) (PDDTT) with PCBM. Fig. 26 gives the molecular structure of PDDTT and the spectral absorption of the PDDTT, PCBM, PDDTT:PCBM films as well as the response characteristics of the detectors. Operating at room temperature, the polymer-based photodetectors exhibited detectivities larger than 1012 cm Hz1/2 W−1 and a linear dynamic range over 100 decibels, which was comparable to or even better than those from Si and InGaAs photodetectors. This work offered researchers low-cost multicolor photodetectors with high quantum efficiency, high sensitivity, and high speed over the broad spectral range from UV to NIR.
 Fig. 26  (a) Molecular structures of PDDTT and PC60BM. (b) Absorption spectra of thin films PDDTT (black curve), PC60BM (green curve), and PDDTT:PC60BM bulk heterojunction composites (blue curve). The inset shows the absorption spectra of the three materials from 300 to 500 nm. (c) Energy-level diagrams of PDDTT, PC60BM, PVK, PS-TPD-PFCB, C60, ITO, PEDOT, and Al. Reproduction with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


3.4.2 Photoswitches. 
Organic photoswitches are in great demand due to their high storage densities, fast data-processing rates and high accuracy. Organic photoswitches work in two distinct modes. One mode is dependent on reversible conversion between two isomers with different conductivities of active materials via photochemical reaction upon illumination. In this mode, the conductivities of open (non-conjugated) and closed (conjugated) states of chemical rings in photochromic molecule changed by exposing to light. Whalley et al.186 fabricated reversible photoswitches with photochromic molecule bridging between single wall carbon nanotubes (Fig. 27). They demonstrated that thiophene-based devices could only be switched from insulating to conducting states, however, pyrrole-based devices could be switched on/off repeatedly.
 Fig. 27  Molecular bridges between the ends of an individual SWNT electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Another mode of organic photoswitches is attributed to the photo-generated current in the organic semiconductors under light illumination. To the best of our knowledge, the conductivity of the semiconductor is determined by the free carriers in the conduction band (σ = nqμ, where σ is conductivity, n is the number of free carriers, q is the charge of electrons, and μ is mobility). The energy gap of common organic semiconductor materials is about several electronvolts, therefore the gap is narrow enough for the generation of substantial numbers of charge carriers by light with a certain wavelength band. Hence, conductivity can be enhanced under light illumination. With the photo irradiation switched between ‘on’ and ‘off’, the devices could work between low and high impedance states.
Tang et al. have fabricated high-quality photoswitches based on F16CuPc single crystals, which is an air-stable, n-type organic semiconductor.12 The response and recovery velocities were estimated to be near 100 Hz and 50 Hz, respectively. More significantly, the devices also showed high reproducibility and retention ability. After several tens of cycles and nearly 1 h of continuous work, no degradation in the current was observed. Zhou et al.413 also fabricated excellent photoswitchers of organic single crystal sub-micrometre ribbons on flexible poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrates by using low-cost solution methods. The photoswitcher exhibited high performance with a gain of about 1.3 × 103, a responsivity of about 420 A W−1, and a highest on/off ratio of more than 1000. More interestingly, the highly reproducible on/off switching property was exhibited either with planar geometry or in the bending state. No significant current changes under the same illumination light were observed in the bending state. It is worth noting that the photocurrent even increased a little in the bending state. The Hu group also reported a high-performance photoswitch based on ordered single-crystal microwire arrays of anthracene derivatives, which was prepared via a solution process.422
As is well known, after photon absorption and exciton generation, photo-generated current is formed via a two-step process: free-carrier transportation in the active layers and collection photo-generated carriers by electrodes. The transportation of free carriers in the active layer is usually identified as the “hopping” mechanism, the transportation distance of the free carriers in the active layer is strongly limited by the hopping distance, that is, the distance between the anode and cathode. Using nanogap electrodes provides an opportunity to collect the photo-generated carriers efficiently. Given this, Hu et al.244,423 fabricated nanometre-scale photoswitches based on Au nanogap electrodes using TA-PPE as the active layer by self-assembly. With altering the light irradiation between on and off, the photocurrent passing through the device changed quickly with a switching ratio as high as 1000. Following this, they further demonstrated high-performance photoswitches based on nanogap electrodes constructed with blends of P3HT:PCBM as active materials, which exhibited a highest on/off ratio of around 104 with an applied bias of 1 mV. These results opened the door for the application of conjugated polymers in high-performance photoswitches.324
Various impact factors on performance of photoswitches have been deeply studied, such as light intensities, electrodes, phase states, molecular packing, and so on. For example, the current of the device usually increased linearly with increasing light intensities,422 which may result from the combination processes of carrier photogeneration, carrier recombination, carrier trapping/detrapping at the localized states, carrier hopping between the localized states, and carrier transport via the extended states.413 Recently, reduced graphene oxide was demonstrated to be useful as an efficient electrode in organic photoswitching devices, owing to the lower contact resistance between reduced graphene oxide film and organic materials compared with that between noble metals and organic materials.425 Very recently, Wang et al. reported that the performance of the photoswitches based on 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA) single crystals showed strong phase dependence, as shown in Fig. 28. Devices of β phase single crystals exhibited higher photoswitch performance than that of the α phase.424 Luo et al.426 demonstrated that the supramolecular assembling motif may be a critical factor governing the properties of organic photoswitches.
 Fig. 28  The single crystal structures of (a) α and (b) β phase BPEA. Photoswitching characteristics of (c) α and (d) β phase BPEA single crystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 424. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. 


3.4.3 Phototransistors. 
3.4.3.1 Brief introduction to phototransistors. 
Phototransistors, a kind of three terminal device with photo as the “fourth terminal”, can get especially high gains through the transistor action427 since the gate applied bias of transistors provides an efficient way for the dissociation of the photo generated excitons into free carriers and is beneficial for the following carrier transport and collection,12i.e., phototransistors provide high efficiency for the mentioned processes and result in effective photo detection. Moreover, phototransistors take advantage of combining the light detection and signal magnification properties together to realize the functionalities in a single device.428,429
Although ordinary transistors exhibit photosensitive effects if they are exposed to light, the structure of the phototransistor is specifically optimised for photo applications. The photo transistor has much larger base and collector areas than those used for normal transistors. The normal structures of inorganic phototransistors, which can be divided into homo- and hetero-junction structures, are shown in Fig. 29. Early homojunction phototransistors used germanium or silicon as the semiconductors, and now, gallium arsenide is generally adopted as the semiconductor. These devices were generally made by using diffusion or ion implantation. Heterostructures use different materials at the sides of the p–n junction. These are generally fabricated by epitaxial growth of materials that have matching lattice structures and with mesa structures.
 Fig. 29  Structure of inorganic phototransistors. (a) Homojunction planar phototransistor and symbol of phototransistors. (b) Heterojunction mesa-structure phototransistors. 
The operation of phototransistors is based on their active regime, wherein the collector of an n–p–n transistor is made positive with respect to the emitter or negative for an n–p–n transistor. For homostructures, i.e. ones using the same material throughout the device, the gain of the devices can approach 50 to a few hundred. However, for heterostructure devices, the levels of gain may rise to ten thousand. Despite their high level of gain the heterostructure devices are not widely used because they are considerably more costly to manufacture. A further advantage of all phototransistors is their much lower level of noise compared to other devices. Certainly, phototransistors are widely used in a variety of different circuit configurations such as in common emitter and common collector circuits etc. In common emitter circuits, the collector is taken to the supply voltage via a collector load resistor, and the output is taken from the collector connection on the phototransistor. The circuit generates an output that moves from a high voltage state to a low voltage state when light is detected, working as an amplifier (Fig. 30a). In common collector circuits, the emitter is taken to ground via a load resistor, and the output for the circuit being taken from the emitter connection of the device. The circuit generates an output that moves from the low state to a high state when light is detected (Fig. 30b). The circuits are useful for detecting objects, sending data or reading encoders etc. Since the discovery of phototransistors by William Shockley in the 1950s,430 phototransistors have been well developed and are used widely in our daily life, such as optoisolators, high sensitive optical switches and retro sensors etc.
 Fig. 30  Phototransistor circuits. (a) Common emitter circuits. (b) Common collector circuits. 
Organic phototransistors have attracted attention recently with the rapid development of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). OFETs are not only essential building blocks for the next generation of cheap and flexible organic circuits, but also provide insight into the charge transport of organic semiconductors. Since the discovery of OFETs in the 1980s,431 they have attracted particular attention due to the great advantages over inorganic field-effect transistors such as low cost, flexibility, low temperature processing ability and tuning properties by molecular design.432 The light responsivity (R), photocurrent/dark current ratio (P) and mobility (μ) are believed to be key parameters of organic phototransistors.
3.4.3.2 Phototransistors of conjugated polymers. 
The first organic phototransistors probably could be traced back to 2001, Narayan et al.433 reported the effect of light incident on a polymer-based field-effect transistor with polyvinyl alcohol, (PVA) as a transparent insulator and regioregular poly(3-octylthiophene-2,5-diyl), P3OT, as semiconductor. The transistor exhibited large photosensitivity indicated by the sizable changes in the drain-source current at low levels of light. The response was considerably higher than that from existing organic/polymeric planar, two-terminal photodetectors due to an additional process contributing to the enhancement. The light-responsive polymer transistor opens up a device-architecture concept for polymer-based electronics.
Hu et al.244 first self-assembled nanojunction phototransistors based on TA-PPE and Au nanogap electrodes (Fig. 31), which worked well as a nanometre scale phototransistor. With gate bias increasing strong conductance oscillation was observed in this self-assembled transistor (under low temperature 147 K), which was assigned to single-electron charging oscillations arising from electron tunneling through the nanometre scale transistor.423 Dong et al.242 further fabricated phototransistors of TA-PPE films, which exhibited responsivity at 36 mA W−1 and a switch ratio up to 3.3 × 103. Two effects, photoconductive and photovoltaic effects, were both observed in the same transistors depending on the gate bias. With gate bias the polymer phototransistors were dominated by the photovoltaic effect, while without gate bias the devices were dominated by the photoconductive effect.
 Fig. 31  Schematic images of TA-PPE based self-assembled phototransistors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
It is well-known that for the application of polymer materials in phototransistors, several challenges need to be considered (1) how to generate carriers efficiently by incident light, (2) how to transport carriers efficiently, and (3) how to collect carriers for signal efficiently. Presently, the narrow absorption bands of most polymers actually limit process (1), and the low mobility of most polymers limits the efficiency of processes (2) and (3), which result in the low performance of their phototransistors. Taking all those into consideration, Dong et al.434 fabricated high performance phototransistors with a planar copolymer named HXS-1 (Fig. 32),435 which gave an on/off ratio up to 4.6 × 104 (the highest on/off ratio of organic or polymer phototransistors). They assigned the high performance of the phototransistors to (i) the wide absorption features of HXS-1 in the whole UV-Vis range, (ii) the ideal HOMO energy level of HXS-1 (−5.21 eV) to align with Au electrodes (−5.2 eV) and (iii) the high mobility of the polymer thin films (0.06 cm2 V−1 s−1). Moreover, the devices both under continuous operation conditions and long-term measurement conditions exhibited excellent stability, indicating the potential applications of the devices in polymer-based optoelectronics.
 Fig. 32  Schematic of high performance phototransistors of HXS-1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3.4.3.3 Phototransistors of small molecules. 
Saragi et al.436 addressed organic phototransistors based on the spiro-conjugated molecule 2,7-bis-(N,N-diphenylamino)-2,7-bis(biphenyl-4-yl)-9,9-spirobifluorene. Intramolecular charge transfer led to an increase in charge carrier density, providing the amplification effect. The sensitivity was better than 1 A W−1 for ultraviolet light at 370 nm, making the device interesting for sensor applications. Noh et al.437 fabricated highly photosensitive organic phototransistors based on a biphenyl end-capped fused bithiophene (BPTT) oligomer. The device showed excellent photosensitivity and an Iph/Idark of 82 A W−1 and 2.0 × 105. Moreover, the BPTT FETs showed a high UV stability even after 6 h of strong irradiation with an intensity of 50 mW cm−2. It was expected that the BPTT OPTs could be used in highly sensitive UV detectors or sensors. In 2006, Noh et al.438 further examined organic phototransistors based on 6T and pentacene under UV light illumination. The transfer characteristics of 6T OPTs demonstrated two distinguishable responses, i.e., a fast response, caused by photoconductive effects, was mainly the result of an increase in conductance via a greater flow of photogenerated mobile carriers into the channel layer; and a slow response, which was caused by photovoltaic effects, was the result of a slow release of accumulated and trapped electrons in the semiconductor–gate dielectric interface.
Molecular packing is of key importance for organic OFETs as well as organic phototransistors. Compared with thin films, organic single crystals could show intrinsic charge-transport properties and high mobility because of the perfect order of molecules. The absence of grain boundaries and the minimized concentration of charge traps in single crystals provide the opportunity for the fabrication of high performance devices, and the revealing of the relationship between the microscopic molecular packing and macroscopic charge transport of the materials.11,439 Mas-Torrent et al.440 fabricated organic single crystal phototransistors based on dithiophene-tetrathiafulvalene (DT-TTF) and dibenzo-tetrathiafulvalene (DB-TTF). A high ratio of photocurrent to dark current of the order of near 104 was observed for DT-TTF due to the photogeneration of mobile charge carriers (holes). Tang et al.12 studied the single crystal field-effect phototransistors of F16CuPc based on an individual sub-micro/nanoribbon with an asymmetrical drain/source electrode (Au/Ag) configuration (Fig. 33) because such configuration was beneficial to electron transport and collection by electrodes. Indeed, all devices exhibited a strong photo dependence, i.e., the light can act as an independent variable to control the output current of the single crystalline transistors. The maximum on/off ratio of the phototransistor was 4.5 × 104 at low bias (VG = −6.0 V) (Fig. 34) due to the gate applied bias providing an efficient way for the dissociation of the photogenerated excitons, and which was beneficial for the formation of the conducting channel of the phototransistors.
 Fig. 33  (a) An individual sub-micro ribbon on a SiO2 surface with a 350 nm width and 260 nm thickness. (b) Au gap electrodes were fabricated by thermal evaporation with a micro Au wire as the mask, by slightly moving the Au wire mask, Au–Ag gap electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation (c). (d) SEM image of a device based on an individual F16CuPc single crystal sub-micro ribbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
 Fig. 34  (a) The “output” characteristics of a F16CuPc photo transistor using light to substitute the VG. The light density changed from 0 to 4.46 mW cm−2 with a fixed VG = 0 V. The channel length of the device was around 10 μm with a width of 350 nm. (b) The “transfer” characteristics of the single crystal F16CuPc phototransistor measured in the dark (solid circles) and under illumination (open circles, 1.12 mW cm−2) at VSD = 10 V with channel length of 10 μm and width of 350 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Jiang et al.441 introduced single crystals of tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) and 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) into phototransistors. High photoresponsivity, low persistent conductivity, and response reversibility were found in single crystalline TCNQ, while TTF had large persistent conductivity when the light is switched on and off. It was probably attributed to different band gaps and the compactness of molecular packing. Single crystalline TCNQ combined light detection, switching, and signal amplification in a single device. Guo et al.442 reported organic phototransistors based on anthra[2,3-b]benzo[d]thiophene, which showed a mobility of 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1, with maximum photoresponsivity of about 1000 A W−1 and a photocurrent/dark-current ratio of around 800 under white light irradiation of 30 μW cm−2. Later, Guo et al.443 reported phototransistors of novel linear asymmetric oligoarene 6-methyl-anthra[2,3-b]benzo[d]thiophene (Me-ABT) microribbons, which showed a mobility of 1.66 cm2 V−1 s−1, a photoresponsivity of 12000 A W−1, and a photocurrent/dark current ratio of 6000 even under low light power conditions (30 mW cm−2). These studies should boost the development of the organic semiconductors with high-quality microstructures for potential application.
3.4.3.4 Interface of organic phototransistors. 
Interface engineering between semiconductors and dielectric materials, e.g., the energy alignment between polymer semiconductors and electrodes and the air stability of the conjugated polymers are also key parameters for the development of adapted polymer phototransistors.18 For example, Hu et al. fabricated pentacene-based phototransistors with Ta2O5 as the insulator,444 the photosensitivity and threshold voltage shifts were 4000 and 13.5 V, respectively. For PMMA, the corresponding values were only 0.5 and 2.9 V, respectively. Such a large difference between Ta2O5 and PMMA was attributed to the difference in electron trapping ability between Ta2O5 and PMMA, and more electrons were probably trapped at the pentacene/Ta2O5 interface. Marjanovic et al.445 also found that the interface is critically important for device performance. When they used poly-vinyl-alcohol (PVA) as the gate insulator, the device demonstrated phototransistor behavior at low light intensities with a high response. Unfortunately, the device properties were irreversible after illumination occurred. When they used divinyltetramethyldisiloxane-bis(benzocyclobutene) (BCB) as gate dielectrics, the device exhibited phototransistor behavior in a wide range of illumination intensities with good photo-stabilities. Therefore, much work is encouraged to optimize the interface between active materials and the dielectric materials, with the hope of improving the device performance.
With bulk heterojunction-based organic phototransistors,445–447 the interface between donor and acceptor functions is the site for exciton dissociation,448 which will improve the photogenerating efficiency of charge carriers in the conducting channel. Phototransistors based on the composite of P3HT and TiO2 nanoparticles demonstrated high photosensitivity, fast response, and stable performance under the illumination of both visible and ultraviolet light.449 The built-in electric field in the P3HT/TiO2 composite helped the dissociation of an exciton into charge carriers when the exciton moved to the P3HT/TiO2 interface. Under the illumination of visible light, excitons were generated in the P3HT part. Electrons would be trapped in the TiO2 nanoparticles. While under the illumination of UV light, excitons were generated in the TiO2 nanoparticles, which would also dissociate into free charges at the interface of P3HT/TiO2, and electrons would be trapped in the TiO2 nanoparticles and the holes diffuse to the P3HT. Therefore, visible and UV light illumination could result in electrons accumulated in TiO2 nanoparticles in both cases, which would change the threshold voltage of the phototransistors, thus caused the high photosensitivity of the devices.

4. Perspective and conclusion
Organic photoresponse materials and devices are promising for the fabrication of low-cost, large-area molecular electronics and subsequently have potential to relieve energy crisis and environmental problems. Despite the great advantages of organic photoresponse materials and devices over their inorganic counterparts, there are still several bottlenecks that need to be overcome before their applications. The first is the stability of organic photoresponse materials and devices. Ambient and thermal instability are two major obstacles for commercial application. Unlike the band-conduction of charge carriers in inorganic semiconductors, the movement of charge carriers in organic semiconductors is via hopping. Thus, oxygen and water will easily affect the activities of charge carries in organic photoresponse materials. A lot of organic photoresponse semiconductors demonstrate ambient instability, especially, n-type ones. Fortunately, ambient stability can be realized by isolating devices from the effects of oxygen and water through encapsulation. Thermal instability is another critical issue that currently plagues organic photoresponse devices. Continuous light illumination will inevitably cause changes in organic chemical bonds or cause morphology changes of active materials, which will decrease the performance of devices. Highly ambient stable, high fatigue resistant semiconductors are encouraged to be synthesized to break this bottleneck. The next is the lifetime of organic photoresponse materials and devices. A variety of different parameters will cause fast aging of organic photoresponse materials and devices. Short functioning lifetime is one of the major factors that make organic photoresponse devices lack competition when compared to expensive but long lifetime inorganic ones. To create new organic materials with long lifetime and devices with perfect self-protecting structures would be a solution to this problem. The third is the performance of organic photoresponse devices. Relatively low performance of organic photoresponse devices is one of the major problems for commercial application. The development of high mobility organic photoresponse semiconductors like thin crystal films is probably the solution to this problem. Additionally, compatibility of the organic semiconductor band gap and the interface between organic semiconductor and metal electrodes may also be major factors that contribute to low performance of organic photoresponse devices. Fortunately, some exciting progress has been made to overcome all these disadvantages of organic photoresponse materials. For instance, MPcs16 and perylene derivatives15,450,451 are ambient and thermally stable organic photoresponse materials that have been applied commercially in photocopiers and printers. Some fabricated high performance photoresponse devices exhibited even better performance than their inorganic counterparts. With the approach of the minimization era, high density integration will be one of the primary elements in future organic logic circuits and molecular devices. Chip scale integration of photoresponse devices is increasingly recognized as a critical component in next generation computing, telecommunication, sensing technologies, memory, etc. Multifunctional materials and devices are ideal elements for practical implementation of integration. High stability, high photosensitivity, high electrosensitivity and high fatigue resistance versatile materials are encouraged to be created. The development of multifunctional organic optoelectronic devices with the properties of less noise affection, less energy lost, and higher light to electricity energy conversion efficiency is of great relevance for the general purpose of achieving highly integrated optoelectronic systems and also is a developing trend in photoresponse devices.
Presently, the study of organic photovoltaics is focusing on the pursuit of high efficiency, high stability and facile processability, e.g., printed technology. Those have been well addressed in previous sections. As to organic photoconductors and devices, if we trace back its history,452 the first devices of organic photoconductors were single-layer, but with the advent of laser printers in the early 1980s, double-layer devices appeared to separate the charge-generation and charge-transport processes. With the further development of high quality images and longer lifetimes, multi-layer devices emerged. What can we expect for future organic photoconductors and devices? First, the pursuit of images with high resolution is continuing as a big ambition for organic photoconductors. For this target, one important point is to reduce the thickness of the organic photoconductor layer. Second, the manufacturing cost is definitely proportional to the number of device layers, hence, decreasing the number of layers is of benefit for cost-effective devices. Probably, in the near future, non-crystalline, high mobility charge transport materials will facilitate the device configuration and shift the device structure back to single-layer devices again. For optical memory materials and devices, the use of photochromic materials for three-dimensional memory seems a potential approach for memory with high density, because they present several major advantages compared to current optical systems, including their erasable/writable capability, high resolution, and high sensitivity.
In conclusion, three photon-related effects, photovoltaic, photoconductive, and optical memory effects, occurring in photoresponse materials upon illumination, are inner driving forces of photoresponse devices. Typical organic (including small-molecules and polymers) and hybrid photoresponse materials are employed to discuss how activities of charge carriers induce photon-related effects in photoresponse devices (including photodetectors, photoconductive devices, photoswitches, phototransistors, photovoltaic cells, photonic mode memory devices, opto/electro dual mode memory devices). Functioning mechanisms, limiting factors of performance, and how to improve performances of these photoresponse devices are reviewed in this manuscript. It is hoped that this review can offer help and pave the way toward building highly compacted molecular electronics, which is the trend in this energy-saving and environment-protecting era.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (20721061, 20872146, 50725311, 51033006, 51003107), the China-Denmark Co-project, TRR61 (NSFC-DFG Transregio Project), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2010CB808400, 2011CB932300, 2009CB930400) and Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Notes and references

          V. Petrova-Koch, High-Efficient Low-Cost Photovoltaics. Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,  2009, vol. 140, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-79359-5_1, ISBN: 978-3-540-79358-8 Search PubMed .
W. Smith, Nature, 1873, 7, 303 Search PubMed .
P. P. Barashev, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1972, 9, 387–414 CrossRef .
P. P. Barashev, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1972, 9, 9–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Gladun and P. P. Barashev, Sov. Phys. Usp., 1970, 12, 490–506 CrossRef .
C. K. Chiang, C. R. Fincher, Y. W. Park, A. J. Heeger, H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, S. C. Gau and A. G. MacDiarmid, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977, 39, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293–293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C.-L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2009, 325, 1665–1667 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Miles, G. Zoppi and I. Forbes, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Bredas and J. R. Durrant, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1689–1690 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 529–540 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Li, Y. Song, Y. Liu, H. Li, W. Xu, W. Hu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2624–2628 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Liu and A. J. Bard, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 235–245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Reynaert, V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 784–790 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Law, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 449–486 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Weiss and M. Abkowitz, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 479–526 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, C. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5211–5222 RSC .
T. Umeyama, T. Takamatsu, N. Tezuka, Y. Matano, Y. Araki, T. Wada, O. Yoshikawa, T. Sagawa, S. Yoshikawa and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10798–10806 CAS .
Z. Bayiyr, S. Merey and E. Hamuryudan, Monatsh. Chem., 2003, 134, 1027 CrossRef .
S. Günster, S. Siebentritt, J. Elbe, L. Kreienhoop, B. Tennigkeit, D. Wöhrle, R. Memming and D. Meissner, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1992, 218, 117–122 CrossRef .
Q. Sun, L. Dai, X. Zhou, L. Li and Q. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 253505 CrossRef .
A. Huijser, T. J. Savenije, A. Shalav and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 034505 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, H. Li, Y. Song, W. Xu, W. Hu, L. Jiang, Y. Liu, X. Wang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3010–3014 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Y. Tong, W. Hu, Q. Wan and T. Bjørnholm, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4234–4237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terao, H. Sasabe and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103515 CrossRef .
J. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wöhrle and D. Meissner, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129–138 CrossRef .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Chan, S. L. Lai, M. K. Fung, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 023504 CrossRef .
J. G. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757–5759 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Bailey-Salzman, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 013508 CrossRef .
M. Brumbach, D. Placencia and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3142–3151 CAS .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS .
B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, D. Gebeyehu, P. Simon, F. Kozlowski, A. Werner, F. Li, S. Grundmann, S. Sonntag, M. Koch, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, H. Hoppe, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, I. Riedel, V. Dyakonov and J. Parisi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riede, T. Mueller, W. Tress, R. Schueppel and K. Leo, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048–16050 CrossRef CAS .
W. Warta and N. Karl, Phys. Rev. B, 1985, 32, 1172–1182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kallmann and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1959, 30, 585–586 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5427–5429 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mayer, M. T. Lloyd, D. J. Herman, T. G. Kasen and G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6272–6274 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pandey and J.-M. Nunzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 213506 CrossRef .
L. Valentini, D. Bagnis, A. Marrocchi, M. Seri, A. Taticchi and J. M. Kenny, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 32–34 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Lloyd, A. C. Mayer, S. Subramanian, D. A. Mourey, D. J. Herman, A. V. Bapat, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9144–9149 CrossRef CAS .
F. Silvestri, A. Marrocchi, M. Seri, C. Kim, T. J. Marks, A. Facchetti and A. Taticchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6108–6123 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marrocchi, F. Silvestri, M. Seri, A. Facchetti, A. Taticchi and T. J. Marks, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1380–1382 RSC .
J. E. Anthony, S. Subramanian, S. R. Parkin, S. K. Park and T. N. Jackson, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7984–7989 RSC .
A. M. van de Craats, N. Stutzmann, O. Bunk, M. M. Nielsen, M. Watson, K. Müllen, H. D. Chanzy, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 495–499 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lemaur, D. A. da Silva Filho, V. Coropceanu, M. Lehmann, Y. Geerts, J. Piris, M. G. Debije, A. M. van de Craats, K. Senthilkumar, L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. M. Warman, J.-L. Brédas and J. Cornil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3271–3279 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. van de Craats and J. M. Warman, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 130–133 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Schmidtke, R. H. Friend, M. Kastler and K. Müllen, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 174704 CrossRef .
W. W. H. Wong, D. J. Jones, C. Yan, S. E. Watkins, S. King, S. A. Haque, X. Wen, K. P. Ghiggino and A. B. Holmes, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 975–978 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. H. Wong, T. B. Singh, D. Vak, W. Pisula, C. Yan, X. Feng, E. L. Williams, K. L. Chan, Q. Mao, D. J. Jones, C.-Q. Ma, K. Müllen, P. Bäuerle and A. B. Holmes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 927–938 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Winzenberg, P. Kemppinen, G. Fanchini, M. Bown, G. E. Collis, C. M. Forsyth, K. Hegedus, T. B. Singh and S. E. Watkins, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5701–5703 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Anthony, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 452–483 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
C. Videlot, A. El Kassmi and D. Fichou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 69–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roncali, P. Frère, P. Blanchard, R. de Bettignies, M. Turbiez, S. Roquet, P. Leriche and Y. Nicolas, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roquet, R. de Bettignies, P. Leriche, A. Cravino and J. Roncali, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3040–3045 RSC .
S. Karpe, A. Cravino, P. Frère, M. Allain, G. Mabon and J. Roncali, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1163–1171 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Zhou, W. Wu, Y. Liu, W. Tian, G. Yu, W. Qiu, S. Chen and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7702–7707 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, H. Fan, Y. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Li and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9667–9673 RSC .
N. Kopidakis, W. J. Mitchell, J. van de Lagemaat, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen and W. L. Rance, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 103524 CrossRef .
C.-Q. Ma, M. Fonrodona, M. C. Schikora, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3323–3331 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, S. Roquet and J. Roncali, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3033–3037 CrossRef CAS .
F. Saremi, G. Lange and B. Tieke, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 923–926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, Z. Wang, S. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. Smet and W. Dehaen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4731–4735 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zambounis, Z. Hao and A. Iqbal, Nature, 1997, 388, 131–132 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, B. Walker and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11545–11551 CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, X.-D. Dang, B. Walker, J. Seo, T. Kent and T.-Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 103301 CrossRef .
B. Walker, A. B. Tamayo, X.-D. Dang, P. Zalar, J. H. Seo, A. Garcia, M. Tantiwiwat and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X.-D. Dang, C. Kim and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-J. Egelhaaf, PhD Thesis, University of Tübingen, Germany,  1996, ch. 4 Search PubMed .
C. Uhrich, R. Schueppel, A. Petrich, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, E. Brier, P. Kilickiran and P. Baeuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2991–2999 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schulze, C. Uhrich, R. Schüppel, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, E. Brier, E. Reinold and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2872–2875 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yin, L. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Q. Qi, F. Zhang and S. Yin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 023303 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, X. Wan, B. Yin, J. Zhou, G. Long, S. Yin and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2464–2468 RSC .
R. Fitzner, E. Reinold, A. Mishra, E. Mena-Osteritz, H. Ziehlke, C. Körner, K. Leo, M. Riede, M. Weil, O. Tsaryova, A. Weiß, C. Uhrich, M. Pfeiffer and P. Bäuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 897–910 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wynands, M. Levichkova, K. Leo, C. Uhrich, G. Schwartz, D. Hildebrandt, M. Pfeiffer and M. Riede, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 073503 CrossRef .
M. Riede, C. Uhrich, J. Widmer, R. Timmreck, D. Wynands, G. Schwartz, W.-M. Gnehr, D. Hildebrandt, A. Weiss, J. Hwang, S. Sundarraj, P. Erk, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3019–3028 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. C. Tse, J. Lu, Y. Tao and M. S. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2182–2189 RSC .
S. Steinberger, A. Mishra, E. Reinold, J. Levichkov, C. Uhrich, M. Pfeiffer and P. Bauerle, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1982–1984 RSC .
Y. Shirota, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 75–93 RSC .
C. He, Q. He, Y. Yi, G. Wu, F. Bai, Z. Shuai and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4085–4090 RSC .
W. Li, C. Du, F. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Fahlman, Z. Bo and F. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5327–5334 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ripaud, T. Rousseau, P. Leriche and J. Roncali, Adv. Energy Mater., 2010, 1, 540–545 CrossRef .
H. Shang, H. Fan, Y. Liu, W. Hu, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1554–1557 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wurthner and M. Stolte, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5109–5115 RSC .
Y. He and Y. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .
A. Varotto, N. D. Treat, J. Jo, C. G. Shuttle, N. A. Batara, F. G. Brunetti, J. H. Seo, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5166–5169 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and L. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1227–1236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, A. Iwashita, Y. Abe, C.-Z. Li, K. Matsuo, M. Hashiguchi and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15429–15436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144–16145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223307 CrossRef .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Kepler, Appl. Opt., 1969, 8(Suppl 1), 25–26 Search PubMed .
R. M. Schaffert and C. D. Oughton, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1948, 38, 991–998 CrossRef CAS .

          M. D. Shattuck and U. Vahtra, U.S. Pat., 3,484,327,  1969 Search PubMed .

          W. A. Light, U.S. Pat., 3,615,414,  1971 Search PubMed .

          R. H. Moser and A. L. Thomas, The Phthalocyanines, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1983 Search PubMed .
T. Enokida, R. Hirohashi and T. Nakamura, J. Imaging Sci., 1990, 34, 234–242 CAS .
Y. Wang and D. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1521–1525 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schreiber, R. Bilke, J. Pan, I. Bleyl, J. Bondkowski, D. Adam and D. Haarer, Xerographic Photoreceptors and Organic Photorefractive Materials IV, 1998, 3471, 224–234 CAS .

          S. Hayashida, S. Tai, N. Hayashi, Y. Iwakabe, N. Kinjo and S. Numeta, U.S. Pat., 4,886,721,  1989 Search PubMed .

          S. Tai, S. Hayashida and N. Hayashi, U.S. Pat., 4,842,970,  1989 Search PubMed .

          S. Hayashida and S. Tai, U.S. Pat., 4,749,637,  1988 Search PubMed .

          R. B. Champ and M. D. Shattuck, U.S. Pat., 3,824,099,  1974 Search PubMed .
F. Silvestri, M. D. Irwin, L. Beverina, A. Facchetti, G. A. Pagani and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17640–17641 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. P. Smits, S. Setayesh, T. D. Anthopoulos, M. Buechel, W. Nijssen, R. Coehoorn, P. W. M. Blom, B. de Boer and D. M. de Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 734–738 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Jie, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Luo, Z. He, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, C. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2427–2432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Binda, T. Agostinelli, M. Caironi, D. Natali, M. Sampietro, L. Beverina, R. Ruffo and F. Silvestri, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1314–1319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rau, Berichte Der Bunsen-Gesellschaft Fur Physikalische Chemie, 1969, 73, 810–819 CAS .

          R. B. Champ and M. D. Shattuck, U.S. Pat., 3,898,084,  1975 Search PubMed .

          K. Seki, Y. Suzuki and H. Yamanami, SPSE Proceedings, The Fifth International Congress on Advances in Non-Impact Printing Technologies, 1990.
H. Li, R. Termine, N. Godbert, L. Angiolini, L. Giorgini and A. Golemme, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1184–1191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Umeda, T. Shimada, T. Aruga, T. Niimi and M. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 8531–8534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Umeda and M. Yokoyama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 34, L44–L46 CAS .

          R. J. Regensburger and J. J. Jakubowski, U.S. Pat., 3,904,407,  1975 Search PubMed .
Z. D. Popovic, A.-m. Hor and R. O. Loutfy, Chem. Phys., 1988, 127, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Loutfy, A. M. Hor, P. Kazmaier and M. Tam, J. Imaging Sci., 1989, 33, 151–159 CAS .
R. Bai, M. Ouyang, R. J. Zhou, M. M. Shi, M. Wang and H. Z. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 055604 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Wang, Y. Qi, J. P. Gao, G. G. Sacripante, P. R. Sundararajan and J. D. Duff, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2075–2079 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mo, M.-M. Shi, J.-C. Huang, M. Wang and H.-Z. Chen, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 76, 236–242 CrossRef .

          S. P. Clark, G. A. Reynolds and J. H. Perlstein, U.S. Pat., 4,327,169,  1982 Search PubMed .

          M. R. Detty, B. J. Murray and J. H. Perlstein, U.S. Pat., 4,365,017,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. R. Detty and B. J. Murray, J. Org. Chem., 1982, 47, 5235–5239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizuguchi and A. C. Rochat, J. Imaging Sci., 1988, 32, 135–140 CAS .
T. P. I. Saragi, J. Londenberg and J. Salbeck, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 046104 CrossRef .
A. Iwasaki, L. Hu, R. Suizu, K. Nomura, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga, Y. Noda, K. Kanai, Y. Ouchi, K. Seki and H. Ito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4022–4024 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Allen, E. T. Robinson, C. M. Stott and F. Thompson, Dyes Pigm., 1989, 10, 183–193 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Takei, E. Kijima, S. Goto and N. Hiroyuki, U.S. Pat., 4,835,080,  1989 Search PubMed .
D. S. Weiss and M. Burberry, Thin Solid Films, 1988, 158, 175–187 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Baranyi, A. M. Hor, R. O. Loutfy and Z. D. Popovic, U.S. Pat., 4,925,760,  1990 Search PubMed .

          G. Baranyi, A. M. Hor and R. O. Loutfy, U.S. Pat., 4,952,472,  1990 Search PubMed .
K. Katagiri, Y. Oguchi and Y. Takasu, Nippon Kagaku Kaishi, 1986, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .

          E. R. Meinders, A. V. Mijiritskii, L. v. Pieterson and M. Wuttig, Optical Data Storage, Phase-change media and recording Series: Philips Research Book Series, Springer, The Netherlands,  2006, vol. 4 Search PubMed .
Y. Hirshberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 2304–2312 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Mandzhikov, V. A. Murin and V. A. Barachevskii, Sov. J. Quantum Electron., 1973, 3, 128–129 CrossRef .
D. A. Parthenopoulos and P. M. Rentzepis, Science, 1989, 245, 843–845 CAS .

          Y. Song and D. Zhu, High Density Data Storage, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Singapore,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Irie, Pure Appl. Chem., 1996, 68, 1367–1371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Stobbe, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1905, 38, 3673–3682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yokoyama, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1717–1740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yokoyama, T. Goto, T. Inoue, M. Yokoyama and Y. Kurita, Chem. Mater., 1988, 1049–1052 CAS .
Y. Yokoyama, T. Inoue, M. Yokoyama, T. Goto, T. Iwai, N. Kera, I. Hitomi and Y. Kurita, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yokoyama and Y. Kurita, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1994, 246, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yokoyama, T. Tanaka, T. Yamane and Y. Kurita, Chem. Lett., 1991, 20, 1125–1128 CrossRef .
F. Strube, R. Siewertsen, F. D. Sonnichsen, F. Renth, F. Temps and J. Mattay, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 2011, 1947–1955 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, T. Li, M. Fan, X. Mai, H. Zhao and D. Xu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 123, 53–56 CrossRef .
G. Tomasello, M. J. Bearpark, M. A. Robb, G. Orlandi and M. Garavelli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2913–2916 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Baker, F. C. Tompkins, H. A. Fahim, A. M. Fleifel, F. Bergmann, A. Kalmus, E. Fischer, Y. Hirshberg, H. R. V. Arnstein, E. R. Ward, L. A. Day, R. S. Bradley, W. Tadros, M. Kamel, A. S. Bailey, D. H. Bates, H. R. Ing, M. A. Warne, E. Neale, L. T. D. Williams, H. B. Henbest, A. G. Sharpe, A. H. Lamberton, E. P. Hart, C. A. Bunton, E. A. Halevi, J. P. Thurston, J. Walker, R. A. Robinson, F. G. Mann, B. B. Smith, D. L. Hammick, A. M. Roe, S. Peat, W. J. Whelan and G. J. Thomas, J. Chem. Soc., 1952, 4518–4548 RSC .

          J. C. Crano and Robert Guglielmetti, Organic Photochromic and Thermochromic Compounds, Plenum Press, New York,  1999, vol. 1 Search PubMed .

          H. Ono and C. Osada, U.K. Pat., 1,186,987,  1970 Search PubMed .
J. Harada, Y. Kawazoe and K. Ogawa, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2593–2595 RSC .

          R. J. Hovey, N. Y. C. Chu, P. G. Piusz and C. H. Fuchsmann, U.S. Pat., 4,342,668,  1982 Search PubMed .

          N. Y. C. Chu, U.S. Pat., 4,699,473,  1987 Search PubMed .
L. Raboin, M. Matheron, J. Biteau, T. Gacoin and J.-P. Boilot, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3242–3248 RSC .
M. R. di Nunzio, P. L. Gentili, A. Romani and G. Favaro, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6123–6131 CAS .
W. Yuan, L. Sun, H. Tang, Y. Wen, G. Jiang, W. Huang, L. Jiang, Y. Song, H. Tian and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Voloshin, A. V. Metelitsa, J. C. Micheau, E. N. Voloshina, S. O. Besugliy, A. V. Vdovenko, N. E. Shelepin and V. I. Minkin, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2003, 52, 1172–1181 CrossRef CAS .
N. Voloshin, E. Gaeva, A. Chernyshev, A. Metelitsa and V. Minkin, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2009, 58, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Görner and H. J. Kuhn, in Adv. Photochem., John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007, vol. 19 Search PubMed .

          J. March, Advanced Organic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 4th edn,  1992 Search PubMed .
S. P. Kwasniewski, L. Claes, J.-P. Francois and M. S. Deleuze, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 7823–7836 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irie, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1685–1716 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aloïse, M. Sliwa, Z. Pawlowska, J. Réhault, J. Dubois, O. Poizat, G. Buntinx, A. Perrier, F. Maurel, S. Yamaguchi and M. Takeshita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7379–7390 CrossRef .
M. Irie and M. Mohri, J. Org. Chem., 1988, 53, 803–808 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hanazawa, R. Sumiya, Y. Horikawa and M. Irie, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 206–207 RSC .
Y. Yokoyama, N. Hosoda, Y. T. Osano and C. Sasaki, Chem. Lett., 1998, 27, 1093–1094 CrossRef .
M. Irie, K. Sakemura, M. Okinaka and K. Uchida, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 8305–8309 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gilat, S. H. Kawai and J.-M. Lehn, Chem.–Eur. J., 1995, 1, 275–284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida and M. Irie, Chem. Lett., 1995, 24, 969–970 CrossRef .
K. Uchida, Y. Nakayama and M. Irie, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 1311–1315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakayama, K. Hayashi and M. Irie, J. Org. Chem., 1990, 55, 2592–2596 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gilat, S. H. Kawai and J.-M. Lehn, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 1439–1442 RSC .
Y. Nakayama, K. Hayashi and M. Irie, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida, S. Nakamura and M. Irie, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1992, 65, 430–435 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsujioka and H. Kondo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 937–939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yokoyama, T. Shiozawa, Y. Tani and T. Ubukata, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4521–4523 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, Q. Wang, G. Lu, R. Chen and X. Sun, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 6702–6707 CrossRef .
A. C. Whalley, M. L. Steigerwald, X. Guo and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12590–12591 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Ashraf, N. A. Bruque, J. L. Tan, G. J. O. Beran and R. K. Lake, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 024524 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 137–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen, P. A. van
Hal and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3371–3375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granstrom, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885–3887 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reyes-Reyes, K. Kim and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083506 CrossRef .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, C. K. Luscombe, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13988–13989 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1355–1360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Z. Tan, Y. Yan, Y. He, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4911–4916 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mühlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884–2889 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Svensson, F. Zhang, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. C. Hummelen, J. M. Kroon, O. Inganäs and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 988–991 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, K. G. Jespersen, C. Björström, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, V. Sundström, K. Magnusson, E. Moons, A. Yartsev and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Q. Hou, L. Zheng, X. Deng, G. Yu and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1653–1655 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud and M. Leclerc, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2295–2300 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, L. Wang, L. Lan, C. Luo, W. Zhuang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033307 CrossRef .
K.-H. Ong, S.-L. Lim, H.-S. Tan, H.-K. Wong, J. Li, Z. Ma, L. C. H. Moh, S.-H. Lim, J. C. de Mello and Z.-K. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1409–1413 CrossRef CAS .
K. Reichenbacher, H. I. Suss and J. Hulliger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 22–30 RSC .
H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, S. C. Price, S. Liu and W. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2995–2998 CrossRef CAS .
Q. T. Zhang and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5065–5066 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, A. Najari, P. Berrouard, S. Beaupré, B. Réda Aïch, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5330–5331 CrossRef CAS .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595–7597 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Chu, J. Lu, S. Beaupré, Y. Zhang, J.-R. Pouliot, S. Wakim, J. Zhou, M. Leclerc, Z. Li, J. Ding and Y. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4250–4253 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, S. Chen, K. R. Graham, J. Subbiah, C. E. Small, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10062–10065 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bijleveld, A. P. Zoombelt, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, D. M. de Leeuw and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16616–16617 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge, T. W. Holcombe, O. P. Lee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15547–15549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Y. Li, Y. Wu, P. Liu, B. S. Ong, S. Zhu and G. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4112–4113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, W. Wang, W. Chen, T. Xu, S. B. Darling, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu and L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3284–3287 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Lee, J. M. Cho, Y. Goo, W. S. Shin, J.-C. Lee, W.-H. Lee, I.-N. Kang, H.-K. Shim and S.-J. Moon, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1791–1793 RSC .
M. Zhang, X. Guo and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Chen, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3086–3089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Hu, P. Liu, W. Li, X. Gong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9638–9641 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, Z. Tan, B. Domercq, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, Y. Li, D. Zhu, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7246–7247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, E. Zhou, X. Zhan, X. Wang, Y. Li, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073309 CrossRef .
J. A. Mikroyannidis, M. M. Stylianakis, G. D. Sharma, P. Balraju and M. S. Roy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7904–7912 CAS .
J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876–3892 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268–284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3728–3743 RSC .
H. Hoegl, J. Phys. Chem., 1965, 69, 755–766 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nešpůrek, V. Cimrová, J. Pfleger and I. Kmínek, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1996, 7, 459–470 CrossRef .
R. M. Schaffert, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1971, 15, 75–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Grazulevicius, P. Strohriegl, J. Pielichowski and K. Pielichowski, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 1297–1353 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Moisan, B. André and R. Lever, Chem. Phys., 1991, 153, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
L. Angiolini, L. Giorgini, H. Li, A. Golemme, F. Mauriello and R. Termine, Polymer, 2010, 51, 368–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Campbell and B. K. Crone, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 024502 CrossRef .
G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379–2383 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Dong, H. X. Li, E. J. Wang, H. Nakashima, K. Torimitsu and W. P. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19690–19693 CAS .
H. L. Dong, H. X. Li, E. J. Wang, Z. M. Wei, W. Xu, W. P. Hu and S. K. Yan, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 13241–13244 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, H. Nakashima, K. Furukawa, Y. Kashimura, K. Ajito, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and K. Torimitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2804–2805 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, I.-W. Hwang, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 632–636 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pfleger, I. Kminek, S. Nespurek and W. Schnabel, IEEE Trans. Electr. Insul., 1992, 27, 856–860 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kminek, E. Brynda and W. Schnabel, Eur. Polym. J., 1991, 27, 1073–1080 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wigglesworth, A. J. Myles and N. R. Branda, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 2005, 1233–1238 CrossRef .
F. Stellacci, C. Bertarelli, F. Toscano, M. C. Gallazzi, G. Zotti and G. Zerbi, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 292–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Marsella, Z.-Q. Wang and R. H. Mitchell, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 2979–2982 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hattori and T. Uryu, J. Polym. Sci., 1999, 37, 3513–3522 CAS .
J. Gu, B. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, B. Lu and Z. Lu, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 327–329, 427–430 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lévesque and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 4347–4352 CrossRef .
A. Warshawsky, N. Kahana, F. Buchholtz, A. Zelichonok, J. Ratner and V. Krongauz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 2825–2832 CrossRef CAS .
F. Buchholtz, A. Zelichenok and V. Krongauz, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 906–910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alonso, V. Reboto, L. Guiscardo, V. Maté and J. C. Rodríguez-Cabello, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 8072–8077 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Kumar and D. C. Neckers, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, Y.-K. Choi and M.-H. Lee, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 4855–4860 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian and H. Y. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1597–1600 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Li, B. Chen, Q. Luo and H. Tian, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2004, 205, 1497–1507 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wigglesworth and N. R. Branda, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5473–5480 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Myles, Z. Zhang, G. Liu and N. R. Branda, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 2749–2751 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Myles and N. R. Branda, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wigglesworth and N. R. Branda, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 123–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho and E. Kim, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8684–8687 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. McLendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. Moser and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9577–9578 CrossRef .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef .
I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, F. Witt, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12784–12791 CAS .
C.-Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 449–452 CrossRef .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, G. Zou, X. Shen and X. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233504 CrossRef .
S. W. Tsang, H. Fu, R. Wang, J. Lu, K. Yu and Y. Tao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183505 CrossRef .
D. M. N. M. Dissanayake, R. A. Hatton, T. Lutz, R. J. Curry and S. R. P. Silva, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 245202 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pradhan, S. K. Batabyal and A. J. Pal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093106 CrossRef .
N. M. Dissanayake and Z. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 286–290 CrossRef .
G. Kalita, S. Adhikari, H. R. Aryal, M. Umeno, R. Afre, T. Soga and M. Sharon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 123508 CrossRef .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton, G. Y. Chen and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 023105 CrossRef .
B.-Y. Yu, A. Tsai, S.-P. Tsai, K.-T. Wong, Y. Yang, C.-W. Chu and J.-J. Shyue, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 255202 CrossRef .
S. Berson, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly, S. Guillerez and B. Jousselme, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3363–3370 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sadhu, N. A. Nismy, A. A. D. T. Adikaari, S. J. Henley, M. Shkunov and S. R. P. Silva, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265607 CrossRef .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C.-P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. E. Shaheen, E. L. Williams and G. E. Jabbour, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3404–3406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mansurova, K. Meerholz, E. Sliwinska, U. Hartwig and K. Buse, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 79, 174208 CrossRef .
H. Y. Chen, M. K. F. Lo, G. W. Yang, H. G. Monbouquette and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 543–547 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Lee, T. Katayama, H. Kajii, H. Araki and K. Yoshino, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1591–1592 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ouyang, R. Bai, L. Yang, Q. Chen, Y. Han, M. Wang, Yang and H. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2343–2348 CAS .
T. P. Osedach, N. Zhao, S. M. Geyer, L.-Y. Chang, D. D. Wanger, A. C. Arango, M. C. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5250–5254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sofos, J. Goldberger, D. A. Stone, J. E. Allen, Q. Ma, D. J. Herman, W.-W. Tsai, L. J. Lauhon and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiu, C.-C. Chen, J.-T. Sheu and K.-H. Wei, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 769–774 CrossRef CAS .
A. Star, Y. Lu, K. Bradley and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS .
C. Anghel, V. Derycke, A. Filoramo, S. Lenfant, B. Giffard, D. Vuillaume and J.-P. Bourgoin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3619–3625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Borghetti, V. Derycke, S. Lenfant, P. Chenevier, A. Filoramo, M. Goffman, D. Vuillaume and J.-P. Bourgoin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2535–2540 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Leong, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar, Y. M. Lam, T. P. Chen and P. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7354–7361 RSC .
S. Karg, W. Riess, V. Dyakonov and M. Schwoerer, Synth. Met., 1993, 54, 427–433 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, C. Zhang and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 1540–1542 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Synth. Met., 1993, 59, 333–352 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124903 CrossRef .
B. P. Rand, J. Xue, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124902 CrossRef .
T. Erb, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, S. Raleva, B. Stühn, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pfuetzner, J. Meiss, A. Petrich, M. Riede and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 253303 CrossRef .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Savenije, J. E. Kroeze, X. Yang and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1260–1266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, C. Soci, R. C. Coffin, T. Q. Nguyen, A. Mikhailovsky, D. Moses and G. C. Bazan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 252105 CrossRef .
W. Wang, H. Wu, C. Yang, C. Luo, Y. Zhang, J. Chen and Y. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183512 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093511 CrossRef .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,  2007 Search PubMed .
V. Shrotriya, E. H.-E. Wu, G. Li, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 064104 CrossRef .
N.-K. Persson and O. Inganäs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3491–3507 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 074506 CrossRef .
M. Hiramoto, M. Suezaki and M. Yokoyama, Chem. Lett., 1990, 19, 327–330 CrossRef .
A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1667–1669 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer, J. Wildeman, F. B. Kooistra, J. C. Hummelen, M. G. R. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1897–1903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 169–181 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sista, M.-H. Park, Z. Hong, Y. Wu, J. Hou, W. L. Kwan, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 380–383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E67–E71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, T. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Dong, J. Song, H. Zhao, Z. Wei, W. Xu, W. Hu and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1645–1648 CrossRef CAS .
P. Puschnig and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, C. R. Phys., 2009, 10, 504–513 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Bhardwaj, G. D. Sharma, S. Chand, S. C. Jain and V. Kumar, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 015103 CrossRef .
Z. R. Hong, R. Lessmann, B. Maennig, Q. Huang, K. Harada, M. Riede and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 064511 CrossRef .
Y. A. M. Ismail, T. Soga and T. Jimbo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1582–1586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, A. B. Tamayo, X. D. Dang, J. H. Seo and T. Q. Nguyen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 163306 CrossRef .
F. Yang, R. R. Lunt and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053310 CrossRef .
X. X. Jiang, J. G. Dai, H. B. Wang, Y. H. Geng and D. H. Yan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 446, 329–332 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, J. G. Xue, F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233508 CrossRef .
R. Schueppel, R. Timmreck, N. Allinger, T. Mueller, M. Furno, C. Uhrich, K. Leo and M. Riede, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 044503 CrossRef .
D. Cheyns, B. P. Rand and P. Heremans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 033301 CrossRef .
Y. J. Cheng, S. H. Yang and C. S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, K. Pichler, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3120–3122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Theander, A. Yartsev, D. Zigmantas, V. Sundström, W. Mammo, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 12957–12963 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gügel and K. Müllen, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 15346–15351 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stubinger and W. Brutting, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 3632–3641 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266–5274 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, M. S. Liu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 594–619 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, M. Granstrom, D. S. Thomas, K. Petritsch and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 60, 1854–1860 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, D. Vangeneugden, R. Kiebooms, D. Vanderzande, T. Fromherz, F. Padinger, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1583–1584 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, T. Ameri, P. Denk, K. Forberich, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 4029–4035 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Chen, Z. R. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, H. Fujiwara and M. Yokoyama, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3781–3787 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 398, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Andersson and O. Inganäs, Chem. Phys., 2009, 357, 120–123 CrossRef .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef .
I.-W. Hwang, Q.-H. Xu, C. Soci, B. Chen, A. K.-Y. Jen, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030–3042 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Borsenberger, L. E. Contois and D. C. Hoesterey, J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 68, 637–641 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Borsenberger and A. I. Ateya, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 4035–4040 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Chance and C. L. Braun, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 3573–3581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 155209 CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen, A. Dhanabalan, P. A. van Hal and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 709–712 CrossRef CAS .
C. Winder, G. Matt, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, N. S. Sariciftci and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, F. Banishoeib, I. V. Severen, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2064–2070 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783–1789 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, W. Schwinger, F. Schaeffler, A. Hinsch, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 587–592 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ahlswede, W. Muhleisen, M. W. B. M. Wahi, J. Hanisch and M. Powalla, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143307–143309 CrossRef .
J. C. Bernede, Y. Berredjem, L. Cattin and M. Morsli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083304 CrossRef .
A. W. Hains and T. J. Marks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 023504 CrossRef .
A. Hayakawa, O. Yoshikawa, T. Fujieda, K. Uehara and S. Yoshikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163517 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, M. Johansson, M. R. Andersson, J. C. Hummelen and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 662–665 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288–1290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao and F. A. Hegmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 223306 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and N. Herron, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1992, 200, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, M. D. Curtis and A. H. Francis, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2134–2141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, A. Miki, M. Yoshida and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1500–1502 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Däubler, D. Neher, H. Rost and H. H. Hörhold, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 1964–1972 CrossRef .
S. Barth, H. Bässler, H. Rost and H. H. Hörhold, Phys. Rev. B, 1997, 56, 3844–3851 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, T. Imahigashi and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yokoyama, S. Shimokihara, A. Matsubara and H. Mikawa, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 76, 724–728 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Loutfy and E. R. Menzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 4967–4970 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Bobrovsky, N. I. Boiko and V. P. Shibaev, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1025–1028 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Bobrovsky, N. I. Boiko, V. P. Shibaev and J. Springer, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1180–1183 CrossRef .
M. Irie, S. Kobatake and M. Horichi, Science, 2001, 291, 1769–1772 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata and Y. Kawata, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1777–1788 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, P. J. Wesson, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Lim, J. Seo and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14542–14547 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, Y. Cao, S. Liu, M. L. Steigerwald and X. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10807–10812 CAS .
T. Iimori, T. Naito and N. Ohta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4654–4661 CAS .
H. Li, Y. Wen, P. Li, R. Wang, G. Li, Y. Ma, L. Yang, Y. Song, Q. Yang and D. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163309 CrossRef .
H. Li, J. Wang, H. Lin, L. Xu, W. Xu, R. Wang, Y. Song and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1237–1241 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10305–10309 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, K. J. M. Bishop, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, C. J. Campbell, T. P. Gray and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2007, 316, 261–264 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, Anatoliy O. Pinchuk, George C. Schatz and Bartosz A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8363–8367 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, T. P. Gray, P. J. Wesson, B. D. Myers, V. P. Dravid, S. K. Smoukov and B. A. Grzybowski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2763–2769 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iimori, T. Naito and N. Ohta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3486–3487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Cho, S. J. Kim, Y. D. Han, D. H. Park, K. H. Kim, D. H. Choi and J. Joo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2905–2912 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, M.-Y. Chiu, J.-T. Sheu and K.-H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143105 CrossRef .
S. Dutta and K. S. Narayan, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
E.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Chang, J.-T. Shieh, S.-R. Tseng, H.-F. Meng, C.-S. Hsu and S.-F. Horng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043507 CrossRef .
F. Yan, H. Liu, W. Li, B. Chu, Z. Su, G. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, D. Yang and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 253308 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, J. Clifford, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Li, G. Wu, M.-M. Shi, H.-Z. Chen and M. Wang, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1648–1653 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Su, W. Li, B. Chu, T. Li, J. Zhu, G. Zhang, F. Yan, X. Li, Y. Chen and C.-S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 103309 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, W. Li, B. Chu, Z. Su, D. Yang, F. Yan, Y. Chen, D. Zhang, L. Han, J. Wang, H. Liu, G. Che, Z. Zhang and Z. Hu, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ray and K. L. Narasimhan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093516 CrossRef .
S.-H. Wu, W.-L. Li, B. Chu, C. S. Lee, Z.-S. Su, J.-B. Wang, F. Yan, G. Zhang, Z.-Z. Hu and Z.-Q. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 093302 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Chen, W.-C. Yen, W.-F. Su, C.-H. Ku and J.-J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 233301 CrossRef .
H.-G. Li, G. Wu, M.-M. Shi, L.-G. Yang, H.-Z. Chen and M. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 153309 CrossRef .
T. N. Ng, W. S. Wong, M. L. Chabinyc, S. Sambandan and R. A. Street, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 213303 CrossRef .
X. Xu, M. Davanco, X. Qi and S. R. Forrest, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1122–1127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3745–3749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Higashi, K.-S. Kim, H.-G. Jeon and M. Ichikawa, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 034502 CrossRef .
A. D. D. Dwivedi, A. K. Singh, R. Prakash and P. Chakrabarti, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 900–903 CrossRef .
J. D. Zimmerman, V. V. Diev, K. Hanson, R. R. Lunt, E. K. Yu, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2780–2783 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Arnold, J. D. Zimmerman, C. K. Renshaw, X. Xu, R. R. Lunt, C. M. Austin and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3354–3358 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. An, B. O'Connor, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1152–1157 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Clifford, G. Konstantatos, K. W. Johnston, S. Hoogland, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Fu, H. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3937–3941 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, J. Jiang, H. Nakashima, Y. Luo, Y. Kashimura, K.-Q. Chen, Z. Shuai, K. Furukawa, W. Lu, Y. Liu, D. Zhu and K. Torimitsu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 027801 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wei, H. Li, W. Xu and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 143302 CrossRef .
P. Yao, P. Chen, L. Jiang, H. Zhao, H. Zhu, D. Zhou, W. Hu, B.-H. Han and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5008–5012 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Q. Yan, Y. Zhou, T. Li, N. Zhu, C. Bai, Y. Cao, J. Wang, J. Pei and D. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5725–5727 RSC .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2nd edn,  1981 Search PubMed .
A. J. Seeds and A. A. A. de Salles, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 1990, 38, 577–585 CrossRef .
M. A. Romero, M. A. G. Martinez and P. R. Herczfeld, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 1996, 44, 2279–2287 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley, M. Sparks and G. K. Teal, Phys. Rev., 1951, 83, 151–162 CrossRef .
A. Tsumura, H. Koezuka and T. Ando, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 1210–1212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Yu and W. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3358–3406 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Narayan and N. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1891–1893 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, Z. Bo and W. Hu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qin, W. Li, C. Li, C. Du, C. Veit, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Andersson, Z. Bo, Z. Liu, O. Inganäs, U. Wuerfel and F. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14612–14613 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. I. Saragi, R. Pudzich, T. Fuhrmann and J. Salbeck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2334–2336 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Noh, D.-Y. Kim, Y. Yoshida, K. Yase, B.-J. Jung, E. Lim and H.-K. Shim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 043501 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Noh, J. Ghim, S.-J. Kang, K.-J. Baeg, D.-Y. Kim and K. Yase, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094501 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4994–5007 RSC .
M. Mas-Torrent, P. Hadley, N. Crivillers, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 86–88 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, X. Yang, Z. Cui, Y. Liu, H. Li and W. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123308 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, C. Du, C.-a. Di, J. Zheng, X. Sun, Y. Wen, L. Zhang, W. Wu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 143303 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, C. Du, G. Yu, C. Di, S. Jiang, H. Xi, J. Zheng, S. Yan, C. Yu, W. Hu and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, G. Dong, C. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 072108 CrossRef .
N. Marjanovic, T. B. Singh, G. Dennler, S. Günes, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, R. Schwödiauer and S. Bauer, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 188–194 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. I. Saragi, R. Pudzich, T. Fuhrmann-Lieker and J. Salbeck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143514 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Zhao, L. Hu, G. Gruner and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16996–17003 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Mok, F. Yan and H. L. W. Chan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023310 CrossRef .
F. Yan, J. Li and S. M. Mok, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 074501 CrossRef .
T. Abe, S. Miyakushi, K. Nagai and T. Norimatsu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1562–1568 RSC .
V. P. Singh, R. S. Singh, B. Parthasarathy, A. Aguilera, J. Anthony and M. Payne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 082106 CrossRef .
D. S. Weiss and A. Martin, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 479–526 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The paper is dedicated to Prof. Daoben Zhu for his 70th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Huanli Dong
	Huanli Dong is an assistant Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She grew up in Shandong province, China. She received her PhD degree from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009 after she got her MS degree in Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Material, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. She is presently focusing on the self-assembling of molecular materials and the application of molecular materials in optoelectronic devices.

Hongfei Zhu
	Hongfei Zhu grew up in Jiangsu province, China. He received his BS degree (2001) in Department of Fine Chemical Engineering, Huaihai Institute of Technology. Then he received his MS degree in the department of chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China (2004). After that, he worked as an editor for the Chinese Journal of Organic Chemistry. In 2011 he obtained his PhD degree from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He focuses on organic photoresponse materials and devices.

Qing Meng
	Qing Meng is an assistant Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She grew up in Shanxi province, China. She received her BS degree (2004) in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanxi University. Then she joined the institute. In 2006, she continued her studies in the institute as a PhD candidate, and obtained her PhD degree in 2011. She focuses on the design and synthesis of new organic semiconductors.

Xiong Gong
	Xiong Gong is an assistant Professor of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, the University of Akron. As a senior research scientist Xiong Gong worked in the Center of Polymers and Organic Solids at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and also held the manager position of advanced materials and devices at Cbrite Inc. He has published more than 100 peer-reviewed papers with over 3500 citations. His research interests cover semiconducting polymers and devices.

Wenping Hu
	Wenping Hu is a Professor of Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD from the Institute in 1999. Then he joined Osaka University and Stuttgart University as a research fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences and Alexander von Humboldt, respectively. In 2003 he worked in Nippon Telephone and Telegraph, and then returned to the institute. He focuses on molecular electronics and has more than 180 refereed publications with about 3000 citations.

 	Fig. 1  The conversion process of incident light to electric current: (a) photoexcitation and exciton formation, (b) exciton diffusion, (c) exciton dissociation, (d) charge transfer and collection.	 

 	Scheme 1  Molecular structures of representative porphyrins and phthalocyanines used in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  Normalized absorption spectra for ClAlPc and CuPc demonstrating long-wavelength absorption of the former, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) for a device of architecture ITO/ClAlPc/C60/BCP/Ag with an optimized ClAlPc growth rate of 0.5 Å s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Scheme 2  Molecular structures of representative acene-based donors in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of oligothiophene dendrimer donors used for photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorbance spectra for films of CuPc and two phases of TiOPc as compared to the AM1.5 solar spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 4  Molecular structures of linear donor–acceptor materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  The absorption of compound α,α-DH6TDPP film and solution in chloroform (a) and SMDPPEH film, PC71BM film, and SMDPPEH:PC71BM blend films as a function of blend ratio (b). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electronic absorption (a) and emission spectra (b) of the DCVnT (n = 1–5) series in dichloromethane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (DCV6T and DCV7T have wide absorptions ranging from 300 nm to 800 nm for their thin films, obtained from ref. 81.)	 

 	Scheme 5  Chemical structures of star-shaped donor–acceptor molecules.	 

 	Scheme 6  Chemical structures of commonly used acceptors in organic solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of C60 and C70 in the range of 200–900 nm. Enhanced absorption of a wide spectral range is observed for C70 compared to C60. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 7  Stabilization mechanism of DCE-stabilized MPc nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Scheme 7  Structures of naphthalocyanines, triphenylamine-based trisazo pigment, AlkSQ and GlySQ, PTAC, and other photoconductors.	 

 	Scheme 8  (a) Chemical structures of fulgenic acid and fulgide; (b) Photochemical isomerization among the three forms of fulgides.	 

 	Scheme 9  Photochromic reaction of furylfulgides with variable substituents R at the photochromic core unit.	 

 	Scheme 10  Photoisomerization of pyrrylfulgide with dicyanomethylene.	 

 	Scheme 11  Light-driven ring-closing (E→C)/ring-opening (C→E) electrocyclic reaction of 2,5-dimethylfurylfulgide (FF-3).	 

 	Scheme 12  Photochromism of (a) spiropyran and (b) spirooxazine.	 

 	Scheme 13  Chemical structures of compounds 1 and 2.	 

 	Scheme 14  The compounds of two spirooxazines (SO-1 and SO-2) and two naphthopyrans (NP-1 and NP-2).	 

 	Fig. 8  Scheme for three-dimensional optical recording based on photochromism of spiropyran. Information is written by a two-photon absorption (532 nm + 1064 nm) of spiropyran, which leads to merocyanine formation in the volume element where absorption occurred. Reading of information is absorption of two 1064 nm photons, followed by fluorescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, Copyright 1989 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Scheme 15  Photochromism mechanism of a typical spironaphthoxazine. Left: closed form (colorless). Right: TTC; open form (colored).	 

 	Scheme 16  Stilbene changes between different states. Both E–Z isomerization and the 6π electrocyclization are reversible, but the oxidation renders the entire sequence irreversible.	 

 	Scheme 17  Diarylethenes of [2.2] and [2.4] transformation processes.	 

 	Scheme 18  Photochromism of dithienylethene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 19  Photochromism of compounds 3a and 4a.	 

 	Scheme 20  Absorption maxima wavelengths of the closed-ring isomers of diarylethenes.	 

 	Scheme 21  Molecular structure of the bipolar diarylethene derivative used in the experiment.	 

 	Scheme 22  Representative polyphenylenevinylenes for photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Scheme 23  Representative polythiophenes recently used in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Scheme 24  Representative low-band gap photovoltaic copolymers based on a 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole acceptor.	 

 	Scheme 25  Molecular structures of PBnDT-DTBT and PBnDT-DTffBT.	 

 	Scheme 26  Representative low-band gap photovoltaic copolymers based on thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor.	 

 	Scheme 27  High performance low-band gap photovoltaic polymers based on N-alkylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione acceptor.	 


PTB1	−4.90	−3.20	0.58	12.5	65.4	4.76
PTB2	−4.94	−3.22	0.60	12.8	66.3	5.10
PTB3	−5.04	−3.29	0.74	13.1	56.8	5.53
PTB4	−5.12	−3.31	0.76	9.20	44.5	3.10
PTB5	−5.01	−3.24	0.68	10.3	43.1	3.02
PTB6	−5.01	−3.17	0.62	7.74	47.0	2.26
PTB3a	
	
	0.72	13.9	58.5	5.85
PTB4a	
	
	0.74	13.0	61.4	5.90 (6.1b)
PTB5a	
	
	0.66	10.7	58.0	4.10

DCB	0.74	13.95	60.25	6.22	

DCB/DIO	0.74	14.09	68.85	7.18	13.99
CB	0.76	10.20	50.52	3.92	

CB/DIO	0.74	14.50	68.97	7.40	14.16

 	Scheme 28  Other conjugated systems of low-band gap copolymers used in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Scheme 29  Some representative PDI-based conjugated polymer acceptors used in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Scheme 30  Four types of photoconductive polymers.	 

 	Scheme 31  Copolymers with DTE as pendant groups and with multi-photochromic units as pendant groups.	 

 	Scheme 32  Pendant and cross-linked DTE-based polymers.	 

 	Scheme 33  Some main-chain DTE polymers.	 

 	Fig. 9  Morphology of lamellar hybrid nanostructure. (a) SEM (top-down) image of deposited platelets using 1-pyrenebutyric acid (PyBA), magnified in the inset. (b) SEM (cross-sectional view) image of deposited platelets using PyBA. (c) TEM image of lamellar sheets within platelets deposited using PyBA, magnified in the inset. (d) Schematic diagram of lamellar ordering composed of inorganic Zn-rich regions and bilayers of PyBA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Absorption and photoluminescence spectra of the CdSe and CdSe@ZnSe QDs. (b) Energy level diagram for the CdSe and ZnSe bulk materials, P3HT, and the electrode materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic bulk-heterojunction architecture of photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a controlled BHJ photovoltaic device structure grown on top of indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass. (b) Surface of CuPc film grown on top of ITO-coated glass by OVPD. (c) Fit of the dark J–V characteristics of the OVPD BHJ device, where the solid line is the experimental data, and the circles are a fit according to the modified ideal diode equation. (d) SEM images of the planarized surface of a PTCBI layer (500 ± 25) Å thick grown on top of CuPc needles, Inset: cross-section of the completed photovoltaic device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 303. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The chemical structures of HBC-PhC12 and perylene dye molecule along with a simplified diagram of the π–π stacking configuration. The intercolumnar distance L 34 Å and cofacial distance dc 3.5 Å are indicated. An electron diffraction image was taken from a spin-coated xylene film of perylene dyes, and the densest ring of diffraction spots from crystallites corresponds to a spacing of approximately 3.5 Å. (b) HOMO and LUMO energy diagrams for HBC-PhC12 and perylene dye. Note that there is a 0.65 eV LUMO offset and a 0.07 eV HOMO offset between the two materials. (c) Tapping-mode AFM image of a film spin-coated from a 40:60 blend solution of HBC-PhC12 and perylene diimide. (d) Field-emission scanning electron microscope, SEM, image of a 40% HBC-PhC12 blend sample, imaged with the cleaved surface tilted 15° from normal to the incident electron beam (1 kV). Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 14  BF TEM images and the corresponding schematic representation of the pristine photoactive layer (a,b) and the thermal annealed P3HT/PCBM photoactive layer (c,d). Device performance of pristine (blue) and thermally annealed (red) photoactive layers of P3HT/PCBM devices, (e) ICPE and (f) current density–voltage characteristics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure with a brief flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the TiOx layer. (b) The energy levels of the single components of the photovoltaic cell, P3HT, PCBM, TiO2. (c) Incident monochromatic photon-to-current collection efficiency spectra for the two devices with and without the TiOx optical spacer layer. (d) The current density–voltage characteristics of polymer solar cells with (circles) and without (squares) the TiOx optical spacer under AM1.5 illumination from a calibrated solar simulator with an intensity of 90 mW cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Device configuration and (b) proposed energy level diagram of tandem solar cells containing two BHJs as subcells and TiO2/PEDOT4083 as an interconnection layer. (c) Absorbance (optical density, O.D.) of P3HT:PC70BM and PSBTBT:PC70BM BHJ films and tandem photovoltaic cells without reflective cathode. (d) J–V characteristics of a tandem and reference single cell measured under standard AM1.5G 100 mW cm−2 illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 17  Electronic state diagram describing the photo-induced charge-carrier formation mechanism in an organic solar cell: S0 denotes the singlet ground state of the donor or the acceptor, and S1 denotes the first singlet excited state (excitonic state). At the D/A interface, intermolecular charge transfer leads to charge-transfer (CT) states, where the hole is on donor molecule(s) and the electron is on acceptor molecule(s). CT1 is the lowest energy charge-transfer state. CT* represents excited (“hot”) levels346,350,351 of the CT/CS manifolds. The final state is a charge-separated state (CS), where the hole in the donor layer and the electron in the acceptor layer are free from one another. The ki terms indicate various competing relaxation and electron-transfer rates. Reproduction with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  SEM cross-section images of MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend films cast on ITO-glass from (a) chlorobenzene and (b) toluene solution. The brighter little objects are polymer nanospheres, whereas the large inclusion in (b) is a PCBM cluster. Schematic of (c) chlorobenzene and (d) toluene cast MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend layers as active layers in the solar cell. In (c) holes and electrons find percolated pathways to reach the respective electrode. In (d) electrons and holes suffer recombination due to missing percolation. Reprinted from ref. 364, Copyright 2006 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Comparison of the HOMO/LUMO energy levels and band-gap energies of the above mentioned representative small molecule and conjugated polymer donors, acceptors as well as the work functions of electrodes used in photovoltaic cells.	 

 	Fig. 20  Conceptual scheme for intrinsic and extrinsic (via electron transfer with an electron donor or acceptor as shown) photo generation adapted from law. (OPC represents the organic photoconductor).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A novel spironaphthoxazine SOFC molecule with a stable ring-opened photomerocyanine form by incorporating a ferrocene moiety to the parent spironaphthoxazine, (b) two-dimensional luminescence images obtained using a confocal microscope employing fluorescence as the read-out method, and (c) three-dimensional high-density recording using the two-photon technology of SOFC-poly(methyl methacrylate) films. Reproduction with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (d) Photonic Memory: a facile approach to amplifying fluorescent contrast by introducing photonic crystals into optical memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Structural formula of trans-MUA. (b) UV irradiation of nanoparticles (here, gold) covered with a mixed monolayer of MUA and dodecylamine (DDA) causes photoisomerization of trans-MUA to cis-MUA. The cis isomer reverts to the trans form either spontaneously (slowly), upon irradiation with visible light, or by heating (both rapidly). (c) Writing into AuNP film using a light pen (IUV = 10 mW cm−2) moved over the film at 3 mm s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 386. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 23  Dynamic responses of the optical programming and electrical erasing of a typical P3HT/CdSe device. Light was turned on at t = 80 s and turned off at t = 90 s. A short (100 ms) negative gate voltage pulse was applied at t = 260 s to erase the memory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 398. Copyright 2008 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 24  Memory effect in a polymer FET device at 20 K: Id(t) in depletion mode (Vg = 60 V) before photoexcitation (t < 50 s), during photoexcitation (λ = 632.8 nm) with intensity of 33 mW cm−2 (○) and after turning off light (t > 100 s). The dotted line is the extrapolated curve indicating the persistence behaviour of the device. Negative gate bias (−60 V) pulse applied at t = 150 s, and upon reapplying a positive gate bias (PGB) (60 V), the Id returns to the original dark state. The solid line indicates Id(t) in enhancement mode (Vg = −60 V) under dark conditions. The inset shows the memory effect for different durations of illumination (1 s, 10 s, 50 s, and 100 s). Reproduced with permission from ref. 399. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of device structure and light absorptions by each cell in a vertical stack full-color image sensor. (b) Schematic sensitivity spectra for each cell. The dashed-dotted line in panel (b) schematically depicts the compensated sensitivity curve of an R-cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 414. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Molecular structures of PDDTT and PC60BM. (b) Absorption spectra of thin films PDDTT (black curve), PC60BM (green curve), and PDDTT:PC60BM bulk heterojunction composites (blue curve). The inset shows the absorption spectra of the three materials from 300 to 500 nm. (c) Energy-level diagrams of PDDTT, PC60BM, PVK, PS-TPD-PFCB, C60, ITO, PEDOT, and Al. Reproduction with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 27  Molecular bridges between the ends of an individual SWNT electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  The single crystal structures of (a) α and (b) β phase BPEA. Photoswitching characteristics of (c) α and (d) β phase BPEA single crystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 424. Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 29  Structure of inorganic phototransistors. (a) Homojunction planar phototransistor and symbol of phototransistors. (b) Heterojunction mesa-structure phototransistors.	 

 	Fig. 30  Phototransistor circuits. (a) Common emitter circuits. (b) Common collector circuits.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic images of TA-PPE based self-assembled phototransistors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Schematic of high performance phototransistors of HXS-1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) An individual sub-micro ribbon on a SiO2 surface with a 350 nm width and 260 nm thickness. (b) Au gap electrodes were fabricated by thermal evaporation with a micro Au wire as the mask, by slightly moving the Au wire mask, Au–Ag gap electrodes were deposited by thermal evaporation (c). (d) SEM image of a device based on an individual F16CuPc single crystal sub-micro ribbon. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) The “output” characteristics of a F16CuPc photo transistor using light to substitute the VG. The light density changed from 0 to 4.46 mW cm−2 with a fixed VG = 0 V. The channel length of the device was around 10 μm with a width of 350 nm. (b) The “transfer” characteristics of the single crystal F16CuPc phototransistor measured in the dark (solid circles) and under illumination (open circles, 1.12 mW cm−2) at VSD = 10 V with channel length of 10 μm and width of 350 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 
Footnote
† The paper is dedicated to Prof. Daoben Zhu for his 70th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
