Strategies for extending charge separation in colloidal nanostructured quantum dot materials  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP03551F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP03551F
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23283-23300Strategies for extending charge separation in colloidal nanostructured quantum dot materials

        
          
            Partha 
            Maity
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hirendra N. 
            Ghosh
          
        
      *ab
aRadiation and Photochemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai-400085, India. E-mail: hnghosh@barc.gov.in
bInstitute of Nano Science & Technology, Mohali, Punjab-160062, India. E-mail: hnghosh@inst.ac.in
Received 
      24th June 2019
    , Accepted 30th September 2019First published on 1st October 2019AbstractSemiconductor colloidal metal chalcogenides (II–VI) in the form of quantum dots (QDs) and different heterostructures (core/shell, alloys, etc.) are of extensive interest in scientific research for both a fundamental understanding and technological applications because of their quantized size and different optical properties; however, due to their small size, the exciton (bound electron and hole) experiences a strong Coulombic attraction, which has a remarkable impact on the charge separation and photophysical properties of QDs. Thus, to achieve an efficient charge separation, numerous attempts have been made via the formation of different heterostructures, QD/molecular adsorbate (either organic or inorganic) assemblies, etc. These hybrid materials ameliorated the absorption of the incident light as well as charge separation. This article reviews the strategies for extending charge separation in these colloidal nanocrystals (NCs), which is one of the crucial steps to elevate the solar to electrical energy conversion efficiency in a quantum dot-sensitized solar cell (QDSC). The article summarizes the benefits of co-sensitization and experimental shreds of evidence for the multiple charge transfer processes involved in a QDSC. Studies have shown that in the co-sensitization process, prolonged charge separation occurs via the dual behavior of the molecular adsorbate, sensitization (electron injection) and capture of holes from photoexcited QDs. This perspective emphases band edge engineering and control of charge carrier dynamics in various core/shell structures. The impact of colloidal alloy NCs on charge separation and interesting photophysical properties was recapitulated via the steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) and femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopic techniques. Finally, the prolonged lifetime and extent of charge separation for these hybrid NCs (or the composites) assisted in the development of a better light harvester as compared to the case of their pure counterparts.
1. Introduction
a. Historical background
The increasing demands of nanotechnology have pushed researchers to improve their manufacturing techniques to produce more efficient systems; via the fundamental knowledge of semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs),1,2 new approaches and ideas have been proposed, which are necessary for creating high-performance and cost-effective systems. A rapid increase in the amount of research on colloidal nanocrystals has been observed in various fields over the past few decades;3–6 these interesting observations for nanomaterials originate from their inherent properties. Quantum dots are man-made semiconductor nanocrystals in which the motion of charge carriers (electrons and holes) is restricted in all three special directions. Due to the confinement effect, the charge carriers obey size quantization, and thus, these materials are named quantum dots.7,8 The terms NCs and QDs are often used to indicate the same system. However, from the scientific point of view, they are no longer synonyms. The size of the NCs varies from 1 to 999 nm, but the charge carriers may not follow the size quantization effects; on the other hand, QDs can be defined as NCs where a few hundred or thousand atoms accumulate in the crystal lattice, and the electronic properties of the charge carriers follow quantum mechanics. A systematic decrease in the energy gap starting from the molecular system to the bulk is illustrated in Fig. 1A. The density of states gradually increased and was maximum for the bulk. Although the term QDs was recently proposed, the confinement effect was proposed in the 1920s when heated glass, which contained CdS colloids, emitted bright luminescence that shifted to a low energy region as compared to the absorption onset.9 In the late 1960s, after the discovery of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), a breakthrough originated in the nanoscience research.10 The best 2D quantum structure was first reported using the MBE;11 in the early 1980s, the theoretical aspect of the size quantization of semiconductors was first proposed by Ekimov and Efros;1 their investigations contributed a lot of knowledge to the discovery of a dimensionless semiconductor called QDs.12 In 1993, the first nearly monodispersed QDs based on CdX (X = S, Se and Te) were synthesized chemically by Murray et al. using an organometallic reagent in a hot coordinating solvent.13
 Fig. 1  (A) Bridging energy gap diagram among molecules to the bulk. The inset shows the equation for the Bohr radius and the energy of the exciton in terms of confinement and Coulomb energy. (B) Size-dependent bandgap energy of the quantum dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 16.) Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Utilization of QDs in different applications. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright (2004) Nature Publishing Group. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright (2008) Nature Publishing Group. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. 
b. Synthesis of QDs
Renewable energy, such as solar energy, can compensate for the decrement in non-renewable energy as a complementary energy source.14,15 Materials such as semiconductors, dyes, polymers, and organic molecules, which have absorption in the visible and NIR regions, can be used as sensitizers in a low-cost third-generation solar cell. QDs, having exciting properties, such as bandgap tunability (Fig. 1B), can serve as active materials.16 In addition to their higher absorption coefficients, large dipole moments and low-cost solution processability make them attractive candidates in various applications (Fig. 1C);4,6,17–19 in all cases, the device performance depends on the material properties, which in turn depend on the synthesis protocols. In 1959, Richard Feynman proposed that devices and materials could one day be invented to atomic specifications without violating the laws of physics. Nowadays, his idea is being successfully used in nanotechnology after the development of two major methodologies, i.e. top-down and bottom-up approaches, for nanocrystal synthesis. The top-down approaches use a larger assembly of nanostructures.20,21 During self-assembly, physical forces operating at the nanoscale are used to combine basic units into larger stable structures. Typical examples are the formation of quantum dots during epitaxial growth and the formation of nanoparticles from the colloidal dispersion (macroscopic) of initial structures, which can be externally controlled during the processing of nanostructures via methods such as etching through the mask, ball milling, and the application of severe plastic deformation. On the other hand, bottom-up approaches include the miniaturization of material components (up to atomic level) via further self-assembly processes, leading to the formation of nanoparticles from the colloidal dispersion. In general, methods for the preparation of nanomaterials can also be divided into two categories: physical and chemical. The physical preparation methods include vapor condensation, physical fragmentation, amorphous crystallization, etc. The chemical preparation methods include sol–gel synthesis, chemical precipitation, hydrothermal, metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), etc.22 In this chemical approach, significant reproducibility can be achieved under specific reaction conditions.
In this study, we reviewed the ways to extend charge separation in colloidal nanocrystals for their application in a solar cell. The key factors such as bandgap adjustment, absorption, and monodispersity control the efficiency of a solar cell. Therefore, in this review, we surveyed the synthesis protocols, which regulate the abovementioned properties. Monodispersity and narrow size distribution were maintained during colloidal synthesis; however, control over the shape and size distribution was challenging because of the nucleation, growth, and precipitation processes that occurred simultaneously. Separate nucleation and growth processes can lead to a narrow size distribution.23 This can be achieved by controlling the precursor concentration (self-focusing)24 and using a capping ligand during synthesis. The capping ligand binds to the surface of the NC, which controls the growth process by inhibiting the agglomeration. Moreover, it helps to passivate the surface-trapped states; one of the most familiar methods for the colloidal synthesis of quantum dots is hot injection synthesis. In the hot injection technique, one of the precursors (mainly a metal ion) in solution is maintained at high temperatures, whereas the other precursor is injected rapidly into the solution, leading to the formation of nuclei, and subsequent growth takes place over these nuclei, forming monodispersed nanoparticles at lower temperatures to reduce further nucleation. The schematic of the hot injection methodology is presented in Fig. 2A. In brief, the metal precursor is dissolved in a long-chain fatty acid (such as oleic acid), and the chalcogenide precursor is injected into the reaction mixture at a high temperature (∼300 °C); this leads to super-saturation. As a result, nuclei form instantaneously, and this process is called burst nucleation. Although the formation of nuclei is a high barrier process, due to high super-saturation and temperature, nucleation commences. Upon the addition of the chalcogenide precursor to the reaction mixture, the temperature of the reaction reduced. In addition, the precursor concentration decreased due to the formation of nuclei, leading to a lower probability of the formation of further nuclei. After nucleation, the growth process started. Thus, the monodispersity of the nanoparticles could be achieved using these separate nucleation and growth processes. The overall nucleation and growth processes could be described in terms of the precursor concentration and reaction time using the La Mer model.25
 Fig. 2  Synthesis protocols for colloidal QDs. (A) Schematic of the hot injection method following the La Mer model for the growth of monodispersed colloidal QDs starting from nucleation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright (1950) American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Non-injected heating process. All precursors were added to a reaction vessel at room temperature and heated to start the nucleation and growth processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 2A illustrates the La Mer model of precursor concentration versus the reaction time, which clearly shows the distinct temporal separation between the nucleation and growth processes. As soon as the precursor was injected, burst nucleation commenced, which occurred until the precursor concentration was above the nucleation threshold. Below the nucleation threshold concentration, no new nuclei formed, and the remaining precursors resulted in a growth process. Therefore, this method is useful if the nucleation threshold can be tuned to optimize the monodispersity of nanoparticles. The model shows that monodispersity is achieved when the consumption of the precursor does not exceed the addition rate of the precursor. Again, the growth process is significantly slower during the nucleation process, which leads to a sharp size distribution. The monodispersity in the initial stage is maintained by the nucleation process, whereas the monodispersity in the ultimate stage is controlled by the growth process; the growth process can be divided into two stages: a fast growth stage and a slow growth stage. The fast growth stage occurs due to the remaining precursor in the solution, in which the smaller particles grow faster than the larger particles because of the minimization of excess surface energy;23 when the monomer concentrations are sufficiently depleted, the growth of the nanoparticles proceeds through a slow growth stage referred to as Ostwald ripening. The sacrificial dissolution of smaller nanoparticles results in the growth of larger particles as the resulting defocusing process occurs. Ostwald ripening can be controlled by rapidly changing the reaction mixture. Supersaturation and nucleation in the reaction can also be achieved by slowly changing the reaction temperature. In this situation, the precursor is mixed at low temperatures, and the supersaturation and decomposition processes occur with the increasing temperature. Similarly, supersaturation can also be achieved by a nucleation burst, after which temperature is controlled to avoid additional nucleation events; due to this, the addition of the monomer to the existing nuclei occurs more rapidly than the formation of a new monomer. Therefore, nucleation does not need to be instantaneous, but in most cases, it should be a single, temporally discreet event to provide the desired nucleation-controlled narrow size dispersions. A very good size distribution (standard deviation, σ < 10%) can be achieved by controlling the precursor concentration, reaction time and temperature of the reaction mixture.28 The unreacted precursor can be separated using a solvent mixture. In the case of oleic acid-capped QDs, a polar solvent, such as ethanol, methanol, acetone, etc., is used to clean the QDs.29,30 Another method of colloidal synthesis is the non-injected heating process27 (Fig. 2B), where all precursors are added to a reaction vessel, and the nucleation and growth processes begin after heating. After nucleation, the growth of the nanocrystals proceeds exactly like that in the case of the hot injection method. A narrower size distribution of the colloidal QDs can also be achieved by the continuous flow synthesis method.31 In this process, both the metal and the chalcogenide precursors continuously flow at a certain flow rate and mix in a chamber to yield the desired materials.
The real-time evidence for the nucleation and growth of the colloidal NCs during synthesis can be achieved using the microfluidic reaction method (Fig. 3A and B).32,33 In this technique, the in situ characterization of materials helps to control their size distribution. The concurrent synthesis and characterization of CdS QDs has been reported by Sounart et al. using the microfluidics method.33 The particle growth was monitored between 400 ms and 28 s across and along the microfluidic channel by monitoring the PL of the CdS QDs. The authors were successfully able to demonstrate a close correspondence between the experimental observation and the diffusion-controlled nucleation model. Moreover, colloidal QDs were synthesized at low temperatures in an aqueous medium.34 The parameters that controlled the aqueous synthesis were (i) the solubility product of the semiconductor in water, (ii) the binding affinity of the surface passivating ligands, (iii) the interaction of water and the hydroxyl ion with the metal ion, (iv) the pH of the reaction medium, etc. All the criteria could be understood using the hard and soft acid–base (HSAB) theory.35 Using different precursor materials, several other approaches for the synthesis of colloidal NCs have been adopted using a one-step method.36–40
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic of the microfluidic synthesis method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (B) Time-lapse images of the CdS QD fluorescence during nucleation and growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Due to their high surface-to-volume ratio, the surface passivated QDs exhibited surface trap states, which acted as a non-radiative decay channel for photogenerated carriers. As a result, the excited state properties, such as the lifetime, emission quantum yield, and charge extraction, were tremendously reduced. A strategy to improve the surface passivation of these solution-processed QDs is to form a shell of other semiconductors on the parent material, resulting in the formation of a core/shell type structure. The synthesis of the core/shell NCs usually occurs via a two-step method: the formation of the core NCs and purification followed by shell formation. The thickness of the shell depends on the core size and the number of monolayers. The shell precursors are added slowly to the core NCs at lower temperatures to preclude the nucleation of the shell NCs and the unwanted growth of the core NCs. To calculate the amount of the shell precursors, the size and concentration of the core NCs are required, which can be calculated via TEM (transmission electron microscopy) images and the UV-Vis spectrum.41 The formed shell can grow by successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method during a chemical bath synthesis.42 A low-temperature synthesis of a CdSe/CdS core/shell for solar cell applications has been reported by Surana et al.43 A different synthesis method for the CdZnSe–CdZnS core–shell catalysed by Cu has been reported by Yucheng et al.44 In this synthesis, CdSe–CdS and Zn-oleate were used as starting materials. They proposed that at high reaction temperatures, the Cu-cation acts as a transporting agent to transfer the Zn-ion to CdSe–CdS. By controlling the reaction, a high photoluminescence quantum yield (>50%) in the spectral range from 470 to 650 nm was obtained. The PL spectra gradually shifted to the blue region due to the incorporation of the Zn-ion into the CdSe–CdS core–shell. Pyramidal “giant” core/shell NCs for infrared optoelectronics applications were reported by Tong et al.45 The two-step method was adopted to synthesize the pyramidal-shaped CuInSexS2−x (CISeS)/CdSeS/CdS giant-QDs, which were found to be highly photostable with long PL lifetime.
The morphology of the synthesized QDs and the core/shell was characterized mainly by TEM, XRD (X-ray diffraction), and optical analysis. A straightforward analysis of size distribution, inter-planar distance, and shell thickness could be conducted via the TEM image. Moreover, the XRD pattern helped to identify the phase of the NCs. The size quantization effect could be studied through optical spectroscopy. Steady-state optical absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopies are the main techniques for this characterization. Both the absorption and the PL spectra red-shifted with an increase in the size of the NCs as the energy decreased with the increasing size. The optical spectra of the core/shell NCs shifted to lower energy with the increasing shell thickness. In addition to these, several other techniques are often used to identify the materials. In the case of alloy and doped NCs, EDX (energy-dispersive X-ray) spectroscopy is very urgent and crucial to confirm the constituent composition. For the Mn-doped NC, EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance) spectroscopy provided the spin information and position of the dopant in the hot material.46,47 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is one of the powerful techniques for investigating the interfaces of the core/shell, thickness, surface properties, etc.48,49 Other sophisticated techniques, such as X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy, have been utilized to study the surface binding properties.50,51 The excited-state lifetime of the core/shell varies based on the core materials, which can be determined using time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy;52,53 the phonon modes of the excited materials are often studied using Raman spectroscopy, which provides useful information about the core/shell structure.54
c. Photophysis of the QDs
For the application of QDs in devices, it is important to know the response of the active QD materials upon the perturbation of light. In the presence of light, the carriers were excited to the quantized band structure depending on the transition probabilities. Carrier relaxation is one of the most important aspects to understand the charge carrier dynamics in QDs. The intraband charge carrier relaxation in this quantum confinement NC system occurs through three major mechanisms: phonon-assisted relaxation (i.e. phonon modes of the crystal lattice), Auger recombination, and an electronic to vibrational energy transfer (EVET) from the QD to the ligand.55 In a bulk semiconductor, the carrier relaxation time is led by very fast carrier cooling dynamics, which is dominated by a Fröhlich interaction with a longitudinal optical (LO) phonon mechanism.56 The typical energy difference between the intraband levels of the CB varies by hundreds of milli eV,57,58 whereas the phonon has an energy of the order of sub ten milli eV.59 Thus, the phonon-mediated energy relaxation time (τ) of the hot carrier can be expressed as follow:56 (1.20)where ΔE is the energy spacing between the subband states of the CB and ωLO is the frequency of the longitudinal optical phonon. Thus, carrier relaxation is mediated by an interaction with the electron-LO phonon, which increases the cooling time of the NCs with the decreasing size of the NCs due to a restriction imposed by momentum and energy conservation.56,60 This effect is referred to as the “phonon bottleneck effect”.61 For an NC having a strong confinement regime, energy relaxation occurs via weak multiphonon processes. Since the energy spacing between the intraband electron states is more comparable to that between the hole states, the “phonon bottleneck effect” affects the electron cooling time than the hole cooling time; for smaller NC QDs, the relaxation time is few hundreds of femtoseconds (fs), and it decreases with a decrease in the size of the QD. Thus, energy relaxation in the strong confinement system no longer takes place through a phonon-assisted mode. However, the phonon bottleneck effect is observed in a limited number of epitaxially grown QDs.60,62,63 The hot electron relaxation time of the QDs decreases with a decrease in the size of the NCs. Therefore, the mechanism of hot carrier relaxation can be explained in terms of an Auger-type electron–hole energy transfer. In the case of II–VI QDs, the energy levels of the CB and VB become discrete, and due to more degeneracy of the VB, the intraband energy spacing between the hole levels is smaller than the electron energy. In the smaller size regime, due to large Coulombic attraction, the electrons and holes can couple together very strongly. Thus, the energy transfer from the hot electron to the denser hole state (as the energy released by the electron overlapped with hole states) occurs through a non-radiative manner, which depends on the extent of the electron hole wave function overlap. This energy loss mechanism involves the transfer of the excess energy from an electron to a hole and subsequently fast hole relaxation through a dense spectrum state. This is an intrinsic electron cooling mechanism, which involves an Auger-type electron–hole interaction and leads to a significantly faster cooling over the multiphonon emission.64,65 When the excitation energy is significantly higher than the band edge energy (i.e. hν ≫ Eg) of the NCs, the hot electrons release excess energy, which can generate another exciton in the same NCs, resulting in the formation of bi-exciton. Depending on the bandgap of the NCs (usually, lower bandgap NCs such as PbS and PbSe), the photon energy released by the hot carriers can generate more than two excitons, which is known as “multiple exciton generation” (MEG).66,67 The released excess energy of the hot electron helps to harvest another exciton, and this process can sometimes be referred to as impact ionization. In addition to this, another mechanism of the cooling process is the energy transfer from an electronic state of the QDs to a vibrational state of the surface molecule.58 Since the synthesized QDs are well passivated by organic surface ligands such as oleic acid, trioctylphosphine, and trioctylphosphine oxide, the probability of an excess energy transfer occurs depending on the intraband spacing that matches with the vibrational energy states of the ligand molecule.68,69 The valence and conduction band splitting of CdSe and the systematic approaches for the intraband relaxation of carrier cooling upon photo excitation are illustrated in Fig. 4A, B and C, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (A) Splitting of the CB and VB of the CdSe QD. (B and C) Intraband electron relaxation mechanism in semiconductor NCs. 
d. Importance of charge separation in the QDSC
As discussed earlier, this prospective review of the QDSC indicates that charge separation plays an important role in the QDSC. The schematic of the QDSC is shown in Fig. 5. The scheme suggests that photo carriers are generated upon the absorption of solar light (step 1). These photogenerated carriers are responsible for the photocurrent in the QDSC. In a typical QDSC, the active material is deposited on another wideband mesoporous semiconductor such as TiO2 and ZnO. The photoexcited electron from the CB of the QD injects into the CB of the TiO2 nanoparticles (step 2) that have been extracted through the electrical circuit of current (step 3). The photoexcited holes are neutralized by the redox couple to generate neutral QDs (steps 4 and 5). The photogenerated electrons are separated through an indium-doped tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass surface, and with the help of the counter electrode (Cu2S), the system returns to its initial state with the generation of photocurrent.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the different photophysical processes involved in the QDSC. Absorption of the solar light by the active (QDs) materials (1), electron injection to TiO2 (2), separation of the photoexcited electron (3), hole transfer followed by neutralization of the hole by the redox couple (4 and 5), exciton annihilation (6), and interfacial charge recombination between the oxidizer (redox couple) and the electron either from the QDs (7) or from the TiO2 surface (8). 
The working principle of the QDSC is quite similar to that of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). Contrary to the case of a p–n junction photovoltaic cell, the generated electrical field is absent in the QDSC as the nanocrystalline TiO2 material does not support any band bending (conduction band) near the interface, a phenomenon that produces a potential gradient after redistributing the free charge carriers between two components of different electrochemical potentials (Fermi levels): macrocrystalline TiO2 and the electrolyte solution.70 Under dark conditions, the Fermi level of the TiO2 electrode stays in equilibrium with the midpoint potential of the redox electrolyte, which lies deep within the band gap of the TiO2 semiconductor material. Thus, the net photocurrent and photovoltage are zero in the dark. When the CB of the QD lies energetically above the CB of TiO2, an electron injection from the QD to TiO2 takes place; the increase in the local concentration of the electron on the TiO2 surface lifts the Fermi level close to the conduction band edge and increases the flow of the electron flux towards the ITO contacts. The hole transfer to a fairly concentrated redox electrolyte had no effect on the chemical potential, which remained the same as that under the dark condition; thus, the photoexcitation energy was stored in the form of free energy of injected electrons, which produced photo-voltage; moreover, the net electron and hole transfer to the respective electrodes resulted in the generation of photocurrent.
The step 1–5 are desirable processes for an ideal QDSC, but the resultant charge separation competes with the step 6 (exciton annihilation) and steps 7 and 8 (interfacial recombination). To design an efficient QDSC, enhanced charge separation is the key controlling parameter, which is the motivation for this review. Many strategies, such as co-sensitization, formation of core–shell heterostructures, and incorporation of alloys and impurities (doping), have been utilized, and the results show that the efficiency of the QDSC increases due to enhanced charge separation. The subsequent description of the abovementioned strategies is provided in the next section.
2. Co-sensitization in the QDSCs
Major drawbacks in the application of QDSCs are (a) limited absorption of the QDs in the solar spectrum, (b) fast exciton annihilation, and (c) photoanode degradation due to slow hole moving rate. These factors can be tackled by co-sensitization or supersensitization. The main idea of the co-sensitization method is that instead of using QDs, the combination of a QD and a molecular adsorbate (especially an organic or inorganic dye molecule) composite material that can act as a photoanode in the QDSCs should be used. In addition to this, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the molecular adsorbate must energetically align as shown in Fig. 6A. Furthermore, the molecular adsorbate can absorb the incident radiation. Thus, the light absorption ability of the mixture would increase. More importantly, the adsorbate molecule can capture the photoexcited hole from the photo-excited QD (path 1 in Fig. 6A), and simultaneously, the photo-excited molecule can inject the electron to the CB of the QD (path 2 in Fig. 6A). Therefore, sequential light absorption and improved charge separation can easily be achieved. The co-sensitization technique has been successfully employed in a CdS/dibromofluorescein (DBF) composite.71
 Fig. 6  (A) CT processes (hole transfer, electron injection, and charge recombination reactions) involving CdS QDs and the DBF dye in chloroform; the inset shows the molecular structure of DBF. (B) Optical absorption spectra of the (a) DBF dye (0.3 mM), (b) CdS QD (0.49 μM), and (c–i) DBF–CdS complex at a constant DBF concentration (0.3 mM) with the increasing CdS QD concentration in chloroform (in the mixture, [CdS] is (c) 0.049, (d) 0.098, (e) 0.147, (f) 0.196, (g) 0.294, (h) 0.392, and (i) 0.49 μM). (Inset) Benesi–Hildebrand (B–H) plot of the DBF–CdS CT complex. (C) Transient absorption spectra of the CdS–DBF composite materials in chloroform at different time delays after excitation with a 400 nm laser light. (Inset) Kinetic decay trace at 590 nm. (D) Kinetic decay traces at (a) 500, (b) 650, and (c) 900 nm for the CdS–DBF system in chloroform after exciting the samples with 400 nm laser light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Although the energetics of CdS and DBF fulfilled the co-sensitization model, an increase in the light absorption by the composite material was observed (Fig. 6B) due to the formation of a charge transfer (CT) complex (path 3 in Fig. 6A). A separate calculation was performed to measure the extinction coefficient of the CdS/DBF composite using the Benesi–Hildebrand (B–H) plot (Fig. 6B inset), and the extinction coefficient was found to be 2.14 × 106 M−1 cm−1. The hole and electron transfer were studied using steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence measurements. The fs-TA spectra obtained at different time delays following 400 nm laser excitation are plotted in Fig. 6C. Below 550 nm, a negative absorption change was observed due to the formation of the CT complex between CdS and DBF. In addition to this, broad photoinduced absorption was demonstrated by the DBF cation radical at ∼650 nm and the CB electron of the CdS QDs. With the help of the fs-TA kinetics measurement, the average times for the hole and electron transfer were reported, and the values were 800 fs and <100 fs, respectively (Fig. 6D). Moreover, a complete charge separation was experimentally confirmed from the slow bleach recovery kinetics (Fig. 6D). Utilizing these exciting properties of CdS/DBF, we performed photovoltaic measurements. The photo-electrochemical performances of the mesoscopic TiO2 films modified with CdS, DBF, and CdS/DBF were monitored under a similar illumination condition of AM 1.5 irradiation (100 mW cm−2) using the I−/I3− redox couple, where Pt-coated ITO was used as a counter electrode. The electrolyte composition used was as follows: 0.6 M 1,2 dimethyl 3-propylimidazolium, iodide, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M, 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile. It is noteworthy that Fig. 7A and B purely show a comparison of the solar cells based on the CdS QD, DBF dye and CdS/DBF composite; moreover, the actual photocurrent action spectra can be further improved by the optimized fabrication of a QDSC. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCE) vs. wavelength and the current density (J) as a function of the voltage (V) spectra for CdS, DBF and the CdS_DBF composite system are plotted in Fig. 7A and B, respectively. The efficiency of the measured photocell is summarized in Table 1. It is interesting to see a dramatic improvement in the photovoltaic response of the CdS–DBF composite on the TiO2 photoanode, which represents high efficiency of super-sensitization in stabilizing the interfacial charge separation of the QDSC. There is a direct correlation between the transient absorption and maximum IPCE observed for the TiO2/CdS/DBF electrode, which is much higher as compared to that in the case of both the TiO2/CdS electrode and the TiO2/DBF electrode; this confirms efficient hole transfer from the CdS QD to the DBF molecule as well as super sensitization through the CdS–DBF CT complex. Similarly, a squaraine dye (JK-216) was incorporated into the co-sensitization model, and an improved efficiency (Fig. 7C and D) of 3.14% (CdS/Al2O3/JK-216) was obtained against 1.01% for CdS.72
 Fig. 7  Photovoltaic performance of the DBF–CdS super-sensitizer in terms of (A) IPCE vs. wavelength and the (B) current density (J) as a function of the voltage (V) for the (a) CdS QD, (b) DBF molecule, and (c) CdS–DBF composite. (C) The IPCE spectra and (D) J–V curves obtained for the nanostructured TiO2 film electrodes modified with (a) CdS, (b) JK-216, (c) CdS/JK-216, and (d) CdS/Al2O3/JK-216. (Electrolyte: 0.22 M Co(bpy)3(PF6)2, 0.033 M Co(bpy)3(PF6)3, 0.1 M LiClO4, and 0.2 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile). Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 QDSC performance in terms of IPCE and IV for CdS QD, DBF, and CdS_DBF




Systems

V
oc (V)

I
sc (mA)
FF (%)
Efficiency (η, %)




DBF
0.54
0.19
54

0.23



CdS
0.66
0.12
62

0.43



CdS_DBF
0.56
0.47
64

1.1





Furthermore, by tuning the energetics of the molecular adsorbate, such as pyrogallol red (PGR) (Fig. 8A and B)73 and aurin tricarboxylic acid (ATC) (Fig. 8C and D),74 with the CdSe QD, the formation of the CT complex and the extreme charge separation mechanism were investigated. In both cases, the hole and electron transfer time were reported, which varied in the sub hundreds and less than hundreds of fs, respectively. In addition, a slow charge recombination was observed.
 Fig. 8  (A) (a and b) Schematic of the modified DSSC system. The system consisted of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) on which nanocrystalline (nc) TiO2 (off-white big circles) was grown. QDs (red circles) bound to nc-TiO2via a MPA linker (not shown) and covered by a thin layer of amorphous TiO2 (gray coating) to which the dye molecules (small blue circles) were connected. This entire structure was immersed in a liquid redox electrolyte (I−/I3−). (c) The band alignment of each component in the system relative to the vacuum level. (B) Lifetime measurements of the different cell configurations excited at 470 nm, showing an efficient FRET in the measured electrode. The donor emission transient (detected using a 633 ± 30 nm band-pass filter) is presented in panel a. The dashed red curve represents the lifetime of the donor only, whereas the solid black curve was measured in the presence of an acceptor. The acceptor emission decay trace (detected using a 700 nm long-pass filter) is presented in panel b. Herein, the dashed blue curve represents the lifetime of the acceptor only, whereas the solid green curve was obtained in the presence of a donor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
Apart from these, several other attempts were made separately to study the mechanism of the electron75–78 and hole71,73,74,79 transfer using selective molecules. In the present review, we have summarized some of them. The time of the photoexcited electron transfer from the CdSe QDs to methyl viologen was found to be 150 fs as reported by Wang et al.80 A sub ps (3.4 ± 0.1 ps) electron transfer from photoexcited CdSe QDs to anthraquinone81 and methylene blue was reported by Zhu et al. and Yang et al., respectively. Compared to the previous study, a slow electron transfer time (54 ps) was reported by Boulesbaa et al. for electron transfer from CdSe QD to rhodamine B.82 Apart from these, electron transfer at a semiconductor interface, such as PbS and TiO2, was detected by Yang et al. on a 6 fs time scale.83 Photoanode corrosion is one of the disadvantages in the QDSC due to the slow hole moving rate. Thus, hole extraction or neutralization is a challenging task to achieve an efficient solar cell device made of QDs. Several attempts have been made by the researchers to find an appropriate hole transporting material for the QDSC. Herein, few mechanistic approaches have been demonstrated. The hole transfer rate was studied by Alivisatos and co-workers84 in a series of ferrocene molecules, and it was reported that the charge transfer followed the Auger-assisted relaxation mechanism. A temperature-dependent hole transfer was studied by the same group,85 and it was demonstrated that at low temperatures, the hole transfer rate did not change, whereas it increased at high temperatures. Malicki et al. observed a hole transfer from photoexcited PbS to the amino-ferrocene system.86 It was reported that the probability of charge transfer depended on the permeability of the ligand. Apart from this, several other studies have been reported on the tuning of the interfacial hole transfer in the QD system.87–90 Similar to the electron and hole transfer, energy transfer can enhance the charge separation and light absorption process in the QDSC.91–94 Buhbut et al. designed a solar cell where the mixture of a dye and QDs served as a light harvester (Fig. 9A).95 It was demonstrated that the efficiency of the DSSC was enhanced due to further sensitization by the QDs through a non-radiative FRET process. The lifetime of the donor–acceptor in this hybrid system was demonstrated by comparing the PL decay traces (Fig. 9B). It was found that the lifetime of the donor and the acceptor was reduced (Fig. 9B(a)) and enhanced (Fig. 9B(b)), respectively, in the mixture, which was clearly attributed to the FRET process. The presence of the QDs not only helped in the absorption of visible light but also enhanced the electron injection efficiency through the FRET process.
 Fig. 9  (A) Optical absorption spectra of CdSe (1 μM) in the presence of various PGR concentrations. The PGR concentrations were (a) 0.0, (b) 1 μM, (c) 10 μM, (d) 50 μM, (e) 100 μM, and (f) 100 μM PGR without CdSe. Inset: Absorption spectra of the pure CdSe QD. (B) Schematic of charge separation in the PGR–CdSe QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (C) Optical absorption spectra of the (a) ATC dye (20 mm), (b) CdSe QD (0.1 mm), and (c–h) ATC–CdSe complex at a constant ATC concentration (20 mm) with the increasing CdSe QD concentration in chloroform (in the mixture, [CdSe] was (c) 0.002, (d) 0.004, (e) 0.02, (f) 0.04, (g) 0.08, and (h) 0.1 mm). Inset: Benesi–Hildebrand (B–H) plot of the ATC–CdSe CT complex. (D) Transient absorption decay kinetics of the ATC–CdSe complex at (a) 540 nm, (b) 670 nm and (c) 900 nm, after excitation with a 400 nm laser light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
An enhanced photoelectric effect was reported by Li et al. in the co-sensitized TiO2/g-C3N4/CdS/CdSe system.96 The cascade band energy alignment facilitated energy transfer from the lower band gap CdSe to TiO2 (Fig. 10A). An enhanced photocurrent was observed by Sarkar et al. for the CdTe quantum dot-decorated ZnO nanorod-based dye-sensitized solar cells.97Fig. 10B shows that energy transfer from the CdTe QDs to the N719 dye molecule and the simultaneous electron transfer from the CdTe QD to the ZnO nanorod facilitate charge separation. As a result, the photocurrent and efficiency of the hybrid dye-sensitized solar cell increased. A theoretical modelling reported by Manzoor et al. showed that the photoresponse of the CdSe–dye–TiO2-based solar cell was enhanced through the co-sensitization method.98 A probable mechanism of electron transfer in this hybrid system is schematically presented in Fig. 10C. They proposed that due to the interaction between the CdSe–dye and TiO2, the HOMO and LUMO levels of the composite system decreased, which enhanced the light absorption probability to increase the overall efficiency. Graphene, being a good electron conducting material, is widely used to extract photoexcited electrons.99 A comprehensive study reported by Tavakoli et al. shows that graphene/PbS (Fig. 10D) is the best choice for solar cells.100 In this study, they demonstrated that graphene not only acted as an electron extracting layer but it also helped to passivate the PbS surface by forming a PbS/graphene quasi core/shell structure.
 Fig. 10  (A) Photogenerated electron–hole transfer mechanism of the co-sensitization strategy with a cascade energy level arrangement for the TiO2/g-C3N4/CdS/CdSe nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (B) Co-sensitization via electron and energy harvesting in the CdTe quantum dot-decorated ZnO nanorod-based dye-sensitized solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the different mechanisms (type I and type II pathways) of the photoinduced electron transfer between the dye and the semiconductor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (D) Characteristics of the bulk heterojunction PbS/G CQD solar cells. J–V and EQE spectra of the bulk heterojunction PbS/G CQD solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
An improved short circuit current and open circuit voltage have been reported by Blas-Ferrando et al. using the TiO2/CdS QD-ZnPc/[Co(phen)3]3+/2+-sensitized solar cell.101 Zinc phthalocyanines (ZnPcs) acted as a co-sensitizer in the CdS solar cell, and the cascade charge separation helped to enhance the PCE. Utilizing the co-sensitization technique, it was reported that the enhanced charge collection of the CdSe/CdSexTe1−x type-II heterojunction nanorods (HNRs) mediated higher PCE.102 A record PCE of 5.47% (5.89% with modified electrode configuration) was reported by Lee et al. for the CdSe/CdSexTe1−x core/patchy-shell HNRs co-sensitized by CdS.103 The CdS layer was deposited by the SILAR method, which passivated the surface and reduced the charge recombination.
3. Core–shell heterostructure
The nanocrystal QDs comprise a very high surface to volume ratio, which leads to different trap states. These trap states are responsible for the reduction of photocurrent in a solar cell device. To increase the surface quality and the electronic structure of the semiconductor, QDs often adopt a core/shell nano-architecture. These core/shell NCs possess more than one semiconductor in a single nanostructure, which is referred to as a hetero-structure (HS). Depending on the band energy alignment of the semiconductor NCs, type-I and type-II core/shell heterostructures have been recognized.104–108 In a type-I hetero-structure, smaller band gap materials are confined in the core, which is surrounded by wider band gap materials.52 The reverse band alignment of these heterostructures is referred to as an inverted type-I core–shell structure.109 Conversely, in a type-II core/shell structure, the lowest energy states of the VB and CB are separated in different materials. Thus, upon photoexcitation, both the electron and the hole are localized in the core material, whereas in the case of type-II core–shell structure, either of the charge carriers is localized either in the core or the shell.53,110,111 Apart from these type-I and type-II heterostructures, another important class of hetero-structures has been well established depending on the charge carrier delocalization. This type of hetero-structure is known as a quasi-type-II or type-I1/2 core/shell hetero-structure.112–115 In a quasi-type-II core/shell hetero-structure, the band alignment of the HS aligns like that in the type-I core/shell hetero-structure. However, due to the low CB or the VB offset energy difference, either of the charge carriers is delocalized in two nanocrystals. This type of HS is more useful in terms of quality as well as application. The wider band materials passivate the core of the NC, whereas charge delocalization increases charge separation. The energy level band structure and extent of charge carrier localization for these core–shells HS are shown in Fig. 11A. Similar to QDs, the core–shell HSs are mainly synthesized by the hot injection method.116 In this case, the inner core material is prepared first, and then, the layers of other materials with different thicknesses are coated on it. The beauty of the core–shell NCs is that the band edge properties can be easily engineered by changing the number of layers. By inverting the binary QD materials, the electronic and photophysical properties have been changed tremendously. For example, the CdS/CdSe core–shell can form an inverted type-I structure, whereas CdSe/CdS forms a quasi-type-II structure (Fig. 11B).116 Both the electron and the hole were selectively extracted using benzoquinone (BQ) and pyridine (Py), respectively, from CdS/CdSe, whereas only electrons could be extracted from CdSe/CdS (Fig. 11C) due to the energy difference between the accessible band alignments. It was demonstrated from the fs-TA measurement (Fig. 11D) that in the presence of both BQ and Py, the 1S bleach kinetics recovered faster than that with only CdS/CdSe. The CdSe/CdS 1S bleach kinetics recovered faster only with BQ. The similar bleach kinetics in the presence of Py was attributed to an inefficient hole extraction. Band-edge engineering and the control of charge carrier dynamics were demonstrated by Boldt et al. using colloidal ZnSe/ZnS/CdS type-II NCs.117 It was observed that the wave function distribution of the HS completely depended on the thickness of the ZnS barrier (Fig. 12A), which was controlled by the annealing temperature of CdS and the amount of the deposited materials. They observed the suppression of both the band-edge absorption and emission with the increasing ZnS thickness (more than four monolayers) due to wave function overlap. The carrier dynamics were investigated using fs-TA measurements following 400 nm excitation (Fig. 12B). The distribution of the different electronic states upon the formation of the core–shell structure was successfully employed. Because of better charge separation and photostability as compared to that in the binary QDs, the core–shell NCs were used in the QDSC. Lee et al. used the CdS/CdSe/ZnS core–shell as the active material in QDSC.118 The step-wise band alignment was the driving force, which enhanced the electron injection and hole neutralization efficiency. As a result, they obtained the highest power conversion efficiency (PEC) of 4.22% as compared to 1.1% for CdS and 1.24% for CdSe. Furthermore, studies were performed by Pan et al. where they showed that due to the less charge recombination and higher photostability of CdS/CdSe, the PEC was enhanced to 5.32%.109 Few other studies reported by a different group showed that the PEC was enhanced owing to the inhibition of charge recombination.119–121 The same approach was utilized in CuInS2/ZnS QDs by Zhong et al. where the ZnS layer helped to diminish the trap states and enhanced the charge separation.122 Consequently, they were able to reach the record PEC of 7.04% as compared to 5.05% for only CuInS2. As abovementioned, the type-II HS is ideal for charge separation due to a staggered band alignment, which decoupled the photo-excited electron from the hole.41,123 CdTe/CdSe is one of the promising type-II core–shell structures that have been used in the QDSC. Since Te-based precursors are difficult to stabilize, a post-synthesis technique has been employed by Wang et al., and the PEC of 6.76% has been obtained.124 A shell thickness-dependent PCE was demonstrated in the CdSe/CdS quasi type-II core–shell HS.125 It was observed that with the increasing CdS shell thickness, the PCE of the CdSe/CdS HS increased. A record 3.88% PCE (which was 57% more than that for only CdSe) for the four monolayers of the CdS shell was observed due to the slow cooling and less charge recombination. Several other type-II core–shells were reported by the researcher where record PCEs were obtained due to slow charge recombination.126–129 An extreme charge separation was obtained in a CdS/CdTe-BrPGR (bromo pyrogallol red) system (Fig. 13A),130 where fs-TA spectroscopy was used to monitor the charge separation dynamics. The results showed that a 49% charge recombination occurred at a 1 ns time scale for CdS/BrPGR, whereas only 22% charge recombination was observed in CdS/CdTe-BrPGR (Fig. 13B) in the same time scale. The type-II regime and presence of the molecular adsorbate helped charge separation in the QD. Moreover, it was observed that Br-PGR formed a strong CT complex, which assisted in the absorption of more light in the solar spectrum. Likewise, an insignificant charge recombination was demonstrated in the CdSe/CdTe type-II core–shell sensitized ATC (Fig. 13C).74 Due to the cascade band alignment of the CdSe/ZnS type-I core–shell, a facile charge recombination was observed. In this study, a slow (6 ps) and comparatively fast (3 ps) hole transfer times were obtained for the type-I and type-II interfaces, respectively (Fig. 13D). In this regard, more studies were performed to understand the mechanism of the charge transfer process in the CdS/CdSe inverted type-I and CdS/CdTe-type-II sensitized Re–polypyridyl complexes.131
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic of the charge carrier distribution in different types of core–shell HSs. (B) Band-edge engineering of the CdS/CdSe inverted type-I and CdSe/CdS quasi type-II HSs. (C) Upper panel: Steady-state PL spectra of the CdS/CdSe inverted type I core–shell HS (a) in the absence of any quencher, (b) in the presence of a hole quencher, and (c) in the presence of an electron quencher (λex = 400 nm). Inset: Time-resolved PL decay trace of CdS/CdSe at 575 nm (a′) in the absence of any quencher molecule, (b′) in the presence of Py, and (c′) in the presence of BQ after excitation with a 445 nm laser source. Lower panel: Steady-state PL spectra of the CdSe/CdS quasi-type II core–shell HS (d) in the absence of any quencher, (e) in the presence of Py, and (f) in the presence of BQ (λex = 500 nm). Inset: Time-resolved PL decay trace of CdSe/CdS at 596 nm (d′) in the absence of any quencher molecule, (e′) in the presence of Py, and (f′) in the presence of BQ after excitation with a 445 nm laser source in degassed chloroform. “L” stands for the excitation laser profile. (D) Upper panel: Normalized bleach recovery dynamics for the CdS/CdSe inverted type I core–shell (a) in the absence of any quencher, (b) in the presence of an electron quencher (BQ), and (c) in the presence of a hole quencher (Py) at 578 nm in a chloroform solution. Lower panel: Normalized bleach recovery dynamics of the CdSe/CdS quasi-type II core–shell (d) in the absence of any quencher, (e) in the presence of an electron quencher (BQ), and (f) in the presence of a hole quencher (Py) at 560 nm in a chloroform solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  (A) Qualitative model for the temperature-dependent diffusion of the cations and the possible resulting potential landscapes speculating no alloying, an idealized one-step approximation, and a weak and strong diffusion of Cd2+ and Zn2+ ions. The red arrows symbolize cation diffusion. The energy axis is not drawn to scale. (B) Smoothed TA spectra of the ZnSe/ZnS/CdS particles made at 310 °C (left) after 100 ps. The spectra were fitted with Gaussian functions to determine the overlapping states (center). The decay kinetics of the 1S, 2S, and 1P–1S states were fitted to a triple-exponential decay function (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 13  (A) Charge distribution at the CdS/CdTe-Br-PGR interface. (B) Bleach recovery kinetic traces of the (a) CdS QD sensitized with Br-PGR at 560 nm and the (b) CdS/CdTe core–shell sensitized with BrPGR at 650 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustrating the electron and hole transfer process in the CdSe/ZnS type-I and CdSe/CdTe-type-II core–shell QDs sensitized by ATC. (D) Comparison of the normalized bleach recovery kinetics (at 20 ps) in the transient absorption study of (a) ATC–CdSe, (b) ATC–CdSe/ZnS, and (c) ATC–CdSe/CdTe at 540 nm. Inset: Normalized bleach recovery kinetics on a short time scale. All measurements were performed in chloroform following 400 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4. Alloy NCs
Band edge engineering in semiconductor nanocrystals is essential for different applications. In the case of the II–VI semiconductor quantum dots, it is more challenging to manipulate the band gap without changing the size of the nanocrystals, which can be easily achieved by alloying. Alloy QDs are the new class of versatile semiconductor nanocrystals.132–134 The quantum confinement effect of the alloy is also achieved by the dual behavior, size and composition of the NC. Therefore, the physical and opt-electronic properties of alloy QDs depend on both the size of the NC as well as the composition of the constituents. Thus, the composition of alloy nanocrystals provides an extra degree of freedom towards selecting desirable properties, which can help to design better nanostructures for several applications. Alloy QDs consist of two or more heterojunction semiconductor surfaces that exhibit a new rearrangement of charge carriers in the energy levels of the adjoining segments. Due to their high surface-to-volume ratio, the smaller NCs accumulate many surface defect states where charge carriers are trapped, and as a result, non-radiative processes are increased. The surface-trapped states can be reduced by forming an alloy where the wider band gap semiconductor material acts as a passivated layer. Due to these exciting properties of alloy QDs, these materials can be used in various applications such as photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, photocatalysis, and in vivo imaging.135–139 Depending on the structural property, these NCs are classified as homogeneous and graded alloy NCs. For a homogeneous alloy NC, the distribution of the constituent through the nanocrystals is the same, whereas in a graded structure, due to difference in the reactivity of the constituent, they form a quasi-core–shell type structure.139,140 Thus, the charge carrier dynamics in the homogeneous alloy NC and the graded alloy NC varies with their structure. CdSxSe1−x is one of the extensively studied alloy QDs in the QDSC because it can form all possible compositions due to a <3.5% lattice-mismatch between CdSe and CdS.141 Moreover, it shows enhanced light coverage in the solar spectrum,142–144 high PLQY with long-life excited-state properties145 and photostability.146 Herein, we present some examples, which show that the CdSxSe1−x alloy QD is a superior sensitizer than CdS and CdSe. The CdSeS-based QDSC was first designed by Wang et al. with a PCE of 0.6%.147 Although the efficiency was very low, this study motivated further research on the CdSxSe1−x alloyed QDs. By adopting the SILAR technique, Hossain et al. showed a PCE of 4.05%.141 Santra et al. found that by changing the layer thickness of the CdSeS QDs, the PCE could be controlled from 3.0% to 3.2% for three and two-layered QDs, respectively (Fig. 14A) under AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2).148 For this study, the authors used a photoanode of 0.24, 0.23, and 0.25 cm2 respectively for the green, orange, and red CdSSe QDs, the Cu2S/RGO composite was used as the counter electrode, and aqueous 2 M Na2S/2 M S was used as the electrolyte. The slow intraband electron cooling and less interface charge recombination stimulated an unprecedented record PCE of 4.5% (±0.18)% as reported for the CdS0.7Se0.3 alloy QDs.138 The PCE for CdS QDs and CdSe QDs was measured under identical conditions and found to be 1.1 (±0.07)% and 3.36 (±0.1)%, respectively; we attributed the low PCE of CdS to the less absorption of light in the solar spectrum. Although the CdSe and CdS0.7Se0.3 alloy QDs had similar size distributions, the slow intraband cooling of the hot electrons of the CdS0.7Se0.3 alloy QDs assisted in the absorption of more light compared to CdSe (Fig. 14B). In this work, we reported that CdSxSe1−x alloy QDs form a core–shell type structure. Due to different reactivity of the constituent, CdSxSe1−x alloy QDs formed graded type structure, and the core of the NC was CdSe rich. Although, the band energy diagram of CdSe and CdS show that they form a type-I structure, because of the low CB offset energy between CdSe and CdS, the excited electrons are no longer confined in only CdSe and the photoexcited holes become confined in inner CdSe due to a large VB offset energy. This graded core–shell structure is referred to as a quasi-type-II structure. Therefore, the photoexcited electron was decoupled from the hole, which increased the time for the Auger mediated intraband electron cooling process in the CdSxSe1−x alloy QDs. Furthermore, we noticed the CdSxSe1−x alloy QDs enhanced the charge separation due to a graded-like (fewer trap states) structure. Overall, a slow cooling of the hot electron and less charge recombination was achieved via alloy formation that enhanced the PCE in the QDSC. A similar slow hot carrier cooling and less charge recombination was also demonstrated in the CdZnSe alloy QDs. A reduced hole trapping process and high PLQY was also achieved via alloying as reported by Rosenthal and coworkers.149 Another important class of II–VI alloyed QDs is CdSexTe1−x. Pan et al. prepared CdSe0.45Te0.55 alloyed QDs via a non-injection high-temperature pyrolysis route.136 These CdSeTe alloyed QDs displayed a wider absorption (excitonic absorption onset at 800 nm) that extended into the NIR region. A record 6.36% PCE was reported based on the CdSe0.45Te0.55 alloyed QDs due to a wider solar light absorption, high conduction band edge, and stability as compared to that of the binary counterpart (Fig. 14C). It was reported that the post-synthesis deposition technique reduced charge recombination in the alloyed structure. Similar to the II–VI based semiconductor, the IV–VI based alloy was also widely studied in photovoltaic applications.150,151 Ma et al. reported that individual PbS and PbSe QDs showed better open-circuit voltages and a short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. However, in the PbSxSe1−x alloy both were enhanced because of the alloy structure.152 In addition to II–VI and IV–VI semiconductor alloys, I–III–VI group QDs have demonstrated significant interest due to their green light harvesting ability (absence of Cd and Pb) and low production cost.153–155 The CuInS2 (Se2) NCs are commonly known as CIS (CISe). Kuo et al. first employed CuInS2/ZnS on a ZnO nanowire for the QDSC.155 Using a iodine iodide I−/I3− redox couple, they obtained a 0.71% PCE. Utilizing CuInS2 as an active material in the QDSC, Meng and coworkers reported a 1.47% PCE.156 The architecture of the CIS based QDSC was changed by Teng and coworker.154 They used an additional layer of CdS that enhanced the PCE to 4.2%. It was demonstrated that the layer of CdS enhanced the light absorption range and reduced charge recombination. A substantially increased PCE from 1.06% to 2.49% was recorded for Au–CIS.157 It was demonstrated that the Au mediated bi-exciton dissociation in CIS enhanced the light harvesting capability of the Au–CIS nano-hybrid materials. Apart from these findings, there are several other reports where record PCEs were reported for alloy NCs due to less charge recombination.158–161 To reduce the trap states in QDs, Fitzmorris et al. synthesized a core/shell/shell structure using a Cd1−xZnxSe/ZnSe/ZnS structure.162 They observed a high PLQY due to a reduction in the trap states that were achieved by the graded-like structure (Fig. 15A). Furthermore, the carrier dynamics performed using fs-TA measurements (Fig. 15B) showed a slow recovery (dynamics) for the ground state bleach for the core/shell/shell alignment.
 Fig. 14  (A) IPCE spectra and J–V characteristics of the QDSCs with working electrodes containing (a) green, (b) orange, and (c) red CdSeS QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (B) Carrier dynamics in the CdSxSe1−x graded alloy. Right panel: Direct correlation between electron cooling (1S bleach recovery dynamics) and the incident photocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the CdS, CdSe, and CdS0.7Se0.3 alloy QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Band energetics and current density vs. voltage curves for different sensitizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic showing the band structure of an aCSS (core/shell/shell) QD and the lifetimes for various excitonic processes after absorption of a photon (purple arrow) with an energy greater than the bandgap. The band edges are curved in the core to represent the gradient alloy structure where the center of the core is cadmium rich. Following the absorption of a photon, carrier cooling occurred within an 8 ps lifetime. (B) 540 nm bleach recovery traces for aC (core), aCS (core/shell), and aCSS (core/shell/shell) with a low (left) and high (right) pump power. The trend shows that the aC bleach decayed the fastest, followed by aCS and aCSS. This same trend was consistent at higher pump powers and helps to describe the high QY of the aCSS sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
A hybrid solar cell was proposed by Soltani et al. utilizing a pDPP5T-2 electron-donating polymer, PC61BM and CdSexTe1−x QDs (Fig. 16A).163 The architect of this hybrid solar cell followed the co-sensitization method (described above), which allowed for more light absorption as well as charge separation. A record PCE of 5.11% was obtained when the device contained 4 wt% of the CdSexTe1−x alloy QDs. It was proposed that the enhanced PCE was observed due to the enhanced short circuit current. Furthermore, the improvement in the short circuit current could be due to the increase in light absorption by the composite (Fig. 16B). Moreover, the fs-TA kinetics as a function of the CdSexTe1−x alloy QDs showed slow recombination due to charge separation assisted by the cascade band alignment (Fig. 16C).
 Fig. 16  (A) Band energy diagram of the hybrid solar cell. (B) J–V characteristics of the hybrid solar cells under AM1.5G and 100 mW cm−2. (b) The corresponding EQE spectra as a function of the CdSexTe1−x content for the hybrid solar cells. (C) Time absorption profiles at 850 nm (top panel) and 1100 nm (bottom panel) for DPP:PC61BM and the ternary films containing 1, 4, 14 and 20 wt% CdSexTe1−x QDs. The solid lines represent the fitted curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Doped NCs
The introduction of an impurity into a crystal lattice is another way to increase charge separation in an NC system. The dopant molecule can also tune the optical and photophysical properties of the parent NCs. The impact of the dopant on the photophysical properties of the QDs and their utilization in a QDSC have been demonstrated in literature.153,164–169 Usually, transition metals and lanthanides are used as dopants as they have a vacant orbital for capturing the electron. A record 5.4% PCE was obtained by Santra et al. using a Mn-doped CdS/CdSe sensitizer (Fig. 17A).165 The photogenerated electron was transferred to the d-orbital of the Mn center (Fig. 17B), and due to the Laporte and spin forbidden transition in the d–d orbitals of Mn, the lifetime of the photoexcited electron prolonged that helped in the enhancement of the PCE (Fig. 17B).
 Fig. 17  (A) Current density vs. voltage (left) and IPCE vs. wavelength (right) of undoped and Mn: doped CdS and CdS/CdSe. (B) Schematic illustrating the electron transfer (ket) from doped CdS to TiO2 nanoparticles. kr and kr′ represent the electron recombination with holes and a redox couple, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Another study by Santra et al. reported that the Mn dopant suppressed charge recombination in Mn-doped QDs. Prolonging the excitation lifetime of the electron assisted in enhancing both the short circuit current and open-circuit voltage when the Fermi energy was increased to a higher negative potential.170 Another example of suppressed charge recombination through doping was reported by Zhong et al.171 By introducing the Mn dopant into CdSexTe1−x/ZnS, they demonstrated an improvement in the PCE from 8.55% to 9.40%. In addition, the Mn-center acted as an electron storage center in Mn:CdSe.46 Slow charge recombination was measured on a MnCdSe/Br-PGR complex using fs-TA spectroscopy.46 Moreover, approximately a 30% increased PCE (from 3.3 ± 0.11 to 4.29 ± 0.07%) was observed in the Mn-doped CdZnSSe gradient alloy due to the Mn-mediated slow electron cooling process.172 Apart from Mn, several other dopants like Cu,173–175 Co,176etc., have been introduced in the crystal lattice of QDs for charge separation.
6. Summary and outlook
Over the past few years, research on colloidal quantum dots has become significantly advanced in the field of synthesis, characterization, charge carrier dynamics, and device application optimization. These efforts have enabled the realization of a real photovoltaic device with a record PCE of more than 11% using solution-processed colloidal QDs. This seminal work has motivated us to further study these kinds of systems for the achievement of a stable, higher PCE for commercial applications. This review primarily focuses on the strategies of improved charge separation methods in colloidal semiconductor QDs and their application in QDSCs. The efficiency of a third-generation solar cell is directly proportional to its current density, which depends on the overall charge that separates after photoexcitation. We surveyed the overall progress and the possibilities of charge separation in QD-based solar cells in this study. Despite all the recent development in the field of QD research in terms of synthesis, characterization, and applications, there are many challenges in the commercialization of QDSCs. Consequently, we believe that the following steps could bring attention to the future developments in this field:
(i) The first and foremost attempt is to synthesize novel quantum dot materials with light-absorbing and photophysical properties. Although a large number of studies have been recently performed to improve the surface quality of quantum dots, the defect density of the quantum dot as compared to that of the bulk analog remains questionable. The degree of charge separation, improved charge carrier transport, and diminished defect states could be ameliorated by introducing surface engineering techniques such as introducing strong binding surface passivating ligands, a core/shell heterostructure, and self-healing surfaces.
(ii) In this comprehensive study, we realized that the light absorption and charge separation of quantum dots could be enhanced through the co-sensitization method, which was useful for achieving higher PCE. Thus, co-sensitization is one of the excellent choices to design a stable high-performance QDSC. Although many attempts have been made to design a QDSC through the co-sensitization method, we believe that finding a suitable co-sensitizer for a QDSC is challenging. A co-sensitizer not only helps to separate the charges by extracting the hole from the QDs and injecting the electron into the CB of the QD but also absorbs more light in the solar spectrum. Therefore, new co-sensitizers should be explored that can adjust the energetics (HOMO and LUMO) in terms of stability, are environmentally friendly, and have a low cost. Furthermore, solvent polarity plays a significant role in the solubility of the dye molecule. Engineering the polarity with QDs to better load the electrode surface could be another factor for enhancing the PCE. Moreover, to design co-sensitized QDSCs, more fundamental knowledge about the electron and hole transfer time in the QD/molecular system may be useful.
(iii) Suppression of charge recombination in a QDSC urgently needs to be explored to improve the solar cell performance. In our reviewing process, we noticed that a core/shell HS, alloys, doped nanocrystals, etc. are useful materials for solar cell applications due to their less charge recombination. Therefore, band edge engineering, alloy NC formation, and doping of suitable molecules are good choices for designing a high-performance QDSC. However, to execute these materials in solar cell applications, they need to be deposited on a TiO2 surface. Usually, a ligand exchange surface coating technique is adopted to fabricate this photoanode. This coating process is performed through the sol–gel method in which it is difficult to generate a compact photoanode. Thus, an alternative surface-coating technique, such as atomic layer deposition (ALD), may be a better choice to achieve higher PCE.
(iv) Charge recombination at the interfaces of the QD and electrolyte (mainly the hole neutralizing redox electrolyte) also results in a significant loss in the stability and efficiency; thus, the use of a suitable hole neutralizing electrolyte improves the efficiency of the QDSC. Research on the counter electrode and the electrolyte is essential for both charge separation and stability. Zhong and co-workers have contributed a lot of work towards finding an appropriate redox couple.177 They reported a breakthrough in PCE using a Co2+/3+ redox electrolyte. Therefore, we believe that the further exploration of a compatible electrolyte may aid in the development of a high-performance solar cell.
(v) The stability of the QDSC is one of the major issues in the current scenario. Long-term stability is required for real device applications. Therefore, more attempts are needed to improve the stability. The device sealing method for a liquid QDSC or the use of an all-inorganic based solid QDSC could reasonably enhance the long-term stability.
(vi) Moreover, one of the main concerns is that the device should be environmentally friendly. Most of the QDs are based on Cd or Pb, which are known as toxic and hazardous materials. Therefore, the active materials used in the QDSC should be green and not harmful to the environment. Cd- and Pb-free I–III–VI and I–III–VI2 QDs are alternative choices for this application. The low bandgap CIS/Se (CuInS2 and CuInSe2)159,178 and CIGS/Se (CuInGaS2 and CuInGaSe2)179 QDs have good light-absorbing properties. More studies on their charge carrier dynamics may help to build a real device for the QDSC. Moreover, aqueous-based redox electrolytes are best choice than the toxic polysulfide electrolyte. A carbon-based counter electrode may be used in the QDSC as it is environmentally friendly, has higher activity, and is cost-effective; based on all these fundamental ideas, we speculate that researchers will be able to design a charge-separated active QD for efficient device applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
P. M. acknowledges DAE (Govt. of India) for the research fellowship.
References
A. I. Ekimov, A. L. Efros and A. A. Onushchenko, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 921 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bao and M. G. Bawendi, Nature, 2015, 523, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Wood, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kudera, M. Zanella, C. Giannini, A. Rizzo, Y. Li, G. Gigli, R. Cingolani, G. Ciccarella, W. Spahl, W. J. Parak and L. Manna, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 548 CrossRef CAS .
F. Widmann, J. Simon, B. Daudin, G. Feuillet, J. L. Rouvière, N. T. Pelekanos and G. Fishman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, R15989 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Berry, Phys. Rev., 1967, 153, 989 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Arthur Jr., J. Appl. Phys., 1968, 39, 4032 CrossRef .
R. Dingle, W. Wiegmann and C. H. Henry, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1974, 33, 827 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Reed, J. N. Randall, R. J. Aggarwal, R. J. Matyi, T. M. Moore and A. E. Wetsel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 60, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Cui, R. M. Levenson, L. W. K. Chung and S. Nie, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Ancona, S. E. Kooi, W. Kruppa, A. W. Snow, E. E. Foos, L. J. Whitman, D. Park and L. Shirey, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lam, Y. F. Zhang, Y. H. Tang, C. S. Lee, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, J. Cryst. Growth, 2000, 220, 466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545 CrossRef CAS .
J. Thessing, J. Qian, H. Chen, N. Pradhan and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, Y. Jang and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kwon, Y. Piao, J. Park, S. Angappane, Y. Jo, N.-M. Hwang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, S. Sun, W. Gaschler, H. Doyle, T. A. Betley and C. R. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 47 CAS .
H. Liu, J. S. Owen and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Steckel, B. K. H. Yen, D. C. Oertel and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, A. a. O. El-Ballouli, L. Rollny, O. Voznyy, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lignos, R. Maceiczyk and A. J. deMello, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Sounart, P. A. Safier, J. A. Voigt, J. Hoyt, D. R. Tallant, C. M. Matzke and T. A. Michalske, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 908 RSC .
L. Jing, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Li, X. Huang, Y. Li, A. L. Rogach and M. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Pearson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 3533 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Han, Y. Wu, Q. Xiang, Y. Qiao, C. Feng, Z. Chen and X. Deng, Mater. Lett., 2019, 255, 126560 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bratskaya, K. Sergeeva, M. Konovalova, E. Modin, E. Svirshchevskaya, A. Sergeev, A. Mironenko and A. Pestov, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 182, 110342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. S. Souza, F. L. N. Sousa, D. V. Freitas, É. T. Neto, S. K. L. Rocha, A. G. Silva, M. V. Silva, M. T. S. Correia, P. A. Santa-Cruz, D. M. A. Ferraz Navarro and M. Navarro, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 237, 121832 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, F. Peng, J. Zhou, W. Gong, G. Slaven, K. P. Loh, C. T. Lim and D. T. Leong, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 41 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jalalah, Y.-H. Ko, F. A. Harraz, M. S. Al-Assiri and J.-G. Park, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 257 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Surana, I. T. Salisu, R. M. Mehra and B. Bhattacharya, Opt. Mater., 2018, 82, 135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, H. Zhu, X. Wang, D. Cui, Z. Gao, D. Su, J. Zhao and O. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, X.-T. Kong, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, F. Navarro-Pardo, D. Barba, D. Ma, S. Sun, A. O. Govorov, H. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800656 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Debnath, P. Maity, S. Maiti and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros and S. C. Erwin, Science, 2008, 319, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-N. Gillet and M. Meunier, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Borchert, S. Haubold, M. Haase, H. Weller, C. McGinley, M. Riedler and T. Möller, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 151 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rafeletos, S. Nørager and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2542 RSC .
A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6514 CrossRef .
L. P. Balet, S. A. Ivanov, A. Piryatinski, M. Achermann and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H.-J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Baranov, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, T. S. Perova, R. A. Moore, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, Y. Masumoto and I. Nabiev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 165306 CrossRef .
M. D. Peterson, L. C. Cass, R. D. Harris, K. Edme, K. Sung and E. A. Weiss, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bockelmann and G. Bastard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 8947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 16338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pandey and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Science, 2008, 322, 929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lowisch, M. Rabe, F. Kreller and F. Henneberger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2489 CrossRef CAS .
H. Benisty, C. M. Sotomayor-Torrès and C. Weisbuch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 10945 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Sagar, R. R. Cooney, S. L. Sewall, E. A. Dias, M. M. Barsan, I. S. Butler and P. Kambhampati, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235321 CrossRef .
T. H. Gfroerer, M. D. Sturge, K. Kash, J. A. Yater, A. S. Plaut, P. S. D. Lin, L. T. Florez, J. P. Harbison, S. R. Das and L. Lebrun, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 16474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Urayama, T. B. Norris, J. Singh and P. Bhattacharya, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4028 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kambhampati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22089 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin and A. J. Nozik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kambhampati, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, S. Rühle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maity, T. Debnath and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4020 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, R. Nicolaescu, S. Paek, J. Ko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Singhal and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16358 CrossRef CAS .
T. Debnath, P. Maity and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 13305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Matylitsky, L. Dworak, V. V. Breus, T. Basché and J. Wachtveitl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Harris, S. Bettis Homan, M. Kodaimati, C. He, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, N. K. Swenson, S. Lian, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2299 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Ahmed, S. M. Aly, A. Usman, M. S. Eita, V. A. Melnikov and O. F. Mohammed, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8010 RSC .
P. Singhal, P. Maity, S. K. Jha and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 10590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, Z.-S. Li, J. Zhao, L. Wang, Q.-D. Chen, W.-Q. Wang and H.-B. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, Z. Huang, D. Wu and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, X. Xiang and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Olshansky, T. X. Ding, Y. V. Lee, S. R. Leone and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Olshansky, A. D. Balan, T. X. Ding, X. Fu, Y. V. Lee and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malicki, K. E. Knowles and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4400 RSC .
Z. Xu, C. R. Hine, M. M. Maye, Q. Meng and M. Cotlet, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lian, D. J. Weinberg, R. D. Harris, M. S. Kodaimati and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Ding, J. H. Olshansky, S. R. Leone and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Maity, J. Dana and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18348 CrossRef CAS .
S. Melle, O. G. Calderón, M. Laurenti, D. Mendez-Gonzalez, A. Egatz-Gómez, E. López-Cabarcos, E. Cabrera-Granado, E. Díaz and J. Rubio-Retama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18751 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Blas-Ferrando, J. Ortiz, V. González-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, I. Mora-Seró, F. Fernández-Lázaro and Á. Sastre-Santos, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1732 RSC .
B. J. Walker, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Maity, T. Gayathri, S. P. Singh and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
P.-P. Li, Y. Cao, C.-J. Mao, B.-K. Jin and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1563 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Makhal, K. Lakshman, T. Bora, J. Dutta and S. Kumar Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14248 CrossRef CAS .
T. Manzoor and A. H. Pandith, J. Comput. Chem., 2019, 40, 2444–2452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ojha, T. Debnath, P. Maity, M. Makkar, S. Nejati, K. V. Ramanujachary, P. K. Chowdhury, H. N. Ghosh and A. K. Ganguli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6581 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. Aashuri, A. Simchi, S. Kalytchuk and Z. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18886 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Blas-Ferrando, J. Ortiz, V. González-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, I. Mora-Seró, F. Fernández-Lázaro and Á. Sastre-Santos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J. C. Flanagan, B. Lee, T. Hwang, J. Kim, B. Gil, M. Shim and B. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, J. C. Flanagan, J. Kim, A. J. Yun, B. Lee, M. Shim and B. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, L.-S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, I. Mekis, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, O. Benson and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brovelli, R. D. Schaller, S. A. Crooker, F. García-Santamaría, Y. Chen, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, H. Zhang, K. Cheng, Y. Hou, J. Hua and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, C.-H. Chuang, C. Burda and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, P. Z. El-Khoury, A. N. Tarnovsky, M. Kirsanova, I. Nemitz, A. Nemchinov and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, L. J. Hill, J. Chen, J. R. McBride, N. G. Pavlopolous, N. E. Richey, J. Pyun and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chuang, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2530 CrossRef CAS .
M. Allione, A. Ballester, H. Li, A. Comin, J. L. Movilla, J. I. Climente, L. Manna and I. Moreels, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, C.-H. Chuang, C. Burda and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16255 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maity, T. Debnath and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26202 CrossRef CAS .
K. Boldt, C. Ramanan, A. Chanaewa, M. Werheid and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee, B.-M. Huang and H.-T. Chien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6903 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Radich, N. R. Peeples, P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16463 CrossRef CAS .
D. Punnoose, C. S. S. Pavan Kumar, H. W. Seo, M. Shiratani, A. E. Reddy, S. Srinivasa Rao, C. V. Thulasi-Varma, S.-K. Kim, S.-H. Chung and H.-J. Kim, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3423 RSC .
J. B. Sambur and B. A. Parkinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, I. Mora-Seró, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Feng, G. Yang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dana, S. Maiti, V. S. Tripathi and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, Q. Shen, I. Mora-Seró, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, Y. Kuga, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yu, B.-X. Lei, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1396 RSC .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, H. Qin, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1536 RSC .
J. Luo, H. Wei, F. Li, Q. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3464 RSC .
P. Maity, T. Debnath, U. Chopra and H. N. Ghosh, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2698 RSC .
P. Maity, T. Debnath, T. Banerjee, A. Das and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10051 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Korgel and H. G. Monbouquette, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 3588 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, A. Kornowski, M. G. Burt, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 224, 153 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maity, T. Debnath and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10785 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, H. Lu, Z. Yang, L. Tong, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, K. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Feng and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Swafford, L. A. Weigand, M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride, J. L. Rapaport, T. L. Watt, S. K. Dixit, L. C. Feldman and S. J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Maity, S. Maiti, T. Debnath, J. Dana, S. K. Guin and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21309 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Bailey and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaniyankandy, S. Rawalekar and H. N. Ghosh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2755 RSC .
M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, N. Mathews and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7154 RSC .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aubert, M. Cirillo, S. Flamee, R. Van Deun, H. Lange, C. Thomsen and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2388 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Garrett, A. D. Dukes Iii, J. R. McBride, N. J. Smith, S. J. Pennycook and S. J. Rosenthal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12736 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Maity, T. Debnath and H. N. Ghosh, Slow Electron Cooling Dynamics of Highly Luminescent CdSxSe1−x Alloy Quantum Dot, in Ultrafast Phenomena XIX, ed. K. Yamanouchi, S. Cundiff, R. de Vivie-Riedle, M. Kuwata-Gonokami, L. DiMauro, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, p. 275 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Peng, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Yanagida and L. Han, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7690 RSC .
A. Kumar, K.-t. Li, A. R. Madaria and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1181 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Keene, J. R. McBride, N. J. Orfield and S. J. Rosenthal, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Smith, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. Wei, Q. Huang, X. Hu, H. Zhao, R. Yu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3881 RSC .
T.-L. Li, Y.-L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315 RSC .
K.-T. Kuo, D.-M. Liu, S.-Y. Chen and C.-C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6780 RSC .
X. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15903 RSC .
S. Mondal, R. Aepuru, J. Dana, N. Ghorai and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 28497 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, J. Yang, J. H. Yu, W. Baek, C.-H. Lee, H. J. Son, T. Hyeon and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, Z. Pan, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Zhao, D. Long, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhong, J.-S. Yu and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8398 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Fitzmorris, Y.-C. Pu, J. K. Cooper, Y.-F. Lin, Y.-J. Hsu, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Soltani, A. A. Katbab, K. Schaumberger, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, S. Rechberger, E. Spiecker, A. G. Alabau, A. Ruland, A. Saha, D. M. Guldi, V. Sgobba and T. Ameri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 654 RSC .
A. Pimachev, U. Poudyal, V. Proshchenko, W. Wang and Y. Dahnovsky, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 26771 RSC .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, L. Lv, C. Fei, Y. Wang, X. Liu and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19653 RSC .
N. Pradhan, D. M. Battaglia, Y. Liu and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pradhan, D. Goorskey, J. Thessing and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mocatta, G. Cohen, J. Schattner, O. Millo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Science, 2011, 332, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and Y.-S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 654 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Shen, T. Izuishi, Z. Pan, K. Zhao and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 877 RSC .
T. Debnath, K. Parui, S. Maiti and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 3755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Srivastava, S. Jana and N. Pradhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Viswanatha, S. Brovelli, A. Pandey, S. A. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Makkar and R. Viswanatha, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 22103 RSC .
N. Firoozi, H. Dehghani and M. Afrooz, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 98 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, H. Rao, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7659 RSC .
L. Zhang, Z. Pan, W. Wang, J. Du, Z. Ren, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21442 RSC .
T. D. Lee and A. U. Ebong, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 70, 1286 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Bridging energy gap diagram among molecules to the bulk. The inset shows the equation for the Bohr radius and the energy of the exciton in terms of confinement and Coulomb energy. (B) Size-dependent bandgap energy of the quantum dots. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 16.) Copyright (2010) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (C) Utilization of QDs in different applications. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright (2004) Nature Publishing Group. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright (2008) Nature Publishing Group. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis protocols for colloidal QDs. (A) Schematic of the hot injection method following the La Mer model for the growth of monodispersed colloidal QDs starting from nucleation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright (1950) American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright (2007) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Non-injected heating process. All precursors were added to a reaction vessel at room temperature and heated to start the nucleation and growth processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic of the microfluidic synthesis method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (B) Time-lapse images of the CdS QD fluorescence during nucleation and growth. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1.20)

 	Fig. 4  (A) Splitting of the CB and VB of the CdSe QD. (B and C) Intraband electron relaxation mechanism in semiconductor NCs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the different photophysical processes involved in the QDSC. Absorption of the solar light by the active (QDs) materials (1), electron injection to TiO2 (2), separation of the photoexcited electron (3), hole transfer followed by neutralization of the hole by the redox couple (4 and 5), exciton annihilation (6), and interfacial charge recombination between the oxidizer (redox couple) and the electron either from the QDs (7) or from the TiO2 surface (8).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) CT processes (hole transfer, electron injection, and charge recombination reactions) involving CdS QDs and the DBF dye in chloroform; the inset shows the molecular structure of DBF. (B) Optical absorption spectra of the (a) DBF dye (0.3 mM), (b) CdS QD (0.49 μM), and (c–i) DBF–CdS complex at a constant DBF concentration (0.3 mM) with the increasing CdS QD concentration in chloroform (in the mixture, [CdS] is (c) 0.049, (d) 0.098, (e) 0.147, (f) 0.196, (g) 0.294, (h) 0.392, and (i) 0.49 μM). (Inset) Benesi–Hildebrand (B–H) plot of the DBF–CdS CT complex. (C) Transient absorption spectra of the CdS–DBF composite materials in chloroform at different time delays after excitation with a 400 nm laser light. (Inset) Kinetic decay trace at 590 nm. (D) Kinetic decay traces at (a) 500, (b) 650, and (c) 900 nm for the CdS–DBF system in chloroform after exciting the samples with 400 nm laser light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photovoltaic performance of the DBF–CdS super-sensitizer in terms of (A) IPCE vs. wavelength and the (B) current density (J) as a function of the voltage (V) for the (a) CdS QD, (b) DBF molecule, and (c) CdS–DBF composite. (C) The IPCE spectra and (D) J–V curves obtained for the nanostructured TiO2 film electrodes modified with (a) CdS, (b) JK-216, (c) CdS/JK-216, and (d) CdS/Al2O3/JK-216. (Electrolyte: 0.22 M Co(bpy)3(PF6)2, 0.033 M Co(bpy)3(PF6)3, 0.1 M LiClO4, and 0.2 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile). Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

DBF	0.54	0.19	54	
0.23

CdS	0.66	0.12	62	
0.43

CdS_DBF	0.56	0.47	64	
1.1


 	Fig. 8  (A) (a and b) Schematic of the modified DSSC system. The system consisted of a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) on which nanocrystalline (nc) TiO2 (off-white big circles) was grown. QDs (red circles) bound to nc-TiO2via a MPA linker (not shown) and covered by a thin layer of amorphous TiO2 (gray coating) to which the dye molecules (small blue circles) were connected. This entire structure was immersed in a liquid redox electrolyte (I−/I3−). (c) The band alignment of each component in the system relative to the vacuum level. (B) Lifetime measurements of the different cell configurations excited at 470 nm, showing an efficient FRET in the measured electrode. The donor emission transient (detected using a 633 ± 30 nm band-pass filter) is presented in panel a. The dashed red curve represents the lifetime of the donor only, whereas the solid black curve was measured in the presence of an acceptor. The acceptor emission decay trace (detected using a 700 nm long-pass filter) is presented in panel b. Herein, the dashed blue curve represents the lifetime of the acceptor only, whereas the solid green curve was obtained in the presence of a donor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Optical absorption spectra of CdSe (1 μM) in the presence of various PGR concentrations. The PGR concentrations were (a) 0.0, (b) 1 μM, (c) 10 μM, (d) 50 μM, (e) 100 μM, and (f) 100 μM PGR without CdSe. Inset: Absorption spectra of the pure CdSe QD. (B) Schematic of charge separation in the PGR–CdSe QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (C) Optical absorption spectra of the (a) ATC dye (20 mm), (b) CdSe QD (0.1 mm), and (c–h) ATC–CdSe complex at a constant ATC concentration (20 mm) with the increasing CdSe QD concentration in chloroform (in the mixture, [CdSe] was (c) 0.002, (d) 0.004, (e) 0.02, (f) 0.04, (g) 0.08, and (h) 0.1 mm). Inset: Benesi–Hildebrand (B–H) plot of the ATC–CdSe CT complex. (D) Transient absorption decay kinetics of the ATC–CdSe complex at (a) 540 nm, (b) 670 nm and (c) 900 nm, after excitation with a 400 nm laser light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Photogenerated electron–hole transfer mechanism of the co-sensitization strategy with a cascade energy level arrangement for the TiO2/g-C3N4/CdS/CdSe nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. (B) Co-sensitization via electron and energy harvesting in the CdTe quantum dot-decorated ZnO nanorod-based dye-sensitized solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic of the different mechanisms (type I and type II pathways) of the photoinduced electron transfer between the dye and the semiconductor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (D) Characteristics of the bulk heterojunction PbS/G CQD solar cells. J–V and EQE spectra of the bulk heterojunction PbS/G CQD solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic of the charge carrier distribution in different types of core–shell HSs. (B) Band-edge engineering of the CdS/CdSe inverted type-I and CdSe/CdS quasi type-II HSs. (C) Upper panel: Steady-state PL spectra of the CdS/CdSe inverted type I core–shell HS (a) in the absence of any quencher, (b) in the presence of a hole quencher, and (c) in the presence of an electron quencher (λex = 400 nm). Inset: Time-resolved PL decay trace of CdS/CdSe at 575 nm (a′) in the absence of any quencher molecule, (b′) in the presence of Py, and (c′) in the presence of BQ after excitation with a 445 nm laser source. Lower panel: Steady-state PL spectra of the CdSe/CdS quasi-type II core–shell HS (d) in the absence of any quencher, (e) in the presence of Py, and (f) in the presence of BQ (λex = 500 nm). Inset: Time-resolved PL decay trace of CdSe/CdS at 596 nm (d′) in the absence of any quencher molecule, (e′) in the presence of Py, and (f′) in the presence of BQ after excitation with a 445 nm laser source in degassed chloroform. “L” stands for the excitation laser profile. (D) Upper panel: Normalized bleach recovery dynamics for the CdS/CdSe inverted type I core–shell (a) in the absence of any quencher, (b) in the presence of an electron quencher (BQ), and (c) in the presence of a hole quencher (Py) at 578 nm in a chloroform solution. Lower panel: Normalized bleach recovery dynamics of the CdSe/CdS quasi-type II core–shell (d) in the absence of any quencher, (e) in the presence of an electron quencher (BQ), and (f) in the presence of a hole quencher (Py) at 560 nm in a chloroform solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Qualitative model for the temperature-dependent diffusion of the cations and the possible resulting potential landscapes speculating no alloying, an idealized one-step approximation, and a weak and strong diffusion of Cd2+ and Zn2+ ions. The red arrows symbolize cation diffusion. The energy axis is not drawn to scale. (B) Smoothed TA spectra of the ZnSe/ZnS/CdS particles made at 310 °C (left) after 100 ps. The spectra were fitted with Gaussian functions to determine the overlapping states (center). The decay kinetics of the 1S, 2S, and 1P–1S states were fitted to a triple-exponential decay function (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Charge distribution at the CdS/CdTe-Br-PGR interface. (B) Bleach recovery kinetic traces of the (a) CdS QD sensitized with Br-PGR at 560 nm and the (b) CdS/CdTe core–shell sensitized with BrPGR at 650 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Schematic illustrating the electron and hole transfer process in the CdSe/ZnS type-I and CdSe/CdTe-type-II core–shell QDs sensitized by ATC. (D) Comparison of the normalized bleach recovery kinetics (at 20 ps) in the transient absorption study of (a) ATC–CdSe, (b) ATC–CdSe/ZnS, and (c) ATC–CdSe/CdTe at 540 nm. Inset: Normalized bleach recovery kinetics on a short time scale. All measurements were performed in chloroform following 400 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) IPCE spectra and J–V characteristics of the QDSCs with working electrodes containing (a) green, (b) orange, and (c) red CdSeS QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. (B) Carrier dynamics in the CdSxSe1−x graded alloy. Right panel: Direct correlation between electron cooling (1S bleach recovery dynamics) and the incident photocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the CdS, CdSe, and CdS0.7Se0.3 alloy QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (C) Band energetics and current density vs. voltage curves for different sensitizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic showing the band structure of an aCSS (core/shell/shell) QD and the lifetimes for various excitonic processes after absorption of a photon (purple arrow) with an energy greater than the bandgap. The band edges are curved in the core to represent the gradient alloy structure where the center of the core is cadmium rich. Following the absorption of a photon, carrier cooling occurred within an 8 ps lifetime. (B) 540 nm bleach recovery traces for aC (core), aCS (core/shell), and aCSS (core/shell/shell) with a low (left) and high (right) pump power. The trend shows that the aC bleach decayed the fastest, followed by aCS and aCSS. This same trend was consistent at higher pump powers and helps to describe the high QY of the aCSS sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Band energy diagram of the hybrid solar cell. (B) J–V characteristics of the hybrid solar cells under AM1.5G and 100 mW cm−2. (b) The corresponding EQE spectra as a function of the CdSexTe1−x content for the hybrid solar cells. (C) Time absorption profiles at 850 nm (top panel) and 1100 nm (bottom panel) for DPP:PC61BM and the ternary films containing 1, 4, 14 and 20 wt% CdSexTe1−x QDs. The solid lines represent the fitted curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Current density vs. voltage (left) and IPCE vs. wavelength (right) of undoped and Mn: doped CdS and CdS/CdSe. (B) Schematic illustrating the electron transfer (ket) from doped CdS to TiO2 nanoparticles. kr and kr′ represent the electron recombination with holes and a redox couple, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
