Device optimization of CsSnI 2.95 F 0.05 -based all-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with non-linear charge-carrier-density dependent photovolta ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA04593A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA04593A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1222-1229Device optimization of CsSnI2.95F0.05-based all-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with non-linear charge-carrier-density dependent photovoltaic behaviors†

        
          
            Shuai 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingwei 
            Shang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liyan 
            Yu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Lifeng 
            Dong
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266042, PR China
bDepartment of Physics, Astronomy, and Materials Science, Missouri State University, Springfield, Missouri 65897, USA. E-mail: donglifeng@qust.edu.cn
Received 
      4th September 2014
    , Accepted 16th November 2014First published on 24th November 2014AbstractDetermining how the intrinsic kinetics of photo-generated charge carriers affect extrinsic photovoltaic performance is difficult yet essential work for the optimization of novel types of solar cells. However, contributions of several coexistent internal reactions can rarely be differentiated from one to another solely by means of experimental approaches. In this contribution, we propose the optimization of all-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells by applying the inorganic hole-transport material (HTM) CsSnI2.95F0.05, experimentally focusing on enhancement of the interconnection between electrolyte precursor and the TiO2 nanorod array. More importantly, by taking advantage of a physics-based device-level model that describes the diverse kinetics occurring among active TiO2/dye/HTM junctions, we quantified the correlation between electrolyte precursor adsorbed onto the TiO2 electrode and hole injection from dye to HTM. We attribute the significant impact of hole injection rate (khi) on non-linear charge carrier density-dependent photovoltaic response to one physical interpretation of experimental observations concerning abnormal photovoltaic responses following variable intensity illumination. Eventually, we achieved an average power conversion efficiency of approximately 7.7% over a large number of fabricated cells, the best one of which attained 9.8%.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), first reported in 1991 by O’Regan and Grätzel,1 declared the beginning of a new era in photovoltaic devices. DSCs utilize nanoporous metal oxide electrodes, having a relatively high internal surface area for sufficient sensitizer anchoring, and separate light absorption/photogeneration from electron/hole transport for reduction of recombination processes. In recent years, based on conventional DSCs, various advanced materials or device structures have been employed for additional improvements in cell performance, e.g., polymer-encapsulated dye-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles,2 TiO2 hollow spheres for photoelectrode composition,3 and coaxial fiber-shaped DSC structures.4 In particular, substitution of solid-state hole-transport-materials (HTMs) for the aqueous electrolytes, such as iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) redox couples in organic solvents, has gradually become one of the most promising directions. Until now, several solid-state HTMs, such as spiro-OMeTAD,5,6 CuAlO2,7 polymer,8 and inorganic–organic hybrid gel,9 have been applied in device fabrication, and recently reported DSCs, involving CsSnI3 doped with SnF2, have achieved an impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) up to 10.2%.10 Upgraded all-solid-state solar cells can meet technological challenges such as electrolyte leakage and electrode corrosion; moreover, they require a one-step dye-regeneration process instead of two or more steps as conventional I−/I3− redox couples behaving a lower over-potential for dye regeneration by HTMs.11
In practice, unlike liquid electrolytes, the disadvantage of solid HTMs, besides their relatively low mobility, probably is their poor penetration into nanoporous photoelectrodes.12 Extreme care is required for successful coupling between HTMs and dye-sensitized TiO2 membranes. Detailed recombination mechanisms and internal reactions of all-solid-state photovoltaic (PV) devices deserve thorough investigation, which is quite necessary for optimization during cell fabrication processes.
On aspect of theoretical analysis for some of the new generation of solar cells, the nonlinear carrier-density dependent behavior (called ‘nonlinear behavior’ hereafter), has been observed frequently in PV devices such as DSCs,11,13 P3HT/PCBM blend solar cells,12 and so forth. Correspondingly, in device-level modelling work, so-called empirical non-linear recombination theory14,15 is widely adopted to describe the charge carrier losses, which in brief, provides an empirical description for total recombination rate in formation of power-law relation on carrier density with a nonlinear exponent, but does not physically differentiate among internal kinetic mechanism possibilities. Although non-linear recombination theory can predict an abnormal carrier-density-dependent response observed during measurements, it does not provide a physical explanation for this apparent nonlinear behavior.
We have developed one kind of all-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell (SDSC) by assembling a self-synthesized unit with a TiO2 nanorod array16 as the photoelectrode and inorganic CsSnI2.95F0.05 as the HTM. The optimization work associated with this device includes a study on optimal annealing temperature of the TiO2 nanorod array for its crystalline improvement,17 and modifying the morphology of the TiO2 nanostructured electrode.18 In particular, we created a double-layered TiO2 array-cluster structure in order to enhance dye coverage. The corresponding PCE is only circa 1.2%,18 probably due to the unexpected intensive recombination induced by excessively complicated film structure. Instead, the optimal morphology and crystallinity of the single-layer TiO2 nanorod array was obtained by optimizing the temperature and duration of calcination treatment, producing solar cells in which the PCE was approximately around 2.81%.17
In this paper, we continue the optimization work focusing on solid-state HTM CsSnI2.95F0.05. Until now, we have achieved a PCE as much as 9.8%, with the average value approximating 7.7%. More importantly, a physics-based device model has been constructed that attempts to physically describe different charge carrier recombination mechanisms and dye regeneration/hole transfer kinetics for such all-solid-state solar cells. By numerically solving the device model, we identify the relationship between electrolyte precursor soaking time (ts) onto the TiO2 electrode and hole injection rate (khi) from dye to HTM; and we analyze how khi influences non-linear charge carrier density-dependent photovoltaic response, as one explanation for this apparent nonlinear behavior in this instance.
Experimental
Material synthesis and device assembly
Solid-state HTM CsSnI2.95F0.05 was produced by heating a mixture of CsI, SnI2, and SnF2 in a stoichiometric ratio at 450 °C for 0.5 h under vacuum and then quenching to room temperature. Electrolyte precursor was prepared by dissolving 150–300 mg CsSnI2.95F0.05 powder into 1.5 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide solvent. All processes above were performed under an Ar atmosphere. Subsequently, the precursor solution was stored at 0 °C in a protective Ar atmosphere. The detailed preparation of TiO2 and platinum counter electrodes can be referred to our reports elsewhere1,2 or the brief introduction given in ESI.†
For cell fabrication, the Pt counter electrode was affixed to the TiO2 electrode with the platinum coating facing the TiO2 nanorods. Subsequently, 0.05 mL of electrolyte precursor solution was injected into the interspace between the electrodes. Finally, before conducting the photovoltaic measurements, a large group of cells was stored in the dark under ambient atmosphere and held for different durations from 2 h to 48 h.
Morphology and photovoltaic characterization
Micro-morphologies of synthesized material and device structure were examined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6700F). The cross-sectioned SEM image [Fig. 1(a)] demonstrates a stacked device configuration from which the thicknesses of the TiO2 electrode (∼1 μm) and CsSnI2.95F0.05 cap layer (3–4 μm) were estimated.
 Fig. 1  (a) FESEM image of a cross-sectioned CsSnI2.95F0.05-based all-solid-state DSC, and (b) corresponding energy band and primary internal reactions among TiO2/N719/CsSnI2.95F0.05. 
Photocurrent–voltage (j–V) characterizations were conducted under AM1.5G illumination provided by a full-spectrum solar simulator (Newport 96000) and neutral density filters. Two injected light intensities with powers of 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) and 14.2 mW cm−2 were exported. It is noted that for j–V measurements, the bias voltage scanning was set at 0.01 V s−1 scanning rate with scanning orientation from zero to high voltage. In fact, we also experimentally checked the hysteresis phenomenon (as shown in Fig. S1 of ESI†) that was unexpectedly observed in the latest perovskite-based solar cells,19 and demonstrated that although CsSnI2.95F0.05 is a kind of unusual perovskite compound,20 our cells are robustly independent on optoelectronic measurement conditions, neither on the scan rate nor scan orientation of bias voltage. Correlated electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) were acquired on a CHI660D electrochemical workstation (ChenHua, China). External quantum efficiency (EQE) was characterized at AC mode, by scanning the wavelength from 400 to 800 nm with 10 nm wavelength intervals, and specific measurement system was schematically illustrated in Fig. S2 of ESI.†
Measurement observation
An optimal PCE was achieved when the electrolyte precursor was maintained between the electrodes for around 48 h. The measurement data, associated with a set of solar cells fabricated under the same conditions, indicate the average PCE is approximately 7.7%, and the best efficiency attains as much as 9.8% under 14.2 mW cm−2 illumination, concluded from the statistical diagram with typical j–V characteristics shown in Fig. S3 of ESI;† the same measurements executed under 1 sun achieves an average PCE around 5%.
In particular, Fig. 2 presents j–V characteristics associated with one solar cell measured under 1 sun (plot-a, PCE ∼5%) and under dark condition (plot-b). In order to conduct a study dedicating to intrinsic optoelectrical properties of solar cells without disturbance by electric connection, the series resistance Rs from external circuits has been eliminated, thus yielding j′–V (plot-c).
 Fig. 2  Measured j–V characteristics illuminated by solar simulator (plot a, η ≈ 5%, FF = 0.37 @1 sun) and dark condition (plot b); by excluding series resistance Rs from the entire circuit, j′sp–V curve (plot d) has an apparent discrepancy with respect to j′–V (plot-c, η ≈ 7.4%, FF = 0.58 @1 sun), of which the rectangle and triangle symbols represent the maximum power points, respectively. (Here Rs = 7.22 Ω cm2, the value of which is obtained by EIS measurement and given in Table 1). 
For many kinds of photovoltaic devices, j–V characteristics under dark and light conditions usually obey the superposition relation given by the mathematical expression j′sp(V) = jsc + jdark(V), with jsc being the short-circuit current density, and jdark(V) the current–voltage characteristic under dark conditions. It indicates that the j–V relationship under illumination can be reconstructed by jsp(V). However, by following this reconstruction (Fig. 2, plot-d), the obvious displacement of the maximum power point between j′sp–V and j′–V can been observed, thus indicating that the conventional superposition relationship is invalid for our fabricated cells.
On the other hand, we present in Fig. 3 the effective lifetime (τeff) versus voltage variation of the same cells, extracted from EIS (illuminated) and OCVD measurements acquired at the same moment [measurement data and parameter extraction can be referred to in the ESI† (Part 5)]. The former one yields the lifetime under illumination; and OCVD basically provides a detailed resolution of the effective lifetime under dark conditions, over a wide range of variation of the Fermi level, particularly in the low potential domain closed to zero volt bias.21Fig. 3 confirms that τeff(V) in the dark results in more than one order-of-magnitude higher than that under illumination. For DSCs, OCVD simplifies the interpretation of the results, because without photo-excitation occurring, only recombination between TiO2 and the electrolyte is measured.22 According to the affinitive relationship between recombination and effective lifetime,23 the τeff(V) comparison reflects a higher recombination rate when light injection is imposed on the cells.
 Fig. 3  Effective lifetime versus bias voltage extracted from EIS (light) and OCVD measurements. 
Therefore, the experimental observation of both static and small-signal measurements demonstrates that different recombination mechanisms are dominating under different operational conditions of solar cells. These observations emphasize the importance of physically describing the coexisting kinetic mechanisms for advanced device-level analysis of DSCs under development.
Modelling and simulation
Under dark conditions, charge carrier loss is generally predominated by the recombination between electrons on the TiO2 conduction band (CB) and holes in the HTM (so-called process EHR). Under illumination, optical generation occurs, followed by electron excitation from dye HOMO to its LUMO, and the electron-dye recombination (EDR process) correspondingly joins in the entire charge loss mechanisms. As long as excited electrons are injected into the CB of TiO2, oxidized states of the dye (S+) are generated at the same time. Hole injection (process HI) from dye HOMO to HTM valance band (VB) should occur immediately; meanwhile, oxidized dye molecule need to be regenerated into original state (S0). According to the schematic illustration in Fig. 1(b), three back reactions probably account for cell performance deterioration, i.e., EDR and EHR processes, as well as a self-decay process during which excited electrons spontaneously relax to their ground states prior to injection into the CB of TiO2. In practice, due to the good coupling between orbitals of dye LUMO and the TiO2 conducting state,24 conduction band drops make the electron injection proceeding extremely fast.16,17 Furthermore, after photogeneration the electron injection from dye to metal oxide semiconductor behaves in ps time scale, which is much faster than other energetics or kinetics schematics in DSCs, according to S. E. Koops's research.25 Therefore, electron self-decay is insignificant, and we thereby assume a completely efficient electron–hole separation, i.e., electron injection efficiency ηinj = 1.
Corresponding hole-injection reaction RHI and recombination rates UEDR, UEHR can be expressed by: RHI = khi··[S+](1) UEDR = kedr·[S+]·nc(2) UEHR = kehr·nc·h(3)in which kx (x = hi, edr, ehr) is the kinetic rate constant with unit cm3 s−1; nc and h represent conduction band electrons and holes of HTM concentration respectively;  is the density of available spots for holes in HTM; and [S+] is the concentration of oxidized-state dye. In this case, the total recombination rate Un can be defined as Un = UEDR + UEHR.
The intrinsic defects of CsSnIxF3−x associated with Sn vacancies provide high mobility for hole transport, and thus make the semiconductor material assume a metallic character.26 In this case, our modeling presumes that the intrinsic hole concentration maintains stability during the whole reaction process. For simplification, we temporarily assume that only extended states below VB of HTM will interact with excited dye molecules and take part in the hole transport movement, and we write the hole concentration as: h = Nv·F(E − Efp)(4)where Nv is the valence band states of HTM per volume, and Fermi–Dirac distribution F for holes with Fermi level Efp.
In order to describe complete device physics, the above kinetic rates of eqn (1)–(4) have to be coupled to continuity equations for both conduction-band electron and excited dye concentrations (eqn (5) and (6)) with a voltage-driven boundary condition at the FTO–TiO2 interface (anode, x = 0) and a complete reflecting boundary condition (Neumann boundary condition) at the interface between the nanoporous film and the bulk HTM (cathode, x = d) (eqn (7) and (8)), where nt is trapped charge density in TiO2, D0 is the electron diffusivity in equilibrium state, and Nc is the conduction band density of states per unit volume. Ec and Ef represent the conduction band edge and electron Fermi level of TiO2, respectively; Gop represents the optical generation rate, and Gs-ex is the generation rate triggered by self-exciting processes occurring in the dye. Accordingly, the applied optical model has been presented in ESI† (Part 6).  
In order to solve the model under time-varying conditions, a multiple-trapping/de-trapping model27 has been applied here. Computation of nt can be achieved by integrating the product of trap density of states and Fermi–Dirac distribution though the exponential energy tail below Ec, and finally can be approximated by: (9)where NT is the concentration of localized trap states per unit volume and trap factor αT describes the depth of the state distribution below Ec.
The trapping/de-trapping processes in TiO2 have been proved to be much faster than those of transport and recombination;27 therefore, the localized states only behave as thermally activated capture/emission centers. In other words, even under non-equilibrium conditions, the conduction band electrons and trap populations still maintain quasi-equilibrium with each other, and thus share the same quasi-Fermi level. Hence, the dynamics of the localized states and of extended occupation has been correlated by a certain factor in bracket of eqn (10) which is only function of nc, not explicitly time-dependent. (10)
Due to the space dependence of parameters involved in modeling, these second-order differential equations with non-constant coefficients generally require a numerical solution. The primary parameters input in simulation are given in Table 1, and the results are specifically discussed in following sections.
Table 1 Primary parameters used in simulation




Parameters
Value
Refer





D
0 (cm2 s−1)
1.38 × 10−3
EIS measurement and optimized



α
T

0.1
EIS measurement (ESI†) (Part 7)



N
T (cm−3)
1.5 × 1019
Empirical value



N
V (cm−3)
1 × 1021
Empirical value



N
c (cm−3)
3.24 × 1020
Empirical value



k
edr (cm3 s−1)
2 × 10−13
Empirical value



k
ehr (cm3 s−1)
9 × 10−18
Empirical value



R
s (Ω cm2)
7.22
EIS measurement



d (μm)
1
Cross-section SEM graph [Fig. 1(a)]



d
EL (μm)
3–4
Cross-section SEM graph [Fig. 1(a)]


Active area (cm2)
0.502
Experiment data




Results and discussion
The performance improvement of all-solid-state DSCs: device-assembling experiments and corresponding theoretical analysis
Regarding the all-solid-state DSCs we developed, the aqueous electrolyte precursor penetrates into the TiO2 nanoporous film initially, then transfers into solid-state and functions as hole-transport medium. Hence, HTM and the assembly associated with it impose a rather significant influence on final device performance. A large group of samples were fabricated, as mentioned in the ‘Experimental’ section, for soaking durations from 2 h to 48 h for the electrolyte precursor. Each of samples was assembled into a complete solar cell with Pt counter electrode sealed, and prepared for photoelectrical measurements.
The direct influence of electrolyte soaking time on morphology of the TiO2 nanorod array is shown by SEM images presented in Fig. S8 of ESI,† from which the changes of electrolyte precursor penetration can be clearly observed. By means of EIS characterization again, the small signal (ss) transport parameters can directly reflect the apparent impact of soaking time on cell performance. Fig. 4 shows chemical capacitance Cu(V) and hole transport resistance Rhtm(V) of cells with CsSnI2.95F0.05 soaking for 3 h and 48 h, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of SS transport parameters vs. bias voltage, with different ts (3 h and 48 h, respectively): (a) hole transport resistance Rhtm, (b) chemical capacitance. 
By increasing ts, chemical capacitance at the HTM/TiO2 interface has been obviously improved; Rhtm, on the other hand, becomes one order-of-magnitude lower after sufficient electrolyte holding time upon the TiO2 nanoporous film, which implies that improved hole transport through HTM happens correspondingly. The effective lifetime of charge carriers with different electrolyte soaking time was compared based on OCVD extraction as shown in Fig. S9 of ESI.† It confirms that the extracted effective lifetime has been indeed improved along with ts increasing, especially within the first three hours after electrolyte precursor was added onto TiO2 film.
Moreover, by using the modeling method described in section “Modelling and simulation”, we attempt to interpret how ts influence the interaction between electrolyte precursor and TiO2 nanorod array. We implemented the simulation with parameters given in Table 1, while varying the hole injection rate from 1 × 10−19 to 9 × 10−18 cm3 s−1.
We first compute the charge collection efficiency ηcoll spectrum within the visible wavelength range, altering with khi increasing (Fig. 5); ηcoll(λ) can be obtained according to the mathematical expression as eqn (11). This calculation normalizes the current generation by the light absorption, which is equivalent to separating electronic properties from optical ones, thus helping to focus exclusively on the charge carrier transport behaviors. (11)where, Q (cm−2 s−1) represents the number of charge carriers generated during optoelectronic excitation, and ηLH is light harvest efficiency defined as follows: (12)
 Fig. 5  Charge collection efficiency varying with respect to khi increasing; ηcoll computed according to the integration represents the arithmetic mean value of collection efficiency coll(λ) across the visible light spectrum (inset figure). 
Further, according to the simulation of current–voltage characteristics on the static state, the corresponding jsc and cell efficiency η ascend significantly with respect to khi, while Voc and FF are barely affected. At the same time, a series of j–V measurements reveals the apparent increasing tendency of jsc and η with respect to soaking time, while Voc and FF maintain almost stable.
Thus, we correlate a simulated jsc–khi relation to measured jsc–ts, based on which affiliation between khi and ts can be interpolated and described by the mathematical expression below [the monotonic increase of khiversus ts as concluded from Fig. 6(a)]. khi(ts) ≈ (0.22ts3 − 6.2ts2 + 59ts − 7.6) × 10−20 (ts ≥ 0)(13)
 Fig. 6  (a) Monotonic increase of khiversus ts described by eqn (13); (b–e) simulation (solid lines) and measurement (symbol curves) comparison of PV performance, i.e., jsc, Voc, FF, η, versus khi under 100 mA cm−2 illumination. 
According to this deduction, we remap the measured jsc, η, Voc and FF to khi and perform the further comparison with the simulation. Fig. 6(b–e) demonstrates that the model with the hypothetical khi–ts relationship is able to fairly reproduce the entire tendency observed from the measurement. Thus, combining Fig. 5 with Fig. 6, we support the approach that prolonging the soaking time of electrolyte guarantees thorough penetration of precursor. Extended soaking substantially improves the connection between the hole-transport medium and the N719–TiO2 working electrode, especially within the first three hours, equivalent to enhancing hole injection from dye-HOMO into VB of HTM, or a dye regeneration process. This improvement is reflected by the subsequent enhancement of charge collection efficiency, and consequently generates remarkable photocurrent and corresponding cell PCE. The promotion of electrolyte precursor soaking time on cell performance has also been confirmed through EQE characterization, as shown in Fig. S10 of ESI.† The group of EQE spectra demonstrates both magnitude and width of spectra turn to apparent augment along with ts increasing.
Nonlinear photoelectrical response under variable light intensity: experimental observations and corresponding physical interpretation
Despite the fact that the photovoltaic performance of our fabricated device has been improved, an irregular optoelectronic response is observed nonetheless from the photovoltaic measurements, i.e., better PV performance is unexpectedly observed under weaker illumination. Empirically, we argue that this phenomenon could include the non-linear photoelectric response upon the photo-generated charge carrier density. In fact, this sort of irregular optoelectronic behavior has been experimentally studied, e.g., in research of P3HT/PCBM blend organic solar cells,28,29 yet rarely discussed for solid-state DSCs.
Herein, by taking advantage of the proposed device-level model, we propose a physical explanation concerning the non-linear optoelectronic response based on experimental observations. We initially implemented simulations to describe solar cells under variable illumination conditions with light intensity (Ix) ranging from 0.01 to 1 sun. The input parameters remain as given in Table 1, and khi was set to 9 × 10−18. On the other hand, PV measurements were conducted on cells illuminated under a light source with intensities varying from 14.2 to 100 mW cm−2.

Fig. 7 summarizes the most significant quantities jsc, Voc, and PCE versus Ix relationships, both from simulations (dot curves) and measurements (cross symbols).
 Fig. 7  Nonlinear response of significant PV quantities jsc, Voc, and η with respect to Ix, both simulated (dots) and measured (cross symbols) values. The coll–Ix relationship is obtained by simulation according to eqn (11) and (12), as Ix increasing. 
Numerical calculation is able to basically reproduce the measurement and furthermore, provide additional detailed information associated with illumination spanning across a large intensity range. Generally speaking, jsc is supposed to linearly increase with respect to Ix, such as the relationship jph ∝ Ix shown by the black dashed line; however, along with Ix increasing, the jphvs. Ix relationship within an intensity range close to 1 sun has deviated from the usual linear case jph ∝ Ix.
Apparently, it is irrational to anticipate the amount of photo-generated carriers being linearly proportional to that of injected photons. The primary explanation is that the corresponding charge collection capability depends on Ix, i.e., according to the insert plot of Fig. 7(a), coll under 1 sun decreases to 30% lower than that under 0.01 sun. Further experimental demonstration has been done in order to predict the photocurrent density (jinteg) based on characterized EQE spectrum as we mentioned in last subsection (under extremely low light intensity approximating to 0.1 mW cm−2) according to the integration formula reported elsewhere.15 We theoretically expect the discrepancy between jinteg and jph around 30% according to the analysis in Fig. 7 that the average charge collection efficiencycoll illuminated by extremely low-intensity light should approximately be 30% higher than that under normal 1 sun illumination; however, in practice jinteg turns only up to 10% higher than jph (Fig. S11 of ESI†), probably because that we cannot guarantee exactly the same electronic and optical losses apart from charge collection process in both EQE and j–V measurement systems.
In fact, according to the simulation prediction [Fig. 7(b)], Voc is not obviously intervened by light intensity within the region from 0.1 to 1 sun, just as we observed from measurements. Nevertheless, it does not mean that the weaker the illumination, the better the PV performance that the cell can attain. If Ix becomes too weak, Voc should decrease significantly; therefore, the final η correspondingly declines.
Furthermore, we argue that it is the charge carrier density (n) that the light intensity impacts. The photovoltaic behavior of solar cells can be generalized simply as: j = jph − jrec(V)(14)where jrec represents recombination current density, and it usually is the function of bias voltage. When the cell is operated at an open-circuit condition, all the optic-generated charges are lost due to recombination, i.e., jrec(V) ≈ jph(15)
Because, under open-circuit conditions, the charge carrier density is approximately uniform throughout the entire active layer, we can disregard the spatial dependence of charge carrier density, and straightforwardly correlate jrec to noc in this way: jrec(Voc) ≈ q·d·k(oc)·ocγ(16)in which q is a single electric charge, d is the thickness of active layer, and k(n) represents the general recombination rate constant; γ is the nonlinear recombination coefficient, i.e., the exponent of power-law relation. Eqn (16) is the widely-used empirical relationship for photovoltaic devices, and when γ = 1, the equation yields a linear case.
In order to discover the decisive factor that possibly determines γ, we plotted the simulated jrec with respect to noc in a semi-logarithmic scale under different conditions, retaining other input parameters in Table 1, while varying khi from 5 × 10−17 to 5 × 10−20, as shown in Fig. 8 (symbol curves).
 Fig. 8  Simulated jrec (symbol curves) with respect to noc in a semi-logarithmic scale under different conditions, i.e., (a): khi = 5 × 10−20, γ = 0.792; (b): khi = 1 × 10−19, γ = 0.8; (c): khi = 1 × 10−18, γ = 0.8337; (d): khi = 9 × 10−18, γ = 0.8869; (e): khi = 5 × 10−17, γ = 0.99. Reproduction (black solid lines) by empirical power-low relation corresponding to eqn (16) (the insert presents monotonic increase of γ with respect to khi). 
It is observed that jrec(noc) relationships can be successfully reconstructed by eqn (16) with the non-linear power-law exponent γ < 1; the insert in Fig. 8 presents the straightforward monotonic correlation between khi and γ, and implies that γ approaches 1 only if khi is relatively high and declines with decreasing khi. Hereby, it indicates that the non-linearity of cell response is related to dye regeneration/hole injection processes; as long as these two simultaneous processes have adequate kinetic rates, the device can essentially exhibit linear behavior with respect to charge concentration; otherwise, a poor dye regeneration/hole injection rate induces γ < 1, i.e., nonlinearity behavior. In other words, if the HTM properties and device assembly continuously improve by pushing the dye-regeneration/hole transfer rate to ideal conditions, it is theoretically possible to obtain solar cells having not only a higher PCE, but also approximately linear/regular response behaviors.
Conclusions
In this paper, we propose the optimization of photovoltaic performance of all-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells by applying the inorganic hole-transport material, CsSnI2.95F0.05. The experimental work focuses both on HTM precursor synthesis and cell assembly process. By optimizing the interconnection between electrolyte precursors with TiO2 nanoporous electrodes, we achieved an average PCE of approximately 7.7% over a large number of fabricated cells, the best one of which attained 9.8% (under 14.2 mW cm−2). At the same time, a physics-based device-level model for this type of SDSC has been developed. Instead of using empirical kinetic equations, the model emphasizes the respective descriptions of the diverse kinetics occurring among the active TiO2 layer, dye, and HTM.
We corroborate that increasing the soaking time of HTM precursor can promote the hole transfer rate from excited dye HOMO to HTM, substantially upgrading charge carrier collection efficiency, and thus the photocurrent and PCE of solar cells. On the other hand, we observed an abnormal phenomenon during photoelectrical characterization: the photo-generated current deviated from linearity with increasing illumination intensity. By implementing a numerical calculation, we first reconstructed the power-law non-linear response formula for carrier density with empirical coefficient γ by varying the hole injection rate; in other words, a straightforward correlation between khi and γ has been justified. Subsequently, we confirmed that the non-linear photovoltaic response means that the charge collection efficiency of all-solid-state DSCs is determined by the photogenerated charge carrier density. This phenomenon is probably induced by unsatisfactory hole transfer kinetics between dye and HTM; namely, empirical non-linear coefficient γ is intensively related to the intrinsic kinetic rate khi, and will approximate 1 only if khi is sufficiently adequate.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51172113 & 51373086), the International Science & Technology Cooperation Program of China (2014DFA60150), the Shandong Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars (JQ201118), the Taishan Scholar Overseas Distinguished Professorship program from the Shandong Province Government, PR China, the Qingdao Municipal Science and Technology Commission (12-1-4-136-hz), and the post-doc funding of Qingdao Government, P. R. China. The authors thank Dr Michael Craig for helpful discussions.
Notes and references
B. C. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
S.-H. Park, I. Y. Song, J. Lim, Y. S. Kwon, J. Choi, S. Song, J.-R. Lee and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1559 CAS .
G. Sadoughi, R. Mohammadpour, A. Irajizad, N. Taghavinia, S. Dadgostar, M. Samadpour and F. Tajabadi, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 371 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, H. Li, X. You, Z. Yang, J. Deng, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 345 CAS .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, L. Cevey, M. Piccirelli, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2085 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3643 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bandara and J. P. Yasomanee, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2007, 22, 20 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhattacharya, S. K. Tomar and J.-K. Park, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 485711 CrossRef .
J. Joseph, K. M. Son, R. Vittal, W. Lee and K.-J. Kim, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, 697 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, A. Ivaturi, R. Gunning, S. Diefenbach, J. Kirkpatrick, C. M. Palumbiny, V. Sivaram, H. Geaney, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. E. Welland and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12088 CAS .
J. Melas-Kyriazi, I.-K. Ding, A. Marchioro, A. Punzi, B. E. Hardin, G. F. Burkhard, N. Tétreault, M. Grätzel, J.-E. Moser and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 407 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, M. Juozapavicius, L. Liu, X. Li, E. Palomares, A. Forneli and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547 RSC .
J. Villanueva-Cab, H. Wang, G. Oskam and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 748 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cappelluti, S. Ma, D. Pugliese, A. Sacco, A. Lamberti, G. Ghionea and E. Tresso, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14634 RSC .
X. Sun, Q. Sun, C. Xie and L. Dong, Chin. J. Lumin., 2013, 34, 257 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Q. Sun, Y. Li, L. Sui and L. Dong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18716 RSC .
S. Ma, Y. Li, Q. Sun and L. Dong, J. Nano Energy Power Res., 2013, 2, 123 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS .
I. Borriello, G. Cantele and D. Ninno, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235214 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Garcia-Cañadas, E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 6903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Giménez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, S. E. Koops, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1126 CAS .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, J.-H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235203 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 698 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experiments of material synthesis, EQE, EIS and OCVD measurements as well as corresponding data analysis, optical model coupled in device-level modeling, SEM photographs of CsSnI2.95F0.05 precursor on TiO2 nanorod prolonging for different duration, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta04593aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) FESEM image of a cross-sectioned CsSnI2.95F0.05-based all-solid-state DSC, and (b) corresponding energy band and primary internal reactions among TiO2/N719/CsSnI2.95F0.05.	 

 	Fig. 2  Measured j–V characteristics illuminated by solar simulator (plot a, η ≈ 5%, FF = 0.37 @1 sun) and dark condition (plot b); by excluding series resistance Rs from the entire circuit, j′sp–V curve (plot d) has an apparent discrepancy with respect to j′–V (plot-c, η ≈ 7.4%, FF = 0.58 @1 sun), of which the rectangle and triangle symbols represent the maximum power points, respectively. (Here Rs = 7.22 Ω cm2, the value of which is obtained by EIS measurement and given in Table 1).	 

 	Fig. 3  Effective lifetime versus bias voltage extracted from EIS (light) and OCVD measurements.	 
RHI = khi··[S+]	(1)
UEDR = kedr·[S+]·nc	(2)
UEHR = kehr·nc·h	(3)
h = Nv·F(E − Efp)	(4)

 		 
	(9)
	(10)


D
0 (cm2 s−1)	1.38 × 10−3	EIS measurement and optimized

α
T
	0.1	EIS measurement (ESI†) (Part 7)

N
T (cm−3)	1.5 × 1019	Empirical value

N
V (cm−3)	1 × 1021	Empirical value

N
c (cm−3)	3.24 × 1020	Empirical value

k
edr (cm3 s−1)	2 × 10−13	Empirical value

k
ehr (cm3 s−1)	9 × 10−18	Empirical value

R
s (Ω cm2)	7.22	EIS measurement

d (μm)	1	Cross-section SEM graph [Fig. 1(a)]

d
EL (μm)	3–4	Cross-section SEM graph [Fig. 1(a)]
Active area (cm2)	0.502	Experiment data

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of SS transport parameters vs. bias voltage, with different ts (3 h and 48 h, respectively): (a) hole transport resistance Rhtm, (b) chemical capacitance.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 5  Charge collection efficiency varying with respect to khi increasing; ηcoll computed according to the integration represents the arithmetic mean value of collection efficiency coll(λ) across the visible light spectrum (inset figure).	 
khi(ts) ≈ (0.22ts3 − 6.2ts2 + 59ts − 7.6) × 10−20 (ts ≥ 0)	(13)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Monotonic increase of khiversus ts described by eqn (13); (b–e) simulation (solid lines) and measurement (symbol curves) comparison of PV performance, i.e., jsc, Voc, FF, η, versus khi under 100 mA cm−2 illumination.	 

 	Fig. 7  Nonlinear response of significant PV quantities jsc, Voc, and η with respect to Ix, both simulated (dots) and measured (cross symbols) values. The coll–Ix relationship is obtained by simulation according to eqn (11) and (12), as Ix increasing.	 
j = jph − jrec(V)	(14)
jrec(V) ≈ jph	(15)
jrec(Voc) ≈ q·d·k(oc)·ocγ	(16)

 	Fig. 8  Simulated jrec (symbol curves) with respect to noc in a semi-logarithmic scale under different conditions, i.e., (a): khi = 5 × 10−20, γ = 0.792; (b): khi = 1 × 10−19, γ = 0.8; (c): khi = 1 × 10−18, γ = 0.8337; (d): khi = 9 × 10−18, γ = 0.8869; (e): khi = 5 × 10−17, γ = 0.99. Reproduction (black solid lines) by empirical power-low relation corresponding to eqn (16) (the insert presents monotonic increase of γ with respect to khi).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experiments of material synthesis, EQE, EIS and OCVD measurements as well as corresponding data analysis, optical model coupled in device-level modeling, SEM photographs of CsSnI2.95F0.05 precursor on TiO2 nanorod prolonging for different duration, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta04593a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
