Understanding the loss mechanisms in high-performance solution-processed small molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells doped with a PFN impurity   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP01732A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP01732A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 13176-13185Understanding the loss mechanisms in high-performance solution-processed small molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells doped with a PFN impurity†

        
          
            Ali 
            Aghassi
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Cormac D. 
            Fay
          
        
      
Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, AIIM Faculty, University of Wollongong, Innovation Campus, Squires Way, Wollongong, 2500, Australia. E-mail: aa009@uowmail.edu.au
Received 
      28th March 2019
    , Accepted 24th May 2019First published on 24th May 2019AbstractContamination of the active layer with an impurity could result in significant degradation in the performance of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells as a result of enhancing the loss of the charge carriers via a trap-assisted recombination. In this study, PFN as an impurity was intentionally introduced to a BHJ solar cell composed of a high-performance solution-processed small molecule (p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 as a donor and PC60BM as an acceptor. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PFN doped devices degrades owing to the reduction of short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). At a low concentration, PFN mostly reduces the generation of charge carriers, whereas doubling the PFN concentration conversely affects both generation and collection of charge carriers. Charge carrier dynamics of devices has also been probed using photovoltage decay, time-resolved charge extraction (TRCE) and photoinduced charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV) before and after incorporation of PFN. The results reveal that traps introduced by PFN reduce the decay of charge carriers via bimolecular recombination, leading to a higher charge carrier density and photovoltage at long times under an open-circuit potential (Voc). However, under short-circuit (Jsc) conditions, traps considerably impede the collection of charge carriers causing the appearance of an S-shaped current density–voltage curve.
Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have been proposed as a promising alternative to the inorganic photovoltaic systems owing to their potential regarding low-cost manufacturability, scalability, and light-weight.1 Their power conversion efficiency has been steadily improved over the course of the past 10 years with currently reported efficiencies reaching ca. 14%.2,3 However, there still remains challenges yet to be addressed regarding their commercial viability including their comparatively low power conversion efficiency, scale-up process, and stability.4 Further investigation into factors that impose constraints upon achieving higher performance in OPV devices is therefore required.5,6
Organic solar cell devices typically consist of two electrodes (ITO and aluminum in the normal structure) encompassing a light absorbing organic layer. In bulk heterojunction architectures, the active layer is typically composed of electron donor and electron acceptor materials that are blended in a specified ratio to yield a bicontinuous interpenetrating network film following casting from solution. The overall performance of the device largely depends on photogenerated charge carriers within the bulk heterojunction being collected at the electrodes while avoiding recombination.7–9 This largely requires (a) the travel of excitons to the critical donor/acceptor interface, (b) transportation of free charge carriers via the hopping mechanism through the BHJ film, and finally (c) collection of electrons and holes at the appropriate electrode, all of which have to occur prior to recombination. As such, any hindrance boosting charge carrier recombination should be suppressed in order to achieve a high power conversion efficiency. Chemical impurity is considered as one of the limiting factors that can interfere with the photophysical processes – thereby increasing charge carrier recombination. Various materials have been identified as potential sources for chemical impurities, and some examples include metals,10 residual catalysts,11–14 additives,15 and to some extent, products of BHJ photodegradation via atmospheric oxygen.11–13 There are also some reports that solar cell devices were intentionally contaminated (yet in a controlled manner) with impurities so as to examine recombination dynamics of charge carriers in the presence of trace impurities.16–19 The negative impacts of impurities on the performance of the solar cell devices have been explained in terms of enhancing energetic disorder, deep trap states and eventually a trap-assisted recombination mechanism.16,17,20,21 The introduced trap states (by an impurity) can facilitate annihilation of a charge carrier in several ways including (i) direct absorption of incoming photons into trap states, (ii) exciton quenching at the interface between trap sites and the donor and/or acceptor, and (iii) trapping of mobile charge carriers.17 Examination of the literature shows that the polymer-based bulk heterojunction has predominantly been the subject of studies regarding chemical impurities, while little attention has been paid to the solution-processed small molecule (SSM) BHJ devices.20 SSM BHJ solar cells have been extensively studied over the past five years for their great potential to outperform their polymer-based counterparts. They offer some advantages over polymeric materials such as a well-defined and discrete structure, reproducibility from batch-to-batch and facile synthesis and purification, among others. Their improvement is beholden to the synthesis of new molecular frameworks, optimization of the BHJ morphology, device engineering, and understanding the underlying device physics.22–24
The aim of this research is to study the impact of [(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFN) once it was added to high-performance SSM BHJ solar cells based on 7,7′-[4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl]bis[6-fluoro-4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole (p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 as the donor and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM) as the acceptor. Fig. 1 shows the chemical structures of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, PFN and PC60BM and the schematic of the conventional structure of the solar cell. PFN is a conjugated polyelectrolyte that has been widely used as an electron transport layer to modify the interface between BHJ and the cathode electrode.25,26 Although PFN is mainly soluble in polar solvents (methanol), it can be dissolved in common organic solvents such as chlorobenzene or 1,2-chlorobenzene. It is therefore plausible that residual amounts of PFN contamination can be contained in the bulk heterojunction during device fabrication; particularly, inverted structure devices whose active solution is cast on top of the PFN interfacial layer. In the present study, a PFN impurity was introduced in a controlled manner into the SSM BHJ devices and the photovoltaic characteristics of the devices were investigated as a function of the PFN trace impurity. The focus was to probe the impact of the PFN impurity on the photophysical processes that govern the performance of the devices such as generation, transportation, collection and recombination of charge carriers. This marks an important step in the investigation of the impact of the trace impurity as it is vital to understand and alleviate the degradation mechanisms of SSM photovoltaic devices that exhibit exceptional potential for achieving high power conversion efficiency. For the purpose of this study, p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 was chosen as a promising small molecule donor that has demonstrated great potential to achieve a PCE of 10%.27,28 The small molecule has also been subjected to extensive research studies in the past few years. Thus, there is plenty of information available in the literature regarding its internal mechanism and various processing methods to improve overall performance. On the other hand, PC60BM was chosen as the acceptor due to its low absorption, which allows contrast, to some extent, for the interpretation of data presented here, albeit at the cost of relatively low PCEs of the devices.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, PFN and PC60BM and (b) schematic of the conventional structure of the solar cell device. 
Results and discussion
Current density–voltage characteristics

Fig. 2a shows the current density–voltage curves of the representative devices fabricated from p-DTS(FBBTh2)2:PC60BM without and with the incorporation of PFN. The extracted parameters from the current density–voltage curves are shown in Table 1. The control devices show a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.43 ± 0.4%. The addition of 0.014% and 0.029% PFN to the BHJ leads to the reduction of the PCE to 2.54 ± 0.5% and 0.95 ± 0.3%, respectively. The reduction of PCE in the devices that contained 0.014 wt% PFN is primarily due to the reduction of the short-circuit current (Jsc). The decrease of Jsc can stem from the loss in photon absorption, charge carrier generation and/or charge carrier collection. Considering that the FF (charge collection/extraction) of the devices remains almost unchanged, the loss of Jsc can be related to the reduction of either photon absorption and/or generation of charge carriers by the BHJ active layer. A further increase of PFN concentration to 0.029% weight ratio, however, results in the reduction of both Jsc and FF, suggesting that charge carrier collection/extraction is also deteriorated along with other factors. The impact of added PFN on the open-circuit voltage (Voc), however, is not significant. The influence of impurity on the Voc could vary from one BHJ to another depending on the impurity. Though some reports show a reduction of Voc associated with impurities,12,16,17,19,20 unchanged Voc is observed in P3HT:PCBM BHJ devices doped with the Pd(PPh3)4 impurity.29
 Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics and (b) external quantum efficiency versus wavelength under short-circuit conditions and (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices with and without two concentrations of PFN impurity. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic characteristics of the PCDTBT:PC60BM solar cell devices before and after doping with two concentrations of PFN impurity. The values are the average of eight (8) devices




Devices

V
oc (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)




Reference
692 ± 5
9.2 ± 1.1
54.1 ± 2.3
3.43 ± 0.4


0.014 wt% PFN Inc.
705 ± 10
6.9 ± 1.2
52.2 ± 2.3
2.54 ± 0.5


0.029 wt% PFN Inc.
710 ± 70
3.42 ± 0.8
38.9 ± 4.3
0.95 ± 0.3




One possible cause for the reduction of the PCE in devices doped with PFN could be the enhancement of charge carrier recombination via trap states (and/or recombination centers) introduced by PFN. It is also suggested that trap states within the band gap can change the built-in field and charge carrier mobility in BHJ systems so that it diminishes the sweep-out rate of charge carriers to the electrodes, leading to a decrease of Jsc and IPCE.20 Please note that the devices doped with 0.029 wt% PFN exhibit an S-shaped current density–voltage (J–V) curve. The appearance of the S-curve phenomenon has been attributed to several reasons such as energy barrier,30,31 vertical phase separation,32 defects or dipole at the interface,33,34 and imbalanced charge carrier mobility.35 The location of the S-shape feature in the fourth quadrant of the current–voltage curve, i.e., the power output region, suggests that extraction/collection of the charge carriers is hindered due to the presence of a barrier. This energy barrier may originate from the amino group of PFN that could act as a hole trap,36 impeding charge carriers from being collected at the electrodes and thereby increasing charge carrier recombination.
The external quantum efficiency measurements taken under short-circuit conditions (Vapp = 0 V) for pristine and PFN containing devices are shown in Fig. 2b. In general, the EQE spectra that demonstrate the conversion efficiency of photons to electrons were adversely affected by the presence of PFN. Besides, the decrease in the EQE is spectrally uniform and seen over the entire wavelength range. The obtained Jsc by integrating the EQE spectrum of the control, and 0.014 wt% and 0.029 wt% PFN-containing devices is 8.77, 8.06, and 4.11 mA cm−2, respectively. These values are consistent with Jsc values obtained from the current density–voltage measurements. The loss in the EQE can be attributed to the PFN traps that increase recombination of charge carriers prior to sweep-out. In addition, lower charge carrier generation in PFN-based devices could be another possibility for the EQE loss as PFN absorption overlaps with BHJ film absorption. The overlap mostly happens between 300 and 450 nm (Fig. S1, ESI†). However, the impact of PFN absorption on the reduction of EQE and overall performance of the devices could be marginal due to its low concentration. It is reported that the photo-to-electron conversion efficiency in PCDTBT:PC70BM BHJ devices reduced after doping with the PC84BM impurity because of enhanced disorder and reduced charge carrier mobility.17 The impact of the PFN impurity on the charge carrier generation and mobility will be addressed in the following sections.
UV-vis absorption characteristics
The influence of the addition of PFN on the UV-vis absorption characteristics of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ films is shown in Fig. 2c. It was reported that the λmax of the as-cast p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PCBM film is around 620 nm and further addition of DIO gives rise to a red-shift of the λmax and the emergence of a new vibronic peak at around 670 nm.37 The appearance of the vibronic peaks was assigned to the good molecular ordering within the BHJ film.37–39 Similar results, i.e., λmax = 627 nm and the vibronic peak at ca. 678 nm, were observed here for the pristine p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ film. It is noticeable that no extra absorption peak emerges following the introduction of PFN. This is because a relatively low concentration of PFN was used compared to the donor and acceptor concentration. However, once PFN was incorporated into the BHJ layer, the absorption peaks became more pronounced. Possible explanations could be (i) the increment of the bulk heterojunction film thickness,40 (ii) the absorption of PFN itself, (iii) light scattering/reflection by PFN and (iv) enhancement of molecular ordering within BHJ.37 Given the fact that (a) the bulk heterojunction thickness was set to 100 ± 5 nm with and without PFN, (b) PFN primarily absorbs at 300–450 nm (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†),41 and (c) the observed enhanced absorption predominantly between 600 and 750 nm, it is thus suspected that the absorption enhancement could be due to the improvement in the molecular ordering of the small molecule within the BHJ film upon the addition of PFN. The impact of the impurity on the absorption characteristics varies from one BHJ film to another. For example, maximum absorption of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ film remained unchanged following doping with PFN; however, the shoulders representing the degree of crystallization of P3HT decreased.19 On the other hand, the absorption characteristics of PCDTBT:PC70BM remained almost unchanged before and after the introduction of PC84BM.17
Photocurrent and charge collection probability
To investigate the impact of the added PFN on charge carrier generation and collection, photocurrent (Jph) and charge collection probability (Pc) of the devices were examined versus effective voltage (Vint). The photocurrent was determined by subtraction of the current density obtained under illumination (JL) from the dark current (JD). The effective voltage is denoted as the difference between the applied voltage (Vapp) and voltage at which the photocurrent approaches zero (Vbi or flat-band potential). Vint determines the strength of the electric field within the devices and is an indication of the driving force for the extraction of charge carriers.30,42,43 In Fig. 3a, the photocurrent characteristics are shown as a function of effective voltage for devices fabricated with and without PFN. The solar cell devices made with 0.014 wt% PFN show a small but noticeable reduction of the Jph. When PFN content in the BHJ film increased to 0.029 wt%, however, the photocurrent density decreased significantly across all effective voltages. At a low effective voltage (Veff < 0.1), the photocurrent linearly increases with voltage. This linear behavior is attributed to the competition between drift and diffusion of photogenerated charge carriers toward their electrodes.44 For Veff > 0.1 V, the photocurrent starts to saturate for both the reference and 0.014 wt% PFN doped devices, whereas saturation for devices doped with 0.029 wt% PFN takes place at around Veff > 0.3 V. These findings suggest that the internal electric field strength degrades across the active layer in the presence of PFN impurity traces. It must be noted that in the saturation regime, the photocurrent becomes independent of temperature and electric field, meaning that every exciton (electron–hole pair) is dissociated into free charge carriers at the interface between the donor and acceptor. As a result, photocurrent can be expressed as: Jph,sat = edGmax(1)where Jph,sat is the photocurrent density in the saturation regime, e is the elementary charge (1.60217662 × 10−19 C), d is the thickness of the active layer (100 nm) and Gmax is the maximum possible generation rate of free charge carriers produced by dissociation of excitons at the donor–acceptor interface.43,44
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent (Jph) and (b) charge collection probability as a function of effective voltage of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices before and after the addition of two PFN concentrations as the impurity into the active layer. 
The Gmax values were calculated and are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the inclusion of PFN into the BHJ significantly diminishes the number of generated excitons (and therefore charge carriers) that can contribute to the photocurrent. Given the fact that the photocurrent is independent of the voltage and temperature in the saturation regime, the Gmax is primarily determined by the number of photons absorbed by the active layer. The reduction of Gmax can be partly attributed to the absorption of some portion of incoming photons by PFN impurities, resulting in lower exciton generation. This mitigation in exciton generation could particularly take place at wavelengths below 400 nm, i.e., where PFN has its highest absorptivity (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). Thus, it is evident that the introduction of PFN can deteriorate the optical characteristics of the active layer, which could be one of the reasons for the reduction of the short-circuit current.
Table 2 The Jph,sat and Gmax values of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices before and after the addition of PFN




Devices
Reference
0.014 wt% PFN
0.029 wt% PFN





J
ph,sat (A m−2)
119.22
91.056
52.604



G
max (m−3 s−1)
7.44 × 1027
5.68 × 1027
3.28 × 1027




Another possible explanation for the reduction of Gmax could be the shrinkage of exciton diffusion length in the presence of the PFN impurity. The exciton diffusion length (LD) is typically used to indicate the average distance that an exciton can migrate during its lifetime.45 It is well known that an exciton must migrate to the electron–donor acceptor to be dissociated, making it a crucial step for an efficient photocurrent. It was shown that the LD is decreased in the presence of the impurity.10,46 Thus, it can be speculated that the LD is shorter in the device doped with PFN (due to quenching of exciton by the PFN impurity), meaning that lower numbers of excitons would participate in the generation of photocurrent.

Fig. 3b compares charge collection probability (Pc) of the devices as a function of effective voltage. The Pc can be obtained from the ratio of Jph/Jph,sat.43 The Pc of devices that contained 0.014 wt% PFN remains unaltered compared to the control devices, whereas doubling the PFN concentration to 0.029% by weight significantly diminishes the collection of charge carriers across all effective voltages, particularly at voltages lower than 0.1 V. This indicates that at lower concentrations, PFN does not interfere with the collection of charge carriers, but at higher concentrations, it significantly prevents charge carriers (electrons and/or holes) from being collected at the electrodes, thereby enhancing charge carrier recombination.43 This is clearly reflected in the fill factor of devices, as those containing 0.029 wt% PFN exhibit a 28% reduction in the FF, whilst it slightly decreases in the 0.014 wt% PFN doped devices. Indeed, the fill factor demonstrates the competition between the charge carrier sweep-out by an internal field and loss of the charge carriers via recombination. As such, reduction of the fill factor following PFN addition can be ascribed to the enhancement of charge carrier recombination via trap states such that a lower number of charge carriers can be extracted.
Charge carrier dynamics

Fig. 4a shows the photovoltage decay (PVD) of solar cell devices over time before and after the introduction of PFN into the p-DTS(FBBTh2)2:PC60BM bulk heterojunction. The control device had a higher photovoltage in the early time periods (10−5–10−7 s) compared to the PFN-doped devices. The lower photovoltage values (during the early time period) in the PFN-doped devices can be correlated to the reduction of charge carrier generation (as evident from Gmax values). The Voc in BHJ solar cells is determined by quasi-Fermi level splitting that is obtained when available electronic states (density of states) are occupied by a certain amount of charge carriers. The charge carrier density, on the other hand, under open-circuit conditions, is determined by a competition between the generation and recombination of the charge carriers, considering that the recombination term has a charge carrier dependency. Thus, any change in either the generation or recombination rates could influence charge carrier density and subsequently the Voc.47 According to the calculated Gmax values, generation of charge carriers is diminished in the presence of added PFN. Therefore, it can be rationalized that the lower charge carrier density led to the lower quasi-Fermi level, which results in the lower photovoltage in the PFN-doped devices. It is noted that the photovoltage values in the PFN-doped devices are lower when compared to the open-circuit voltage values extracted from the current density–voltage measurements. The reason for such a difference is yet to be discovered. One possible reason may be the different nature of techniques (steady state versus transient).48
 Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltage decay, (b) charge carrier density and (c) bimolecular recombination coefficient as a function of time of photovoltaic devices comprising p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ in the absence and presence of PFN incorporated into the active layer as an impurity. 
It is also clear that there is a crossover at around 35 μs, such that at longer times, the PFN-doped devices possess higher photovoltage values. These results suggest that bimolecular recombination at longer times (>10−5 s) slows down in PFN-doped devices, resulting in a higher amount of charge carriers remaining within devices, which in turn causes a higher photovoltage response. Such a crossover was previously observed in a photo-degraded KP115:PCBM BHJ solar cell by Clarke et al.48 It was suggested that photodegradation gives rise to the widening of the density of states (DOS) upon which decay dynamics (bimolecular recombination) of localized (trapped) polarons mitigate, whereas delocalized polaron kinetic decay appears to remain less affected. Considering that charge carriers predominantly recombine via a bimolecular loss mechanism under open-circuit conditions, trap states introduced by PFN could account for the reduction of bimolecular recombination at longer times in devices containing PFN.
To gain more of an understanding of the PFN impurity effect on the charge carrier dynamics, time-resolved charge extraction (TRCE) was performed. The decay of charge carrier density (n) is expressed as a function of time in Fig. 4b. It is evident that at very early times (100 ns), the charge carrier density of the PFN-based devices is lower than that of the control devices. These findings are in accordance with both the calculated Gmax and photovoltage decay results and demonstrate that the generation of charge carriers is reduced by the addition of PFN as an impurity. Moreover, the decay of charge carrier density after 50 μs decreases in PFN-doped devices, clearly demonstrating that the devices possess a higher charge carrier density at longer times compared to the control devices. The higher charge carrier density matches well with the higher photovoltage observed in PVD and indicates that the charge carriers decay more slowly via bimolecular recombination in the presence of the extended trap states.
The observed charge carrier dynamics (above) can be described by using a biphasic model.49 This model distinguishes (bimolecular) recombination kinetics into fast and slow phases. The slow phase is typically ascribed to the recombination of charge carriers in the presence of an exponential distribution of trap states. The fast phase, on the other hand, is assigned to bimolecular recombination of free charge carriers when their density is greater than that of trap states.49–51 Given the biphasic model, it can be inferred that extracted charge carriers at longer times are highly likely to be trapped (shallow traps), which have not undergone bimolecular recombination during the delay time between photoexcitation and extraction of charge carriers.
Further insight into charge carrier dynamics was achieved by calculating the bimolecular recombination coefficient (β) as a function of charge carrier density (eqn (2)) assuming pure bimolecular recombination.49,52 (2)Fig. 4c presents the calculated β values over time for control and PFN-doped devices. It is evident that β is almost independent of time (or higher charge carrier density) for shorter times (100 ns to 1 μs) before and after incorporation of PFN as the impurity. This implies that bimolecular recombination of free charge carriers has not been affected by the introduction of PFN as the impurity and the bimolecular recombination is not responsible for the lower charge carrier density in PFN-based devices at early times. At long delay times (or lower charge carrier density), however, β values of PFN devices are smaller compared to control devices, indicating a reduction of bimolecular recombination following doping with PFN. The results of this analysis suggest that incorporation of PFN into the bulk heterojunction may result in an increased density of trap states, causing some portion of photogenerated charge carriers to be trapped in deeper and broader trap states. The charge trapping mitigates the number of free charge carriers that can take part in bimolecular recombination. As a consequence, bimolecular recombination declines in PFN-based devices, leading to the observed higher charge carrier density at the longer times (Fig. 3a and b).
It should be noted that there may appear to be an inconsistency between the reduced Jsc and higher number of extracted charge carriers in PFN-based devices. Such a difference was previously explained in terms of the different nature of techniques used to measure the Jsc and the charge carrier density (steady state versus transient techniques). It has been reported that short-circuit conditions can be experimentally difficult to probe with any level of sensitivity using transient techniques.48 This is due to the fact that the transient techniques (PVD or TRCE) are more reminiscent of open-circuit potential conditions, whereas the steady-state techniques (J–V measurement) are performed under short-circuit conditions. As such, a higher charge carrier density observed at longer times in PFN-doped devices may not necessarily be present under Jsc conditions. Furthermore, the primary loss mechanism of charge carriers under short-circuit conditions was determined as trap-assisted recombination.20,53 Trap-assisted recombination is a monomolecular process that considers recombination of a mobile charge carrier with a trapped charge carrier. Cowan et al. also reported that the added PC84BM impurity in PCDTBT:PC70BM BHJ solar cells causes polaron loss that not only takes place through trapping but also partly via polaron recombination to the ground state.17 It is probable, therefore, that the border, deeper trap states in PFN-based devices boost trap-assisted recombination under Jsc conditions, thereby reducing the efficiency of charge carrier collection/extraction at the electrodes (Fig. 2b), which could account for the reduction of Jsc in devices doped with PFN.
Charge carrier mobility is another key factor that could be affected by the addition of PFN impurity. Table 3 shows the calculated charge carrier mobility for the control and PFN-doped devices using photo-induced charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (photo-CELIV).54,55 One would expect that increasing trap states slows down charge carrier mobility. Indeed, a two orders of magnitude reduction in the charge carrier mobility of P3HT:PCBM BHJ devices was predicted.56 This is not clearly observed here. The primary cause could be the inability of the photo-CELIV technique to measure the low mobility of deeply trapped charge carriers.48 Accordingly, the calculated mobility values can be attributed primarily to the free, delocalized charge carriers that can be extracted under the given circumstances of the technique. Nevertheless, charge carrier mobility could be affected by the type of traps, i.e. shallow vs. deep. The shallow traps tend to decrease the mobility due to the increase in energetic disorders.57 On the other hand, charge carriers are immobilized in deep traps and energetic disorder remains almost unchanged for deep trapping and consequently charge carrier mobility.57 It should be also pointed out that charge carriers in the deep trap states cannot be easily extracted. This can be inferred from the observed long tail of extracted charge carriers (Fig. S3, ESI†) for devices doped with 0.029 wt% PFN that does not reach the capacitive response.
Table 3 The calculated charge carrier mobility values of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices before and after the addition of PFN




Devices
Reference
0.014 wt% PFN
0.029 wt% PFN





μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)
3.99 × 10−5
4.08 × 10−5
4.22 × 10−5




It should be mentioned that while the above results are consistent, it would be beneficial to further examine the possibility of the penetration of the PFN impurity within the BHJ when it is especially used with big substrates. It would also be beneficial to probe the impact of using various polar solvents on the appearance of the PFN impurity. This would help to further develop strategies to prevent PFN contamination.
Experimental
Materials
p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 (purity of >99.5%, 1-material), PFN (Solaris Chem. Inc.) and PC60BM (purity of >99.5%, Solaris Chem. Inc.), chlorobenzene (CB) (anhydrous, purity of >99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), and 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) (Sigma-Aldrich) were commercially available and used without any further purification.
Device fabrication
A conventional architecture was used throughout the study (Fig. 1b), i.e., the device structure consisted of ITO-coated glass substrate/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)(PEDOT:PSS)/p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM/Al. The ITO coated glass substrates (Rs ≤ 15 Ω Sq−1, Xin Yan Technology Ltd) were successively cleaned by sonication for 20 min each in deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol. The substrates were treated with UV-ozone for 20 min prior to depositing a layer of PEDOT:PSS on top of the ITO side. A 0.45 μl PTFE filter was used to initially filter the PEDOT:PSS solution, which was subsequently spin-coated on top of the substrates at 5000 rpm for 45 s to achieve a thickness of 30–40 nm. The PEDOT:PSS coated substrates were subject to thermal annealing for 10 min at 120 °C in ambient air to remove residual solvent. The p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM blend films were cast from a solution of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM (1:1.5 donor/acceptor ratio, 35 mg ml−1) in chlorobenzene solvent containing 4% (v/v) DIO. To incorporate PFN, 0.1 mg of PFN was dissolved in 1 ml of CB and then 50 and 100 μl of PFN containing CB were mixed with pure CB to prepare a 1 ml solution. The weight ratios of PFN to the active materials were 0.014% and 0.029 wt%, respectively. The thickness of the active layers was measured using a Dektak 150 stylus surface profiler (Veeco) and determined to be around 100 ± 5 nm. The BHJ films were left inside a glove box for 30 min and then were annealed at 70 °C for 10 min and 80 °C for 5 min. The cathode electrode was finally deposited by thermal evaporation of 100 nm of aluminum. The active area of the device was 0.06 cm2. The solar cell devices were encapsulated in a glass slide via UV-curable epoxy for testing in air.
UV-vis absorption
UV-vis absorption of the BHJ films was obtained by using a UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV-3600). The baseline was corrected for glass absorption using a single point correction at 800 nm.
Current density–voltage measurement
Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cell devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter. The devices were irradiated with a white light illumination density of 100 mW cm−2 1.5 air mass (AM) using a solar simulator (PV Measurement Inc.). The irradiance was calibrated with a standard silicon photovoltaics certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Incident photon-to-collected electron (IPCE)
IPCE measurement was performed using a QEX10 quantum efficiency measurement system (PV Measurement Inc.). AC mode was chosen for both calibration and measurement. A 10 nm wavelength step was set to record the photocurrent response of the device.
Photovoltage decay (PVD)
The solar cell devices were illuminated with a 532 nm laser pulse with an energy of around 10 μJ at a repetition rate of 10 Hz, where they were kept under open-circuit conditions using a nanosecond switch (Asama Lab.). The decay of the photo-generated voltage was then recorded over time using a digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, DPO4054).
Time-resolved charge extraction (TRCE)
TRCE measurements were performed using a nanosecond switch (Asama Lab.). The role of the switch was to retain the device under open circuit conditions (2.2 MΩ impedance) for a well-defined, adjustable delay in time after charge generation. The device was illuminated using a laser pulse as described above. After an adjustable delay in time, the impedance was switched to low and extraction of photogenerated charge carriers took place. A digital oscilloscope (as introduced above) was employed to record the transient photocurrent. The amount of charge carriers was calculated by integration of the transient photocurrent. Further division of the charge carrier amount by the volume of the bulk heterojunction yielded the charge carrier density. The charge associated with the dark switch capacitive response was also calculated and subtracted from the charge carrier density.
Photo-induced charge extraction with linear increase in the voltage (Photo-CELIV)
The device was excited by a laser pulse, as described earlier. The device was kept under open-circuit conditions for an adjustable delay in time set by a time delay generator (Stanford Research DG535). Then, the photogenerated charge carriers were extracted using a linearly increasing voltage pulse applied by a function generator.
Conclusions
Photovoltaic characteristics of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ devices were investigated as a function of purposefully added PFN as an impurity. As a result of the PFN addition, a significant reduction was induced on the photovoltaic performance of the devices – primarily due to a loss of Jsc and FF. Analysis of photocurrent results shows that low concentrations of PFN mostly affect charge carrier generation, whereas a higher PFN concentration induces a significant decrease in both the generation and collection of charge carriers. Studying charge carrier dynamics of devices doped with PFN revealed that bimolecular recombination of charge carriers slows down at longer times, leading to a higher charge carrier density and photovoltage. This reduced bimolecular recombination under Voc conditions is assigned to the increase in trap state density as a result of the introduction of PFN to the BHJ. These trap states, on the other hand, significantly hamper the collection of charge carriers and thereby enhance trap-assisted recombination under Jsc conditions, which is manifested in a low FF and the appearance of an S-shaped J–V curve. However, the mobility of charge carriers remains unaltered before and after PFN addition, indicating that either the photo-CELIV technique has the inability to measure low mobility of charges or has difficulty in extracting charges trapped in the deep state. These findings clearly indicate that PFN as an impurity (even in small amounts) can have a detrimental impact on the performance of the photovoltaic devices and that any residual impurity must be prevented from being added to the BHJ during or after fabrication of the photovoltaic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Note from RSC Publishing
This article was originally published with incorrect page numbers. This is the corrected, final version. The Royal Society of Chemistry apologises for these errors and any consequent inconvenience to authors and readers.
Acknowledgements
A. A. acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council through the Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP110101369). A. A. acknowledges support from the Australian National Fabrication Facility.
Notes and references

          B. P. Rand and H. Richter, Organic Solar Cells: Fundamentals, Devices, and Upscaling, CRC Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 52), Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 427–436 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Hou, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li, R. Yu, B. Gao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Over 14% Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells Enabled by Chlorinated Nonfullerene Small-Molecule Acceptors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800613 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cheng and X. Zhan, Stability of organic solar cells: challenges and strategies, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2544–2582 RSC .
O. Inganäs, Organic Photovoltaics over Three Decades, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800388 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ramirez, M. Causa’, Y. Zhong, N. Banerji and M. Riede, Key Tradeoffs Limiting the Performance of Organic Photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703551 CrossRef .
S. Shoaee, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, The Role of Mobility on Charge Generation, Recombination, and Extraction in Polymer-Based Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703355 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Charge photogeneration in organic solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Laquai, D. Andrienko, C. Deibel and D. Neher, in Elementary Processes in Organic Photovoltaics, ed. K. Leo, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, vol. 272, pp. 267–291 Search PubMed .
I. J. Curtin, D. W. Blaylock and R. J. Holmes, Role of impurities in determining the exciton diffusion length in organic semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 163301 CrossRef .
Ö. Usluer, M. Abbas, G. Wantz, L. Vignau, L. Hirsch, E. Grana, C. Brochon, E. Cloutet and G. Hadziioannou, Metal Residues in Semiconducting Polymers: Impact on the Performance of Organic Electronic Devices, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1134–1138 CrossRef .
C. Bracher, H. Yi, N. W. Scarratt, R. Masters, A. J. Pearson, C. Rodenburg, A. Iraqi and D. G. Lidzey, The effect of residual palladium catalyst on the performance and stability of PCDTBT:PC70BM organic solar cells, Org. Electron., 2015, 27, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Nikiforov, B. Lai, W. Chen, S. Chen, R. D. Schaller, J. Strzalka, J. Maser and S. B. Darling, Detection and role of trace impurities in high-performance organic solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1513 RSC .
N. Camaioni, F. Tinti, L. Franco, M. Fabris, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, L. Bonoldi, A. Pellegrino, A. Calabrese and R. Po, Effect of residual catalyst on solar cells made of a fluorene–thiophene–benzothiadiazole copolymer as electron-donor: a combined electrical and photophysical study, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 550–559 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Jacobs, F. Wang, Z. I. Bedolla Valdez, A. N. Ayala Oviedo, D. J. Bilsky and A. J. Moulé, Photoinduced degradation from trace 1,8-diiodooctane in organic photovoltaics, J. Mater. Chem., 2018, 6, 219–225 CAS .
L. Kaake, X.-D. Dang, W. L. Leong, Y. Zhang, A. Heeger and T.-Q. Nguyen, Effects of impurities on operational mechanism of organic bulk heterojunction solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1706–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Cowan, W. L. Leong, N. Banerji, G. Dennler and A. J. Heeger, Identifying a Threshold Impurity Level for Organic Solar Cells: Enhanced First-Order Recombination Via Well-Defined PC84BM Traps in Organic Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3083–3092 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, C. Cabanetos, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, J. A. Bartelt, E. T. Hoke, A. El Labban, P. M. Beaujuge, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. D. McGehee, Improving the long-term stability of PBDTTPD polymer solar cells through material purification aimed at removing organic impurities, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2529 RSC .
L. Nian, J. Zhou, K. Zeng, X. Wu, L. Liu, Z. Xie, F. Huang and Y. Ma, The effect of interfacial diffusion on device performance of polymer solar cells: a quantitative view by active-layer doping, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 317–322 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Leong, G. C. Welch, L. G. Kaake, C. J. Takacs, Y. Sun, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Role of trace impurities in the photovoltaic performance of solution processed small-molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2103 RSC .
M. Kuik, L. J. A. Koster, G. A. H. Wetzelaer and P. W. M. Blom, Trap-assisted recombination in disordered organic semiconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 256805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Collins, N. A. Ran, M. C. Heiber and T.-Q. Nguyen, Small is Powerful: Recent Progress in Solution-Processed Small Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602242 CrossRef .
C. B. Nielsen, S. Holliday, H.-Y. Chen, S. J. Cryer and I. McCulloch, Non-fullerene electron acceptors for use in organic solar cells, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2803–2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ni, X. Wan, M. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, A–D–A small molecules for solution-processed organic photovoltaic cells, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4936–4950 RSC .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Simultaneous enhancement of open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density, and fill factor in polymer solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636–4643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Enhanced power-conversion efficiency in polymer solar cells using an inverted device structure, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 CrossRef .
Z. Liu and N. Wang, Improved efficiency and thermal stability of ternary all-small-molecule organic solar cells by NCBA as a third component material, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19524–19535 RSC .
J. Miao, H. Chen, F. Liu, B. Zhao, L. Hu, Z. He and H. Wu, Efficiency enhancement in solution-processed organic small molecule: fullerene solar cells via solvent vapor annealing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 183302 CrossRef .
A. Saeki, M. Tsuji and S. Seki, Direct Evaluation of Intrinsic Optoelectronic Performance of Organic Photovoltaic Cells with Minimizing Impurity and Degradation Effects, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aghassi, C. D. Fay and A. Mozer, Investigation of S-shaped current–voltage characteristics in high-performance solution-processed small molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, S. Corvers, K. Leo and M. Riede, Investigation of Driving Forces for Charge Extraction in Organic Solar Cells: Transient Photocurrent Measurements on Solar Cells Showing S-Shaped Current–Voltage Characteristics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 873–880 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tremolet de Villers, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, Improving the Reproducibility of P3HT:PCBM Solar Cells by Controlling the PCBM/Cathode Interface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18978–18982 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, Correlating reduced fill factor in polymer solar cells to contact effects, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093301 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, S. Sista and Y. Yang, Dipole induced anomalous S-shape I–V curves in polymer solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094512 CrossRef .
W. Tress, A. Petrich, M. Hummert, M. Hein, K. Leo and M. Riede, Imbalanced mobilities causing S-shaped IV curves in planar heterojunction organic solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 063301 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, Z. Hu, C. Duan, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, The effect of methanol treatment on the performance of polymer solar cells, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 484003 CrossRef .
J. A. Love, C. M. Proctor, J. Liu, C. J. Takacs, A. Sharenko, T. S. van der Poll, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Film Morphology of High Efficiency Solution-Processed Small-Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizuguchi, Correlation between Crystal and Electronic Structures in Diketopyrrolopyrrole Pigments as Viewed from Exciton Coupling Effects, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 1817–1821 CrossRef CAS .
T. Erb, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, S. Raleva, B. Stühn, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Correlation Between Structural and Optical Properties of Composite Polymer/Fullerene Films for Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, W. Wen, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, High-molecular-weight insulating polymers can improve the performance of molecular solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4168–4172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, L. Ying, T. Liu, F. Huang, S. Wang, W. Huang, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Efficient and low-temperature processed perovskite solar cells based on a cross-linkable hybrid interlayer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18483–18491 RSC .
J. A. Love, S.-H. Chou, Y. Huang, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Effects of solvent additive on “S-shaped” curves in solution-processed small molecule solar cells, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2016, 12, 2543–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aghassi and C. D. Fay, Effects of IPA treatment on the photovoltaic performance of bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 130, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Device Physics of Polymer:Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, D. B. Dement, V. E. Ferry and R. J. Holmes, Intrinsic measurements of exciton transport in photovoltaic cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1156 CrossRef PubMed .
O. V. Mikhnenko, M. Kuik, J. Lin, N. van der Kaap, T.-Q. Nguyen and P. W. M. Blom, Trap-limited exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1912–1917 CrossRef CAS .
T. Heumueller, T. M. Burke, W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, K. Vandewal, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Disorder-Induced Open-Circuit Voltage Losses in Organic Solar Cells During Photoinduced Burn-In, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500111 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke, C. Lungenschmied, J. Peet, N. Drolet, K. Sunahara, A. Furube and A. J. Mozer, Photodegradation in Encapsulated Silole-Based Polymer: PCBM Solar Cells Investigated using Transient Absorption Spectroscopy and Charge Extraction Measurements, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1473–1483 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke, J. Peet, P. Denk, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and A. J. Mozer, Non-Langevin bimolecular recombination in a silole-based polymer:PCBM solar cell measured by time-resolved charge extraction and resistance-dependent time-of-flight techniques, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5241–5245 RSC .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Charge carrier formation in polythiophene/fullerene blend films studied by transient absorption spectroscopy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030–3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Clarke, A. M. Ballantyne, S. Tierney, M. Heeney, W. Duffy, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Charge Photogeneration in Low Band Gap Polyselenophene/Fullerene Blend Films, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8068–8075 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke, C. Lungenschmied, J. Peet, N. Drolet and A. J. Mozer, A Comparison of Five Experimental Techniques to Measure Charge Carrier Lifetime in Polymer/Fullerene Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401345 CrossRef .
R. A. Street, M. Schoendorf, A. Roy and J. H. Lee, Interface state recombination in organic solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81(15), 205307 CrossRef .
A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Pivrikas, R. Österbacka, G. Juška, L. Brassat and H. Bässler, Charge carrier mobility in regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) probed by transient conductivity techniques: a comparative study, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 12 CrossRef .
A. J. Mozer, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, M. Westerling, A. Pivrikas, R. Österbacka and G. Juška, Time-dependent mobility and recombination of the photoinduced charge carriers in conjugated polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 397 CrossRef .
M. P. Eng, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, Concentration-Dependent Hole Mobility and Recombination Coefficient in Bulk Heterojunctions Determined from Transient Absorption Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3096–3100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, L. Duan, H. Li and Y. Qiu, Universal Trap Effect in Carrier Transport of Disordered Organic Semiconductors: Transition from Shallow Trapping to Deep Trapping, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10651–10660 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp01732aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, PFN and PC60BM and (b) schematic of the conventional structure of the solar cell device.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics and (b) external quantum efficiency versus wavelength under short-circuit conditions and (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices with and without two concentrations of PFN impurity.	 

Reference	692 ± 5	9.2 ± 1.1	54.1 ± 2.3	3.43 ± 0.4
0.014 wt% PFN Inc.	705 ± 10	6.9 ± 1.2	52.2 ± 2.3	2.54 ± 0.5
0.029 wt% PFN Inc.	710 ± 70	3.42 ± 0.8	38.9 ± 4.3	0.95 ± 0.3
Jph,sat = edGmax	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent (Jph) and (b) charge collection probability as a function of effective voltage of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ solar cell devices before and after the addition of two PFN concentrations as the impurity into the active layer.	 


J
ph,sat (A m−2)	119.22	91.056	52.604

G
max (m−3 s−1)	7.44 × 1027	5.68 × 1027	3.28 × 1027

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltage decay, (b) charge carrier density and (c) bimolecular recombination coefficient as a function of time of photovoltaic devices comprising p-DTS(FBTTh2)2:PC60BM BHJ in the absence and presence of PFN incorporated into the active layer as an impurity.	 
	(2)


μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)	3.99 × 10−5	4.08 × 10−5	4.22 × 10−5
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp01732a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
