Piezoelectric properties of CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite thin films and their applications in piezoelectric generators   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA09662F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09662F
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 756-763Piezoelectric properties of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films and their applications in piezoelectric generators†

        
          
            Yun-Jeong 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tran-Van 
            Dang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyung-Jin 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Byeong-Ju 
            Park
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Ho 
            Eom
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyun-A 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Daehee 
            Seol
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yunseok 
            Kim
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sung-Ho 
            Shin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Junghyo 
            Nah
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Soon-Gil 
            Yoon
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daeduk Science Town, 34134, Daejeon, Korea. E-mail: sgyoon@cnu.ac.kr
bResearch Analysis Center, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, 34134, Daejeon, Korea
cSchool of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon, 16419, Korea
dDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daeduk Science Town, 34134, Daejeon, Korea. E-mail: jnah@cnu.ac.kr
Received 
      27th November 2015
    , Accepted 1st December 2015First published on 1st December 2015AbstractCH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) perovskite thin films were applied to fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO)/glass and Au/Ti/polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates via a two-step process, which involved depositing a CH3NH3I (MAI) solution onto PbI2 films via spin-coating followed by crystallization at temperatures of 100 °C. The 500 nm-thick crystallized MAPbI3 perovskite thin films showed a Curie temperature of ∼328 K, a dielectric permittivity of ∼52, a dielectric loss of ∼0.02 at 1 MHz, and a low leakage current density of ∼10−7 A cm−2 at ±3 V. The polarization–electric field (P–E) hysteresis loop and piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) results showed that the films had well-developed ferroelectric properties and switchable polarization. Poling at an electrical field of 80 kV cm−1 enhanced the power density of the generator. The values for output voltage and current density of the poled films reached 2.7 V and 140 nA cm−2, respectively, which were 2.7-fold higher than those of the non-poled samples.
Introduction
Recently, CH3NH3PbX3 perovskites (X = Cl, Pb, and I) with a direct band gap energy of 1.5–2 eV have shown outstanding properties as absorber layers in perovskite solar cells, with an increase from 3.8% to more than 19.3% in only 4 years, and have been identified as possible base materials for high-efficiency commercial photovoltaic devices.1–6 High power-conversion efficiencies using MAPbI3 have been achieved in both mesoporous structure and planar heterojunction structure devices, using either spin-coating or thermal-evaporation deposition methods.7–10 However, the use of solar energy has both time- and location-dependent characteristics that can present problems, such as the recent abrupt changes in weather caused by the El Nino phenomena that can reduce the power produced by solar cells.
Energy harvesting from the ambient environment and biomechanical movement have attracted interest in wearable and sustainable technologies. Although the energy output from piezoelectric generators may not be as large as that from solar energy, these also have their own advantages such as independence from natural conditions, universality, and flexible characteristics. These advantages make them useful as an energy supply for microelectronic systems and wearable electronic devices.
MAPbI3 has a cubic perovskite structure at high temperature, which undergoes a cubic-tetragonal transition as the temperature decreases.11,12 The ferroelectric polarizations caused by these types of structural characteristics have been thoroughly investigated by various researchers.13–15 The polarization switching and light-enhanced piezoelectricity of MAPbI3 materials have also been addressed by Coll et al.16 However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has reported piezoelectric energy harvesting devices using MAPbI3 perovskite thin films. Thus, both piezoelectric and photovoltaic energy harvesting can be achieved in a single device by using the same materials, enabling energy harvesting irrespective of time and/or environmental variations. Therefore, MAPbI3 perovskites can potentially be adopted for realizing hybrid energy harvesting devices. In this study, structural and ferroelectric properties of 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 thin films were investigated in detail and adopted to demonstrate the performance of piezoelectric generators.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns measured at room temperature using MAPbI3 films annealed at different temperatures. The final thickness of the MAPbI3 films was approximately 500 nm irrespective of the annealing temperature. The samples annealed under a dry air atmosphere for 3 h from 80 to 130 °C using CH3NH3I (MAI) layers deposited onto PbI2 films showed a well-crystallized MAPbI3 structure with a polycrystalline nature. However, an extra PbI2 phase in the samples annealed at 150 °C was observed at XRD 2θ = 13°. This result suggested that PbI2 was formed by dissociation from MAPbI3 caused by the evaporation of MAI, which resulted in a thermally unstable state above 130 °C. The MAPbI3 materials were known to undergo cubic-tetragonal transition to a tetragonal structure at room temperature.11,12 In order to investigate the crystal structure of MAPbI3 at room temperature, the MAPbI3 thin films were observed at room temperature via high-resolution XRD (HRXRD). Fig. 1(b) and (c) show the HRXRD patterns at 2θ = ∼14° and ∼28°, respectively. The cubic phase of the MAPbI3 showed a single peak in the (100) plane at 2θ = 14° and also a single peak in the (200) plane at 2θ = 28°.17 However, as shown in Fig. 1(b), although the peaks near 2θ = 14° were not as well developed, they seemed to be overlapped by those two peaks. Therefore, these were considered to be different peaks, and were noted as peaks in the (002) and (110) planes. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the peaks observed at near 2θ = 28° were clearly separated as 2θ = 28.3° and 28.6°, which indicated the (004) and (220) planes, respectively. Based on the XRD patterns observed at room temperature using the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h under an air atmosphere, the MAPbI3 films showed a tetragonal structure at room temperature, which was consistent with the results reported in the previous work.17Fig. 1(d) shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) surface image of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 3 h under an air atmosphere. The dense and uniform grains were well developed with a mean grain size of approximately 603 nm. On the other hand, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1(d), samples annealed at 100 °C for 1 h showed disparate grain morphologies that were composed of small grains (mean grain size of approximately 170 nm). This result suggested that the grain morphologies of the MAPbI3 films were critically dependent on the annealing time at 100 °C. The XRD patterns of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C up to 4 h (Fig. S1, ESI†) showed no evolution of the PbI2 phase.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns measured at room temperature using the MAPbI3 films annealed at different temperatures. Enlarged XRD patterns at 2θ of (b) ∼14° and (c) ∼28°. (d) SEM surface image of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 3 h under an air atmosphere. Inset of (d) shows the SEM image of the films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. 
The Curie temperature using samples annealed at 100 °C for 1 h was investigated for the ferroelectric properties of the MAPbI3 films at room temperature. First, high-temperature XRD was used for the investigation of the transitions in the cubic-tetragonal structure of the MAPbI3 films as a function of temperature. Fig. 2(a) shows the variations in XRD patterns observed in situ at near 2θ = 28° with increasing temperature using high-temperature XRD. Because the peaks at 2θ = 28° were clearly separated at room temperature, the cubic-tetragonal transitions could be studied. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the XRD (004) peak disappeared slightly with increasing temperature and it had completely disappeared within a temperature range of approximately 56–59 °C. In addition, the XRD (220) peak that indicates the tetragonal structure was changed to a cubic (200) peak when the temperature was increased above 56 °C. Based on the XRD patterns observed at different temperatures, the Curie temperature of the MAPbI3 films ranged from 56–59°. To observe the Curie temperature that would be exhibited during a dielectric transition, the dielectric permittivity of the MAPbI3 films was plotted with temperature, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The Curie temperature of MAPbI3 films is reported to occur from 327–330 K.11,12,18 The dielectric permittivity increased with increasing temperature from 298 to 328 K and then decreased with increasing temperature above 328 K. This result suggested that the Curie temperature of the MAPbI3 films was approximately 328 K, which is consistent with the reported results.
 Fig. 2  (a) Variations in XRD patterns observed in situ at near 2θ = 28° with increasing temperature using high-temperature XRD. (b) Relationship between dielectric permittivity and temperature for the clear observation of the MAPbI3 Curie temperature. Here, the heating rate for the observation of the dielectric permittivity with increasing temperature was approximately 2° min−1. (c) SIMS elemental distribution of Pb and I observed along the depth of MAPbI3 films. (d) SIMS mapping image of the Pb and I of the MAPbI3 films deposited onto the high-roughened FTO bottom electrode. 
Because the MAPbI3 films prepared via a single-step spin-coating process using MAPbI3 solutions showed neither dense nor uniform morphologies, they were deposited via a two-step process. After the deposition of PbI2 onto the FTO/glass, both low- and high-concentrate-MAI solutions were spin-coated onto the PbI2 films, and subsequently they were annealed to form the MAPbI3 films.19 In this two-step process, it was important to determine the existence of the Pb element in the surface of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films for homogeneous compositional distribution. Fig. 2(c) shows the elemental distribution of Pb and I in the MAPbI3 films, and Sn and F in the FTO electrode along the depth of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3/FTO substrate. Based on the SIMS profile, Pb and I elements were clearly distributed on the film surface. However, the Pb and I elements were remarkably diffused into the FTO, although the annealing temperature was as low as 100 °C. In order to investigate the origin of the remarkable diffusion of the Pb and I elements, elemental mapping via SIMS was performed, and the results are shown in Fig. 2(d), where the Pb elements are highlighted in green in the MAPbI3 films, and the F elements are highlighted in blue in the FTO electrode. The mapping image shows the Pb element within the FTO layer. However, when the rms roughness of the FTO was as high as 20 nm, the inhomogeneous distribution of the Pb elements in the interface between the MAPbI3 films and the FTO was attributed to the high roughness of the FTO electrode. The Auger electron spectroscopy depth-profile was obtained to identify the homogeneous distribution of the Pb2+ and I1− elements using the MAPbI3 films deposited onto the Au/Ti/glass, and the results are shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†).
For transparent characteristics of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films, absorption spectra of the films as-deposited onto the FTO/glass and annealed at 100 °C for 1 h are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The colors of the annealed MAPbI3 films were not varied as transparent dark-brown, as compared with those of the as-deposited samples. Based on the absorption spectra, high absorptions in the range of 300 to 500 nm wavelength were observed, and then they rapidly decreased with increasing wavelength above 500 nm. The absorption spectra of the samples before and after annealing showed similar tendencies with increasing wavelength.
The dielectric and the leakage properties of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the crystallized films at 100 °C showed an approximate dielectric permittivity of 52 and a dielectric loss of 0.02 at 1 MHz, which indicated a high dielectric constant in the crystallized thin films annealed at a low temperature. The leakage current density in dielectric materials should be low because the electric field was applied to align the dipoles in order to enhance the dielectric properties of the thin films. Fig. 3(b) shows the leakage current density vs. applied voltage of the MAPbI3 films. The leakage properties of the films were as low as ∼10−7 A cm−2 in the range of ±3 V because the marginal leakage current density in the dielectric films was approximately below 1 μA cm−2 at an optional applied voltage. The breakdown strength of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films was approximately 60 kV cm−1. The polarization hysteresis loops were observed to investigate the ferroelectric properties of the MAPbI3 films. Fig. 3(c) shows the relationship between the polarization and applied voltage of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h. Although the P–E curves were not fully saturated at an applied voltage of ±3 V, the hysteric behavior of the P–E curves was observed. This indicated switchable ferroelectric polarizations in the MAPbI3 films, and showed that the values for remnant polarization (Pr) and the coercive field (2Ec) were 0.15 μC cm−2 and 36 kV cm−1, respectively.
 Fig. 3  (a) Variations in dielectric permittivity and dissipation factor of the MAPbI3 films as a function of frequency. (b) Leakage current density vs. applied voltage of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films. (c) P–E hysteresis loop of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films. (d)–(f) PFM topography, amplitude, and phase images recorded at scan rate of 0.5 Hz, respectively. The image size is 3 μm × 3 μm. (g)–(i) Piezo amplitude, piezo phase, and piezoresponse hysteresis loop of the MAPbI3 films, respectively. 
In order to investigate the local polarization state of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h, PFM analysis was performed. Fig. 3(d) shows the topography of the MAPbI3 films annealed for 1 h. The grains were small, approximately 170 nm, due to the short annealing time (see Fig. S4 (ESI†)). The PFM amplitude and phase images, which were simultaneously obtained with the topography (Fig. 3(d)), are shown in Fig. 3(e) and (f), respectively. The obtained PFM phase image and the corresponding histogram (inset in Fig. 3(f)) clearly indicated that the MAPbI3 films had a preferred polarization direction. We further explored the local ferroelectric properties using piezoresponse hysteresis loops. Since the averaged amplitude and phase hysteresis loops showed typical butterfly and rectangular shapes (Fig. 3(g) and (h), respectively), the results confirmed the existence of ferroelectricity in the MAPbI3 films even on a nanoscale. The piezoresponse hysteresis loop also reflected this tendency, as shown in Fig. 3(i). Since ferroelectric materials also possess piezoelectricity, the results show that MAPbI3 films can be utilized for energy-harvesting applications. Thus, to explore piezoelectric properties, the effective d33 piezoelectric coefficient of the MAPbI3 films was gauged by measuring the Vac-dependent piezoresponses. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the absolute value of the effective d33 piezoelectric coefficient was approximately 5.12 pm V−1, which was similar to the values reported in previous reports.20
To demonstrate the application of MAPbI3 in piezoelectric generators, thin-film piezoelectric generators using 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 thin films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h were fabricated. Specifically, two substrates, PET/indium-tin oxide (ITO) and MAPbI3/Au/Ti/PET, were combined using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as an adhesive layer to sandwich an active piezoelectric layer between two electrode layers. The details of the fabrication process can be found in the Methods section, and the real photographs of the energy harvesting device and measurement setup are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†). Here, two devices were prepared for piezoelectric output performance measurements: an as-fabricated device [Fig. 4(a)] and a device poled under a high electric field (80 kV cm−1) [Fig. 4(b)]. The power generation mechanism of two MAPbI3 piezoelectric thin film generators is schematically described in Fig. 4(a) and (b). When the device was pushed, a piezoelectric potential was induced in the MAPbI3 piezoelectric film, forcing electrons to move toward the top electrode through an external circuit until accumulated electrons balance the piezoelectric potential, generating a positive voltage and a current pulse. As the pressure was released, the induced piezoelectric potential in the MAPbI3 rapidly vanished and the accumulated electrons on the top electrode flowed back to the bottom electrode, generating negative voltage/current pulses. In this application, the PDMS layer served as a potential barrier for electrons, preventing internal leakage of the current between the two electrodes through the active piezoelectric layer. In a non-poled device [Fig. 4(a)], the polarization domain of the MAPbI3 piezoelectric film is randomized at its initial state. Thus, when pressure is applied, the generated net piezoelectric potential is relatively small. When the piezoelectric generator [Fig. 4(b)] was poled under a high electric field, however, it exhibited a much higher piezoelectric potential compared with the non-poled piezoelectric generator. Values for the output voltage and current of the fabricated devices generated by periodically applied pressure are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d), respectively, for non-poled devices. During this measurement, a 10 MΩ load resistance was connected, and what is considered to be a normal constant pressure of 0.5 MPa was periodically applied to a 1 cm2 area of the generator. The non-poled device generated a peak voltage and a current of 1.0 V and 50 nA cm−2, respectively. In device poled at 80 kV cm−1 [Fig. 4(e) and (f)], however, the values for voltage and current were increased to 2.7 V and 140 nA cm−2, respectively, which averaged a 2.7-fold increase by comparison with those of the non-poled samples. The output performance of the MAPbI3 piezoelectric generator was comparable to that (peak voltage and current of 6.5 V and 70 nA cm−2, respectively) of the BaTiO3 film-based piezoelectric generator, as reported by Gao et al.21 This result clearly indicated that the domain alignment of the MAPbI3 thin film layer played an important role in enhancing the performance of the piezoelectric generators.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) The power generation mechanisms of MAPbI3 piezoelectric thin film generators under non-poled and poled conditions, respectively. (c and d) Open-circuit voltage outputs and short-circuit current density outputs of the non-poled piezoelectric generator measured in a forward connection mode, respectively. (e and f) Open-circuit voltage outputs and closed-circuit current density of the piezoelectric generator poled at 80 kV cm−1, respectively. 

Fig. 5(a) shows variations in peak voltage and current density of the generators as a function of poling electric field. During the measurement, the applied pressure was maintained at 0.5 MPa. The peak output voltages and current densities of the generators were linearly increased with increasing poling electrical field by 80 kV cm−1, and then they were saturated at 100 kV cm−1. Dielectric breakdown occurred at poling fields of above 100 kV cm−1. The peak output voltage and current density of the piezoelectric generators after poling at 80 kV cm−1 were measured under various applied forces and the result is shown in Fig. 5(b). The peak output voltages and current densities were linearly increased with the applied force from 0.1 to 0.3 MPa and then they were slightly saturated at applied forces from 0.3 MPa. The highest output voltage and current density of the MAPbI3 piezoelectric generators are approximately 2.7 V and 140 nA cm−2 respectively, at a poling field of 80 kV cm−1 and an applied force of 0.5 MPa. The piezoelectric potential generated in the MAPbI3 perovskite thin films was also calculated using COMSOL Multiphysics® software and their results are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†). Approximately 3 V of piezoelectric potential difference was developed across the MAPbI3 perovskite thin film, which is similar to the values experimentally measured. Next, the validity of output voltage and current was also confirmed by switching polarity tests, measuring the output signals in a reverse connection mode. The measured output signals in Fig. 5(c) and (d) are exactly reversed in comparison with the values measured in a forward connection mode [Fig. 4(e) and (f)]. These results confirmed that the measured output signals were indeed generated by the piezoelectric generator.
 Fig. 5  (a) Variations in peak output voltage and current density for different poling fields at an applied pressure of 0.5 MPa. (b) Relationship between peak voltages and current densities as a function of applied pressure for piezoelectric generators poled at 80 kV cm−1. (c) Open-circuit voltage outputs and (d) short-circuit current density of the piezoelectric generator poled at 80 kV cm−1 measured in a reverse connection mode. The applied pressure was maintained at 0.5 MPa. 
Conclusions
MAPbI3 perovskite thin films were applied to FTO/glass and Au/Ti/PET substrates via a two-step process, which involved depositing a MAI solution onto PbI2 films via spin-coating followed by crystallization at temperatures of 100 °C. Curie temperature, exhibiting a transition from the cubic to tetragonal structure of MAPbI3 thin films, was observed at ∼328 K as indicated by both high-temperature XRD and the relationship between dielectric constant and temperature. The P–E hysteresis loop and PFM results showed that the films had well-developed ferroelectric properties and switchable polarization. Poling at an electric field of 80 kV cm−1 enhanced the power density of the piezoelectric generator. The output voltage and current density of the poled films reached 2.7 V and 140 nA cm−2, respectively, which were 2.7-fold higher than those measured from the non-poled samples. This innovative approach could be helpful for potential applications in hybrid energy harvesting devices and wearable energy harvesting devices.
Methods
Applying MAPbI3 thin film onto a FTO-coated glass substrate
A PbI2 solution was prepared at 60 °C using PbI2 (0.04 g) and N,N-dimethylformamide (HCON(CH3)2) (∼mL). The PbI2 solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 40 s onto a FTO-coated glass substrate accompanied by the flowing of air at 60 °C onto the substrate during deposition in order to maintain a high temperature. Here, the thickness of the PbI2 films was approximately 800 nm. When the substrate temperature decreased below that of the PbI2 solution during deposition, the deposited PbI2 became opaque. The deposited PbI2 became transparent because the solvent in the PbI2 solution was rapidly evaporated by the flow of hot air during deposition. MAI solutions were deposited onto the PbI2-coated FTO-glass substrate using spin coating via a two-step process. First, a low-concentrate-MAI solution (2 mg/1 mL) was spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 5 s onto the PbI2-coated FTO glass in order to promote uniformed film growth. Second, a high-concentrate-MAI solution (40 mg/1 mL) was dropped onto the low-concentrate-MAI layer and was maintained for 3–4 minutes to stabilize the wetting of the low-concentrate-MAI layer. The samples were maintained at 2000 rpm for 20 s. After the spin-coating of the low- and high-concentrate-MAI layers, the MAPbI3 films were prepared via annealing at different temperatures at various durations under a dry air atmosphere.
Characterization and electrical properties of the MAPbI3 piezoelectric films
The crystallinity and the morphologies of the MAPbI3 films were characterized via XRD and SEM, respectively. The phase changes of the MAPbI3 films were investigated via high-temperature XRD at different temperatures. The elemental distribution and mapping image of the Pb2+ and I1− in the MAPbI3 films deposited onto the FTO electrode was studied via secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS). The elemental distribution of the MAPbI3 films deposited onto the Au/Ti/glass substrate was also investigated via Auger electron spectroscopy (AES). The dielectric and leakage properties of the MAPbI3 films were measured using an Au/MAPbI3/FTO/glass (metal–insulator–metal) structure using HP4194A impedance gain-phase and HP4194B semiconductor-parameter analyzers, respectively. Values for the area and thickness of the Au top electrode were 100 × 100 μm2 and 200 nm, respectively. The polarization–voltage hysteresis curve of the ferroelectric MAPbI3 was determined using an RT 66A ferroelectric tester (Radiant Technology) operated in virtual ground mode.
The PFM measurements were conducted using a commercial atomic force microscope (NX-10, Park Systems) with a Pt-coated conductive cantilever (Multi75E-G, BudgetSensors). To acquire the PFM images, an ac modulation voltage of 1.5Vrms and 17 kHz was applied to the conductive tip using a lock-in amplifier (SR830, Stanford Research Systems). The effective d33 piezoelectric coefficient was obtained using a general Vac sweep method.22,23 Here, the ac modulation voltage was progressively increased from 0Vrms to 3Vrms with 17 kHz applied at the tip. The piezoresponse hysteresis loops were obtained using a band excitation (BE) technique.24 To utilize the BE technique, a function generator (PXIe-1062Q, National Instruments) was connected with a PFM. Pulses ranging from −9 to 9Vdc with a 1Vpp BE waveform at 230–310 kHz were applied to measure the piezoresponse hysteresis loop.
Energy harvesting using the MAPbI3 films

(1) Device fabrication. 
PDMS was spin-coated onto the ITO-deposited PET substrate at 3500 rpm for 30 s. The PDMS layer was 25 μm thick. The PDMS-coated electrode layer was then combined with a prepared active ferroelectric dye layer on an Au (400 nm)/Ti (10 nm)/PET substrate, which was then cured in an oven at 95 °C for 3 h. Finally, the fabricated devices were poled in order to align the polarization domain of the active layer while applying various electric fields at room temperature.


(2) Device characterization. 
The output performances of the piezoelectric generator were characterized using a low-noise current amplifier (SR 570, Stanford Research Systems) and an oscilloscope (LT 354, Lecroy Waverunner) with a 10 mega ohm load resistance. During measurements, a periodic force (0.5 MPa) was applied normal to the device surface using a custom-built pushing machine at 0.5 Hz. The active sample area under the stress measured 1 cm × 1 cm.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. NRF-2015R1A2A1A01003867).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. Murakami and H. Snaith, Efficient Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, Perovskites: The Emergence of a New Era for Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. Noh, Y. Kim, W. Yang, J. Seo and S. Seok, Compositional engineering of perovskite materials for high-performance solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. O. Donald and P. L. Stephen, Limits on Yields in the Corn Belt, Science, 2014, 344(485), 6183 Search PubMed .
J. Noh, S. Im, J. Heo, T. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Chemical Management for Colorful, Efficient, and Stable Inorganic–Organic Hybrid Nanostructured Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, B. J. Michael and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Solvent Annealing of Perovskite-Induced Crystal Growth for Photovoltaic-Device Efficiency Enhancement, J. Adv. Mater., 2014, 4(26), 6503 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Efficient organometal trihalide perovskite planar-hetetojunction solar cells on flexible polymer substrates, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
D. Weber, CH3NH3PbX3, a Pb(II)-System with Cubic Perovskite Structure, Z. Naturforsch., 1978, 33, 1443 Search PubMed .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, Dynamic Disorder in Methyl-ammonium trihalogenoplumbates(II) Observed by Millimeter-wave Spectroscopy, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Atomistic origins of high-performance in hybrid halide perovskite solar cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Molecular ferroelectric contributions to anomalous hysteresis in hybrid perovskite solar cells, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081506 CrossRef .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. Wang and A. M. Rappe, Ferroelectric Domain Wall Induced Band Gap Reduction and Charge Separation in Organometal Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Coll, A. Gomez, E. M. Marza, O. Almora, G. G. Belmonte, M. C. Quiles and J. Bisquert, Polarization Switching and Light-Enhanced Piezoelectricity in Lead Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oku, M. Zushi, Y. Imanishi, A. Suzuki and K. Suzuki, Microstructures and photovoltaic properties of perovskite-type CH3NH3PbI3 compounds, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 121601 CrossRef .
N. O. Yamamuro, T. Matsuo and H. Suga, Calorimetric and IR spectroscopic studies fo phase transitions in methyl-ammonium trihalogenoplumbates(II), J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1990, 51, 1383 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, D. T. Tung, H. J. Choi, B. J. Park, J. H. Eom, K. S. Kim, J. R. Jeong and S. G. Yoon, Enhanced reproducibility of the high efficiency perovskite solar cells via a thermal treatment, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52571 RSC .
D. H. Seol, G. S. Han, C. D. Bae, H. J. Shin, H. S. Jung and Y. S. Kim, Screening effect on photovoltaic performance in ferroelectric CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2015, 3, 20352 CAS .
T. Gao, J. Liao, J. Wang, Y. Qiu, Q. Yang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Qin, H. Xue, Z. Xiong, L. Chen and Q. M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9965 CAS .
Y. S. Kim, M. Alexe and K. H. S. Ekhard, Nanoscale properties of thin twin walls and surface layers in piezoelectric WO3−x, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 032904 CrossRef .
D. H. Seol, H. S. Seo, J. Stephen and Y. S. Kim, Nanoscale mapping of electromechanical response in ionic conductive ceramics with piezoelectric inclusions, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 072014 CrossRef .
J. Stephen and V. K. Sergei, Band excitation in scanning probe microscopy: sines of change, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 464006 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09662fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns measured at room temperature using the MAPbI3 films annealed at different temperatures. Enlarged XRD patterns at 2θ of (b) ∼14° and (c) ∼28°. (d) SEM surface image of the MAPbI3 films annealed at 100 °C for 3 h under an air atmosphere. Inset of (d) shows the SEM image of the films annealed at 100 °C for 1 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Variations in XRD patterns observed in situ at near 2θ = 28° with increasing temperature using high-temperature XRD. (b) Relationship between dielectric permittivity and temperature for the clear observation of the MAPbI3 Curie temperature. Here, the heating rate for the observation of the dielectric permittivity with increasing temperature was approximately 2° min−1. (c) SIMS elemental distribution of Pb and I observed along the depth of MAPbI3 films. (d) SIMS mapping image of the Pb and I of the MAPbI3 films deposited onto the high-roughened FTO bottom electrode.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Variations in dielectric permittivity and dissipation factor of the MAPbI3 films as a function of frequency. (b) Leakage current density vs. applied voltage of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films. (c) P–E hysteresis loop of the 500 nm-thick MAPbI3 films. (d)–(f) PFM topography, amplitude, and phase images recorded at scan rate of 0.5 Hz, respectively. The image size is 3 μm × 3 μm. (g)–(i) Piezo amplitude, piezo phase, and piezoresponse hysteresis loop of the MAPbI3 films, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) The power generation mechanisms of MAPbI3 piezoelectric thin film generators under non-poled and poled conditions, respectively. (c and d) Open-circuit voltage outputs and short-circuit current density outputs of the non-poled piezoelectric generator measured in a forward connection mode, respectively. (e and f) Open-circuit voltage outputs and closed-circuit current density of the piezoelectric generator poled at 80 kV cm−1, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Variations in peak output voltage and current density for different poling fields at an applied pressure of 0.5 MPa. (b) Relationship between peak voltages and current densities as a function of applied pressure for piezoelectric generators poled at 80 kV cm−1. (c) Open-circuit voltage outputs and (d) short-circuit current density of the piezoelectric generator poled at 80 kV cm−1 measured in a reverse connection mode. The applied pressure was maintained at 0.5 MPa.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09662f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
