Complex alloy nanostructures as advanced catalysts for oxygen electrocatalysis: from materials design to applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA09092A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09092A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23142-23161Complex alloy nanostructures as advanced catalysts for oxygen electrocatalysis: from materials design to applications

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tierui 
            Zhang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Geoffrey I. N. 
            Waterhouse
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. E-mail: g.waterhouse@auckland.ac.nz
bMacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
cKey Laboratory of Photochemical Conversion and Optoelectronic Materials, Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      15th September 2020
    , Accepted 27th October 2020First published on 30th October 2020AbstractThe oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are utilized extensively in energy conversion and storage devices including polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), rechargeable metal–air batteries and water electrolysers. Herein, we review recent breakthroughs in the design of metal alloy-based nanostructures for oxygen electrocatalysis, placing particular emphasis on how alloy structure and complex architecture influence electrochemical performance. Emerging design principles for alloy-based catalysts include composition regulation, size optimization, morphology control, structure engineering, and interface engineering. By employing one or more of these five design principles, a wide range of alloy systems have been successfully developed in recent years that offer superior ORR and OER activity and stability relative to the benchmark Pt/C and IrO2 or RuO2 electrocatalysts traditionally used in these reactions. Further, many of these well-engineered alloy catalysts offer outstanding electrochemical performance as cathode catalysts in PEMFCs or air electrode catalysts in rechargeable metal–air batteries (e.g., Zn–air and Li–air batteries), thus enabling lower cost fabrication of these devices.Jinlong LiuJinlong Liu received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Adelaide, Australia in 2018. He is currently a Research Fellow in the School of Chemical Sciences at the University of Auckland, New Zealand. His research is focused on the development of advanced nanomaterials for clean energy storage technologies, including Li/Na-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and electrocatalysis.Geoffrey I. N. WaterhouseGeoffrey Waterhouse (FRSC, FNZIC) received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Auckland, New Zealand in 2003. He is a Principal Investigator and Energy Theme leader in the MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology (a New Zealand Centre of Research Excellence). His research interests include solar energy capture technologies, rechargeable batteries and sensors.
1. Introduction
Increasing demand for clean energy technologies with high energy/power densities and low cost provides a strong driver for the development of next-generation energy devices.1–6 PEMFCs and rechargeable metal–air batteries are among the most promising of these next-generation electrochemical energy conversion systems, holding tremendous potential for application in electric vehicles and grid-scale energy storage by virtue of their large theoretical energy densities.2–4 Both PEMFCs and metal–air batteries utilize the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during their energy discharge processes, whilst the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is employed in the recharging of metal–air batteries (and in electrocatalytic water splitting).5 In general, the sluggish kinetics of ORR/OER limit the performance of PEMFCs and metal–air batteries, demanding efficient electrocatalysts to improve the reaction kinetics and lower the overpotential of these reactions.2–4,7–10 Pt is regarded as the benchmark ORR electrocatalyst,2,3 whilst IrO2 and RuO2 represent the state-of-the-art catalysts for the OER.11,12 However, since Pt, Ir and Ru are all precious metals, the high cost and low earth abundance of these elements limit their utility for large-scale commercial applications.2,3,11,12 Further, IrO2 and RuO2 suffer from operational instability during OER at high current densities, which represents a further obstacle to their use in real-world devices.1 In response, substantial effort has been devoted over the past two decades, and especially the last few years, to discovery of efficient and stable electrocatalysts for ORR and OER based on alloys containing precious metals or alternatively only earth abundant elements.1–4,11,12
A number of strategies have emerged in the race towards large-scale ORR and OER catalyst production, with alloy nanostructures and metal single atom catalysts representing the frontrunners in this pursuit. Alloy nanostructures offer a number of advantages over metal single atoms catalysts, especially with respect to OER stability and bifunctional ORR/OER activity.3,4,12–19 Alloying noble metals (e.g., Pt, Au, Ir, Ru, etc.) and earth-abundant transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, etc.) can lead to significantly economies in the usage of precious metals whilst still retaining high activities, thereby reducing the cost of oxygen electrocatalyst production.2,3,12,14 In recent years, researchers have targeted alloy-based catalysts composed entirely of earth-abundant elements for ORR/OER catalysis, thus circumventing the need for high cost precious metals.20–27 Beyond simple composition considerations, complex alloy nanostructures can overcome linear scaling relationships leading to anomalous and dramatic activity improvements, with the interplay between chemical composition, size, exposed facets, morphology, and alloy microstructure being exploited to modulate activity.28 Meanwhile, rationally designed alloy systems capable of suppressing the side decomposition pathways for oxygen catalysis intermediates during ORR and OER leads to enhanced stability during long-term operation.28 Moreover, unlike pure noble metal catalysts that usually suffer from gradual deactivation during use due to poisoning (e.g. poisoning by methanol impurities), alloy catalysts generally possess strong tolerance to electrolyte impurities because of their multiple components with different functionalities.22,29 Inspired by these merits, a great number of alloys have been studied as oxygen electrocatalysts in recent years. These works serve as a solid platform for the future development of higher-performance alloy electrocatalysts with sufficient ORR/OER activity and durability for practical applications.2–4,22
This review offers an overview of recent design strategies reported for the construction of nanostructured alloy catalysts for ORR and OER, as well as the applications of these novel alloys in oxygen-related energy technologies. Unlike previous reviews on ORR/OER catalysts, which place emphasis on a specific type of catalyst (e.g., Wang et al. reviewed Pt-based alloy electrocatalysts for the ORR,30 and Gong et al. reviewed NiFe-based materials for the OER31) or the effect of specific morphologies (e.g., Jin et al. summarized emerging 2D nanomaterials for electrocatalysis5), we aimed here to offer a comprehensive overview of materials design principles relevant to complex alloy catalysts, focussing on how the manipulation of alloy materials, including composition regulation, size optimization, morphology control, structure engineering and interface engineering, can yield complex nanostructures with exceptional physicochemical and electrocatalytic properties for ORR and OER. When used as oxygen electrocatalysts in fuel cells and rechargeable metal–air batteries, the novel alloys have been shown to demonstrate superior catalytic activity and operation stability relative to precious metal catalysts currently used in the ORR and OER. Rapid recent advancements in the performance of alloy-based ORR/OER electrocatalysts inspire confidence that commercial catalysts for the ORR and OER based on non-precious metal alloy catalysts may soon become available. It is the wish of the authors of this manuscript that this review serves as a useful guide to researchers along that pathway.
2. Materials design principles for oxygen electrocatalysis on alloy catalysts
To date, hundreds of different alloy nanomaterials have been investigated as electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER. The ORR and OER performance of some recently reported alloy-related electrocatalysts are summarized in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Each of these works contributes to the fundamental understanding of the factors influencing the intrinsic catalytic activity and electrochemical stability of alloy catalysts for oxygen electrocatalysis. In recent years, the application of computational methods, especially density functional theory (DFT) calculations, have greatly improved understanding of ORR and OER catalysis mechanisms at the atomic and molecular level. Integration of the new knowledge garnered through recent synthetic experimental and theoretical studies provides a blueprint for the rational design of even more efficient ORR/OER catalysts based on alloy nanoparticles. This section, materials design principles, focuses on the judicious adjustment of alloy catalyst composition, size, morphology, structure and interfacial properties to realize enhancements in electrochemical performance for the ORR and OER.
Table 1 Summary of the electrochemical performances of recently reported alloy-related electrocatalysts for the ORR




Catalyst
Electrolyte
ECSA
Mass activity (potential vs. RHE)
Specific activity (potential vs. RHE)
Ref.




Pt3Co
0.1 M HClO4
—
—
∼4.35 mA cm−2@0.9 V

33



Pt3Co/C
0.1 M HClO4
30 m2 gPt−1
1.3 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
4.2 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

34



4.5 nm CoPt3/C
0.1 M HClO4
∼52.7 m2 g−1
∼1.41 A mg−1@0.9 V
∼2.68 mA cm−2@0.9 V

35



Co@Pt/C
0.1 M HClO4
54 m2 gPt−1
∼1.2 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
2.24 mA cm−2@0.9 V

18



CoPt3/C–S
0.1 M KOH
59.76 m2 gPt−1
0.66 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.12 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

36



PtNi bunched nanocages
0.1 M HClO4
68.2 m2 gPt−1
3.52 A mgPt−1
5.16 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

3



Pt3Ni/C
0.1 M HClO4
11.236 m2 g−1
160.8 mA mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.43 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

37



PtNi HSN/C
0.1 M HClO4


1.57 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
2.7 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

38



5.8 nm-Pt1.5Ni/C
0.1 M HClO4
45.81 m2 gPt−1
2.32 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
4.83 mA cm−2@0.9 V

39



Pt34.5Cu65.5
0.1 M H2SO4
34.7 m2 gPt−1
0.59 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.70 mA cm−2@0.9 V

40



Pt–In/In2O3
0.1 M HClO4
28 m2 g−1
0.32 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.14 mA cm−2@0.9 V

41



Pt3Y
0.1 M HClO4
—
—
∼10 mA cm−2@0.9 V

13



Hollow porous Ag–Pt@Pt
0.1 M HClO4
66.5 m2 gPt−1
0.438 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.659 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

42



Pt76Au24
0.1 M HClO4
∼80 m2 gPt−1
0.504 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.62 mA cm−2@0.9 V

43



Pd–Pt octahedral nanocages
0.1 M HClO4
40.3 m2 g−1
0.76 A mgPd+Pt−1@0.85 V
∼1.89 mA cm−2@0.85 V

44



PdMo bimetallene/C
0.1 M KOH
138.7 m2 gPd−1
16.37 A mgPd−1@0.9 V
11.64 mA cm−2@0.9 V

4



Pd6Ni/C
0.1 M KOH
47.5 m2 gPd−1
0.22 A mgPd−1@0.9 V
0.66 mA cmPd−2@0.9 V

45



Ag75Cu25
0.1 M KOH
16.9 m2 gtotal−1
89.5 A gtotal−1@0.85 V
0.95 mA cm−2@0.85 V

19



Co–PtCu RNF/C
0.1 M HClO4
31 m2 gPt−1
1.56 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
5.03 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

46



Pt–Co–W
0.1 M HClO4
65.9 m2 gPt−1
2.25 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
3.41 mA cm−2@0.9 V

47



PtNiCo NWs/C
0.1 M HClO4
82.2 m2 gPt−1
4.20 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
5.11 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

17



PtCu@PtCuNi dendrite@frame
0.1 M HClO4
33.8 m2 gPt−1
2.48 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
7.33 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

48



Pt20Ni60Cu20
1.0 M H2SO4
116 m2 gPt−1
0.473 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.406 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

49



Pt3Ni3MoN/C
0.1 M HClO4
15.54 m2 g−1
0.539 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
—

50



Pt2In0.2Ni1.8
0.1 M HClO4
38.7 m2 gPt−1
0.76 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.96 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

51



PdCu B2@Pt–Cu/C
0.1 M HClO4
58.8 m2 gPt−1
2.55 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
4.33 mA cm−2@0.9 V

52



Porous Pt@PdCu/C
0.1 M HClO4
39.9 m2 g−1
0.57 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.54 mA cm−2@0.9 V

53



Pt2CuW0.25
0.1 M HClO4
52.6 m2 gPt−1
0.75 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
1.42 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

54



Pt–Pd–Ag/C
0.1 M HClO4
39.1 m2 gPt−1
0.206 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.526 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V

55



Pt–Pd9Au
0.1 M HClO4
—
2.54 A mgPt−1@0.9 V
0.98 mA cm−2@0.9 V

56





Table 2 Summary of the electrochemical performances of recently reported alloy-related electrocatalysts for the OER




Catalyst
Electrolyte
Onset overpotential (mV)
OER overpotential (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Ref.




NiFe
1.0 M KOH


298@10 mA cm−2
51.9

57



NiFe-NFF
1.0 M KOH
—
227@10 mA cm−2
38.9

58



Amorphous NiFe alloy
1.0 M KOH
—
265@10 mA cm−2
24

59



Fe0.2Ni0.8/NC-600
1.0 M KOH
—
290@20 mA cm−2
76

60



Hcp-NiFe@NC
1.0 M KOH
—
226@10 mA cm−2
41

61



Co7Fe3
0.1 M KOH
270
365@10 mA cm−2
60

62



NiMo-FG
1.0 M KOH


338@10 mA cm−2
67

63



Ni2Co-N
1.0 M KOH
—
214@10 mA cm−2
53

64



CoDNi-N/C
0.1 M KOH
310
360@10 mA cm−2
72

65



IrNi rhombic dodecahedral nanoframe
0.1 M HClO4
250
300@10 mA cm−2
48.6

66



RuNi-30
1.0 M KOH
—
170@10 mA cm−2
71

67



FeCoNi
0.5 M KOH
—
400@10 mA cm−2
72

68



CS-NiFeCu
1.0 M KOH
—
180@10 mA cm−2
33

69



Co-RuIr
0.1 M HClO4
—
235@10 mA cm−2
66.9

12



IrNiCu double-layered nanoframe/C
0.1 M HClO4
—
303@10 mA cm−2
—

70



Co-doped IrCu octahedral nanocage/C
0.1 M HClO4


293@10 mA cm−2
—

71



Dealloyed FeNi3/NiCu
1.0 M KOH
—
250 @100 mA cm−2
34

72



FeNiMnCrCu
1.0 M NaOH
317
466@40 mA cm−2
58

73



MnFeCoNi
1.0 M KOH


285@10 mA cm−2
52.8

74



AlNiCoFeMo
1.0 M KOH
210
240@10 mA cm−2
46

75



AlNiCoIrMo
0.5 M H2SO4
190
233@10 mA cm−2
55.2

14





2.1 Composition regulation
Conceptually, alloys are obtained by mixing two or more different metals together, which is a basic principle of combinatorial chemistry. Yet in designing or synthesizing alloys for the ORR or OER, it is essential to identify the useful metal combinations amongst the multitude of possible combinations. In making such a selection, a heterogeneous catalysis concept known as the Sabatier principle serves as a useful reference framework. The Sabatier principle states that the binding of a reactant, reaction intermediate, or product to a catalyst should not be too strong or too weak. If the binding of a reactant or intermediate is too weak, it will not adsorb or desorb from the catalyst before the catalyst cycle can be completed (hence the overall reaction rate will be low). Very strong binding of a reactant, intermediate or product will “poison” the catalyst surface and block active sites, which again is detrimental to the reaction rate.28 Generally, the four-electron ORR mechanism involves one adsorption step and four proton–electron transfer steps to reduce dioxygen to water:32 (1) (2) OOH* + H+ + e− → O* + H2O(3) O* + H+ + e− → OH*(4) OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *(5)where * denotes the active site for the adsorption of oxygen intermediates. OER occurs via a four proton–electron transfer mechanism in the opposite direction.
The Sabatier principle was firstly applied to the ORR by Nørskov et al. Experimental ORR activities were correlated with the binding energies of oxygen and hydroxyl (a descriptor of the ORR activity) on a series of metals using DFT, leading to a volcano plot (Fig. 1a).32 The volcano plot in Fig. 1a shows that Pt is the best metal catalyst for the ORR. Nevertheless, Pt is still not at the apex of the volcano plot (∼0.2 eV to the strong binding side of the apex), leaving some margin for improvement. To this end, polycrystalline Pt alloys with the chemical formula of Pt3M (M = Ni, Co, Fe, and Ti) were studied.76 Instead of using the oxygen chemisorption energy as the ORR descriptor, the average energy of the d states on the surface catalyst atoms (i.e. the d-band center) was proposed as a more suitable descriptor, since the d-band center position for each alloy was experimentally accessible via synchrotron-based high-resolution photoemission spectroscopy. A volcano-type correlation was realized between the ORR activity and the d-band center from experimental measurements, in good accord with DFT calculation predictions (Fig. 1b). The alloy Pt3Co offered superior activity due to a more suitable d-band center position and a down-shift of the Pt shell d states relative to the Fermi level. These pioneering works focussed researcher attention to the close causative relationship between electronic surface states of catalysts and oxygen catalysis (i.e., Sabatier's model), whilst also opening the door to the theory-guided discovery of novel electrocatalysts for ORR and other reactions. The discovery that Pt3Co alloys showed outstanding performance for ORR has since stimulated a huge amount of research seeking even more efficient alloy electrocatalysts. Many binary alloys of Pt and other transition metals, including Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, V, Zn, Cr, Nb, Pd, Re, Se, Sn, Ta, Ti, W, Zr, Y, Sc, and Pd, have been synthesized or computationally screened for ORR performance.13,16,29,33,36,49,77–79 Noteworthy here was the discovery by Nørskov et al. that Pt3Y and Pt3Sc alloy nanoparticles were highly efficient and stable electrocatalysts for the ORR, with DFT calculations (Fig. 2a) and electrochemical experiments (Fig. 2b and c) being used for catalyst screening and performance evaluation, respectively.13
 Fig. 1  (a) Oxygen reduction activity plotted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Oxygen reduction activity versus the experimentally measured d-band center relative to platinum. Adapted from ref. 76 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Volcano plots for the ORR on Pt-based transition metal alloys. (b) The first stable reduction sweep for Pt, Pt3Sc and Pt3Y in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Comparison of the first steady cycle (solid lines) and after 90 minutes of cycling (dashed lines) for Pt3Y and Pt3Sc in 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Based on the high performance of certain Pt-based binary alloys for the ORR, researchers subsequently began to explore ternary alloy systems based on Pt. Pt–Pd–Ni,29 Pt–Pd–Ag,55 Pt–Co–W,47 Pt–In–Ni,51 Pt–Cu–Ni,80 Pt–Cu–W,54 and others have been reported in recent years, each of which generally show incremental performance improvements over their binary counterparts in oxygen catalysis. Unlike binary alloy systems, the compositional and geometric complexity of ternary alloys makes it very difficult to carry out high throughput screening procedures (since a parameter space involving three elements demands a lot more computation power and time). Even so, a few theoretical studies have been reported involving three or more different metals.81,82 As an example, Tripkovic et al. predicted that ternary Pt–Pd–Au systems (e.g., Pt2Au/Pd3/Pd and PtAu2/Pd3/Pd) are promising ORR electrocatalysts on the basis of a first principles investigation (Fig. 3).81 Noh et al. carried out a first-principles computational study on PtCuNi ternary alloys, which identified PtskinCu0.76Ni0.24 as an efficient and highly stable ORR electrocatalyst.82
 Fig. 3  Comparison between the activity and stability descriptors used to assess ORR catalyst performance. The grey shaded box is the area with the activities higher than that on Pt(111). Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A study on quaternary Pt-based alloys catalysts was reported recently.83 Using a PtCuxNi ternary alloy nanocrystal as the model catalyst, Tu et al. investigated the effect of W-doping on the ORR properties of a PtCuxNi alloy catalyst. The resulting W-doped PtCuxNi alloy, possessing a quaternary alloy nanostructure, offered enhanced ORR activity and durability compared with PtCuNi ternary catalysts and a commercial Pt/C catalyst from Johnson & Matthey (Fig. 4a and b). The W-doping induced favourable surface reconstruction (Fig. 4c) and synergistic interactions between the constituent metals, thus leading to superior overall ORR activity whilst maintaining good catalyst stability.
 Fig. 4  (a) LSV curves of 111-PtCuNi-W/C at 0 and 20000 CV cycles. (b) Evolution of specific activity and mass activity of 111-PtCuNi-t/C, 111-PtCuNi-W/C and JM Pt/C for ORR. (c) Illustration of the surface reconstruction during W-doping. Adapted from ref. 83 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to simply varying the amounts of different elements in an alloy, fine-tuning the electronic structure of surface atoms in alloy nanoparticles is critical for optimizing catalytic performance. Todoroki et al. prepared a series of model electrocatalysts by depositing platinum monolayers (n) onto different PtxNi100−x(111) alloys (n = 2 and 4; x = 75, 50, and 25), then evaluated the performance of the resulting (ML)-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) alloy catalysts for the ORR.84 It was found that increasing the Ni content in the 2ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) catalysts enhanced the ORR activity (Fig. 5a), leading to a 25-fold activity improvement relative to clean Pt(111) at the optimal 2ML-Pt/Pt25Ni75(111) composition. However, the increase in the Ni content resulted in poor cycling stability owing to Ni dissolution (Fig. 5b). By increasing the number of surface Pt layers to 4, namely 4ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111), the activity enhancement relative to Pt(111) was more modest (4–6 times) but the cycling stability was greatly improved relative to the 2MLPt series of catalysts (Fig. 5c and d). This study demonstrates that regulating the composition of alloy catalysts often requires careful balancing of catalytic activity and electrochemical durability.
 Fig. 5  (a) LSV curves for the ORR recorded at 1600 rpm, and (b) ORR activity changes upon applying potential cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution for the 2ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) surfaces. (c) LSV curves for the ORR recorded at 1600 rpm, and (d) ORR activity changes for the 4ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) surfaces. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Beyond Pt-based alloys, many Pt-free alloys based on Pd, Ag, or earth-abundant transition metals have been pursued for ORR and OER on account of their lower costs and good electrochemical performance.19,45,85 Whilst Pt-based catalysts offer outstanding performance for ORR, their OER catalysis ranges from modest to poor. Hence, the use of Pt-free alloys in oxygen electrocatalysis is generally centred on the development of advanced OER electrocatalysts. For the OER, Ir and Ru are the most active elements.86 Accordingly, binary and ternary alloys containing these metals and one or more of the following first row transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni) have been extensively studied in the pursuit of improved OER electrocatalysts.1 Recently, Shan et al. prepared a series of transition metal doped RuIr catalysts (i.e., M-RuIr, where M = Co, Ni, Fe) and investigated the alloy effect on the OER activity.12 Electrochemical tests showed that the introduction of Co and Ni in the RuIr alloy significantly boosted the OER activity (Fig. 6a). OER activities followed the order Co-RuIr > Ni-RuIr > RuIr > Fe-RuIr, which matched the trend in the OHdes potentials (V vs. RHE) for the same catalysts (Fig. 6b). The superior OER performance of Co-RuIr and Ni-RuIr originated from the weakened adsorption/desorption of oxygen intermediates relative to RuIr, respectively. High-entropy alloys (HEA),87 consisting of equal or relatively large proportions of five or more elements, create infinite possibilities for tuning an alloy's electronic properties and maximizing catalytic activities. Jin et al. recently discovered that a quinary AlNiCoIrMo high entropy alloy exhibited superior OER activity and cycling stability relative to its counterparts containing fewer elements (Fig. 6c and d).14 Overall, multicomponent alloys allow precise fine tuning of the electronic structure and surface facets of oxygen electrocatalysts for enhanced performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves for M-RuIr and RuIr electrocatalysts for OER in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (b) Relationship between low-coordinated oxygen species (OI−) intensity, OH desorption (OHdes) potential, and OER activity. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) OER polarization curves for the AlNiCoIrMo high-entropy alloy and control groups. (d) Potential changes of these samples to reach a current density of 60 mA cm−2 after different CV cycles in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Adapted from ref. 14 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
2.2 Size optimization
The size-dependent catalytic activity of nanostructured metallic electrocatalysts has been widely investigated in fundamental ORR/OER research, leading to so-called size effects on electrocatalytic activity. Intuitively, as the size of nanoparticles decrease, the percentage of surface atoms increases markedly, thereby exposing more metal surface area and active sites for accelerated catalysis. For most types of metal nanoparticles, reaction kinetics will increase with decreasing nanoparticle size (generally to a point where activity dramatically increases or decreases, or remains invariant below a certain critical size). As the size of nanoparticles becomes very small, the relative proportions of particular facets exposed can dramatically change, with the binding energy of oxygen intermediates varying significantly depending on the exposed crystal face. Kinoshita88 constructed models for perfect cubo-octahedral Pt nanoparticles containing only (100) and (111) faces, with the fraction of surface atoms on the (100) and (111) faces relative to the total number of Pt atoms increasing sharply with decreasing particle size below 6 nm. When the particle size was reduced to about 1.8 nm, the (100) faces disappeared, leaving only 8 exposed (111) facets. Markovic et al. studied the ORR kinetics of a series of Pt(hkl) electrodes, with the ORR activity of Pt(111) being higher than that of the Pt(100) plane in both HClO4 and KOH.89 The size dependence of the ORR activity for Pt nanoparticles can be rationalised on this basis (i.e., ORR activity in HClO4 and KOH is maximized when the amount of atoms on surface (111) planes is optimized). However, such knowledge can't easily be transferred to the design of Pt-based alloy catalysts for ORR.
The dependence of ORR activity on nanoparticle size has been explored in a number of binary Pt alloy systems. Using an organic solvothermal method, Wang et al. synthesized monodisperse Pt3Co nanoparticles of size 3 to 9 nm and compared their activity for the ORR.35 As the size of Pt3Co nanoparticles increased from 3 nm to 4.5 nm, their specific activity for ORR increased due to weakened adsorption of oxygenated species, which countered the corresponding decrease in specific surface area. Above 4.5 nm, ORR activities decreased since the loss of surface area and active sites became overwhelming. This resulted in a volcano-shaped mass activity plot as a function of Pt3Co nanoparticle size, with the optimal size for maximal mass activity centred ∼4.5 nm. In a similar study, Zhang et al. prepared two types of carbon-supported octahedral Pt–Ni nanoparticles, namely Pt3Ni/C and Pt1.5Ni/C, which varied in size from 4 to 8 nm. The ORR dependence on particle size was then studied using these two sets of PtNi/C catalysts.39 Intriguingly, Pt3Ni/C showed a monotonous ORR activity enhancement with an increase of particle size from 4 nm to 8 nm, positively associated with an increase in the fraction of (111) terraces. Conversely, Pt1.5Ni/C showed a volcano relationship between the ORR activity and the nanoparticle size, with the highest activity observed for the 5.8 nm-Pt1.5Ni/C catalyst. The observation of a volcano-shaped trend was rationalized by Ni losses and also a higher fraction of exposed surface (111) planes in the Pt1.5Ni catalysts (compared to the Pt3Ni/C catalyst of comparable nanoparticle size).
More recently, Gan et al. reported a volcano-shaped curve for ORR electrocatalysis on Ni-rich PtNi3 alloy nanoparticle catalysts of different size.15 As shown in Fig. 7a, the size-controlled growth of PtxNi1−x nanoparticles using 1,2-tetradecandiol as the reducing agent followed Finke's model. At low concentrations of 1,2-tetradecandiol, Ni-rich PtNi nuclei were generated. Since the nuclei contained few Pt sites to catalyse the reduction of metal precursors, a combination of continuous nucleation and slow growth resulted in small nanoparticles. In contrast, a higher concentration of 1,2-tetradecandiol sustained Pt-richer nuclei that in turn offered an abundance of Pt sites for the catalytic reduction of Pt(acac)2 and Ni(acetate)2, leading to fast nanoparticle growth and the formation of larger nanoparticles. Thus, by simply controlling the amount of 1,2-tetradecandiol used in the synthesis, PtNi3 nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 3.2 to 9.6 nm were obtained for the size effect study. Pt-mass normalized activities and specific activities of the as-obtained PtNi3 catalysts (after activation and electrochemical aging) for ORR were then plotted against nanoparticle size (Fig. 7b and c). The mass activity trend showed a linearly decrease with nanoparticle size, whereas the specific activity showed a “volcano-shaped size dependence” reaching a maximum at a PtNi3 size of 6.7 nm. The size-dependent trends were retained after 30000 potential aging cycles of the ORR, except that the 7.8 nm PtNi3 catalysts showed the highest specific activity following the aging cycles due to its superior resistance to Ni dissolution during ORR tests.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the size-controlled growth mechanisms for PtNi3 nanoparticles. Dependence of (b) Pt-mass and (c) specific activities after activation (diamonds) and after catalyst aging (squares) as a function of the initial particle size. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Nano-size effects have also been reported in alloys with more complicated components. Taking advantage of the fact that reducing alloy particle dimensions to the nanoscale can greatly increase the availability of active sites for better electrocatalysis, nanostructured high entropy alloys (HEAs) were reported recently reported to show outstanding ORR and/or OER properties. For example, Li et al. synthesized a nanoporous AlCuNiPtMn HEA composed of nano-ligaments with typical sizes around 2–3 nm, which exhibited a 16-fold higher mass activity than Pt/C for ORR in acidic media.90 Using quinary metal–organic frameworks (MOFs, i.e., MnFeCoNiCu MOFs) as a pyrolysis precursor, Huang and co-workers prepared MnFeCoNiCu HEA nanoparticles with a size <5 nm, leading to a superior OER activity compared to commercial RuO2.91 Further, Lozano et al. performed a comprehensive computational screening of a series of transition metal alloy/intermetallic ORR catalysts with sizes ranging from subnanometer to nanometer scale.92 To investigate the size dependence of the candidate systems, the adsorption energies of oxygen on 4, 7 and 18 atom nanoparticles were compared. Surprisingly, the size effect varied with the composition of alloy system. As an example, increasing the particle size weakened the oxygen adsorption energy in a Au–Pd related system, yet increased the oxygen adsorption energy in Pt–Pd related system. Accordingly, size optimization studies should be performed for all complex alloy systems, with more attention being paid to this aspect in the development of complicated alloys like HEAs.
2.3 Morphology control
Precise morphology control of nanostructured alloys is crucial to realizing their optimal catalytic activity and achieving operational stability. The morphology of alloy catalysts essentially controls the type and abundance of surface crystal faces exposed during oxygen electrocatalysis, with each different facet offering different interaction strengths with oxygen intermediates and also different electrochemical stability during ORR and OER catalytic reactions. Once the specific ORR/OER activities of different crystal faces of a metal or metal alloy have been determined, alloy materials can be designed with morphologies that maximize the exposure of facets with the desired performance characteristics. As an illustration, Markovic et al. discovered that the ORR activity of the Pt(100) face was higher than that on the Pt(111) face in aqueous H2SO4, but the activity trend was opposite in aqueous HClO4.89 Using this information, Kang et al. synthesized Mn–Pt nanocubes that exclusively exposed (100) facets (Fig. 8a–c), as well as spherical Mn–Pt nanocrystals that exposed both (100) and (111) facets, then applied these materials as ORR electrocatalysts.16 As expected, the cubic Mn–Pt nanocrystals displayed higher ORR activity than the spherical analogues in aqueous H2SO4 (Fig. 8d), whilst the spherical Mn–Pt nanocrystals were more active in aqueous HClO4 (Fig. 8e). Interestingly, the Pt mass normalized activity of the Mn–Pt nanocubes was more than three times higher than that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst in aqueous H2SO4, demonstrating the benefits of both alloying and morphology control in improving the ORR performance in this electrolyte-sensitive reaction. Similar shape-controlled syntheses have been employed in other Pt-based alloy systems, with octahedral PtNi nanoparticles39 exposing predominantly (111) facets delivering superb ORR catalytic performance in aqueous HClO4.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Mn–Pt nanocubes. (c) Model representing as-synthesized Mn–Pt nanocubes with a disordered structure. ORR polarization curves for cubic and spherical Mn–Pt nanocrystals in (d) 0.1 M H2SO4 and (e) 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted from ref. 16 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Using both morphology control and size effects is an effective approach for enhancing alloy catalyst activity. In particular, when one or more of a particle's dimensions are reduced to the subnanometer range, the resultant 2D alloy nanosheets or 1D nanowires show very interesting and sometimes new properties in oxygen catalysis. These 1D and 2D systems typically offer excellent activities owing to their high proportion of surface metal atoms and also surface relaxation effects (e.g. lattice contraction of the top layers of surface atoms) which can act synergistically to improve catalysis efficiencies. Jiang et al. described a general solvothermal method for the preparation of subnanometer Pt alloy nanowires (diameter ∼ 0.8 nm, comprising only 4 to 5 atomic layers) with tuneable composition (e.g., PtNi, PtCo, and PtNiCo) and high aspect ratios (10–150).17 By virtue of fact that the surface of the nanowires exposed predominantly highly active and stable (111) facets, they delivered extraordinary mass and specific ORR activities relative to counterparts with a conventional spherical nanoparticle morphology. The most active PtNiCo nanowires (Fig. 9a and b) exhibited 4.20 A mg−1 and 5.11 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE), which were 32.3 and 26.9 times higher, respectively, than values for a commercial Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 9c). Also, the PtNi alloy nanowires demonstrated excellent stability over 30000 cycles, showing a much lower electrochemical surface area loss (11.6%) compared to PtNiCo nanowires (27.6%) and a commercial Pt/C catalyst (40.4%) over the same number of cycles (Fig. 9d).
 Fig. 9  (a) STEM and (b) HRTEM images of subnanometer PtNiCo nanowires. (c) ORR polarization curves in 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution. (d) The changes in ECSA of Pt/C, PtNi NWs and PtNiCo NWs before and after different potential cycles. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Even more impressively, Luo et al. recently prepared subnanometer-thick metallic alloy nanosheets, classifying the 2D alloys as metallenes (i.e. a graphene-like family of alloys).4 Using a one-pot wet-chemical approach, highly curved PdMo nanosheets termed PdMo bimetallene were fabricated. A high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image for PdMo bimetallene is shown in Fig. 10a. The subnanometer thickness of PdMo bimetallene was verified by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. 10b), with the average thickness determined to be 0.88 nm, corresponding to 4 atomic layers. The PdMo bimetallene served as an efficient and durable bifunctional electrocatalyst for both the ORR and OER in alkaline media. Strikingly, its Pd mass ORR activity at 0.9 V vs. RHE was 16.37 A mg−1, 78 and 327 times higher than those of commercial Pt/C and Pd/C catalysts, respectively (Fig. 10c). Further, the 2D morphology was robust, with the PdMo bimetallene showing exceptional stability after 30000 potential cycles (Fig. 10d). Through detailed catalyst characterization studies and DFT calculations, the outstanding electrochemical properties of the PdMo bimetallene were attributed to a combination of lattice strain, quantum size and alloying effects. This work hints at a bright future for metallene materials in oxygen electrocatalysis and other renewable energy applications.
 Fig. 10  (a) HAADF-STEM and (b) AFM images of PdMo bimetallene. (c) ORR polarization curves and (d) normalized mass activity changes of the catalysts before and after 15000 or 30000 potential cycles. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature. 
In addition to crystalline alloys with well-defined morphologies, amorphous alloys, consisting of randomly arranged atoms with short-range order and irregular boundaries, have also attracted much attention as oxygen electrocatalysts.59,93–96 Due to their unique structural features, amorphous alloys can provide a rich assortment of active sites without sacrificing high electrical conductivity. More importantly, the synthesis of amorphous alloys can often be realized at relatively lower temperature compared to crystalline counterparts. Therefore, a large number of defects can be formed and retained in amorphous alloys, which serve as additional active sites with often very high reactivity. Cai et al. compared amorphous and crystalline NiFe alloys for the OER, reporting that amorphous NiFe alloys demonstrated a much higher OER activity (η10 = 265 mV) than crystalline NiFe alloys (η10 = 365 mV).59 Furthermore, an amorphous multimetal alloy (i.e., NiFeMoB) with near-optimal adsorption energy of oxygen intermediates, delivered an OER current density of 500 mA cm−2 at a very low overpotential of 220 mV.93 Hence, amorphous structures should be considered a special morphology control principle for enhanced oxygen electrocatalysts, deserving of deeper investigation in the future.
2.4 Structure engineering
Engineering the microstructure of alloy catalysts is another effective strategy for modifying catalytic properties. This approach involves modulating the distribution of alloy elements in three dimensions. Structure engineering is defined as a strategy for controlling the metallic element distributions in the alloy nanostructures. Structure engineering is therefore somewhat distinct from interface engineering discussed in the next section, with the latter being more concerned with combining metal alloys with non-metal components to form hybrids with enhanced catalytic properties.
Since noble metals show very good catalytic activity for the ORR noble metal elements localized on the surface has become popular. This approach allows full use of the catalytic properties of the noble metals whilst also reducing the cost of synthesizing alloy catalysts. A further benefit of core–shell structures is stability. A shell of a noble metal serves to protect the underlying core (which may contain for example an alloy of a precious metal and a first row transition metal) from the harsh acid or basic conditions frequently used in oxygen electrocatalysis, thus preventing the dissolution of the non-noble metal in the electrolyte. In this regard, core–shell nanostructures often offer distinct advantages over homogeneous alloys in electrocatalytic applications. The core–shell approach has been successfully adopted to synthesize a number of Pt-based alloys containing 3d transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) for the ORR and OER. Wang et al. recently reported a core–shell nanostructured electrocatalyst comprising a Pt shell and a cobalt core (Fig. 11a) that offered enhanced catalytic activity and durability.18 The Pt@Co nanoparticles delivered a 10-fold improvement in ORR activity versus a commercial Pt/C catalyst, with around 87% mass activity retention after 30000 potential cycles (Fig. 11b). Structural studies and DFT calculations suggested that the activity enhancement resulted from a strain effect in the Pt shell induced by the Co core and also the protection of the Co core by the chemically inert Pt shell. It is worth noting that the ORR activity of core–shell structured PtCo catalysts with Pt shell thicknesses varying from 1 to 4 monolayer showed a volcano-shaped plot as a function of the hydroxide binding energy (Fig. 11c). This implies that manipulating shell thicknesses represents a further strategy for boosting catalytic performance.
 Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image and element maps of Co@Pt nanoparticles. (b) Comparison of the mass activity of Co@Pt nanoparticles, commercial Pt/C and Pt3Co/C catalysts before and after 30000 potential sweep cycles. (c) Volcano plot of the ORR activity as a function of the binding energy of hydroxide (OH) for the different types of surfaces. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
In addition to engineering the near-surface composition of alloy catalysts with a core–shell structure, open nanostructures such as hollow particles or porous tubes can be beneficial for reducing catalyst costs, increasing the active surface area and facilitating mass transfer, thus motivating research into advanced alloy catalyst designs. The synthesis of complex alloy nanostructures has historically proved challenging. However, in recent years, rapid progress has been made in this area and reliable synthetic methodologies introduced. Tian et al. reported the successful synthesis of PtNi bunched nanocages (BNCs) which offered very attractive ORR performance.3 As depicted in Fig. 12a, 1D PtNi bunched nanospheres (BNSs) were first synthesized by a one-pot solvothermal method, which were later etched under acidic conditions to yield PtNi BNCs with a Pt skin and a hollow-structured underlying PtNi alloy. The internal cavities in the PtNi BNCs were obvious by TEM (Fig. 12b), with the individual nanocages being linked in chain-like motifs. STEM-EDS elemental mapping analysis of PtNi BNCs revealed a Pt-rich skin structure on the nanocage walls (Fig. 12c). Compared with a commercial Pt/C reference catalyst, the half-wave potential of PtNi-BNCs/C for ORR showed a positive shift by 63 mV, evidence for much improved ORR kinetics (Fig. 12d). The mass and specific activities for PtNi-BNCs/C were 3.52 A mgPt−1 and 5.16 mA cmPt−2, respectively (Fig. 12e), around 17 and 14 times higher than those of Pt/C, respectively. Moreover, PtNi-BNCs/C showed negligible activity loss (1.3% loss in mass activity) after 50000 cycles (Fig. 12e), reflecting that the complex structure of PtNi BNCs was robust and suitable for long-term operation. Results demonstrate that combining core–shell and hollow structures yielded a novel hierarchical architecture with a high Pt utilization efficiency, favourable kinetics and excellent stability.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of PtNi-BNCs. (b) TEM and (c) HAADF-STEM images with element maps for PtNi-BNCs. (d) LSV curve in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (e) Mass and specific activity evolutions for PtNi-BNCs/C before and after the durability tests over many potential sweep cycles. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Nanoframe alloys, consisting of a nanostructured polyhedral framework with open faces and hollow interiors, represent a further nanostructured porous system attracting huge interest in electrocatalysis. Due to their porosity, nanoframe structures have very high electroactive surface areas per a unit mass. Further, unusual confinement effects that occur within nanospaces can be helpful in promoting collisions between reactants at the catalyst surface, thus increasing reactivity. To date, many alloy nanoframes with different morphologies have been reported as promising electrocatalysts for oxygen catalysis. For example, Lee's group has successfully designed and fabricated a wide assortment of complex nanoframe structured alloys, including facet-controlled Pt@Ni core–shell structured octahedral nanoframes and PtCu dendrite-supported PtCuNi ternary nanoframes for the ORR,38,48 as well as RhCu truncated octahedral nanoframes, rhombic dodecahedral MNi (M = Ir and Pt) nanoframes, Co-doped IrCu hollow octahedral nanocages and IrNiCu double-layered nanoframes for the OER.66,71,97 All these nanoframes demonstrated superior catalytic activity relative to commercial Pt/C or Ir/C and excellent durability, highlighting the merits of engineering nanoframe structures alongside optimization of their composition, size and morphology.
2.5 Interface engineering
Noble-metal-free alloys, especially those based on earth abundant 3d transition metals, have attracted recent attention as possible low cost alternatives to noble metal-based electrocatalysts in many applications including ORR and OER. However, the use of non-noble-metal alloys for oxygen electrocatalysis in aggressive acidic or alkaline environments is complicated by metal dissolution processes leading to poor stability. Accordingly, new design strategies need to be found that circumvent these stability problems. Encapsulating transition metal alloy particles with carbon materials has shown to be an effective strategy to address dissolution concerns. A thin carbon coating can act as physical barrier that prevents contact between the alloy nanoparticles and the electrolyte, thereby suppressing alloy corrosion. Accordingly, the electrocatalytic reactions then take place on the carbon surface, whose electronic properties are altered by the underlying metal alloy. This strategy allows many useful properties of the alloys to be exploited in harsh electrolytes. In order to modulate the electronic structure of the outermost carbon layer towards maximum catalytic performance, it is of vital importance to engineer the interface between the alloy core and the carbon shell. In this section, interface engineering focuses on the rational assembly of alloy and carbon components to tune their interfacial interactions towards more efficient ORR/OER electrocatalysis.
Fe-based materials are among the most active catalysts for ORR. Encapsulating Fe metal or Fe-based allows in carbon nanomaterials has recently been shown to deliver efficient and stable ORR electrocatalysts. For example, using iron acetate as an iron precursor and cyanamide as both a carbon and nitrogen precursor, Chung et al. prepared Fe nanoparticles encapsulated in N-doped carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/carbon nanoparticles via a heat treatment and subsequent etching process.98 The as-prepared catalyst achieved higher activity and better durability under alkaline conditions compared to the benchmark ORR catalyst Pt/C. In other works, Fe-based alloys (e.g., FeCo and FeCu) coated by CNTs have been synthesized using a similar method, then successfully applied for ORR. Metallic Fe is capable of catalysing the growth of CNTs which facilitates the nanoparticle encapsulation process.25,27
Anchoring 3d transition metal alloys on carbon supports other than CNTs, such as carbon nanofiber or carbon fabrics, can also create earth-abundant electrocatalysts with comparable or better ORR catalysis than commercial Pt/C catalysts.21 Only recently has the interface interaction between the alloy and carbon support been investigated in detail, where frequently a carbon shell can form during the synthesis of the electrode material. Bao's group recently reported some fundamental modelling work relating to the catalytic activity of hybrid catalysts and the engineering of interfaces.26,99 In a study examining the activity of metallic Fe nanoparticles within pod-like N-doped CNTs (the catalyst being named Pod(N)-Fe) for the ORR, a model containing a Fe4 nanoparticle encased in a (6,6) single-walled CNT (Fe4@SWNT, Fig. 13a) was constructed, with two distinct effects on the Fe–C interaction being positively identified from DFT calculations.99 Fe cluster incorporation within a SWNT caused the energy states of neighbouring C atoms to be dramatically altered (giving carbon atoms with energies in the range −7.5 to −3.5 eV), creating metallic features in the low density of states (DOS) region near the Fermi level for the SWNT. Bader charge analyses indicated that 1.45 electrons were transferred from the Fe4 cluster to the SWNT, increasing the Fermi level by ∼0.5 eV, as illustrated by the different charge-density distributions in insets I and II of Fig. 13a. N-doping of the SWNTs further improves the DOS near the Fermi level and lowers the work function of the doped area. Both effects are beneficial for enhancing the catalytic reactivity of the modified region of the carbon nanotube exterior by reducing the local work function. These theoretical interpretations were qualitatively supported by experimental ORR activity data collected for Pod(N)-Fe, which was more active than its counterpart without N-doping. The ORR activity could be further enhanced by replacing the Fe nanoparticles in the N-doped pod-like CNTs with CoFe alloy nanoparticles.
 Fig. 13  (a) Projected DOS of the p orbitals of C atoms bonded to Fe4 in Fe@SWNT and Fe4@N-SWNT compared with pure SWNT. Adapted from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) TEM and (c–f) HRTEM images of FeCo nanoparticles encapsulated within pod-like CNTs. (g) ORR polarization curves for graphene nanosheets (GN), Pod(N)-FeCo and Pod(N)-FeCo/GN in 0.1 M H2SO4. (h) DFT calculated dissociative adsorption energy of O2 (Ea(dis)) on the carbon surface of pure or N-doped (two nitrogen atoms doped) SWCNTs, DWCNTs, and TWCNTs with or without an enclosed Fe4 cluster. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bao's group explored the influence of the carbon shell thickness on the ORR activity of FeCo alloy catalysts encapsulated in N-doped pod-like CNTs and graphene nanosheets (GNs). The obtained electrocatalyst was denoted as Pod(N)-FeCo/GNs.26 As can be seen from TEM and HRTEM images (Fig. 13b–f), the FeCo nanoparticles were embedded in the pod-like CNTs and completely covered by a few-layers of graphene (1–4 layers). Note that the introduction of graphene nanosheets allowed precise tuning of the thickness of the carbon wall. ORR polarization curves (Fig. 13g) indicated that Pod(N)-FeCo/GNs with an average carbon wall thickness of 4 layers had much better ORR activity (with a higher onset potential and limiting current) than the pristine GNs or Pod(N)-FeCo with an average carbon wall thickness of 8 layers, indicating that the carbon coating thickness was important to achieving high catalytic activity. Using an identical model to that shown in Fig. 13a, but with various carbon layers added, the effect of the carbon film thickness was quantitatively analysed (Fig. 13h). N-doping single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs), double-walled CNTs (DWCNTs), and triple-walled CNTs (TWCNTs), reduced the dissociative adsorption energies of O2 (Ea(dis)) by 1.33, 0.94, and 1.04 eV, respectively, compared to their un-doped counterparts. Encapsulation of Fe4 nanoparticle in the N-doped CNTs further reduced Ea(dis) by 0.88, 0.25, and 0.06 eV, respectively. Replacing the Fe4 cluster with a Fe2Co2 cluster enclosed in SWCNTs and DWCNTs yielded similar results. Data indicates that limiting the thickness of the carbon shell coated on the alloy nanoparticles, together with N-doping, offers a solid route for tailoring the alloy/carbon interface for more efficient oxygen catalysis.
3. Applications of alloy electrocatalysts in oxygen electrocatalysis
It is well known that the end application of a specific material depends on its properties, whilst the specific properties of the material are determined by its composition and structure. With the ultimate goal of developing advanced alloy catalysts for real world energy conversion and storage technologies, this section aims to show how the aforementioned design principles translate into high performance alloys with high activity and stability in practical devices that employ ORR and/or OER. In particular, this section explores recent the applications of alloy catalysts with demonstrated ORR and/or OER activity in fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
3.1 Fuel cells
Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), also known as polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, are a type of energy conversion device that generate electricity through the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) at an anode and ORR at a cathode. Due to their high chemical-to-electrical energy conversion efficiencies, high energy density and low operating temperature, PEMFCs are very attractive next-generation power sources for various applications, especially medium to heavy vehicles. However, the expansion of PEMFC technology into the energy sector is restricted by the sluggish kinetics of traditional Pt/C ORR catalysts and also high cost/low earth abundance of Pt which is an obstacle to production scale up. Further, for real world applications, extended operation stability is also important. As elaborated above, alloying Pt with other metals enables can greatly increase the kinetics of the ORR and improve the catalyst durability. For instance, Selvaganesh et al. studied the electrochemical properties of a Pt–Au/C cathode in PEMFCs, demonstrating that Pt–Au bimetallic alloys outperform pristine Pt/C cathodes with respect to electrocatalytic activity.100 Further, the Pt–Au/C cathode showed only ∼10% deterioration in PEMFC performance after 7000 accelerated potential cycles and excellent stability with prolonged operation up to 10000 cycles. In comparison, the Pt/C cathode experienced a 60% loss in activity over 7000 cycles under the same testing conditions. X-ray diffraction and TEM characterization studies revealed that the enhanced stability of the Pt–Au/C cathode originating from an alloying effect, wherein the addition of Au alleviated the aggregation of Pt particles during long-term operation whilst also preserving Pt in a metallic state (i.e. Pt0). Zhao et al. reported that preleached Pd–Pt–Ni alloys and binary Pd–Pt alloys offered improved ORR electrocatalysis in PEMFCs.29 In particular, the preleached Pd–Pt–Ni catalyst showed a 2 and 3.5 fold enhancement in Pt mass activity and specific activity, respectively, compared to commercial Pt/C catalyst. This enhanced activity was rationalized in terms of a Pd-rich core and Pt-rich shell structure, with a beneficial strain effect being reinforced by the preleaching step in acid.
Alloying Pt with 3d transition metals is an appealing approach for PEMFCs since it lowers catalyst costs and can also impart exceptional ORR catalysis. Xiong et al. investigated carbon-supported PtM (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) alloys for oxygen reduction in PEMFCs, finding that ordered PtCo offered the best catalytic activity with the lowest polarization losses, which was explained by the optimal structural and electronic features resulting from the interactions between Pt and Co components, such as a decreased Pt–Pt distance.101 A shortening of Pt–Pt distances in PtCo alloys showing enhanced ORR activity in PEMFCs was also reported by Salgado et al.102 Chong et al. reported PtCo alloy catalysts with an ultralow Pt content but excellent performance in PEMFCs.2 By employing cobalt or cobalt–zinc zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (i.e., ZIF-67 or ZIF-8@ZIF-67) as precursors, ultralow concentration PtCo core–shell nanoparticles on a Pt-group metal (PGM)-free support (i.e. an N-doped carbon support) were assembled through thermal carbonization, acid etching and alloying reactions. The obtained low platinum/platinum-free supported (LP@PF) catalysts prepared from ZIF-67 or ZIF-8@ZIF-67 were denoted as LP@PF-1 and LP@PF-2, respectively. In the LP@PF catalyst structure, PtCo alloy nanoparticles consisting of a Pt skin and Pt3Co superlattice core were covered by CoN and CoC terraces (Fig. 14a). The overall Pt loadings in LP@PF-1 and LP@PF-2 were only 2.72 and 2.81 wt%, respectively. Membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) using LP@PF-1 or LP@PF-2 worked efficiently with improved catalytic activity relative to Pt/C in PEMFCs under 1 atm of O2 (Fig. 14b). In an H2–O2 fuel cell, the mass ORR activities of LP@PF-1 and LP@PF-2 were 1.08 and 1.77 A mgPt−1, respectively. Moreover, LP@PF-1 catalyst demonstrated good durability with 64% mass activity retention after 30000 voltage cycles in a H2–O2 fuel cell (Fig. 14c). In addition, when air rather than O2 was selected as the cathodic gas feed, excellent cell performance was maintained over a wide range of different air flow rates and pressures (Fig. 14d). According to computational modelling, the strong interaction between the PtCo nanoparticles and PGM-free support was responsible for the enhancement in ORR activity and durability. This work illustrates that well-designed alloy catalysts containing minimal Pt can function efficiently and reliably under fuel cell conditions.
 Fig. 14  (a) HRTEM image of a representative Pt–Co alloy NP with a Pt3Co superlattice core and Pt skin partially covered by CoN and CoC terraces. (b) H2–O2 fuel cell i–V polarization curves (solid symbols and lines) and power density (hollow symbols and dashed lines) curves recorded under 1 bar of O2 pressure. (c) H2–O2 fuel cell i–V polarization curves and power densities after 30000 voltage cycles. (d) H2-air fuel cell performances for the MEAs containing LP@PF-1 and LP@PF-2 under 1 or 2 bars of pressure. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) H2-air fuel cell polarization plots with Pt/C, PtNi-BNSs/C, or PtNi-BNCs/C as the cathode catalysts. (f) Stability test of H2-air and air-breathing fuel cells at 0.6 V. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As mentioned earlier, PtNi bunched nanocages (BNCs) offered excellent ORR activity and stability in rotating disk electrode (RDE) experiments.3 This excellent performance extends into practice, with the PtNi BNCs electrocatalyst exhibiting impressive performance in both H2-air and air-breathing PEMFCs. A H2-air PEMFC with PtNi-BNCs/C as the cathode catalyst achieved a current density of 1.5 A cm−2 at 0.6 V and a peak power density of 920 mV cm−2, much higher than the systems constructed using PtNi-BNS/C catalysts (1.0 A cm−2 and 770 mW cm−2, respectively) and Pt/C catalysts (0.8 A cm−2 and 600 mW cm−2, respectively) (Fig. 14e). Further, a current density of 170 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V was delivered by PtNi-BNCs/C in the air-breathing PEMFC at room temperature and ambient pressure, whilst Pt/C only afforded 100 mA cm−2, indicating a 70% improvement with respect to the Pt/C reference catalyst. The H2-air and air-breathing fuel cells assembled using PtNi-BNCs/C exhibited very stable operation at a constant output voltage of 0.6 V for 180 h with a negligible current density decay (<3%, Fig. 14f). Among all the Pt-based catalysts reported to date at a comparable Pt loading, PtNi BNCs delivered the best ORR performance for practical PEMFCs, highlighting the huge promise of complex alloy nanostructures for real world fuel cells.
3.2 Metal–air batteries
Rechargeable metal–air batteries are another type of energy storage/energy conversion system based around oxygen electrocatalysis. Certain metal–air batteries offer a higher theoretical specific capacity and energy density than lithium-ion batteries, representing a viable option for portable electronic devices, transportation and grid-scale energy storage. A metal–air battery is composed of a metal anode, an air cathode for oxygen catalysis, and an electrolyte compatible with the anode. During the discharge process, the metal anode (e.g., Zn, Al or Li) is oxidized whilst the oxygen from surrounding air is reduced through the ORR by the cathode catalyst. The charging process involves the reverse reactions, i.e. metal ion reduction by plating on the metal electrode (now the cathode) and O2 evolution at the air electrode (now the anode). Clearly, bifunctional electrocatalysts with good ORR and OER catalysis properties are crucial for the reversible energy storage in metal–air batteries. Indeed, the development of ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts represents one of the biggest technical bottlenecks in this field (other bottlenecks include CO2 absorption by the KOH electrolyte and dendrite formation on the metal electrode during charge–discharge cycles). Tables 3 and 4 summarize the bifunctional electrocatalytic performance of some recently reported alloy-based electrocatalysts in Zn–air and Li–air batteries, respectively.
Table 3 Summary of the electrochemical performances of recently reported alloy-related electrocatalysts in zinc–air batteries




Catalyst
Electrolyte
ΔEa (V)
Open-circuit potential (V vs. Zn)
Specific capacity (mA h gZn−1)
Power density (mW cm−2)
Cyclability
Δηb (V)
Ref.





a ΔE is the potential gap between OER potential at 10 mA cm−2 (Ej=10) and ORR half-wave potential (E1/2).
b Δη is voltage gap.





FeCo@MNC
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.62
1.41
—
115@143 mA cm−2
24 h@20 mA cm−2
0.9

21



Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.765
1.43
∼641.1@10 mA cm−2
194@300 mA cm−2
50 h (>300 cycles)@10 mA cm−2
∼0.74

103



FeCox-NC/CNTs-10
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.80
1.47
775.4@10 mA cm−2
156@∼300 mA cm−2
430 cycles (∼144 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.71

104



FeCo@NC-750
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.69
1.38
763@2 mA cm−2
132@∼280 mA cm−2
20 h@10 mA cm−2
∼0.86

23



N-GCNT/FeCo-3
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.81
1.48
872.2@100 mA cm−2
89.3@∼138 mA cm−2
240 cycles (40 h)@120 mA cm−2
1.49

105



CoFe/FeNC
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.718
1.465
803@10 mA cm−2
154.1@101.2 mA cm−2
350 h (1050 cycles)@5 mA cm−2
0.76

106



CoFe/N–C
0.4 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.844
∼1.3
—
128.6@204.1 mA cm−2
500 cycles@6.5 mA cm−2
∼1.0

107



CoFe/N-GCT
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.88
1.43
—
203@293 mA cm−2
1600 cycles (267 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.8

108



CoFe@NP-CHS
6.0 M KOH
0.672
1.516
—
123.1@∼165 mA cm−2
120 cycles (40 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.591

109



CoFe@NCNTs
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.84
1.45
808@2 mA cm−2
150@300 mA cm−2
500 cycles@10 mA cm−2
∼0.9

27



NPMC/CoFe
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.644
1.496
771@20 mA cm−2
146.34@220 mA cm−2
350 cycles (58.3 h)@50 mA cm−2
0.89

110



FeNi/N-CPCF-950
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.718
1.478
751@10 mA cm−2
160.6@∼250 mA cm−2
960 cycles (640 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.764

111



1.5FeNi@NCNT
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.6
1.38
—
114@∼128 mA cm−2
>100 cycles@10 mA cm−2
1.1

112



NiFe/NBCNT
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
∼0.6
1.44
—
∼30@100 mA cm−2
200 cycles@10 mA cm-2
∼0.8

113



Ni50Fe50@N-CNTs
2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.688
1.43
778@10 mA cm−2
203.6@358.1 mA cm−2
1200 cycles (200 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.76

114



TA-NiFe@NCNT
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.73
∼1.5
—
—
170 h@25 mA cm−2
0.92

115



NiFe/N-CNT
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.77
1.41
739.9@20 mA cm−2
300.7@∼360 mA cm−2
300 cycles (100 h)@5 mA cm−2
0.61

116



Ni3Fe/N–C
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
∼0.74
∼1.4
528@10 mA cm−2
—
105 cycles (420 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.78

117



FeCu0.3-N/C
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.777
1.50
681.62@20 mA cm−2
111@∼200 mA cm−2
75 h@5 mA cm−2
∼1.1

25



CuFe
6.0 M KOH
—
∼1.35
—
212@∼300 mA cm−2
>100 h@20 mA cm−2
—

118



Fe3Pt/Ni3Fe3N
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.665
∼1.2
—
—
240 cycles (>480 h)@10 mA cm−2
0.72

119



NiCo/MNC
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.78
1.42
701@20 mA cm−2
135.2@250 mA cm−2
115 h@10 mA cm−2
1.02

120



N-rGO/NiCo–NiO–CoO
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
∼0.73
∼1.5
735@20 mA cm−2
139@250 mA cm−2
33 h@20 mA cm−2
∼0.7

121



NCNT/CoO–NiO–NiCo
0.2 M ZnO in 6.0 M KOH
0.77
∼1.3
594@7 mA cm−2
—
100 cycles@20 mA cm−2
0.86

20



CuCo@NC
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
—
∼1.25
751.4@20 mA cm−2
303.7@∼280 mA cm−2
100 h@2 mA cm−2
0.84

22



Ag–Cu/Ni
0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
—
1.44
896.4@20 mA cm−2
86.3@100 mA cm−2
200 cycles@20 mA cm−2
∼1.0

122



AgCu-10
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
—
1.48
572@20 mA cm−2
85.8@100 mA cm−2
100 cycles@20 mA cm−2
∼0.96

123



IrMn/Fe3Mo3C
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.62
∼1.25
—
—
100 cycles (200 h)@10 mA cm−2
∼0.82

124



Ni@Ni3Pt
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
—
1.375
—
90@∼100 mA cm−2
478 cycles (>79 h)@10 mA cm−2
<0.62

125



CuPt-TBTC/NGr-90
6.0 M KOH
—
1.35
250@100 mA cm−2
300@∼500 mA cm−2
—
—

126



PtRuCu/CuNN/CuF
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
0.69
1.48
782.9@30 mA cm−2
∼169@280 mA cm−2
240 cycles (120 h)@30 mA cm−2
∼1.0

127



Pd3Pb/C
0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH
—
∼1.48
574@10 mA cm−2
—
560 h@10 mA cm−2
0.72

128



PdMo bimetallene/C
0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH
∼0.77
1.483
798@20 mA cm−2
154.2@∼220 mA cm−2
350 cycles@10 mA cm−2
∼0.6

4





Table 4 Summary of the electrochemical performances of recently reported alloy-related electrocatalysts in lithium–air batteries




Catalyst
Electrolyte
ΔEa (V)
Open-circuit potential (V vs. Li)
Initial discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Cyclability
Δηb (V)
Ref.





a ΔE is the potential gap between OER potential at 10 mA cm−2 (Ej=10) and ORR half-wave potential (E1/2).
b Δη is voltage gap between discharge and charge processes between discharge and charge processes.





Fe–36Ni@NCNTS
1.0 M LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
—
6550@0.1 mA cm−2
67 cycles@0.1 mA cm−2
∼1.5

129



MOF(Fe/Co)-CNTs-600
1.0 M LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
0.82
—
>5000@100 mA g−1
40 cycles@100 mA g−1
1.55

24



Co–Ni@NG
0.1 M LiOH in H2O
0.686
3.55
10780@0.5 mA cm−2
100 cycles@0.5 mA cm−2
0.45

130



Vxc-72/PtCo2
1.0 M LiClO4 in PC + DME
—
—
3100@100 mA g−1
10 cycles@100 mA g−1
∼1.25

131



Pt3Ni-RGO
0.1 M TBAP–DMSO
—
—
11518@0.1 mA cm−2
10 cycles@0.3 mA cm−2
1.46

132



PtAu/C
1.0 M LiClO4 in PC + DME
—
—
∼2000@50 mA g−1
—
∼0.8

133



Au49Pt51/C
1.0 M LiPF6 in EC + DMC
—
3.51
1329@0.12 mA cm−2
—
1.3

134



PdNi-NSMmC/CP
1.0 M LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
—
—
9965@300 mA g−1
120 cycles@300 mA g−1
∼0.8

135



rGO-CuPd
0.1 M LiPF6 in DMSO
—
—
4407@100 mA g−1
20 cycles@100 mA g−1
>1.5

136





Whilst Pt-based catalysts show excellent ORR activity, their OER performance is unsatisfactory, motivating attempts to fabricate bifunctional Pt-free alloys. The 2D PdMo bimetallene proposed by Luo et al. showed promising ORR and OER activities, making it a suitable air electrode electrocatalyst in rechargeable metal–air batteries.4 Luo and co-workers assessed the performance of PdMo bimetallene in both Zn–air and Li–air batteries.4 In an aqueous Zn–air cell, the PdMo bimetallene-based battery exhibited a high specific capacity of 798 mA h gZn−1 and a gravimetric energy density of 1043 W h kgZn−1, surpassing the battery constructed using IrO2 + Pt/C as the air electrode OER and ORR catalysts, respectively (499 mA h gZn−1 and 543 W h kgZn−1, respectively, Fig. 15a). In stark contrast to the fast performance drop of the Zn–air battery constructed using IrO2 + Pt/C catalysts over 75 cycles, the battery constructed with PdMo bimetallene/C as the OER/ORR catalyst performed stably during extended cycling over at least 350 cycles (Fig. 15c), exhibiting a high open-circuit voltage of 1.483 V, a maximum power density of 154.2 mV cm−2, a high rate capability between 10 to 100 mA cm−2 (Fig. 15b) and excellent cycling stability at high current densities (50 and 75 mA cm−2). When applied in a non-aqueous Li–air battery, PdMo bimetallene/C demonstrated superior electrocatalytic ORR/OER activity and durability relative to an electrode based on commercial graphite, Pt/C and RuO2/C. This outstanding performance and versatility encourage the future application of PdMo bimetallene and other metallene materials as efficient bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts in metal–air batteries.
 Fig. 15  (a) Zn mass-normalized specific capacities of Zn–air batteries with PdMo bimetallene/C and IrO2 + Pt/C as the cathodic catalysts at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. (b) Discharge curves of two Zn–air batteries at current densities of 10, 20, 50 and 100 mA cm−2. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of two Zn–air batteries at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with each cycle being 20 min. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Currently, hybrid catalysts involving 3d transition metal alloys and carbon nanostructures are actively being pursued by researchers owing to their excellent combined ORR and OER properties which is an essential requirement for the air-electrode in rechargeable metal–air batteries. Evidence is emerging that alloy hybrids may be able to overcome the traditional limitations of bifunctional OER/ORR catalysts in practical applications. Liu et al. integrated NiCo alloys and their oxides on N-doped multiwall CNTs (namely NCNT/CoO–NiO–NiCo), obtaining an efficient bifunctional catalyst for both primary and rechargeable Zn–air batteries.20 In the case of aqueous rechargeable Zn–air batteries, NCNT/CoO–NiO–NiCo showed better performance than the control catalyst groups including NCNT/CoO–Co, NCNT/NiO–Ni and Pt/C + IrO2, delivering an improved discharge voltage plateau (1.22 V), high energy densities (713 W h kgZn−1 at 7 mA cm−2 and 615 W h kgZn−1 at 20 mA cm−2), and enhanced round-trip efficiencies during 100 cycles at 20 mA cm−2. Similarly, Cai et al. integrated CoFe alloy nanoparticles with N-doped CNTs (CoFe@NCNTs) to produce a very effective catalyst for Zn–air batteries.27 The CoFe@NCNTs electrode resulted in a high open-circuit potential of 1.45 V, an average specific capacity of 808 mA h gZn−1 at 2–10 mA cm−2 and a maximum power density of 150 mW cm−2, outperforming Pt/C. Very recently, Wang et al. investigated FeCu alloys encapsulated in peasecod-like N-doped CNTs as an electrocatalyst for Zn–air batteries, achieving a high voltage (1.50 V), large power density (111 mW cm−2) and long-term stability (75 h).25 Combining electrospinning and calcination treatments, Li et al. obtained FeCo nanoparticles embedded in mesoporous Fe/Co–N–C nanofibers (FeCo@MNC), which offered high-performance as an electrocatalyst in a rechargeable Zn–air battery with low discharge–charge voltage polarization (0.9 V at 20 mA cm−2), high power density (115 mW cm−2 at 143 mA cm−2) and better cycling stability than Pt/C.21
MOFs are useful precursors for the fabrication of alloy nanoparticles wrapped in carbon materials as ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts.137 By facile pyrolysis of a Co–Fe Prussian blue analogue (Co–Fe PBA), Cai et al. synthesized FeCo nanoparticles confined in N-doped carbon layers with a core–shell structure (FeCo@NC).23 When applied as the air electrode catalysts in a Zn–air battery, the optimal FeCo@NC displayed a maximum power density of 132 mW cm−2, a discharge voltage plateau of 1.275 V, and a specific capacity of 763 mA h gZn−1, which was comparable to a Pt/C-based battery (136 mW cm−2, 1.30 V, and 743 mA h gZn−1, respectively). Thanks to the protection offered by the carbon shell, the FeCo@NC electrode exhibited better cycling stability compared with Pt/C. Recently, Huo and co-workers investigated 2D MOF-derived CuCo alloy nanoparticles encased by N-doped carbonaceous nanoleaves (CuCo-NC) for efficient oxygen electrocatalysis in Zn–air batteries.22 The CuCo-NC catalyst demonstrated superior bifunctional ORR and OER catalysis than an air electrode based on Pt/C + Ir/C catalysts, offering a high power density of 303.7 mW cm−2, large specific capacity of 751.4 mA h g−1 at 20 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16a and b), and excellent stability during 100 h of cycling (Fig. 16c). Aside from Zn–air batteries, MOF-derived alloy composites have also been successfully applied in rechargeable Li–O2 batteries. For instance, Wang et al. studied PBA-derived FeCo alloy core@N-doped carbon shell nanoparticles anchored on CNTs as an electrocatalyst in Li–O2 batteries. Excellent performance metrics were realized, including an initial discharge/charge specific capacity of 5000 mA h gcat−1, a small discharge/charge gap of 1.55 V, and good cycling stability up to 40 cycles.24
 Fig. 16  (a) The schematic of the Zn–air battery. (b) Discharge curves for Zn–air batteries with CuCo@NC and Pt/C + Ir/C as the cathodic catalysts at a constant current density of 20 mA cm−2. (c) Long cycling test for a CuCo@NC in Zn–air battery. Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
4. Conclusions and perspectives
Oxygen electrocatalysis plays an essential role in a number of next-generation clean energy technologies. Recent breakthroughs in the synthesis of nanostructured alloys, together with improved understanding of the effects of alloy nanoparticle composition, size, morphology, structure and interfacial properties on ORR and OER electrocatalysis, paves the way for the rational design of improved alloy-based electrocatalysts in technologies such PEMFCs and metal–air batteries. Many of the recently reported alloy-based electrocatalysts offer exceptional catalytic activities and stabilities toward the ORR, OER or both of these reactions (i.e. bifunctional ORR/OER catalysts), performance far beyond those of the commercial benchmark catalysts (Pt/C and IrO2/C, respectively). The highly improved oxygen catalysis and cyclability realized recently using alloy catalysts is expediting their technology transfer into practical fuel cells and rechargeable metal–air batteries. The ever expanding toolbox available to researchers for alloy nanoparticle synthesis, together with the development of computational methods for fast alloy catalyst screening, will likely lead to step-change breakthroughs in ORR and OER catalyst performance in the next few years.
Developing cost-effective ORR/OER electrocatalysts based on earth abundant elements should be a priority of future research, with metal alloys expected to underpin this research endeavour due to their tailorable properties. However, alloys are also more difficult to study from a mechanistic perspective than single metal catalysts. Accordingly, more fundamental studies on model catalysts are needed, which combine theory and various advanced experimental methods, especially in situ and operando techniques at atomic and molecular level, are necessary to ensure deep understanding of oxygen electrocatalysis on alloys (guiding the design of improved electrocatalysts). From the catalyst design point of view, the activity of a catalyst depends on the intrinsic catalytic activity of the material and the number of exposed active sites. To improve the intrinsic reactivity, active alloy compositions and identifying the most active facets are two current design strategies. DFT calculations and high throughput screening using a descriptor-based approach have accelerated the discovery of efficient binary alloy systems over the past two decades. Such methods should be developed to allow the study of alloy systems with increased complexity in composition, such as ternary alloys and high-entropy alloys. To maximize the active site densities and metal atom utilization efficiencies, nanostructure engineering should be leveraged to precisely control the particle size, the element distribution and the interplay between different components, thus requiring more sophisticated and controllable synthesis methods. In addition to screening highly active alloys, electrochemical stability tests should be implemented to assess utility for real applications. Whilst a standard rotating disk electrode (RDE) approach can provide valuable information about catalytic activity and stability, more studies investigating the electrochemical performance of catalysts in real operating fuel cells or metal–air batteries are essential to fill the knowledge gap between fundamental research and commercial implementation of these technologies. Most literature reports pay little attention to the long-term operation stability of their alloy catalysts or how their catalysts perform in practical devices. Current research targeting the discovery of complex alloy nanostructures for enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis, as summarized in this review, is paving the way towards next-generation's renewable energy technologies and the gradual transition away from fossil fuel energy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work received funding support from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for a Catalyst Fund grant (MAUX 1609), the University of Auckland Faculty Research Development Fund, the MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, and a generous philanthropic donation from Greg and Kathryn Trounson.
Notes and references
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3181–3192 RSC .
L. Chong, J. Wen, J. Kubal, F. G. Sen, J. Zou, J. Greeley, M. Chan, H. Barkholtz, W. Ding and D.-J. Liu, Science, 2018, 362, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, X. Zhao, Y.-Q. Su, L. Wang, H. Wang, D. Dang, B. Chi, H. Liu, E. J. M. Hensen, X. W. Lou and B. Y. Xia, Science, 2019, 366, 850 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J.-Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6707–6732 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lei, Z. Wang, H. Yuan, L. Cao, N. Qin, Z. Lu, J. Xiao and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, T. Ling, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 264–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Yuan, Z. Wang, J. Li, M. Yang, L. Cao, G. Liu, D. Qian and Z. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10860–10863 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 463–466 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, K. Su, D. Xv, D. Zhao, J. Li, H. Tong, D. Qian, C. Yang and Z. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25854–25862 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan, T. Ling, K. Davey, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900510 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, J. Lv, H. Jia, W. Liu, H. Li, Z. Chen, X. Lin, G. Xie, X. Liu, S. Sun and H.-J. Qiu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904180 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gan, S. Rudi, C. Cui, M. Heggen and P. Strasser, Small, 2016, 12, 3189–3196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7568–7569 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, D. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Guo, G. Lu and X. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601705 CrossRef .
L. Wang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Z. Zeng, Y. Liu, M. Giroux, M. Chi, G. Wang, J. Greeley, X. Pan and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Lei, Y. Jin, A. Qaseem and R. L. Johnston, Small, 2017, 13, 1603387 CrossRef .
X. Liu, M. Park, M. G. Kim, S. Gupta, G. Wu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9654–9658 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Wu and R. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huo, B. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Ding, H. Yuan, Z. Liang, J. Qi, M. Chen, Y. Xu, W. Zhang, H. Zheng and R. Cao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 12780–12788 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cai, S. Ci, E. Zhang, P. Shao, C. Cao and Z. Wen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Yin, P. Lv, T. Fan, X. He and B. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2127–2133 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, L. Xu, G. Liu, Y. Ye, Y. Quan, C. Wang, W. Wei, W. Zhu, C. Xu, H. Li and J. Xia, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 826, 154152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, L. Yu, D. Deng, X. Chen, F. Yang and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14868–14873 RSC .
P. Cai, Y. Hong, S. Ci and Z. Wen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 20048–20055 RSC .
J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. López, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 971–976 CrossRef .
J. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 660–668 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, N. Zhao, B. Fang, H. Li, X. T. Bi and H. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3433–3467 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lokanathan, I. M. Patil, P. Mukherjee, A. Swami and B. Kakade, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 986–993 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. van der Vliet, K.-C. Chang, H. You, D. Strmcnik, J. A. Schlueter, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19365–19368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Wang, J. Liu and F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9038–9043 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Chen, C. Tian, D. Geng, D. Wang and S. Bai, Electrocatalysis, 2019, 10, 613–620 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oh, H. Baik, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Cheon, B. Kim, H. Kim, S. J. Kwon, S. H. Joo, Y. Jung and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2856–2867 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Y. Hwang and Z. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19778–19787 RSC .
C. Li, T. Liu, T. He, B. Ni, Q. Yuan and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4670–4674 RSC .
Y. Cheng, X. Zhao, Y. Yu, L. Chen, T. Cheng, J. Huang, Y. Liu, M. Harada, A. Ishihara and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 446, 227332 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fu, J. Fang, C. Wang and J. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8803–8811 RSC .
F. Chang, S. Shan, V. Petkov, Z. Skeete, A. Lu, J. Ravid, J. Wu, J. Luo, G. Yu, Y. Ren and C.-J. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12166–12175 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Hong, S. W. Kang, B.-S. Choi, D. Kim, S. B. Lee and S. W. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2410–2419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, Q. Shao, Y. Ji, X. Cui, Y. Li, X. Zhu and X. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap8817 CrossRef .
T. Kwon, M. Jun, H. Y. Kim, A. Oh, J. Park, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706440 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Liu and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10700–10709 RSC .
J. Park, M. Kanti Kabiraz, H. Kwon, S. Park, H. Baik, S.-I. Choi and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10844–10851 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 666–673 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, H. S. Abbo, S. J. J. Titinchi, P. Tsiakaras and S. Yin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 6582–6591 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, S. Dai, Y. Pan, L. Yao, J. Yang, X. Pan, J. Zeng and Z. Peng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11431–11437 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Sang, J. T. L. Gamler, D. P. Chen, R. R. Unocic and S. E. Skrabalak, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5526–5532 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, J. Choi, D.-H. Lim, H.-L. Seo, S.-Y. Lee, Y. Sohn, J. H. Park, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, S. A. Hong, P. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 526–532 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, W. Luo, C. Chen, K. Chen, E. Zhu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, T. Hu, H. Zai, X. Ke, M. Sui, P. Chen, Q. Zhang, Q. Chen, Y. Li and Y. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chalgin, F. Shi, F. Li, Q. Xiang, W. Chen, C. Song, P. Tao, W. Shang, T. Deng and J. Wu, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 6964–6971 RSC .
C. Koenigsmann, E. Sutter, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15297–15306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lim, E. Oh, C. Lim, S. E. Shim and S.-H. Baeck, Catal. Today, 2020, 352, 27–33 CrossRef .
C. Cao, D.-D. Ma, Q. Xu, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807418 CrossRef .
W. Cai, R. Chen, H. Yang, H. B. Tao, H.-Y. Wang, J. Gao, W. Liu, S. Liu, S.-F. Hung and B. Liu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4278–4285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Li, J. Tian, M. Wang, J. Xu, B. Dai and Y. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124977 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6099–6103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X. Wang, M. S. Riaz, C. Dong, Z. Zhang and F. Huang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2427–2433 RSC .
S. Jeong, K. Hu, T. Ohto, Y. Nagata, H. Masuda, J.-i. Fujita and Y. Ito, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 792–799 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Yu, Q. Liang, Y. Pang, L. Miao, X. Liu, Z. Kou, J. He, S. J. Pennycook, S. Mu and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118889 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. He, H. Cao, S. Sun, W. Diao, D. Gao, P. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. Li, R. Liu, D. Ren, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, Y. Hong, J. Yoon, A. Oh, N. K. Chaudhari, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, Y. Wang, J. Hong, K. Suenaga, L. Liu, L.-Y. Chang, C.-W. Pao, T. Zhang, W. Zhao, F. Huang, M. Yang, Y.-Y. Sun and J. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2739–2744 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha and A. K. Ganguli, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1630–1636 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, L. Li, D. Nordlund, H. Chen, L. Fan, B. Zhang, X. Sheng, Q. Daniel and L. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 381 CrossRef .
J. Park, Y. J. Sa, H. Baik, T. Kwon, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5500–5509 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kwon, H. Hwang, Y. J. Sa, J. Park, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604688 CrossRef .
B. Wang, K. Zhao, Z. Yu, C. Sun, Z. Wang, N. Feng, L. Mai, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2200–2208 RSC .
X. Cui, B. Zhang, C. Zeng and S. Guo, MRS Commun., 2018, 8, 1230–1235 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dai, T. Lu and Y. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2019, 430, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Qiu, G. Fang, J. Gao, Y. Wen, J. Lv, H. Li, G. Xie, X. Liu and S. Sun, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 526–533 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897–2901 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, E. Kreidler, L. Xiong and E. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jong Yoo, S.-K. Kim, T.-Y. Jeon, S. Jun Hwang, J.-G. Lee, S.-C. Lee, K.-S. Lee, Y.-H. Cho, Y.-E. Sung and T.-H. Lim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11414–11416 RSC .
M. Lee, Y. Hwang, K.-H. Yun and Y.-C. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, S. Dai, S. Zhang, Z. Lu, C. Zhang, G. W. Graham, Y. Lei, X. Pan and Z. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1720–1728 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tripkovic, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and T. Vegge, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11647–11657 RSC .
S. H. Noh, B. Han and T. Ohsaka, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3394–3403 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tu, K. Chen, L. Zhu, H. Zai, E. Bin, X. Ke, C. Chen, M. Sui, Q. Chen and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807070 CrossRef .
N. Todoroki, R. Kawamura, M. Asano, R. Sasakawa, S. Takahashi and T. Wadayama, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11994–12004 RSC .
T. Löffler, H. Meyer, A. Savan, P. Wilde, A. Garzón Manjón, Y.-T. Chen, E. Ventosa, C. Scheu, A. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802269 CrossRef .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Yeh, S.-K. Chen, S.-J. Lin, J.-Y. Gan, T.-S. Chin, T.-T. Shun, C.-H. Tsau and S.-Y. Chang, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2004, 6, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kinoshita, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 845 CrossRef CAS .
N. Markovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1591 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Tang, H. Jia, H. Li, G. Xie, X. Liu, X. Lin and H.-J. Qiu, J. Catal., 2020, 383, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, B. Zhang, J. Wu, T. Zhang, D. Peng, X. Cao, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11938–11947 RSC .
T. Lozano and R. B. Rankin, Catal. Today, 2018, 312, 105–117 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, H. Yang, J. Zhang, H.-C. Chen, H. B. Tao, J. Gao, S. Liu, W. Liu, X. Li and B. Liu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 624–632 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, G. Zhu, C. Yao, H. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhu and W. Liang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 828, 154465 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ramos-Sánchez, A. R. Pierna and O. Solorza-Feria, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 5165–5168 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Han, Y. Xi, H. You, X. Hao, Z. Li, J. Zhou, D. Song, D. Wang and F. Gao, Small, 2019, 15, 1805435 CrossRef .
J. Park, J. Kim, Y. Yang, D. Yoon, H. Baik, S. Haam, H. Yang and K. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500252 CrossRef .
H. T. Chung, J. H. Won and P. Zelenay, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1922 CrossRef .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Selvaganesh, G. Selvarani, P. Sridhar, S. Pitchumani and A. K. Shukla, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12623–12634 RSC .
L. Xiong and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A697 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, J. R. C. Salgado, M. J. Giz and E. R. Gonzalez, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 1213–1220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Cao, Z. Jiang, X. Tian, X. Hao, T. Maiyalagan and Z.-J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8530–8541 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, X. Li, G. Yu, J. Wang, G. Yan, Z. Wang and H. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227019 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Su, H. Cheng, W. Li, Z.-Q. Liu, N. Li, Z. Hou, F.-Q. Bai, H.-X. Zhang and T.-Y. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602420 CrossRef .
Z. Peng, H. Wang, X. Xia, X. Zhang and Z. Dong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9009–9016 CrossRef CAS .
T. An, X. Ge, N. N. Tham, A. Sumboja, Z. Liu and Y. Zong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7743–7751 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Wang, P. Yu, C. Tian, F. Sun, J. Ma, W. Li and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16166–16170 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Niu, S.-S. Chen, J.-J. Feng, L. Zhang and A.-J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 228594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, L. Gan, D. Li, Y. Gao, X. Yang, K. Wang, S. Lu, H. Wu, S. Ding and C. Xiao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227177 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Ang, J. Liu, X. Y. D. Ma, J. Kong, Y. Zhang, T. Yan and X. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, B. Guo, A. Nie and R. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 585–592 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bin, B. Yang, C. Li, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26178–26187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Peng, W. Duan, G. He and Z. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5994–6001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, L. Shang, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, J. Zhao and T. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13129–13136 RSC .
H. Lei, Z. Wang, F. Yang, X. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xie, M. S. Javed, X. Lu, S. Tan and W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104293 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Tang and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601172 CrossRef .
G. Nam, J. Park, M. Choi, P. Oh, S. Park, M. G. Kim, N. Park, J. Cho and J.-S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6493–6501 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, G. Fu, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9901–9905 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, Y. Tian, H. Li, L. Xu, J. Qian, J. Pang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 797, 1041–1049 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, P. Li, Q. Qin, Z. Li and X. Liu, Carbon, 2018, 139, 35–44 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Chen, Y. Jin, N. Zhang and R. L. Johnston, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17782–17791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin and F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 437–445 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, Y. Li, G. Fu, X. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702385 CrossRef .
T. V. Pham, Y. Li, W.-B. Luo, H.-P. Guo, X.-W. Gao, J.-Z. Wang and H.-K. Liu, Glob. Chall., 2019, 3, 1900027 CrossRef .
R. Illathvalappil, V. M. Dhavale, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9009–9017 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Min, P. Li, J. Yang and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, H. Chen, M. Zhao and F. J. DiSalvo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, H. Li, H. Li, Y. Xie and Z. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 844, 156199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chang, F. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Peng, M. Guan, X. Shen, S. Zhao, N. Liu, Y. Wu and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4366–4372 CrossRef CAS .
D. Su, H.-S. Kim, W.-S. Kim and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 488–493 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar and N. Munichandraiah, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 873–878 RSC .
Y.-C. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, B. Fang, J. Luo, B. Wanjala, D. Mott, R. Loukrakpam, M. S. Ng, Z. Li, J. Hong, M. S. Whittingham and C.-J. Zhong, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 305404 CrossRef .
X. Ren, M. Huang, S. Luo, Y. Li, L. Deng, H. Mi, L. Sun and P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10856–10867 RSC .
M. Sevim, T. Şener and Ö. Metin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 10876–10882 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Zhu, C. Guo, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700518 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Jinlong Liu	Jinlong Liu received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Adelaide, Australia in 2018. He is currently a Research Fellow in the School of Chemical Sciences at the University of Auckland, New Zealand. His research is focused on the development of advanced nanomaterials for clean energy storage technologies, including Li/Na-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and electrocatalysis.
Geoffrey I. N. Waterhouse	Geoffrey Waterhouse (FRSC, FNZIC) received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Auckland, New Zealand in 2003. He is a Principal Investigator and Energy Theme leader in the MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology (a New Zealand Centre of Research Excellence). His research interests include solar energy capture technologies, rechargeable batteries and sensors.

Pt3Co	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	∼4.35 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
33

Pt3Co/C	0.1 M HClO4	30 m2 gPt−1	1.3 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	4.2 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
34

4.5 nm CoPt3/C	0.1 M HClO4	∼52.7 m2 g−1	∼1.41 A mg−1@0.9 V	∼2.68 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
35

Co@Pt/C	0.1 M HClO4	54 m2 gPt−1	∼1.2 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	2.24 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
18

CoPt3/C–S	0.1 M KOH	59.76 m2 gPt−1	0.66 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.12 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
36

PtNi bunched nanocages	0.1 M HClO4	68.2 m2 gPt−1	3.52 A mgPt−1	5.16 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
3

Pt3Ni/C	0.1 M HClO4	11.236 m2 g−1	160.8 mA mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.43 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
37

PtNi HSN/C	0.1 M HClO4	
	1.57 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	2.7 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
38

5.8 nm-Pt1.5Ni/C	0.1 M HClO4	45.81 m2 gPt−1	2.32 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	4.83 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
39

Pt34.5Cu65.5	0.1 M H2SO4	34.7 m2 gPt−1	0.59 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.70 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
40

Pt–In/In2O3	0.1 M HClO4	28 m2 g−1	0.32 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.14 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
41

Pt3Y	0.1 M HClO4	—	—	∼10 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
13

Hollow porous Ag–Pt@Pt	0.1 M HClO4	66.5 m2 gPt−1	0.438 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.659 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
42

Pt76Au24	0.1 M HClO4	∼80 m2 gPt−1	0.504 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.62 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
43

Pd–Pt octahedral nanocages	0.1 M HClO4	40.3 m2 g−1	0.76 A mgPd+Pt−1@0.85 V	∼1.89 mA cm−2@0.85 V	
44

PdMo bimetallene/C	0.1 M KOH	138.7 m2 gPd−1	16.37 A mgPd−1@0.9 V	11.64 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
4

Pd6Ni/C	0.1 M KOH	47.5 m2 gPd−1	0.22 A mgPd−1@0.9 V	0.66 mA cmPd−2@0.9 V	
45

Ag75Cu25	0.1 M KOH	16.9 m2 gtotal−1	89.5 A gtotal−1@0.85 V	0.95 mA cm−2@0.85 V	
19

Co–PtCu RNF/C	0.1 M HClO4	31 m2 gPt−1	1.56 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	5.03 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
46

Pt–Co–W	0.1 M HClO4	65.9 m2 gPt−1	2.25 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	3.41 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
47

PtNiCo NWs/C	0.1 M HClO4	82.2 m2 gPt−1	4.20 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	5.11 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
17

PtCu@PtCuNi dendrite@frame	0.1 M HClO4	33.8 m2 gPt−1	2.48 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	7.33 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
48

Pt20Ni60Cu20	1.0 M H2SO4	116 m2 gPt−1	0.473 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.406 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
49

Pt3Ni3MoN/C	0.1 M HClO4	15.54 m2 g−1	0.539 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	—	
50

Pt2In0.2Ni1.8	0.1 M HClO4	38.7 m2 gPt−1	0.76 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.96 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
51

PdCu B2@Pt–Cu/C	0.1 M HClO4	58.8 m2 gPt−1	2.55 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	4.33 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
52

Porous Pt@PdCu/C	0.1 M HClO4	39.9 m2 g−1	0.57 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.54 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
53

Pt2CuW0.25	0.1 M HClO4	52.6 m2 gPt−1	0.75 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	1.42 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
54

Pt–Pd–Ag/C	0.1 M HClO4	39.1 m2 gPt−1	0.206 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.526 mA cmPt−2@0.9 V	
55

Pt–Pd9Au	0.1 M HClO4	—	2.54 A mgPt−1@0.9 V	0.98 mA cm−2@0.9 V	
56


NiFe	1.0 M KOH	
	298@10 mA cm−2	51.9	
57

NiFe-NFF	1.0 M KOH	—	227@10 mA cm−2	38.9	
58

Amorphous NiFe alloy	1.0 M KOH	—	265@10 mA cm−2	24	
59

Fe0.2Ni0.8/NC-600	1.0 M KOH	—	290@20 mA cm−2	76	
60

Hcp-NiFe@NC	1.0 M KOH	—	226@10 mA cm−2	41	
61

Co7Fe3	0.1 M KOH	270	365@10 mA cm−2	60	
62

NiMo-FG	1.0 M KOH	
	338@10 mA cm−2	67	
63

Ni2Co-N	1.0 M KOH	—	214@10 mA cm−2	53	
64

CoDNi-N/C	0.1 M KOH	310	360@10 mA cm−2	72	
65

IrNi rhombic dodecahedral nanoframe	0.1 M HClO4	250	300@10 mA cm−2	48.6	
66

RuNi-30	1.0 M KOH	—	170@10 mA cm−2	71	
67

FeCoNi	0.5 M KOH	—	400@10 mA cm−2	72	
68

CS-NiFeCu	1.0 M KOH	—	180@10 mA cm−2	33	
69

Co-RuIr	0.1 M HClO4	—	235@10 mA cm−2	66.9	
12

IrNiCu double-layered nanoframe/C	0.1 M HClO4	—	303@10 mA cm−2	—	
70

Co-doped IrCu octahedral nanocage/C	0.1 M HClO4	
	293@10 mA cm−2	—	
71

Dealloyed FeNi3/NiCu	1.0 M KOH	—	250 @100 mA cm−2	34	
72

FeNiMnCrCu	1.0 M NaOH	317	466@40 mA cm−2	58	
73

MnFeCoNi	1.0 M KOH	
	285@10 mA cm−2	52.8	
74

AlNiCoFeMo	1.0 M KOH	210	240@10 mA cm−2	46	
75

AlNiCoIrMo	0.5 M H2SO4	190	233@10 mA cm−2	55.2	
14

	(1)
	(2)
OOH* + H+ + e− → O* + H2O	(3)
O* + H+ + e− → OH*	(4)
OH* + H+ + e− → H2O + *	(5)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Oxygen reduction activity plotted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Oxygen reduction activity versus the experimentally measured d-band center relative to platinum. Adapted from ref. 76 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Volcano plots for the ORR on Pt-based transition metal alloys. (b) The first stable reduction sweep for Pt, Pt3Sc and Pt3Y in 0.1 M HClO4. (c) Comparison of the first steady cycle (solid lines) and after 90 minutes of cycling (dashed lines) for Pt3Y and Pt3Sc in 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison between the activity and stability descriptors used to assess ORR catalyst performance. The grey shaded box is the area with the activities higher than that on Pt(111). Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) LSV curves of 111-PtCuNi-W/C at 0 and 20000 CV cycles. (b) Evolution of specific activity and mass activity of 111-PtCuNi-t/C, 111-PtCuNi-W/C and JM Pt/C for ORR. (c) Illustration of the surface reconstruction during W-doping. Adapted from ref. 83 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) LSV curves for the ORR recorded at 1600 rpm, and (b) ORR activity changes upon applying potential cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution for the 2ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) surfaces. (c) LSV curves for the ORR recorded at 1600 rpm, and (d) ORR activity changes for the 4ML-Pt/PtxNi100−x(111) surfaces. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) LSV curves for M-RuIr and RuIr electrocatalysts for OER in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (b) Relationship between low-coordinated oxygen species (OI−) intensity, OH desorption (OHdes) potential, and OER activity. Adapted from ref. 12 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (c) OER polarization curves for the AlNiCoIrMo high-entropy alloy and control groups. (d) Potential changes of these samples to reach a current density of 60 mA cm−2 after different CV cycles in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Adapted from ref. 14 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the size-controlled growth mechanisms for PtNi3 nanoparticles. Dependence of (b) Pt-mass and (c) specific activities after activation (diamonds) and after catalyst aging (squares) as a function of the initial particle size. Adapted from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Mn–Pt nanocubes. (c) Model representing as-synthesized Mn–Pt nanocubes with a disordered structure. ORR polarization curves for cubic and spherical Mn–Pt nanocrystals in (d) 0.1 M H2SO4 and (e) 0.1 M HClO4. Adapted from ref. 16 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) STEM and (b) HRTEM images of subnanometer PtNiCo nanowires. (c) ORR polarization curves in 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution. (d) The changes in ECSA of Pt/C, PtNi NWs and PtNiCo NWs before and after different potential cycles. Adapted from ref. 17 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HAADF-STEM and (b) AFM images of PdMo bimetallene. (c) ORR polarization curves and (d) normalized mass activity changes of the catalysts before and after 15000 or 30000 potential cycles. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) HRTEM image and element maps of Co@Pt nanoparticles. (b) Comparison of the mass activity of Co@Pt nanoparticles, commercial Pt/C and Pt3Co/C catalysts before and after 30000 potential sweep cycles. (c) Volcano plot of the ORR activity as a function of the binding energy of hydroxide (OH) for the different types of surfaces. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of PtNi-BNCs. (b) TEM and (c) HAADF-STEM images with element maps for PtNi-BNCs. (d) LSV curve in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (e) Mass and specific activity evolutions for PtNi-BNCs/C before and after the durability tests over many potential sweep cycles. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Projected DOS of the p orbitals of C atoms bonded to Fe4 in Fe@SWNT and Fe4@N-SWNT compared with pure SWNT. Adapted from ref. 99 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. (b) TEM and (c–f) HRTEM images of FeCo nanoparticles encapsulated within pod-like CNTs. (g) ORR polarization curves for graphene nanosheets (GN), Pod(N)-FeCo and Pod(N)-FeCo/GN in 0.1 M H2SO4. (h) DFT calculated dissociative adsorption energy of O2 (Ea(dis)) on the carbon surface of pure or N-doped (two nitrogen atoms doped) SWCNTs, DWCNTs, and TWCNTs with or without an enclosed Fe4 cluster. Adapted from ref. 26 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) HRTEM image of a representative Pt–Co alloy NP with a Pt3Co superlattice core and Pt skin partially covered by CoN and CoC terraces. (b) H2–O2 fuel cell i–V polarization curves (solid symbols and lines) and power density (hollow symbols and dashed lines) curves recorded under 1 bar of O2 pressure. (c) H2–O2 fuel cell i–V polarization curves and power densities after 30000 voltage cycles. (d) H2-air fuel cell performances for the MEAs containing LP@PF-1 and LP@PF-2 under 1 or 2 bars of pressure. Adapted from ref. 2 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) H2-air fuel cell polarization plots with Pt/C, PtNi-BNSs/C, or PtNi-BNCs/C as the cathode catalysts. (f) Stability test of H2-air and air-breathing fuel cells at 0.6 V. Adapted from ref. 3 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 


FeCo@MNC	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.62	1.41	—	115@143 mA cm−2	24 h@20 mA cm−2	0.9	
21

Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.765	1.43	∼641.1@10 mA cm−2	194@300 mA cm−2	50 h (>300 cycles)@10 mA cm−2	∼0.74	
103

FeCox-NC/CNTs-10	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.80	1.47	775.4@10 mA cm−2	156@∼300 mA cm−2	430 cycles (∼144 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.71	
104

FeCo@NC-750	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.69	1.38	763@2 mA cm−2	132@∼280 mA cm−2	20 h@10 mA cm−2	∼0.86	
23

N-GCNT/FeCo-3	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.81	1.48	872.2@100 mA cm−2	89.3@∼138 mA cm−2	240 cycles (40 h)@120 mA cm−2	1.49	
105

CoFe/FeNC	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.718	1.465	803@10 mA cm−2	154.1@101.2 mA cm−2	350 h (1050 cycles)@5 mA cm−2	0.76	
106

CoFe/N–C	0.4 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.844	∼1.3	—	128.6@204.1 mA cm−2	500 cycles@6.5 mA cm−2	∼1.0	
107

CoFe/N-GCT	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.88	1.43	—	203@293 mA cm−2	1600 cycles (267 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.8	
108

CoFe@NP-CHS	6.0 M KOH	0.672	1.516	—	123.1@∼165 mA cm−2	120 cycles (40 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.591	
109

CoFe@NCNTs	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.84	1.45	808@2 mA cm−2	150@300 mA cm−2	500 cycles@10 mA cm−2	∼0.9	
27

NPMC/CoFe	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.644	1.496	771@20 mA cm−2	146.34@220 mA cm−2	350 cycles (58.3 h)@50 mA cm−2	0.89	
110

FeNi/N-CPCF-950	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.718	1.478	751@10 mA cm−2	160.6@∼250 mA cm−2	960 cycles (640 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.764	
111

1.5FeNi@NCNT	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.6	1.38	—	114@∼128 mA cm−2	>100 cycles@10 mA cm−2	1.1	
112

NiFe/NBCNT	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	∼0.6	1.44	—	∼30@100 mA cm−2	200 cycles@10 mA cm-2	∼0.8	
113

Ni50Fe50@N-CNTs	2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.688	1.43	778@10 mA cm−2	203.6@358.1 mA cm−2	1200 cycles (200 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.76	
114

TA-NiFe@NCNT	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.73	∼1.5	—	—	170 h@25 mA cm−2	0.92	
115

NiFe/N-CNT	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.77	1.41	739.9@20 mA cm−2	300.7@∼360 mA cm−2	300 cycles (100 h)@5 mA cm−2	0.61	
116

Ni3Fe/N–C	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	∼0.74	∼1.4	528@10 mA cm−2	—	105 cycles (420 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.78	
117

FeCu0.3-N/C	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.777	1.50	681.62@20 mA cm−2	111@∼200 mA cm−2	75 h@5 mA cm−2	∼1.1	
25

CuFe	6.0 M KOH	—	∼1.35	—	212@∼300 mA cm−2	>100 h@20 mA cm−2	—	
118

Fe3Pt/Ni3Fe3N	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.665	∼1.2	—	—	240 cycles (>480 h)@10 mA cm−2	0.72	
119

NiCo/MNC	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.78	1.42	701@20 mA cm−2	135.2@250 mA cm−2	115 h@10 mA cm−2	1.02	
120

N-rGO/NiCo–NiO–CoO	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	∼0.73	∼1.5	735@20 mA cm−2	139@250 mA cm−2	33 h@20 mA cm−2	∼0.7	
121

NCNT/CoO–NiO–NiCo	0.2 M ZnO in 6.0 M KOH	0.77	∼1.3	594@7 mA cm−2	—	100 cycles@20 mA cm−2	0.86	
20

CuCo@NC	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	—	∼1.25	751.4@20 mA cm−2	303.7@∼280 mA cm−2	100 h@2 mA cm−2	0.84	
22

Ag–Cu/Ni	0.1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	—	1.44	896.4@20 mA cm−2	86.3@100 mA cm−2	200 cycles@20 mA cm−2	∼1.0	
122

AgCu-10	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	—	1.48	572@20 mA cm−2	85.8@100 mA cm−2	100 cycles@20 mA cm−2	∼0.96	
123

IrMn/Fe3Mo3C	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.62	∼1.25	—	—	100 cycles (200 h)@10 mA cm−2	∼0.82	
124

Ni@Ni3Pt	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	—	1.375	—	90@∼100 mA cm−2	478 cycles (>79 h)@10 mA cm−2	<0.62	
125

CuPt-TBTC/NGr-90	6.0 M KOH	—	1.35	250@100 mA cm−2	300@∼500 mA cm−2	—	—	
126

PtRuCu/CuNN/CuF	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	0.69	1.48	782.9@30 mA cm−2	∼169@280 mA cm−2	240 cycles (120 h)@30 mA cm−2	∼1.0	
127

Pd3Pb/C	0.2 M ZnCl2 in 6.0 M KOH	—	∼1.48	574@10 mA cm−2	—	560 h@10 mA cm−2	0.72	
128

PdMo bimetallene/C	0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 in 6.0 M KOH	∼0.77	1.483	798@20 mA cm−2	154.2@∼220 mA cm−2	350 cycles@10 mA cm−2	∼0.6	
4



Fe–36Ni@NCNTS	1.0 M LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	—	6550@0.1 mA cm−2	67 cycles@0.1 mA cm−2	∼1.5	
129

MOF(Fe/Co)-CNTs-600	1.0 M LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	0.82	—	>5000@100 mA g−1	40 cycles@100 mA g−1	1.55	
24

Co–Ni@NG	0.1 M LiOH in H2O	0.686	3.55	10780@0.5 mA cm−2	100 cycles@0.5 mA cm−2	0.45	
130

Vxc-72/PtCo2	1.0 M LiClO4 in PC + DME	—	—	3100@100 mA g−1	10 cycles@100 mA g−1	∼1.25	
131

Pt3Ni-RGO	0.1 M TBAP–DMSO	—	—	11518@0.1 mA cm−2	10 cycles@0.3 mA cm−2	1.46	
132

PtAu/C	1.0 M LiClO4 in PC + DME	—	—	∼2000@50 mA g−1	—	∼0.8	
133

Au49Pt51/C	1.0 M LiPF6 in EC + DMC	—	3.51	1329@0.12 mA cm−2	—	1.3	
134

PdNi-NSMmC/CP	1.0 M LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	—	—	9965@300 mA g−1	120 cycles@300 mA g−1	∼0.8	
135

rGO-CuPd	0.1 M LiPF6 in DMSO	—	—	4407@100 mA g−1	20 cycles@100 mA g−1	>1.5	
136


 	Fig. 15  (a) Zn mass-normalized specific capacities of Zn–air batteries with PdMo bimetallene/C and IrO2 + Pt/C as the cathodic catalysts at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. (b) Discharge curves of two Zn–air batteries at current densities of 10, 20, 50 and 100 mA cm−2. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of two Zn–air batteries at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with each cycle being 20 min. Adapted from ref. 4 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The schematic of the Zn–air battery. (b) Discharge curves for Zn–air batteries with CuCo@NC and Pt/C + Ir/C as the cathodic catalysts at a constant current density of 20 mA cm−2. (c) Long cycling test for a CuCo@NC in Zn–air battery. Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
