Impact of moisture on efficiency-determining electronic processes in perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02264F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02264F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10917-10927Impact of moisture on efficiency-determining electronic processes in perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Manuel 
            Salado‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Lidia 
            Contreras-Bernal‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Laura 
            Caliò
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Anna 
            Todinova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Carmen 
            López-Santos
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shahzada 
            Ahmad
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ana 
            Borras
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jesús 
            Idígoras
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Juan A. 
            Anta
          
        
      *a
aÁrea de Química Física, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, E-41013, Seville, Spain. E-mail: anta@upo.es; jaidileo@upo.es
bAbengoa Research, C/Energía Solar No. 1, Campus Palmas Altas, 41014 Sevilla, Spain
cNanotechnology on Surfaces Laboratory, Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla (CSIC-Univ. Seville), Seville ES-41092, Spain
Received 
      14th March 2017
    , Accepted 10th May 2017First published on 11th May 2017AbstractMoisture-induced degradation in perovskite solar cells was thoroughly investigated by structural (SEM, EDS, XRD and XPS) and device characterization (impedance and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy) techniques. Both the influence of the perovskite composition and the nature of the hole selective material were analyzed. The degradation rate was found to be significantly slower for mixed perovskites and P3HT-based devices. However, for a fixed degradation degree (defined as a 50% drop from the initial photocurrent), all configurations show similar features in small-perturbation analysis. Thus, a new mid-frequency signal appears in the impedance response, which seems to be related to charge accumulation at the interfaces. In addition, faster recombination, with a more important surface contribution, and slower transport were clearly inferred from our results. Both features can be associated with the deterioration of the contacts and the formation of a higher number of grain boundaries.
Introduction
Over the last few decades, the research community has shown special interest in the development of efficient and low-cost photovoltaic technologies. In this context, hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials have attracted huge attention owing to their excellent optoelectronic properties.1–5 As a result, since the first report of perovskite materials as a sensitizer in dye-sensitized solar cells (η = 3.8%),6 a significant improvement of the photovoltaic conversion efficiency has been achieved with a current efficiency record of η = 22.1% for a perovskite solar cell.7 This figure is comparable to the photovoltaic performances of other thin-film photovoltaic technologies based on Si, CdTe and GaAs. This remarkable development was possible due to intensive research focused on device engineering and material design.8–12 However, in spite of this progress, the lack of long-term stability restricts its outdoor photovoltaic applications13 and as a consequence its commercialization.
It is well-known that the stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and therefore their photovoltaic performance are intimately associated with the degradation of the perovskite layer. As was previously reported, the main causes behind perovskite degradation are related to different environmental factors,14–16 such as moisture, temperature, oxygen and UV light, which could give rise to different degradation pathways. Niu et al. suggested that perovskite degradation starts with the deprotonation of the methylammonium cation by water to produce methylamine, hydrogen iodide and lead iodide.17 Yang et al. proposed the formation of colorless hydrated (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O as a result of perovskite hydration and the formation of lead iodide as the final product.18 Haque et al. described perovskite degradation by the coupled effect of molecular oxygen and light suggesting that reactive oxygen species and the organic cation of perovskite react among themselves.19 More recently, Wang et al. have proposed a self-degradation process caused by the I2 vapor generated under working conditions due to chemical chain reactions.20 In any case, many approaches have been developed in order to prevent perovskite degradation and guarantee device stability. Among them stand out the effective passivation of devices by the use of hydrophobic polymer layers and the employment of photopolymerized fluorinated coatings, hydrophobic hole-selective materials, hydrophobic carbon electrodes and a thin blocking layer between perovskite and electron-selective layers.21–27
However, the impact of these environmental factors on perovskite degradation kinetics depends on other intrinsic properties such as thermal and electrical stability, which are determined by the perovskite composition. Hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites are defined by the chemical formula ABX3, where A is an organic or inorganic cation (MA = CH3NH3+; FA = HC(NH2)2+ and Cs+), B is a metal (Pb and Sn) and X is a halide (I−, Br− and Cl−). The chemical nature of these elements influences not only the photoelectronic behavior, but also the structural properties defined by the tolerance factor (t)28  where rA, rB and rX are the ionic radii of the different elements A, B and X, respectively. Empirically, for the most stable perovskite, t shows values between 0.8 and 1 giving rise to a cubic crystal structure. However, for t <0.8 the tetragonal or the orthorhombic crystal structure is more probable.28,29 As a consequence, special attention has been paid to the perovskite composition in order to achieve a more stable crystal structure and guarantee long-term stability by the entire or partial inclusion of different ions with different sizes. For instance, the beneficial effect in terms of stability of a partial insertion of bromine into the perovskite structure was reported.30,31 Similar results were found for the inclusion of chloride.32 In both cases, the smaller ionic radii of Br and Cl with respect to I lead to a more compact structure in which the organic cations are less exposed. More recently, Petrus and coworkers reported the impact of the excess of PbI2 as the precursor on perovskite stability against moisture exposure.33 In relation to the organic cations, t values of 0.88 and 0.83 were found for perovskites containing MA and FA, respectively.34 The higher thermal stability found for FAPbI3 was associated with the more-stable cubic crystal phase with respect to the tetragonal one attributed to MAPbI3, which could be related to the different interactions of these cations with the inorganic matrix.29 Similar results were found by Snaith et al. when they compared CsPbI2Br and MAPbI2Br and demonstrated the stability of the former owing to the appropriate ionic radius of Cs+.35 The stability of a triple cation perovskite (containing MA, FA and Cs) has also been investigated.36
To date, previous studies related to perovskite stability have mainly investigated the different perovskite degradation mechanisms under environmental conditions or different approaches to prevent perovskite degradation. SEM and STEM images, EDS mapping, UV-Vis absorbance, XRD patterns, and Raman and IR spectroscopy techniques were commonly used to determine the extent of perovskite degradation and its kinetics. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report where small-perturbation optoelectronic techniques have been used to investigate the impact of moisture on the electronic processes that determine the photovoltaic performance. This is important to better assess how the perovskite improvements investigated in the literature really affect the functioning of the device in terms of stability and efficiency. In order to correlate the moisture effect to this, we have analyzed the electron transport and recombination processes using impedance spectroscopy (IS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS). In this work, we have investigated both the influence of the perovskite composition (MAPbI3 = MAI and Cs0.05(MAPbBr3)0.15(FAPbI3)0.85 = MIX) and the influence of the hole selective material (HSL: 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene = Spiro-OMeTAD and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) = P3HT) on the device stability. In particular, a faster degradation rate was found for MAI perovskite and Spiro-based devices. Regardless of the device configuration, our results point to a faster recombination after moisture exposure due to the coupled effect of the bulk recombination and the surface-mediated recombination. The greater contribution of the latter in degraded devices is revealed by interfacial charge accumulation processes and slower electron transport inside the perovskite layer.
Experimental
Fabrication of perovskite solar cells
Perovskite solar cells were fabricated on FTO-coated glass (Pilkington-TEC15) patterned by laser etching. Before use, the substrates were cleaned using Hellmanex® solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol. Followed this they were ultrasonicated in acetone, rinsed using 2-propanol and dried with compressed air. A TiO2 compact layer was deposited by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) precursor solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma Aldrich) using dry air as a carrier gas. The TiO2 blocking layer was then annealed for a further 30 minutes at 450 °C for the formation of the anatase phase. Once the samples achieved room temperature, a TiO2 mesoporous layer (Dyesol, 30NRD) was deposited by spin coating (4000 rpm for 30 s) and the samples were annealed at 450 °C. Subsequently, pure methylammonium (MAPbI3 = MAI) or mixed cation perovskite (Cs0.05(MAPbBr3)0.15(FAPbI3)0.85 = MIX) was then deposited (Fig. S1†). The pure methylammonium perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing 1.2 M MAI and PbI2 (1:1.15) in DMSO. The mixed cation perovskite was prepared by dissolving FAI (1.01 M), MABr (0.20 M), PbI2 (1.21 M) and PbBr2 (0.20 M) in a mixture of solvents DMSO/DMF (1:4, v/v). After this, CsI (5 wt%) was added (from a 1.5 M stock solution in DMSO) to the precursor solution. The perovskite solution was spin coated in a two step setup at 1000 and 6000 rpm for 10 and 20 s respectively. During the second step, chlorobenzene was dropped on the spinning substrate 15 seconds before the end of the program. The samples were then annealed (100 °C) for 1 h in an argon filled glovebox. After perovskite deposition, 35 μL of a Spiro-OMeTAD or P3HT solution was spin coated at 4000 rpm for 20 seconds as the HSL. The Spiro-OMeTAD material (70 mM) was dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene using standard additives namely 17.5 μL of a lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) stock solution (520 mg of LiTFSI in 1 mL of acetonitrile), 21.9 μL of a FK209 (tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III)tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide)) stock solution (400 mg in 1 mL of acetonitrile) and 28.8 μL of 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP). In the case of the P3HT material, a 15 mg mL−1 solution in chlorobenzene was prepared and doped with 6.8 mL of a 28.3 mg mL−1 stock solution of LiTFSI in acetonitrile. Finally, 80 nm of gold was deposited by thermal evaporation at a vacuum level between 1 v10−6 and 1 an10−5 Torr. All solutions were prepared inside an argon glovebox under controlled moisture and oxygen conditions. For simplicity we will use the following notations to refer to the different device configurations: MAI/Spiro, MAI/P3HT, MIX/Spiro and MIX/P3HT.
Characterization of films and devices
The devices were characterized using current–voltage characteristics with two different light sources: (1) a solar simulator (ABET-Sun2000) under 100 mW cm−2 illumination with an AM 1.5G filter and (2) a white light emitting diode (LED, LUXEON). The light intensity was recorded using a reference solar cell with temperature output (Oriel, 91150). The current–voltage characteristics were determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using an Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat.
The illumination for the different Impedance Spectroscopy (IS) measurements was provided by white, red (λ = 635 nm) and blue (λ = 465 nm) LEDs over a wide range of DC light intensities. This allows for probing the devices at different positions of the Fermi level in the semiconductor and for different optical generation profiles.37,38 A response analyzer module (PGSTAT302N/FRA2, Autolab) was utilized to analyze the frequency response of the devices. To avoid voltage drop due to series resistance, IS measurements were performed at the open circuit potential, the Fermi level (related to the open-circuit voltage) being fixed by the DC illumination intensity. A 20 mV perturbation in the 106 to 10−2 Hz range was utilized to obtain the spectra. IMPS measurements were performed under short-circuit conditions in the 106 to 10−2 Hz range with a light perturbation corresponding to 10% of the DC background illumination intensity. To avoid any additional degradation process related to the moisture, the measurements were carried out under a N2 atmosphere. NOVA 1.7 software was used to generate IS data. Z-view equivalent circuit modeling software (Scribner) was used to fit the spectra.
For the structural characterization, perovskite films were prepared by spin coating onto Si wafers. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the samples were recorded using a Zeiss GeminiSEM-300 microscope operating at 2 keV. Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) images were obtained using a NordlysMax3 detector (Oxford Instruments). Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) was performed using a Silicon Drift Detector (Oxford Instruments). X-ray diffractograms were recorded on a Rigaku diffractometer using a CuKα source. The measurements were performed in a grazing angle geometry. The samples were mounted without any further modification and the divergence slit was adjusted to the dimension of the films. The scan range of 10–60° was selected with an acquisition time of 3 degree min−1. A baseline correction was applied to the diffractograms to compensate for the noise arising from the substrate. X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) characterization was performed on a Phoibos 100 DLD X-ray spectrometer from SPECS. The spectra were collected in the pass energy constant mode at a value of 50 eV for the general spectra and 30 eV for the different peaks using a Mg Kα source. The C 1s signal at 284.5 eV was utilized for the calibration of the binding energy in the spectra. Static water contact angle (WCA) measurements were provided by a Data Physics setup by depositing bidistilled water drops of 1 μL. The given values correspond to statistics over 10 values. The WCAs were evaluated for pinning droplets several seconds after the contact with the surfaces.
Results and discussion
Power conversion efficiencies in the range of 12–16% were obtained under standard conditions (1 sun – AM 1.5 illumination) for the different PSCs studied here (Fig. S2†). The current–voltage characteristics of the different PSCs were measured in reverse scan (from open-circuit conditions to short-circuit conditions) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. In particular, average efficiencies of 15.3%, 13.2%, 13% and 12.5% were obtained for MAI/Spiro, MAI/P3HT, MIX/Spiro and MIX/P3HT devices, respectively (Table S1†). In line with the literature,39–41 these results highlight the impact of the perovskite composition and the material used as the HSL on the photovoltaic performance. For both perovskite compositions, better efficiencies were obtained when Spiro-OMeTAD was used as the HSL with respect to P3HT as a result of the higher VOC. Additionally, in spite of showing similar JSC and VOC for both HSLs, worse efficiencies were obtained for MIX devices due to their lower fill factor. These different devices will be used for the following discussion.
In order to investigate the impact of the moisture exposure on the device stability, the photovoltaic characteristics of the different PSCs were measured inside a hermetic chamber with a constant flow of air with RH >90%. Fig. 1 shows the current–voltage characteristics of PSCs measured by cyclic voltammetry before and during the moisture exposure. The measurements were started with a reverse scan after a dwelling time of 10 s at 1.2 V, and were then continued with a forward scan. According to preliminary results (not shown), the measurements were recorded at different exposure times to follow the degradation kinetics of the different PSC configurations.
 Fig. 1  Normalized I–V curves of the different PSCs (blue) before and (black and red) during the moisture exposure measured in the reverse and forward scans (cyclic voltammetry) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 (white LED). The measurements were performed with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 at room temperature and the photocurrent was normalized with respect to the short-circuit photocurrents obtained before the moisture exposure. 
As shown in Fig. 1, moisture exposure induces negative effects in the photovoltaic performance of the different PSCs. Both VOC (open-circuit photovoltage) and JSC (short-circuit photocurrent) tend to decrease with respect to the moisture exposure time. In particular, efficiency drops of 51% and 19% after 10 min for MAI-based devices and 60% and 42% after 160 min for MIX-based devices were recorded when Spiro and P3HT were used as the HSL, respectively. From these results (Fig. 1), the following trend was extracted. Firstly, focusing on the impact of the perovskite composition, the degradation process was faster when pure perovskite (MAI) was employed as the active layer compared to the degradation rate found for MIX perovskite. The same result was found when Spiro as well as P3HT were used as the HSL. As has been previously reported, the longer device stability obtained for MIX samples was not only due to the partial inclusion of bromine anions,30,31 but also due to the combination of MA, FA and Cs cations.36,42 This combination gives rise to a more thermally and structurally stable perovskite. And secondly, in relation to the nature of the HSL, Spiro-based devices are significantly less stable than those with P3HT as the HSL.
In order to cast light on the perovskite degradation kinetics obtained for the different PSCs, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to investigate the effect of moisture exposure on the device stability. Fig. 2 shows plane-view SEM images obtained for bare perovskites (MAI and MIX) and MAI/HSL (Spiro and P3HT) films deposited on Si/cTiO2/mTiO2 before and after moisture exposure.
 Fig. 2  Plane-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the MAI, MIX, MAI/Spiro and MAI/P3HT layers after moisture exposure (RH = 90%) for 1 and 5 h at room temperature. For more detailed analysis, SEM images of different zones (red circles) were taken using a higher magnification. 
Before moisture exposure, both uncovered perovskites layers formed homogeneous and pinhole-free films, with a larger grain size in the case of MIX perovskite (Fig. S1†). However, after moisture exposure remarkable morphological changes were observable in both cases as shown in Fig. 2. In the case of bare MAI layers, large perovskite crystals with well-defined faces appeared leading to extensive pinholes after 1 hour of moisture exposure. For longer times (5 hours), larger structures with a dendritic shape were formed. In contrast, as was expected according to the literature,30,31,36 no significant change was observed for MIX layers after at least 1 hour of moisture exposure. However, after 5 hours of exposure, large perovskite crystals with reduced pinholes around them were formed. The formation of these large perovskite structures seems to be related to the perovskite aggregation process (Fig. S3†). Similar structural changes were also observed by Wang et al., in whose study perovskite films were exposed to I2 vapor.20 However, in contrast to a previous report,43 EDS analysis showed the same Pb/I ratio for the fresh and degraded samples.
To investigate the influence of the HSL on the device stability, MAI perovskite was used as the active layer. Longer moisture exposure times (5 hours) were used. No significant changes appeared after only 1 hour of exposure. As shown in Fig. 2, as a result of the perovskite degradation, an increased number of emerging structures coming from the underlying perovskite layer appeared when Spiro was used as the HSL. These newly formed crystals are a possible reason for the fracture of the Spiro layer. In contrast, after 5 hours of moisture exposure the P3HT layer appears unchanged. This behavior can be ascribed to the hydrophobic character of the P3HT layer,26 which makes the penetration/percolation of water molecules towards the underlying perovskite layer more difficult. A similar behavior was previously reported using UV-Vis and FTIR spectroscopy.18,44 The water contact angles (WCAs) for the different configurations are reported in Table S2.† WCAs >100° and <80° were found for perovskite/P3HT and perovskite/Spiro configurations, respectively. These results demonstrate the hydrophobic and hydrophilic character of the P3HT and Spiro layers, respectively.
Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that the short-term stability obtained for MAI/Spiro devices was connected to both the perovskite decomposition process and higher affinity to water and the consequent degradation of the Spiro layer.

Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of the two perovskites (MAI and MIX) with and without the HSL (Spiro and P3HT) before and after moisture exposure. The characteristic diffraction peaks of the tetragonal perovskite phase (14.1°, 28.5° and 31.9°)33,45 were obtained for the fresh samples, which remained at the same position when the samples were subjected to humidity (RH > 90%) exposure for 1 hour. As was previously reported, any additional peak appears as a consequence of HSLs.44 Nevertheless, additional diffraction peaks previously related to the formation of the hydrated perovskite complex and PbI2 were found after moisture exposure at 10.5° and 12.7°, respectively.33,45–47 Focusing on these two diffraction peaks, different behaviors can be observed depending on the perovskite composition and/or HSL. Firstly, for uncovered perovskite layers these two peaks were only observable for MAI perovskite after moisture exposure. And secondly, contrary to expectation, higher signal intensities for these two diffraction peaks were found for MAI/Spiro with respect to the uncovered MAI sample. A similar behavior was found for MIX perovskite. In this case, the signal previously attributed to PbI2 was only found for the MIX/Spiro sample after moisture exposure, whereas it was not observed for bare MIX and MIX/P3HT samples. Therefore, the rapid degradation kinetics found for MAI/Spiro samples (Fig. 1) could be related not only to the perovskite composition and/or the degradation of the Spiro (Fig. 2), but also to a possible interfacial interaction of both layers.48 We have further analyzed the chemical composition of the fresh and degraded devices by XPS. The comparison of the atomic percentages of different elements (Pb, I, O, C, N, S, F and Ti) at the surface is shown in Table S3.† In line with Fig. 2, a part of the TiO2 layer was observed for uncovered MAI after moisture exposure suggesting the high Ti percentage. A decrease of the Pb/I ratio was found for both uncovered perovskites. However, the difference was higher for MAI perovskite. In particular, after moisture exposure the Pb/I ratio changed from 0.85 to 0.5 and 0.6 to 0.4 for uncovered MAI and MIX perovskites. Finally, after moisture exposure, a percentage below 1% of I only appears in Spiro-based devices, whereas it is not detected in P3HT-based devices. Considering these results, the following trend can be established to define device stability: MAI/Spiro < MAI/P3HT < MIX/Spiro < MIX/P3HT.
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction of the different (MAI and MIX) perovskite layers with and without the HSL (Spiro and P3HT) deposited on the top (blue line) before and (red line) after moisture exposure for 1 hour. The positions of the XRD peaks for (purple star) PbI2 and (green circle) the hydrated complex are marked in the graphs. 
Once the impact of the moisture exposure on the device stability has been assessed according to the perovskite composition and the material employed as the HSL, we focus our attention on the electronic processes determining the photovoltaic performance. To study the effect of moisture exposure on the device performance, we analyze the impedance response in the form of Nyquist and frequency-dependent capacitance plots (Fig. 4). At this point, it is important to remark that the different PSCs were subjected to different moisture exposure times bearing in mind the different degradation kinetics demonstrated above. Therefore, in order to safely isolate the effect of the degradation rate, a photocurrent drop of 50% was employed as the criterion for the exposure time. After the moisture exposure, the PCSs were flushed with dry nitrogen for 1 hour before starting the characterization by impedance spectroscopy.
 Fig. 4  (A and B) Impedance spectra and (C and D) frequency-dependent capacitance obtained under open-circuit conditions and under white light illumination for (A and C) fresh and (B and D) degraded PSCs. The illumination intensity was fixed in a way such that a photopotential close to the 1-sun VOC is generated (Table S1†). In particular, the applied potentials for the fresh Spiro and P3HT-based devices were 980 mV and 870 mV, respectively, whereas for all degraded devices the applied potential was 850 mV. 
As shown in Fig. 4A, the impedance spectra obtained for the fresh PSCs were characterized by two signals (semicircles or arcs). These two signals will only be well-detected when the peak maxima on the impedance frequency plots are sufficiently well separated (Fig. S4†). As was previously reported,49–53 the signal appearing at high frequencies (HF), the one closest to the origin and the largest semicircle, has been attributed to electronic transport/recombination processes, whereas the signal appearing at low frequencies (LF) has been related to ionic motion and charge accumulation at contacts. These two signals exhibit significant changes in the impedance spectra after moisture exposure. In particular, a distortion of the HF semicircle was found for the degraded PSCs (Fig. 4B). This behavior seems to be more remarkable for the degraded P3HT-based devices. This feature could explain the non-symmetric shape of the HF peak in the impedance frequency plots that was found for the degraded PSCs (Fig. S4†). The non-symmetric shape suggests that the time constant of a process previously hidden under the HF semicircle after degradation now becomes resolved or, alternatively, the appearance of a new capacitive process. The general response of the frequency-dependent capacitance for the fresh and degraded devices is shown in Fig. 4C and D, respectively. According to the literature,49,52,54,55 each plateau is related to a certain specific polarization process. In particular, the LF plateau was attributed to the accumulation of majority carriers at the TiO2/perovskite interface, which seems to be related to the characteristic hysteretic behavior found in PSCs.55,56 On the other hand, the HF plateau was associated with the dielectric polarization of the perovskite in the bulk. In accordance with the different thicknesses of the perovskite layers (d) (Fig. S5†) and the expression for the bulk capacitance C = Aε/d, higher HF capacitance values were found for MAI-based devices. Focusing on the effect of the moisture exposure, although the capacitance values observed for HF and LF plateaus are in the same range (≈10−7 F and ≈10−2 F, respectively) for the fresh and degraded devices, the fact is that a new polarization process in the range of ≈10−6 to 10−5 F was found at mid frequencies after moisture exposure. This effect seems to be more pronounced for P3HT-based devices.
A similar behavior has previously been reported for PSCs with less efficient external contacts. In particular, impedance spectra and frequency-dependent capacitance plots were characterized by the presence of an additional MF component when TiO2 and Nb2O5 were employed as the electron selective layer (ESL) in aged devices.49 Guerrero and coworkers assigned this characteristic feature to the charge accumulation at the ESL/perovskite interface due to the low charge extraction efficiency of these selective contacts. Additionally, an interfacial recombination enhancement was suggested as a consequence of this charge accumulation process. Nevertheless, it should be noted that this charge separation/extraction process is determined not only by the ESL, but also by the perovskite itself and the material used as the HSL. As reported, the interfacial interactions between the selective contacts and the perovskite layer affect the energetic barriers that determine the charge separation/extraction processes.55,57–60 Considering that the devices are characterized by the same ESL, the MF component could be associated with an interfacial charge accumulation process due to the perovskite composition and the material employed as the HSL which can determine the charge extraction not only at the ESL/perovskite interface, but also at the perovskite/HSL interface. This interpretation could explain the difference found for Spiro and P3HT-based devices (Fig. 4 and S4†).
To cast light on the origin of this new feature appearing at mid frequencies after moisture exposure, impedance spectroscopy was performed using two different illumination wavelengths to modify the charge generation profile inside the perovskite layer. Bearing in mind the absorption spectra widely reported in the literature and taking into account the Beer–Lambert law, a different spatial penetration of the optical excitation inside the perovskite layer is expected for blue and red illumination. The photogenerated charge would show a concentration gradient governed by the absorption coefficient.37 In particular, a higher concentration of photogenerated charge would be expected at the ESL/perovskite interface than at the perovskite/HSL one under blue illumination. In contrast, the profile of photogenerated charge is more uniform under red illumination. A similar methodology was previously used to analyze the recombination processes.38

Fig. 5 shows the capacitance–frequency response under blue and red illumination for MAI/Spiro, MAI/P3HT and MIX/Spiro devices before and after moisture exposure. In line with Fig. 4C and D, the capacitance–frequency response obtained under blue and red illumination was characterized by the presence of a characteristic polarization process appearing at mid frequencies (104 to 102 Hz) which overlaps with the HF plateau (bulk capacitance) after moisture exposure. For the fresh devices the capacitance–frequency response was not affected by the electron–hole generation profile produced as a result of the different optical excitation wavelengths employed during the impedance spectroscopy measurement. A similar behavior was found for the degraded MAI/Spiro and MIX/Spiro devices. In contrast, a significant difference was found at mid frequencies for the degraded MAI/P3HT devices when the electron–hole generation profile was modified. In particular, higher MF capacitance values were found when the availability of the photogenerated charges was higher at the perovskite/HSL interface (red illumination) with respect to when charge was photogenerated preferentially in the vicinity of the ESL (blue illumination). This behavior is also brought to light in the Nyquist plots by the presence of the MF semicircle for the degraded MAI/P3HT devices under red illumination (Fig. S6†). Therefore, a more important interfacial charge accumulation process seems to take place after moisture exposure when P3HT was used as the HSL and consequently, a poorer hole extraction is expected at the perovskite/P3HT interface with respect to perovskite/Spiro. This possible interpretation could explain not only the distorted HF semicircle and/or the apparent MF semicircle found in the Nyquist plot of impedance response for the degraded devices, respectively (Fig. 4B and S6†), but also the more remarkable MF capacitive process observed for P3HT-based devices (Fig. 4D). On the other hand, as mentioned above, the energetic barriers that determine the charge extraction/separation process also depend on the perovskite material. As shown in Fig. 5, when the Spiro was used as the HSL the capacitance–frequency response obtained under blue and red illumination shows the same behavior before and after moisture exposure. Similar results were found for MAI/Spiro devices (Fig. 5). Nevertheless, this MF capacitive process seems to be less visible after moisture exposure which suggests a better electron and hole extraction at both interfaces even after moisture exposure. This robustness of the electronic properties of the Spiro contact explains the normally better photocurrents obtained in devices when such a material was used.
 Fig. 5  Frequency-dependent capacitance obtained under open-circuit conditions and under illumination for (squares) fresh and (circles) degraded MAI/Spiro, MAI/P3HT and MIX/Spiro devices using the two excitation wavelengths of (blue) λblue = 465 nm and (red) λred = 635 nm. 
In order to understand the differences found in the Nyquist plot of the impedance spectra at different optical excitation wavelengths for the degraded devices (Fig. S6†), the recombination (HF) kinetics were investigated. Fig. 6 shows the electron recombination resistance extracted by fitting the impedance response under blue and red illumination for the fresh and degraded MAI/Spiro devices to a simple -RSer-(RLF,CPE1)-(RHF,CPE2)- equivalent circuit. To be sure about the fitting, the time constant (τ) was estimated as (1) τ = Rrec × Cb, where Rrec is the electron (HF) recombination resistance and Cb is the bulk capacitance; and (2) τ = 1/2πf, where f is the frequency peak maximum directly extracted from impedance frequency plots. The same behavior was obtained for both fresh and degraded devices (Fig. S7†). On the other hand it is important to note that although degraded perovskites absorb much less light18 and hence produce a comparatively lower potential, the comparison in Fig. 6 and the inset in Fig. 7 is done at the same value of the photogenerated potential so that this difference in absorption is implicitly taken into account.
 Fig. 6  Recombination (HF) resistance versus open-circuit potential as extracted from fittings of the impedance spectra using the two excitation wavelengths of (blue) λblue = 465 nm and (red) λred = 635 nm for (squares) fresh and (triangles) degraded MAI/Spiro devices. 
 Fig. 7  IMPS frequency plot of the imaginary part for the MAI/Spiro device (blue) before and (red) after moisture exposure obtained at a photopotential close to the 1-sun VOC under white light illumination. The inset shows the time constants extracted as τ = 1/2πf, where f is the frequency peak maximum directly extracted from the IMPS frequency plots. 
Specifically, the recombination resistance shows the same behavior for the fresh devices regardless of the electron–hole generation profile. In contrast, a minor difference was found after moisture exposure when the optical excitation wavelength was changed. For the degraded devices, lower values of electron recombination resistance were found when the red illumination was used for optical excitation. In other words, the photogenerated charge at the perovskite/HSL interface seems to recombine more strongly than the photogenerated charge at the ESL/perovskite interface for a degraded device. On the other hand, a remarkable change of the slope of the recombination resistance for both optical excitations was observed with respect to fresh devices. Similar results were obtained for the different devices when a white LED was employed as the illumination source before and after moisture exposure (Fig. S8†). This observation suggests that the charge that has been mainly photogenerated at the ESL/perovskite and perovskite/HSL interfaces is subjected to different recombination mechanisms after moisture exposure. As was previously reported by us,38 the results obtained for fresh devices suggest that the main recombination process is mediated via a trap-limited mechanism in the bulk of the perovskite.61–65 However, surface recombination could be more important as a consequence of the perovskite degradation by moisture.45,66,67 Therefore, the increase of this surface-mediated recombination seems to be intimately related to the larger interfacial charge accumulation described (Fig. 5). Similar results were expected for the rest of the devices studied in this work as revealed by the Nyquist and impedance frequency plots, which showed the same behavior under both optical excitations (Fig. S6 and S9,† respectively).
This interpretation seems to be in line with the conclusions previously reported by A. Leguy and coworkers.45 In particular, they related the efficiency drop after moisture exposure to the isolation of the perovskite grains which would reduce the charge transport leading to an increased recombination at the grain interfaces. In other words, the grain insulating effect could limit the charge transport and improve the charge recombination giving rise to shorter charge diffusion lengths.66,67 In order to consolidate this assumption, IMPS was performed to provide information on the different charge transport processes (Fig. 7).
As shown in Fig. 7, the IMPS frequency plot shows two well differentiated peaks with respect to the frequency scale which have previously been related to different charge transport processes characterized by different time constants.50,56,68 In particular, the HF peak (≈104 Hz) was associated with the electron transport inside the perovskite layer, whereas the LF peak (≈1 Hz) was attributed to ionic motion. In addition, a peak at mid frequencies was also found and related to the electron transport process in the mesoporous TiO2 matrix.56,68 Nevertheless, this MF peak was not resolved in our case (Fig. 7). Considering the HF peak only and the associated time constants (τ = 1/2πf) shown in the inset of Fig. 7, a lower charge diffusion coefficient (Dn) is expected for the degraded devices, since the HF peak appears at lower frequencies (Dn = Ld2/τHF, where Ld is the thickness of the perovskite layer and τHF is the HF time constant).69 A smaller diffusion coefficient gives rise to shorter charge diffusion lengths, in line with the faster recombination observed in the degraded samples.
Conclusions
We have investigated the effect of the moisture-induced degradation of perovskite solar cells using a combination of structural characterization (SEM, EDS, XRD and XPS) and small-perturbation optoelectronic (impedance and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy) techniques. We studied the influence of the perovskite composition and HSL employed on the device stability. In particular, our results reveal a lower degradation rate for perovskite solar cells based on (Cs0.05(MAPbBr3)0.15(FAPbI3)0.85) as the active layer and P3HT as the HSL. On the other hand, the effect of the moisture-induced degradation on the electronic processes that determine the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells was also investigated. Regardless of the device configuration, the charge recombination is governed by the bulk of the perovskite layer via a trap-limited mechanism. However, the moisture-induced degradation modifies the charge recombination mechanism. The additional mid-frequency component recorded in both Nyquist and frequency plots after moisture exposure suggests an interfacial charge accumulation. This charge accumulation process can accelerate the charge recombination rate due to a greater contribution of a surface-mediated recombination route. As a consequence of the moisture-induced degradation, a slower electron transport in perovskite layers was also observed, which can be traced back to the formation of more grain boundaries.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We thank Junta de Andalucía for financial support via grant FQM 1851 and FQM 2310. We thank the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad of Spain (MAT2013-47192-C3-3-R and MAT2016-76892-C3-2-R) and the EU through the Cohesion Fund and FEDER programs (MAT2013-42900-P and MAT2016-79866-R) for financial support and Red de Excelencia “Emerging photovoltaic Technologies”. We also thank the Servicio de Microscopía Electrónica (Universidad Pablo de Olavide) and Prof. Juan P. Espinos and the service for Surfaces Photoemission Analysis in the Materials Science Institute of Seville for the XPS characterization of the samples. SA and LC are thankful for the “Thinface” project from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme, under grant agreement no. 607232, for financial support.
References
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron- and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic–Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342(6156), 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342(6156), 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, O. Inganäs, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Predicting the Open-Circuit Voltage of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells Using Electroluminescence and Photovoltaic Quantum Efficiency Spectra: The Role of Radiative and Non-Radiative Recombination, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(3), 1400812 CrossRef .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Mixed-Organic-Cation Perovskite Photovoltaics for Enhanced Solar-Light Harvesting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53(12), 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey and T. Ma, 
            et al. CH3NH3SnxPb(1−x)I3 Perovskite Solar Cells Covering up to 1060 Nm, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(6), 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Novel Photoelectrochemical Cell with Mesoscopic Electrodes Sensitized by Lead–Halide Compounds (5), Meet. Abstr., 2007, MA2007–02(8), 352 Search PubMed .
Photovoltaic Research | NREL https://www.nrel.gov/pv/, accessed Feb 10, 2017.
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Temperature Processed Meso Superstructured to Thin-Film Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(6), 1739–1743 CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Interface Engineering of Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Science, 2014, 345(6196), 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential Deposition as a Route to High-Performance Perovskite-Sensitized Solar Cells, Nature, 2013, 499(7458), 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells by Vapour Deposition, Nature, 2013, 501(7467), 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent Engineering for High-Performance Inorganic–organic Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(9), 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Reyna, M. Salado, S. Kazim, A. Pérez-Tomas, S. Ahmad and M. Lira-Cantu, Performance and Stability of Mixed FAPbI3(0.85)MAPbBr3(0.15) Halide Perovskite Solar Cells under Outdoor Conditions and the Effect of Low Light Irradiation, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 570–579 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Li, C. Zheng, D. Gao and W. Huang, Advancements in the Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells: Degradation Mechanisms and Improvement Approaches, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(44), 38079–38091 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Shi, T. Li, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells: A Prospective on the Substitution of the A Cation and X Anion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(5), 1190–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Organometal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: Degradation and Stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(2), 323–356 CAS .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, Study on the Stability of CH3NH3PbI3 Films and the Effect of Post-Modification by Aluminum Oxide in All-Solid-State Hybrid Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(3), 705–710 CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Investigation of CH3NH3PbI3 Degradation Rates and Mechanisms in Controlled Humidity Environments Using in situ Techniques, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Light and Oxygen Induced Degradation Limits the Operational Stability of Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(5), 1655–1660 CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Accelerated Degradation of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskites Induced by Exposure to Iodine Vapour, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Water-Repellent Perovskite Solar Cell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(47), 20017–20021 CAS .
S. Guarnera, A. Abate, W. Zhang, J. M. Foster, G. Richardson, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Improving the Long-Term Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells with a Porous Al2O3 Buffer Layer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(3), 432–437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y.-H. Chung, Y. Ma, L. Zhang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu and Q. Gong, A Hydrophobic Hole Transporting Oligothiophene for Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Improved Stability, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50(76), 11196–11199 RSC .
I. Hwang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and K. Yong, Enhancing Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells to Moisture by the Facile Hydrophobic Passivation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(31), 17330–17336 CAS .
F. Bella, G. Griffini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, G. Saracco, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, S. Turri and C. Gerbaldi, Improving Efficiency and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells with Photocurable Fluoropolymers, Science, 2016, 354(6309), 203–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Kwon, J. Lim, H.-J. Yun, Y.-H. Kim and T. A. Park, Diketopyrrolopyrrole-Containing Hole Transporting Conjugated Polymer for Use in Efficient Stable Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Solar Cells Based on a Perovskite, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(4), 1454–1460 CAS .
M. Salado, F. J. Ramos, V. M. Manzanares, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, Extending the Lifetime of Perovskite Solar Cells Using a Perfluorinated Dopant, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(18), 2708–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The Emergence of Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(7), 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Cation-Induced Band-Gap Tuning in Organohalide Perovskites: Interplay of Spin–Orbit Coupling and Octahedra Tilting, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(6), 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Chemical Management for Colorful, Efficient, and Stable Inorganic–Organic Hybrid Nanostructured Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(4), 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, Temperature- and Component-Dependent Degradation of Perovskite Photovoltaic Materials under Concentrated Sunlight, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(3), 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, Dynamic Disorder in Methylammoniumtrihalogenoplumbates(II) Observed by Millimeter-wave Spectroscopy, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87(11), 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Petrus, Y. Hu, D. Moia, P. Calado, A. M. A. Leguy, P. R. F. Barnes and P. Docampo, The Influence of Water Vapor on the Stability and Processing of Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells Made from Non-Stoichiometric Precursor Mixtures, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(18), 2699–2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites for Optoelectronic and Electronic Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45(3), 655–689 RSC .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Bandgap-Tunable Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites with High Thermal Stability for Efficient Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(8), 1502458 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, 
            et al. Cesium-Containing Triple Cation Perovskite Solar Cells: Improved Stability, Reproducibility and High Efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(6), 1989–1997 CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Top and Bottom Surfaces Limit Carrier Lifetime in Lead Iodide Perovskite Films, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Contreras Bernal, M. Salado, A. Todinova, L. Calio, S. Ahmad, J. Idígoras and J. A. Anta, Origin and Whereabouts of Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(18), 9705–9713 CAS .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Effect of Different Hole Transport Materials on Recombination in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite-Sensitized Mesoscopic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(9), 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Compositional Engineering of Perovskite Materials for High-Performance Solar Cells, Nature, 2015, 517(7535), 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salado, J. Idigoras, L. Calio, S. Kazim, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. A. Anta and S. Ahmad, Interface Play between Perovskite and Hole Selective Layer on the Performance and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(50), 34414–34421 CAS .
M. Deepa, M. Salado, L. Calio, S. Kazim, S. M. Shivaprasad and S. Ahmad, Cesium Power: Low Cs+ Levels Impart Stability to Perovskite Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(5), 4069–4077 RSC .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, The Role of Oxygen in the Degradation of Methylammonium Lead Trihalide Perovskite Photoactive Layers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(28), 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Idigoras, A. Todinova, J. R. Sanchez-Valencia, A. Barranco, A. Borras and J. A. Anta, The Interaction between Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskite and Selective Contacts in Perovskite Solar Cells: An Infrared Spectroscopy Study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(19), 13583–13590 RSC .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein and J. Nelson, 
            et al. Reversible Hydration of CH3NH3PbI3 in Films, Single Crystals, and Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(9), 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, C. McCleese, C. Kolodziej, A. C. S. Samia, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Identification and Characterization of the Intermediate Phase in Hybrid Organic–Inorganic MAPbI3 Perovskite, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45(9), 3806–3813 RSC .
X. Guo, C. McCleese, W.-C. Lin and C. Burda, Curing of Degraded MAPbI3 Perovskite Films, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(65), 60620–60625 RSC .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Ionic Reactivity at Contacts and Aging of Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(9), 1502246 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, Properties of Contact and Bulk Impedances in Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells Including Inductive Loop Elements, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(15), 8023–8032 CAS .
E. Guillén, F. J. Ramos, J. A. Anta and S. Ahmad, Elucidating Transport-Recombination Mechanisms in Perovskite Solar Cells by Small-Perturbation Techniques, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(40), 22913–22922 Search PubMed .
A. Todinova, J. Idígoras, M. Salado, S. Kazim and J. A. Anta, Universal Features of Electron Dynamics in Solar Cells with TiO2 Contact: From Dye Solar Cells to Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(19), 3923–3930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, Kinetics of Ion Transport in Perovskite Active Layers and Its Implications for Active Layer Stability, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(40), 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Impedance Spectroscopic Analysis of Lead Iodide Perovskite-Sensitized Solid-State Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(1), 362–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, I.-H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N.-G. Park, Control of I–V Hysteresis in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(22), 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zarazua, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Light-Induced Space-Charge Accumulation Zone as Photovoltaic Mechanism in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(3), 525–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Contreras, J. Idigoras, A. Todinova, M. Salado, S. Kazim, S. Ahmad and J. A. Anta, Specific Cation Interactions as the Cause of Slow
Dynamics and Hysteresis in Dye and Perovskite Solar Cells: A Small-Perturbation Study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(45), 31033–31042 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Enhanced Hole Extraction in Perovskite Solar Cells Through Carbon Nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(23), 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada and S. M. Zakeeruddin, 
            et al. Highly Efficient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells through Band Alignment Engineering, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(10), 2928–2934 CAS .
K. Pydzińska, J. Karolczak, I. Kosta, R. Tena-Zaera, A. Todinova, J. Idígoras, J. A. Anta and M. Ziółek, Determination of Interfacial Charge-Transfer Rate Constants in Perovskite Solar Cells, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(13), 1647–1659 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zou and R. J. Holmes, Temperature-Dependent Bias Poling and Hysteresis in Planar Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite Photovoltaic Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(7), 1501994 CrossRef .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Charge-Carrier Dynamics in Vapour-Deposited Films of the Organolead Halide Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3-xClx, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(7), 2269–2275 CAS .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Band Filling with Free Charge Carriers in Organometal Halide Perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8(9), 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, Z. Li, R. Crisp, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Comparison of Recombination Dynamics in CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Films: Influence of Exciton Binding Energy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(23), 4688–4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Charge-Carrier Dynamics and Mobilities in Formamidinium Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(48), 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt, C. Aranda, L. Shooshtari, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, Changes from Bulk to Surface Recombination Mechanisms between Pristine and Cycled Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 681–688 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, S. A. Bretschneider, V. W. Bergmann, I. M. Hermes, J. Mars, A. Klasen, H. Lu, W. Tremel, M. Mezger and H.-J. Butt, 
            et al. Humidity-Induced Grain Boundaries in MAPbI3 Perovskite Films, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(12), 6363–6368 CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak and M. A. Alam, 
            et al. High-Efficiency Solution-Processed Perovskite Solar Cells with Millimeter-Scale Grains, Science, 2015, 347(6221), 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, W. Tress, K. Domanski, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, T. J. Jacobsson, M. E. Calvo and A. Abate, 
            et al. Unbroken Perovskite: Interplay of Morphology, Electro-Optical Properties, and Ionic Movement, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(25), 5031–5037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Characterization of Nanostructured Hybrid and Organic Solar Cells by Impedance Spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13(20), 9083–9118 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy images, EDS spectra and maps, current–voltage characteristic and photovoltaic parameters, Nyquist impedance spectra, impedance–frequency plots, electron recombination resistances, HF time constant versus potential, static water contact angle and XPS characterization before and after moisture exposure. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02264f‡ Manuel Salado and Lidia Contreras-Bernal have contributed equally to the paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Normalized I–V curves of the different PSCs (blue) before and (black and red) during the moisture exposure measured in the reverse and forward scans (cyclic voltammetry) under a light intensity of 10 mW cm−2 (white LED). The measurements were performed with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 at room temperature and the photocurrent was normalized with respect to the short-circuit photocurrents obtained before the moisture exposure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Plane-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the MAI, MIX, MAI/Spiro and MAI/P3HT layers after moisture exposure (RH = 90%) for 1 and 5 h at room temperature. For more detailed analysis, SEM images of different zones (red circles) were taken using a higher magnification.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction of the different (MAI and MIX) perovskite layers with and without the HSL (Spiro and P3HT) deposited on the top (blue line) before and (red line) after moisture exposure for 1 hour. The positions of the XRD peaks for (purple star) PbI2 and (green circle) the hydrated complex are marked in the graphs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) Impedance spectra and (C and D) frequency-dependent capacitance obtained under open-circuit conditions and under white light illumination for (A and C) fresh and (B and D) degraded PSCs. The illumination intensity was fixed in a way such that a photopotential close to the 1-sun VOC is generated (Table S1†). In particular, the applied potentials for the fresh Spiro and P3HT-based devices were 980 mV and 870 mV, respectively, whereas for all degraded devices the applied potential was 850 mV.	 

 	Fig. 5  Frequency-dependent capacitance obtained under open-circuit conditions and under illumination for (squares) fresh and (circles) degraded MAI/Spiro, MAI/P3HT and MIX/Spiro devices using the two excitation wavelengths of (blue) λblue = 465 nm and (red) λred = 635 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  Recombination (HF) resistance versus open-circuit potential as extracted from fittings of the impedance spectra using the two excitation wavelengths of (blue) λblue = 465 nm and (red) λred = 635 nm for (squares) fresh and (triangles) degraded MAI/Spiro devices.	 

 	Fig. 7  IMPS frequency plot of the imaginary part for the MAI/Spiro device (blue) before and (red) after moisture exposure obtained at a photopotential close to the 1-sun VOC under white light illumination. The inset shows the time constants extracted as τ = 1/2πf, where f is the frequency peak maximum directly extracted from the IMPS frequency plots.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Scanning electron microscopy images, EDS spectra and maps, current–voltage characteristic and photovoltaic parameters, Nyquist impedance spectra, impedance–frequency plots, electron recombination resistances, HF time constant versus potential, static water contact angle and XPS characterization before and after moisture exposure. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02264f
‡ Manuel Salado and Lidia Contreras-Bernal have contributed equally to the paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
