SnS homojunction nanowire -based solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM32116E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32116E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16437-16441Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSnS homojunction nanowire-based solar cells†

        
          
            Guanghui 
            Yue
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Youdao 
            Lin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Wen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Laisen 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dongliang 
            Peng
          
        
      
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P. R. China. E-mail: yuegh@126.com
Received 
      5th April 2012
    , Accepted 11th June 2012First published on 11th June 2012AbstractDoped p–n homojunction single-crystalline SnS nanowire arrays were synthesized on an aluminum foil substrate using Au nanoparticles as the catalyst. These nanowires were fabricated into photovoltaic cells and showed a defined rectifying behavior in darkness. Under AM1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, the cell had a high short-circuit photocurrent density of 7.64 mA cm−2 and energy conversion efficiency of 1.95%. This study provides an experimental demonstration for integrating one-dimensional nanostructure arrays with the substrate to fabricate homojunction photovoltaic cells directly.
Introduction
Accompanying the energy crisis (the depletion of fossil energy) and the nuclear leakage crisis, how to make full use of green energy has recently been the focus of energy research, since it will help us to solve the energy crisis. So there has been a significant and resurgent interest in green renewable energy systems. Solar energy conversion is of particular interest owing to the abundance of the source. It is well known that the generation I solar cells which constitute the vast majority of today's commercial solar cell modules are based on crystalline Si. This renders solar cells with high efficiency and high manufacturing costs. The generation II solar cells, also called thin-film solar cells, are flexible and significantly cheaper to produce than the first generation cells, but they have lower efficiencies.1 The generation III solar cells aim to provide a concept of higher efficiency and lower costs.2 Many reports have shown that some of the generation II and III solar cells which are combined with nanostructured materials have been found with wonderful properties. This is due to some of the performance and processing benefits they enable, for example the geometry of the nanostructures affords a direct path for charge transport, so nanowire (NW) based solar cells are a promising class of photovoltaic (PV) device. Semiconductor nanowires (NWs) offer the advantages of efficient carrier separation, enhanced light absorption, low-cost processing using fewer materials,3 and the collection of contact electrodes.4,5 Great efforts have been made to fabricate one-dimensional (1-D) NWs and ordered NW arrays for PV device applications based on top-down or bottom-up techniques.6–8 A single NW or NW arrays using group IV, III–V, or II–VI compound semiconductor materials have been theoretically and empirically demonstrated to be fit for solar cell applications.9–15 Many of the above group semiconductor NWs were used as building blocks for PV devices.16–18 For example, under AM1.5 irradiation, the CdSe nanorods and polymer–matrix solar cell produced an efficiency of 1.7%.19 Silicon nanowire-based solar cells have a fill factor of ∼0.2 and a conversion efficiency of 0.1%.8,11 Titania or ZnO nanowire dye sensitized solar cells have efficiencies ranging from 0.5% to 1.5%.20 Core–shell InP nanowire solar cell and axial InP nanowire tandem junction solar cell were also studied.21,22 Compared to other nanostructured architectures, these results indicate the benefits of using nanowires for enhanced charge transport in nanostructured solar cells. SnS has attracted much attention and recognition as one of the most important candidates for solar cell material, and our group has prepared SnS nanostructure materials using electrochemical deposition and CVD methods.23–25 Also many references have reported the higher optical absorption coefficient, the very appropriate optical energy band gaps for solar cell and higher photoelectric conversion efficiency.23–29 Here, we investigate the fabrication method for SnS homojunction NW based solar cells on an aluminum foil substrate. The morphology and structure of the SnS homojunction NWs have been studied. In addition, we also report on the fabrication of a SnS nanowire homojunction solar cell and its PV performances. The approach reported here provides important clues to the utilization of 1D nanostructures for PV cell applications.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows a low-magnification SEM image of the SnS nanowires. In the plan view, it is can be found that abundant NWs cover the aluminum substrate. Fig. 1b demonstrates the side view morphology of the SnS NWs segment, which shows the gradually tapered structure. The SnS NWs form arrays and their lengths are in the range of 10 μm. The low-magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-synthesized SnS NWs is shown in Fig. 1c. From the TEM image of the single SnS NW shown in Fig. 1c, the nanowire shows a gradually tapered structure which is in accordance with the SEM results. The SAED pattern (Fig. 1c insert) taken from the nanowire confirms that the nanowires are single-crystalline. XRD analysis in Fig. 1d shows that all the samples are orthorhombic SnS (see JCPDS no. 39-0354). It can be seen that the major peak (101) is strongly dominating over other peaks, indicating the preferred orientation. The sharp and narrow (101) peak indicates that the nanowires are highly crystalline and consist of only a single compositional phase. No impurities such as SnO2 and SnS2 can be detected from the XRD analysis. The atomic percentages of Sn and S in the sample according to FESEM-EDS analysis are 48.86 and 51.14, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Morphological and structural characterization of the p–n SnS NWs. (a) Low-magnification SEM image of the SnS NWs grown on an Al foil substrate. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the SnS NWs showing gradually tapered NWs. (c) Low-magnification TEM image of the SnS NWs. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the SnS NWs is in the inset figure. (d) XRD spectrum of the SnS NWs showing the (101) preferred orientation of growth. Peaks associated with other phases are not observed. 
To investigate the doping profile in the p–n SnS NWs, HRTEM images were used for extracting the lattice spacing and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was applied for monitoring the distribution of the elements Sn, S, B, and P. From Fig. 2b and c, it can be seen that the atomic ratio of S is a little higher than Sn, and the ratios of P and B are much lower. Fig. 2b and c show the TEM-EDS line-scanning profiles of the p-type and n-type segments on a single p–n SnS NW, respectively. The EDS line-scanning profile of the p-doped SnS segment (corresponding to the position marked with C) reveals that the nanowire is composed of the elements Sn, S and P. It can be found that the P atoms are uniformly distributed in the radial direction rather than only incorporated into its surface region. The EDS line-scanning profile from the p-type SnS:B segment (corresponding to the position marked with (A) shows that the Sn and S signals can be clearly detected without any P signals in p-type segment. This indicates that the P atoms were not incorporated into the p-type segment during the growth of the n-type segment. Fig. 2d–f are the HRTEM images recorded from different positions corresponding to the denoted regions of C–A. The lattice spacing trace demonstrates that the d-spacing corresponding to the (101) plane of the p-type segments (∼0.29 nm) was smaller than that of the n-type segment (∼0.298 nm) at each region far away from the p–n interface. As can be seen from Fig. 2d and f, some lattice distortion can be detected, which may be due to some of the P atoms or B atoms inset into the orthorhombic SnS lattice that occupy the Sn vacancies or form interstitial atoms. The line-scanning profile from A to C on the single nanowire (shown in the ESI Fig. S2†) provides clear information about the relative concentration of the P or B elements along the scanned direction. As the scanned spots crossed the interface of the p–n junction and moved further into the n-type region, the elemental signals of B suddenly disappear and P appeared. It is apparent that the doping concentration of the B or P element in the p- and n-type segment is distributed uniformly not only along the growth direction, but also in the radial direction. It is well known that the SnS nanomaterials, such as films, nanoparticles, and other kinds of nanostructure materials, have demonstrated the p-type semiconductor properties with a slightly higher S atomic ratio.26–29 In our experiment, the adopted B or P atoms will be located at the sites of the orthorhombic SnS lattice where the Sn vacancy appeared. The B atoms will offer more holes and will let the B-doped section show more definitely a p-type identity, and the P atoms will supply excess electrons and reveal the n-type semiconductor characteristics. The element analyzer results indicated that the ratio of Sn:S:P:B is 47.13:49.37:3.02:0.48.
 Fig. 2  TEM analysis of a single SnS nanowire. (a) Low-magnification TEM image of a single SnS NW comprising the n- and p-type segments. (b) and (c) are the TEM-EDS line-scanning profiles of p-type and n-type segments in SnS nanowire. (d–f) are the high-resolution TEM images of A, B and C zones on a single SnS NW. 
A solar cell (SC) was fabricated to demonstrate the viability of the SnS NW arrays for use in photovoltaic applications. A schematic illustration of the SnS p–n homojunction photovoltaic cell is shown in Fig. 3a (a SEM image of SnS nanowire tips exposed above the photoresist layer can be seen in the ESI Fig. S3†). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the solar cell are shown in Fig. 3b, which was measured in dark and under air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) illumination from a calibrated solar simulator with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (equivalent to 1 sun). For the device, an obvious turn on voltage can be observed at ∼0.4 V under forward bias. At +0.2 V bias, it could be found that the forward current density of the device was 0.14 mA cm−2. While at −0.2 V, the reverse leakage current density was less than 0.006 mA cm−2. The rectification ratio is greater than 20 at ∼0.2 V. The result not only implies a good p–n junction between the p-type SnS nanowires and n-type SnS nanowires, but also demonstrates that the fabricated homojunction cell has a clear diode behavior in darkness. The device yields an obvious photocurrent upon illumination of the front surface with simulated sunlight. Under 100 mW cm−2 intensity, a short-circuit current density JSC of ∼7.64 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage VOC of ∼0.65 V were obtained. Fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) were calculated according to the following equations: FF = VMJM/VOCJSC(1) η = VOCJSC(FF)/(S·Pin)(2)where VOC and JSC are the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current and VM and JM are the voltage and current density at the maximum power output (indicated as the shaded rectangle in Fig. 3b), Pin is the incident optical power and S is the active area of the solar cell, respectively. From the J–V curve under simulated AM1.5G condition, the FF and η were calculated to be ∼0.39 and ∼1.95%, respectively. In addition, in the first quadrant the photocurrent was obviously higher than the dark current. Such differences can be attributed to the photo-enhanced current.8,30 By the energy band structure of this homostructure, the rectifying behaviour in the dark and the photocurrent phenomenon under illumination of the SnS homojunction cell can be explained. A schematic energy band diagram of the homojunction diode at thermal equilibrium is shown in Fig. 3c. For the band gap of the p- or n-type nanowires, some hole will appear at the top of the valence band as the B atoms are doped into the nearly-stoichiometric SnS nanowires, and similarly some electrons can be detected at the top of the valence band as the P atoms are doped into the nearly-stoichiometric SnS nanowires. It enlarged the energy band-gap in a sense between the top of the valence band and at the bottom of the conduction band of the p-type SnS nanowires and diminished the energy band-gap of the n-type. It is well known that an asymmetrical energy barrier will be formed at the junction interface, which leads to a large energy barrier for electrons and makes the electron diffusion and recombination with holes in the p-type SnS nanowires become more difficult. Due to the built-in field, the hole injection into the n-type SnS nanowires side is naturally low. Therefore, in the depletion region, the p-type SnS nanowire array section of the homojunction was used as a wide band gap semiconductor to decrease the leakage current. When the device is illuminated by the simulated sunlight, photons with energy will be absorbed by the SnS nanowires. As can be seen from both sides of the p–n homojunction shown in Fig. 3c, the generated holes and electrons are collected effectively due to the large built-in electric field at the junction and thus yield the photocurrent. Note that the effects of the band offset at the junction and the influence of the metal electrodes (expected to be the ohmic contact) had been neglected before we could get this qualitative analysis. One of the advantages of the single-crystalline nature and aligned morphology of the SnS nanowires is that it permits a fast and direct transport for photogenerated carriers from the p–n junction to the external electrode, and greatly reduces the recombination losses of the photogenerated carriers and causes a high photocurrent.20,30
 Fig. 3  (a) A schematic of the SnS p–n homojunction photovoltaic cell. (b) Current density vs. voltage for the solar cell in the dark and under simulated AM1.5G illumination with intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Schematic energy band diagram of the homojunction diode showing the photogenerated carrier transfer process. 
The effect of light intensity on the solar cell performance was also investigated. Fig. 4 shows short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), and power-conversion efficiency (η) as a function with different illumination intensity. The JSC follows a near-linear relationship with the illumination intensity increasing, whereas the VOC shows some increase at a lower illumination intensity and then saturates at a higher intensity as shown in Fig. 4a. On the other hand, the FF decreased from 0.434 to 0.393 as the illumination intensity was increased from 40 to 100 mW cm−2, which is probably due to the increasing resistive loss.30,31 Even without full optimization of the fabrication process, the energy conversion efficiency of our cells was measured to be >1.5% under all tested illumination intensities (Fig. 4b). Compared with Si, SnS has a considerably higher optical absorption coefficient and closer band gap energy to the optimum solar energy, which may be the reason for the efficiency obtained in this study. In addition, the present nanowire p–n junctions were formed epitaxially and embedded in the nanowires, which should minimize the effect of recombination due to the defect-induced states near the p–n junction and surfaces.
 Fig. 4  Solar cell performance under different illumination intensities. (a) Short-circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the cell as functions of light intensity. (b) Fill factor (FF), and power-conversion efficiency (η) of the cell as functions of light intensity. 
Conclusions
In summary, doped p–n homojunction SnS nanowire arrays were synthesized on an Al foil substrate with Au as the catalyst. The nanowires are single-crystalline and grow along the [101] direction. A homojunction solar cell was directly fabricated from the SnS nanowire and the cell exhibited defined rectifying behavior in the dark with a rectification ratio greater than 20 at ∼0.2 V. A maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼1.95% was achieved under 1 sun simulated by AM1.5 solar illumination with a high open-circuit voltage of ∼0.65 V, a short-circuit current density of ∼7.64 mA cm−2and a fill factor of ∼0.39. This study demonstrated the excellent potential of SnS 1D nanostructure arrays for use in homojunction PV cells. Significantly, the aligned SnS nanowires can be directly incorporated into the device structure without a complicated fabrication process, making this solar cell architecture a promising candidate for future photovoltaic applications, yet with potential for lower cost. Ongoing research is focused on improving the power conversion efficiency of the cells by reducing contact resistance, minimizing shunts, optimizing nanowire geometry and improving the p–n junction quality. Further work is needed to quantitatively understand the interface of this homojunction.
Methods
Through a Au catalyzed chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, SnS homojunction nanowires were synthesized on an aluminum foil substrate. A conventional three-zone horizontal tube furnace was used for the synthesis. A quartz tube with an outer diameter of 40 mm, inner diameter of 30 mm and length of 800 mm was installed in the furnace. Sulfur (2 g), SnS (2 g) and the substrate were loaded in the quartz tube in sequence as illustrated in the ESI Fig. S1†, where the distance between the SnS powder and substrate was about 20 cm, and the distance between the sulfur powder and SnS powder was about 15 cm. The substrates used were cleaned in dilute HF solution for 30 s and then rinsed in deionized water. Several drops of water-dispersed colloidal Au nanoparticles with a nominal diameter of 10 nm were applied to the Al foil substrate along with a similar amount of dilute HF solution, and left dormant for 30 s. After being rinsed in deionized water, the substrates were dried by a nitrogen gun and placed onto the CVD system. After the quartz tube was evacuated by a vacuum system to about 10−3 Pa, the tube was backfilled with a high purity carrier and reaction mixed gas of Ar and H2, where the hydrogen gas flow volume ratio is 5%. A procedure was used to control the three-zone heating rate and the start of heating time, respectively. This can make the three zones get their working temperature at 150, 800 and 300 °C at the same time. After that, the temperature of the three zones of the furnace was kept for 20 min, during which a mixed gas with a flow rate of 200 sccm was introduced into the system. In order to synthesize the p–n homojunction NWs, 0.05 sccm of B2H6 was introduced into the system for the first 12 min, and then 0.5 sccm of PH3 was introduced for the last 8 min of reaction time, respectively. After 20 min reaction, the furnace was left to cool down to room temperature with the argon and hydrogen mixed gas. After deposition, the substrate was covered with a black color product.
These products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/Max-2400x, CuKα radiation), and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, FEI Nano230). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) attaching to FE-SEM was used to analyze the elemental composition of the samples. Before high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL JEM-2100F) observation, the products were scraped off the substrates and suspended in ethanol solution. To demonstrate the viability of the p–n homojunction SnS nanowires for use in PV application a solar cell was fabricated. For preparing the solar cell, the spaces between the SnS nanowires were filled with insulating photoresist (PMMA) via spin coating. After photoresist deposition, the surface of the sample was partially dissolved by acetone until the tips of SnS nanowires were exposed for metal contact. After that, the array was sputter coated with a 200 nm thick transparent conducting indium tin oxide (ITO) layer to electrically tie all the wires together. Top finger contacts were created by shadow evaporation of Ti (50 nm)/Al (200 nm). A schematic structure of the SnS nanowire homojunction solar cell with an active cell area of 1 × 1 cm2 is illustrated in Fig. 3a. Photovoltaic measurements were recorded by employing a Keithley 2400 digital source meter. Solar cell performance was measured by utilizing an Air Mass 1.5 G (AM1.5G) solar simulator with an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2 under ambient conditions.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation of China (no. 50902117 and no. 50825101), and the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (Grant no. 2009J01263).
References
A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Photovoltaic technology: the case for thin-film solar cells, Science, 1999, 285, 692–698 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Green. Proceedings of the Fourth World Conference Photovoltaic Energy Conversion 2006, Vol. 1, p. 15 Search PubMed .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Semiconductor nanowires for energy conversion, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Brendan, A. A. Harry and S. L. Nathan, Comparison of the device physics principles of planar and radial p–n junction nanorod solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302–114311 CrossRef .
L. Hu and G. Chen, Analysis of optical absorption in silicon nanowire arrays for photovoltaic applications, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249–3252 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, X. Y. Bao, C. Soci, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang and D. Wang, Direct heteroepitaxy of vertical InAs nanowires on Si substrates for broad band photovoltaics and photodetection, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2926–2934 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Single nanowire photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Silicon nanowire solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233117 CrossRef .
O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Characteristics of vapor–liquid–solid grown silicon nanowire solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Coaxial silicon nanowires as solar cells and nanoelectronic power sources, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stelzner, M. Pietsch, G. Andrä, F. Falk, E. Ose and S. Christiansen, Silicon nanowire-based solar cells, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 295203–295204 CrossRef .
A. Kandala, T. Betti and A. Fontcuberta i Morral, General theoretical considerations on nanowire solar cell designs, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 173–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Photovoltaic measurements in single-nanowire silicon solar cells, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 710–714 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Garnett and P. Yang, Silicon nanowire radial p–n junction solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224–9225 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Czaban, D. A. Thompson and R. R. LaPierre, GaAs core–shell nanowires for photovoltaic applications, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 148–154 CrossRef .
C. Colombo, M. Heibeta, M. Gratzel and A. Fontcuberta i Morral, Gallium arsenide p–i–n radial structures for photovoltaic applications, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 173108 CrossRef .
K. Sun, A. Kargar, N. Park, K. N. Madsen, P. W. Naughton, T. Bright, Y. Jing and D. Wang, Compound semiconductor nanowire solar cells, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2011, 17, 1033–1049 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kevin, Y. H. Fou, A. S. W. Wong and G. W. A. Ho, Novel maskless approach towards aligned, density modulated and multi-junction ZnO nanowires for enhanced surface area and light trapping solar cells, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 315602–315609 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Hybrid nanorod-polymer solar cells, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nanowire dye-sensitized solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
H. Goto, K. Nosaki, K. Tomioka, S. Hara, K. Hiruma, J. Motohisa and T. Fukui, Growth of core–shell InP nanowires for photovoltaic application by selective-area metal organic vapor phase epitaxy, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 035004 CrossRef .
M. Heurlin, P. Wickert, S. Fält, M. T. Borgström, K. Deppert, L. Samuelson and M. H. Magnusson, Axial InP nanowire tandem junction grown on a silicon substrate, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2028–2031 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yue, D. L. Peng, P. X. Yan, L. S. Wang, W. Wang and X. H. Luo, Structure and optical properties of SnS thin film prepared by pulse electrodeposition, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 468, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yue, L. S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Z. Chen and D. L. Peng, Characterization and optical properties of the single crystalline SnS nanowire arrays, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 359–363 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yue, Y. D. Lin, X. Wen, L. S. Wang, Y. Z. Chen and D. L. Peng, Synthesis and characterization of the SnS nanowires via chemical vapor deposition, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 106, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. R. Reddy, N. K. Reddy and R. W. Miles, Photovoltaic properties of SnS based solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3041–3046 CrossRef .
P. K. Nair, M. T. S. Nair, V. M. García, O. L. Arenas, Y. Peña, A. Castillo, I. T. Ayala, O. Gomezdaza, A. Sánchez, J. Campos, H. Hu, R. Suárez and M. E. Rincón, Semiconductor thin films by chemical bath deposition for solar energy related applications, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 52, 313–344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ristov, G. Sinadinovski, M. Mitreski and M. Ristova, Photovoltaic cells based on chemically deposited p-type SnS, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 69, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Reddy and K. T. R. Reddy, Electrical properties of spray pyrolytic tin sulfide films, Solid-State Electron., 2005, 49, 902–906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Tang, Z. H. Chen, H. S. Song, C. S. Lee, H. T. Cong, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Vertically aligned p-type single-crystalline GaN nanorod arrays on n-type Si for heterojunction photovoltaic cells, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4191–4195 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Hybrid solar cells from regioregular polythiophene and ZnO nanoparticles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm32116eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Morphological and structural characterization of the p–n SnS NWs. (a) Low-magnification SEM image of the SnS NWs grown on an Al foil substrate. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the SnS NWs showing gradually tapered NWs. (c) Low-magnification TEM image of the SnS NWs. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the SnS NWs is in the inset figure. (d) XRD spectrum of the SnS NWs showing the (101) preferred orientation of growth. Peaks associated with other phases are not observed.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM analysis of a single SnS nanowire. (a) Low-magnification TEM image of a single SnS NW comprising the n- and p-type segments. (b) and (c) are the TEM-EDS line-scanning profiles of p-type and n-type segments in SnS nanowire. (d–f) are the high-resolution TEM images of A, B and C zones on a single SnS NW.	 
FF = VMJM/VOCJSC	(1)
η = VOCJSC(FF)/(S·Pin)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) A schematic of the SnS p–n homojunction photovoltaic cell. (b) Current density vs. voltage for the solar cell in the dark and under simulated AM1.5G illumination with intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Schematic energy band diagram of the homojunction diode showing the photogenerated carrier transfer process.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solar cell performance under different illumination intensities. (a) Short-circuit current density (JSC) and open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the cell as functions of light intensity. (b) Fill factor (FF), and power-conversion efficiency (η) of the cell as functions of light intensity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2jm32116e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
