Ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy of charge-carrier dynamics in organic photovoltaic materials  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B817113K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B817113K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2575-2591Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUltrafast vibrational spectroscopy of charge-carrier dynamics in organic photovoltaic materials

        
          
            Ryan D. 
            Pensack
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyle M. 
            Banyas
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Larry W. 
            Barbour
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Maureen 
            Hegadorn
          
        
       and 

        
          
            John B. 
            Asbury
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: jasbury@psu.edu
Received 
      30th September 2008
    , Accepted 13th January 2009First published on 17th February 2009AbstractUltrafast vibrational spectroscopy is used to examine the dynamics of interfacial electron transfer, free-carrier formation, and bimolecular charge recombination and trapping in an organic photovoltaic material. The carbonyl (CO) stretch of the functionalized fullerene, PCBM, is probed as a local vibrational reporter of the dynamics in a blend with a conjugated polymer, CN-MEH-PPV. Ultrafast interfacial electron transfer from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM occurs on time scales ranging from less than 100 fs to 1 ps. PCBM molecules at interfaces with the polymer have carbonyl vibrations that are higher in frequency compared to the ensemble. The frequency variation results in part from a vibrational Stark shift arising from an interfacial dipole formed by spontaneous charge transfer from the polymer to PCBM. The Stark shift provides a means to observe directly the formation of free carriers through the spectral evolution of the carbonyl stretch. Free carrier formation occurs surprisingly quickly on the 1–10 ps time scale, suggesting that the charges experience a smaller effective Coulombic binding energy than expected. The interfacial dipole decreases the Coulombic binding energy because the negative pole of the dipole repels electrons at the PCBM domain interface. Following free-carrier formation, electrons diffuse within the material and become trapped on the microsecond time scale resulting in the formation of a distinct peak in the vibrational spectra. The time scale of charge trapping corresponds to the carrier lifetime of similar PPV-based polymer blends that have been reported in the literature on the basis of transient photocurrent measurements.Ryan D. PensackRyan Pensack earned a bachelor’s degree in chemistry from Rutgers University in Newark, NJ in 2006. At Rutgers, he studied thermally and chemically-induced structural changes occurring in biologically relevant lipid systems using infrared spectroscopy. Currently he is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University. His research interests include examination of the molecular nature of charge traps in organic photovoltaic materials using two-dimensional infrared spectroelectrochemical techniques.Kyle M. BanyasKyle Banyas earned a bachelor’s degree in chemistry at King’s College in Wilkes-Barre, PA in 2007. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Pennsylvania State University in the Department of Chemistry. His research interests include time resolved vibrational spectroscopy of materials to understand bimolecular charge recombination and charge trapping in terms of the underlying molecular structures.John B. AsburyJohn Asbury has been an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University since 2005. He earned a PhD degree in experimental physical chemistry with Tianquan Lian at Emory University in 2001 followed by post-doctoral work with Michael D. Fayer at Stanford University. His research interests include ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy of charge-carrier dynamics, spectroelectrochemical studies of defects and charge traps, and the influence of dielectric properties on charge-carrier dynamics in organic electronic materials.
1. Introduction
Organic solar cells represent a promising alternative to large area solar modules.1–4 In addition to the possibility of attaining high energy-conversion efficiency at low cost, the materials enable conformal deposition onto a variety of substrates from solution—thus opening the possible development of solar paint. Much of the work on organic solar cells has focused on two polymers in particular, poly(2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene), referred to here and afterward as MDMO-PPV and RR-P3HT, respectively.5,6 Both polymers phase separate into nano to microscale interpenetrating networks in blends with the methanofullerene [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).7,8 The molecular structures of these polymers along with PCBM are depicted in Fig. 1. A great amount of work has gone into understanding the dependence of devices fabricated from these materials on the morphology of the organic photovoltaic (OPV) active layer7–16 and on the mobility and lifetime of the photo-generated charge carriers.17–28 High molecular order in the polymer phase combined with phase separation length scales of 10–100 nm are optimal. The morphology of the OPV active layer is influenced by a number of factors including the solvent used to cast the film,9 the side chain length,8 the regioregularity16,29 and the mass ratio of the polymer to the fullerene.25,28
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of two conjugated polymers and the electron-accepting fullerene, PCBM, that have been extensively studied in organic photovoltaic devices. MDMO-PPV is an amorphous polymer while RR-P3HT is semi-crystalline. The differences in the conformational order adopted by these polymers may strongly influence the charge-carrier dynamics of the corresponding organic photovoltaic devices. 
Organic solar cells are based on excitonic materials5,6,30 which distinguishes them from their inorganic counterparts. Their excitonic nature requires that electrons and holes be separated by electron transfer from electron-donating to electron-accepting materials. For electron transfer to occur, photogenerated excitations (primarily excitons)31,32 must first diffuse to polymer/fullerene interfaces (Fig. 2, step 1). The length scale over which excitons can diffuse in conjugated polymers is typically 5–10 nm.33–40 A number of approaches have been developed to measure the exciton diffusion length and to understand how this length depends on the characteristics of the polymers.33–38 Fundamental dynamics of excitations in conjugated polymers have been examined by several groups. For example, Barbara41–45 and Huser46,47 directly observed dispersive excitation transport to low lying energy states within individual conjugated polymer chains using single molecule spectroscopy. The influence of inter-chain interactions on the photophysics of conjugated polymers was examined by the Schwartz group using a variety of optical and microscopy techniques.48–51 These studies demonstrated that the conformational distribution of conjugated segments in solid polymer films influences their excitation transport properties,45,50 and that the distribution of conformations is affected by the morphology48 and deposition conditions49 of the films.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of key processes leading to charge collection in organic solar cells. (1) Excitons that form from absorption of photons by the polymer must diffuse to an interface for charge separation to occur, usually by interfacial electron transfer. (2) Once electron transfer has occurred, the charge carriers are still bound to the interface by their mutual Coulombic attraction which can be more than ten-times the thermal energy available at room temperature. (3) Finally, charge carriers must diffuse to the electrodes of the device to enter the external circuit. Along the way, they may become trapped and/or recombine (process 3′) leading to reduction in the charge collection efficiency of the device. 
Following interfacial electron transfer, electron-hole pairs at polymer/fullerene interfaces are bound by Coulombic potentials that can be several tenths of an electron-volt (eV).52,53 These Coulombic potentials should not be confused with the exciton binding energy in the polymer.54 It may seem surprising that free-carrier formation (Fig. 2, step 2) readily occurs in these materials considering that this Coulombic potential can be more than an order of magnitude greater than the thermal energy available at room temperature.54,55 It is commonly believed that the free-energy difference or “driving force” for interfacial electron transfer from the LUMO of the polymer to the LUMO of the fullerene can be as small as 0.3–0.4 eV while still enabling efficient free-carrier formation.6,56–58 This value is contrasted with current conjugated polymer–PCBM blends containing MDMO-PPV or RR-P3HT which have free-energy differences around 1 eV.6 This large driving force is typically viewed as wasted energy, and significant research is ongoing to tune the excited state energy levels of polymers to reduce this value.57–72 However, recent work from the Durrant group has suggested that the large free-energy difference in OPV materials based on RR-P3HT and PCBM may be necessary to drive efficient free-carrier formation.53 These authors found a direct correlation between the driving force for interfacial electron transfer and the free-carrier formation efficiency of blends based on polythiophene variants with PCBM—indicating that excess vibrational energy resulting from electron transfer may facilitate escape of electron-hole pairs from their attractive Coulombic potentials that would otherwise bind them to the interface.
The Coulombic interactions between electrons and holes in the active layers of OPV devices can contribute to decreased charge collection efficiency through bimolecular charge recombination—especially at the maximum-power point. At this point compared to the short-circuit condition, the electric field between the electrodes of a device is suppressed by application of an external load.73 The reduced electric field results in less-efficient charge-separation and more pronounced charge recombination because the transit time of the carriers diffusing through the material (Fig. 2, step 3) becomes comparable to the time scale for bimolecular charge recombination (Fig. 2, step 3′). For example, it is estimated that ∼25% of the photo-generated free carriers in optimized MDMO-PPV-based organic solar cells undergo bimolecular charge-recombination at the maximum-power point.74 Thus, bimolecular charge-recombination remains an important loss mechanism in certain organic solar cells.6
Fundamental understanding of the processes that influence the charge collection characteristics of OPV materials at a mechanistic level may lead to new approaches to control the charge collection efficiency with the practical aim of developing better OPV devices. Ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy provides a unique means to gain structural information about the species involved in 1 excitation transport, 2 free-carrier formation, and 3′ bimolecular charge recombination and trapping by probing the vibrational motions of OPV materials directly. In OPV materials, the optical spectra are frequently too complex to extract structural information about the species undergoing photophysical or photochemical transformation, whilst the time scales on which key processes occur are often too fast to be resolved by electron spin-resonance methods. We have demonstrated that ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy has the unique ability to examine charge-carrier dynamics in these complex materials and to provide structural information about the species involved in the dynamics.75–78Fig. 3A represents the beam geometry that we use in the ultrafast two-dimensional infrared (2D IR) experiments.75,76 The 2D IR experiments are performed with the two pulse self-heterodyned pump–probe approach.75,79 OPV materials are deposited onto silver mirrors which reflect the probe beam at a small angle relative to the surface normal. This beam geometry virtually eliminates nonresonant signals near the time origin of the infrared (IR) pulses. The reflective beam geometry is also used for the microsecond transient IR experiments.77,78Fig. 3B displays the beam geometry used in the ultrafast visible pump IR probe experiment for which OPV materials are deposited onto the front surfaces of CaF2 optical flats.77,78 The transmissive beam geometry is used for this experiment because the high density of electrons that form as a result of electron transfer has a significant influence on the refractive index of the sample. The transmissive geometry is much less sensitive to this effect. Because the OPV materials strongly absorb the visible pump photons, the first surface sample geometry eliminates nonresonant signals that result from overlap of the pump and probe beams in the CaF2 substrate.
 Fig. 3  Diagrams of the beam and sample geometries used for the for (A) 2D IR and (B) visible pump IR probe experiments. These geometries eliminate non-resonant signals that frequently interfere with ultrafast vibrational spectroscopic studies. The symbols represent: etalon—tunable Fabry-Perot interference filter, T—optical delay between the pump and probe pulses, P—polarizer, MCT Array—mercury cadmium telluride multichannel infrared array detector. 
In this Perspective, we describe our recent use of ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy to examine charge-carrier dynamics in a polymer blend OPV material composed of PCBM with the conjugated polymer, poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-(1-cyanovinylene-1,4-phenylene)] (CN-MEH-PPV, see Fig. 4A). The linear IR absorption spectrum of a 1:1 blend (by mass) of CN-MEH-PPV with PCBM is displayed in Fig. 4B along with a spectrum of the pure polymer. The vibrational peak at 1740 cm−1 corresponds to the carbonyl (CO) stretch of the methyl ester group of PCBM. CN-MEH-PPV has negligible absorption in this frequency range. The carbonyl stretch of PCBM is used as a structurally sensitive probe of the charge-carrier dynamics in the blend.75–78 In particular, the frequency of the carbonyl group is sensitive to changes in the charge distribution that occur following electron transfer from the polymer. This sensitivity allows the time scale of exciton diffusion in the polymer to be examined through the corresponding influence on the electron transfer dynamics (section 2). The frequency of the carbonyl vibration is influenced by electric fields that result from interfacial dipoles at the junctions of electron donating and accepting materials55,80–88 resulting in a gradient in the vibrational frequency near the polymer/fullerene interfaces. We have demonstrated that this gradient in vibrational frequency permits the direct measurement of free-carrier formation by spatially and temporally resolving the escape of electrons and holes from their attractive Coulombic potentials at the interfaces (section 3). We find that free-carrier formation occurs surprisingly quickly on the picosecond time scale. We develop an electrostatic model which indicates that such fast dissociation of Coulombically bound electron-hole pairs occurs in part because the interfacial dipolar field decreases the binding energy of the pair. Finally, we unify conflicting measurements of bimolecular charge recombination in organic photovoltaic materials that have been reported in the literature from transient photocurrent17,23,25 and optical spectroscopic investigations.89,90 Our data suggest that the differing sensitivity of these methods to the charge carrier mobility accounts for the two-orders of magnitude variation in the charge recombination lifetimes that have been reported (section 4). A summary and outlook based on the experimental findings in section 5 discusses the implications of the data and analysis.
 Fig. 4  (A) Molecular structures of the conjugated polymer, CN-MEH-PPV, and the electron acceptor, PCBM, examined in the experiments reported here. (B) Comparison of the linear IR spectra of the 1:1 polymer blend of CN-MEH-PPV with PCBM compared with the spectrum of the pure polymer. The vibrational feature at 1740 cm−1 in the polymer blend corresponds to the carbonyl (CO) stretch of the methyl ester group of PCBM. The polymer has negligible absorption in this spectral region permitting the charge transfer dynamics in the blend to be investigated through the time evolution of the neutral bleach and negative polaron absorption of PCBM. 
2. Interfacial electron transfer dynamics
Ultrafast visible pump IR probe spectroscopy has been used to examine electron transfer in a variety of systems including molecules adsorbed onto semiconductor nanoparticles91–103 and intermolecular104 and bridge-mediated intramolecular105–108 donor/acceptor pairs. Interfacial electron transfer from conjugated polymers to fullerenes can be probed by monitoring the change in frequency of the vibrational modes as a consequence of the charge redistribution associated with the electron transfer event.75–78 Transient IR spectra centered on the carbonyl (CO) stretch of PCBM are depicted in Fig. 5 at several time delays between the pump and probe pulses. The spectra are characterized by two distinct features: a broad feature that results from the mid-IR absorption of polarons in the polymer31,32,109–114 and a reduced absorption of the ground to first excited state (0 → 1) vibrational transition of the carbonyl stretch of neutral PCBM (termed a bleach). The excitation wavelength for these experiments, 550 nm, primarily excites the polymer with minimal direct excitation of PCBM.76 Photo-excited conjugated polymers that are blended with fullerenes are known to transfer electrons to the fullerenes on ultrafast time scales.115–126 Charge transfer reduces the carbonyl absorption of neutral ground state PCBM molecules. The polymer has no infrared active vibrational modes around 1740 cm−1 (Fig. 4B). Consequently, the vibrational features in the transient IR spectra arise exclusively from PCBM as a result of interfacial electron transfer.76
 Fig. 5  Comparison of visible pump IR probe spectra of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend following optical excitation at 550 nm at several time delays between the pump and probe pulses. The positive-going vibrational feature corresponds to the reduced neutral absorption (bleach) of the carbonyl stretch of the electron acceptor, PCBM. The best fit spectra used to quantify the CO stretch bleach are overlaid on the data. 
The area of the carbonyl bleach at a particular time delay is proportional to the concentration of electrons that have transferred to the PCBM molecules. The electron transfer event erases the polarization memory of the linearly polarized visible pump pulse. Therefore, the time dependence of the bleach spectrum directly reports the time scale for electron transfer without the need to correct for orientational relaxation of the photo-excited state. A fitting procedure was developed to quantify the bleach area. The broad polaron absorption was modeled with a third-order polynomial function, and the bleach was characterized with a Gaussian line shape. An iterative least-square fitting procedure was employed to extract the bleach spectrum from the polaron absorption for each time delay recorded in the experiment. Examples of the fitting results are overlaid on the transient IR spectra in Fig. 5 for comparison. The polynomial function that describes the polaron absorption for a given transient spectrum is visible as the line under the bleach feature. Spectra from 50-fs time delays and greater were fitted using this procedure.
The interfacial electron transfer kinetics are obtained by integrating the carbonyl bleach spectra to obtain their area at each delay time recorded in the experiment. The main panel of Fig. 6 depicts the bleach area plotted versus the corresponding delay time within the first 10 ps on a linear time axis. The data show a rise in the bleach area on the picosecond time scale. The cross correlation function between the visible and IR pulses in the experiment is less than 200 fs. Thus, the extended-rise kinetics of the bleach area indicate that interfacial electron transfer occurs on a distribution of time scales. The curve fit through the data shows that the electron transfer kinetics can be described by a biexponential function with 90-fs and 0.9-ps time constants contributing 30% and 70% of the amplitude, respectively. The fit curve was convolved with an instrument-response function representing the cross correlation of the pump and probe pulses. The time scale for the 90-fs rise component should be considered approximate, due to the finite time-resolution in the experiment.
 Fig. 6  Integrated area of the carbonyl bleach of PCBM versus the corresponding time delay for the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend plotted on a linear time axis. Inset: time dependence of the bleach area of PCBM plotted over a longer time period on a logarithmic time axis. The three regions in the inset correspond to distinct kinetic processes: 1—ultrafast interfacial electron transfer from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM; 2—partial charge recombination due to back electron transfer to CN-MEH-PPV; and 3—a second interfacial electron transfer phase from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM arising from excitations that form throughout the polymer layer and must diffuse to the polymer/PCBM interface to transfer electrons. The fit curve is calculated from a kinetic model that incorporates these processes along with excited state relaxation. 
Interfacial electron transfer from conjugated polymers to fullerenes has been observed on a variety of time scales ranging from 45 fs115 to 14 ps.116 A number of explanations for this range of reported time scales have been offered in the literature, including the existence of a distribution of distances between the photo-excited conjugated polymer segments and the fullerene molecules,117–119 variation of the blend composition,115,117 disorder in the polymer matrix120 and disparity among the free energy for electron transfer among various conjugated polymer–fullerene pairs. Although a complete explanation for the range of time scales has not emerged, it seems clear that the molecular and electronic structure of the conjugated polymer and the blend composition can significantly influence the measured electron transfer rate.
On the basis of these prior reports, we adopt the following explanation for the distributed electron transfer dynamics that are represented in Fig. 6. The biphasic character of the dynamics results from a distribution of distances between the photo-excited CN-MEH-PPV conjugated segments and the PCBM domains. The time scale of the dynamics suggests an upper bound to this distribution of distances. The distance dependence of electron transfer has been examined in detail for a variety of systems.127–133 From these studies, a timetable for activationless electron tunneling through various media has been constructed127 indicating that electron transfer on the 1 ps time scale can occur over distances between 4 and 7 Å depending on the medium. The conjugation of CN-MEH-PPV chains will create a lower effective barrier to electron tunneling than other media such as alkyl or protein environments. Consequently, the upper bound on the distance over which the 0.9 ps time scale electron transfer occurs is approximately 7 Å. This distance corresponds to a conjugated segment that is separated from a PCBM domain interface by one polymer layer in the π–π stacking direction or a segment that presents the 2-ethylhexyloxy side group to the fullerene domain. The time scale for the fast electron transfer component (90 fs) is similar to the fastest value measured recently in the MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend system.115 The 200 fs time resolution in the visible pump IR probe experiment prevents us from unambiguously reporting dynamics faster than about half this time scale. Consequently, the comparison of the time scale of the fast component with the dynamics of the MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend from the literature115 must remain qualitative.
The inset of Fig. 6 depicts the bleach area kinetics over a much longer time window on a logarithmic time axis. The time window appearing in the main panel of Fig. 6 in which ultrafast electron transfer occurs is labeled as region 1 in the inset. Two other time windows are indicated in the inset corresponding to 10–200 ps and 200 ps–3 ns, labeled regions 2 and 3, respectively. The bleach area decays by approximately 10% by 200 ps and then grows again to reach a second maximum by 3 ns. Following this recurrence, the bleach area decays monotonically to zero on the 100 μs time scale.77,78 It is unusual to observe a recurrence in the signal from a nonequilibrium jump experiment—and when such a recurrence is observed, it indicates that several competing processes are occurring as the system returns to equilibrium.

Fig. 7 presents a kinetic model describing three competing processes that give rise to the recurrence in the bleach area presented in the inset of Fig. 6.77 The fast rise in the bleach area (region 1) corresponds to the ultrafast electron transfer dynamics that are discussed above (Fig. 7, process 1). The decay of the bleach area results from back electron transfer from PCBM to refill the hole in CN-MEH-PPV. Geminate (and/or fast bimolecular) charge recombination is known to occur in PPV-based polymer blends with PCBM.74 The partial decay of the bleach area by 200 ps is a result of this process (Fig. 7, process 2). The recurrence in the bleach area results because polymer segments are excited at a distribution of distances from the PCBM domain interfaces. Photons that are absorbed at significant distances from the interfaces (PPVBLK) must diffuse to the interfaces (PPVINT) before transferring electrons. This extra diffusion step (Fig. 7, process 3) increases the time scale on which electron transfer appears to occur. The time dependence of this diffusion controlled process is limited by the time scale for excited state relaxation of the conjugated polymer. To characterize the time scale for excited state relaxation, we measured the photo-luminescence decay of a pure CN-MEH-PPV film using a time-correlated single photon counting instrument (TCSPC).77,134 Biexponential excited state decay kinetics were observed in the CN-MEH-PPV film with time constants of 0.9 and 3.1 ns, respectively. The rise time of the recurrence of the bleach area (2–3 ns) corresponds to the longer component of the excited state lifetime of CN-MEH-PPV.77 A detailed kinetic model describing the interplay among the four processes depicted in Fig. 7 was constructed. The resulting best-fit curve appears as the solid line through the data in both the main panel and the inset of Fig. 6.
 Fig. 7  Graphical depiction of the kinetic model that was developed to describe the charge transfer processes occurring in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend. The numbers correlate processes in the Figure with the corresponding dynamics in the bleach area kinetics (see Fig. 6). From the kinetic model, we conclude that the second rise in the bleach area on the nanosecond time scale results from diffusion of excitations toward the interfaces. The time scale for this diffusion controlled process corresponds to the excited state lifetime decay of excitons in a pure CN-MEH-PPV film. 
A number of experiments were performed to rule out other processes that might give rise to the recurrence in the bleach area. The first and perhaps most obvious of these processes is time dependent spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach as a result of thermal redistribution. However, temperature-dependent linear IR spectra indicate that the carbonyl vibration is insensitive to temperature over a 97-K range.76 The insensitivity results from the lack of hydrogen bonding in the system. Because the carbonyl bond is not coupled to low frequency modes through hydrogen bonding interactions, the vibrational occupation of the modes that are coupled to the carbonyl vibration is essentially unchanged as the temperature is varied.
Another issue to consider is that the excitation density in the ultrafast visible pump IR probe experiment (∼2 mJ cm−2) was considerably higher than in the TCSPC experiment (0.07 mJ cm−2). Consequently, the contribution of exciton–exciton annihilation to the excited state decay kinetics of CN-MEH-PPV in the blend may have been greater than in the TCSPC experiment which might influence the evaluation of the amplitude of the bleach recurrence from the kinetic model. Exciton–exciton annihilation has been studied in detail in biological light-harvesting systems.135–137 In these systems, this process occurs on the time scale of a few ps. Exciton–exciton annihilation has also been examined in conjugated polymers and found to occur on slightly longer time scales (from a few to 10s of picoseconds).138,139 On time scales longer than 100 ps, this process will have negligible impact on the measured excited state decay kinetics. If exciton–exciton annihilation contributes to the excited state decay kinetics at the excitation density used in the visible pump IR probe experiment, the effect on the modeling of the data would be an underestimation of the amplitude of the slower diffusion controlled electron transfer component relative to the faster component. The measurement of the kinetics of the diffusion-controlled charge transfer process will be unaffected by exciton–exciton annihilation because the diffusion controlled process occurs on the time scale of a few nanoseconds. Our focus here is to report the observation of a previously unrecognized diffusion-controlled electron transfer process in an OPV blend. Therefore, the relative amplitude of this process is of secondary concern. Future studies will quantitatively examine the relative amplitudes of the ultrafast interfacial electron transfer and diffusion-controlled electron transfer processes and will properly take into account the influence of exciton–exciton annihilation.
A third process that could influence the carbonyl bleach area is relaxation of the PCBM negative polaron (PCBM1−) if the carbonyl peak of the negative polaron overlaps the neutral bleach peak. Transient vibrational spectra of the carbonyl bleach of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend (the data, not their Gaussian fits) are displayed in Fig. 8 for time delays of 100 ps, 3 ns and 10 μs.77 The 10-μs transient spectrum was collected with a sub-microsecond time-resolved IR instrument using an excitation density and wavelength that are comparable to the ultrafast IR experiment. The spectra have been shifted by linear offsets and normalized to their maximum positive signal for comparison. The spectra show that the negative polaron of PCBM does not appear in this spectral window on the nanosecond time scale and thus does not interfere with the bleach spectrum on time scales less than 3 ns. Consequently, relaxation of the negative polaron on ultrafast time scales cannot be the origin of the recurrence of the bleach area between 200 ps and 3 ns time delays. The shift of the bleach spectra toward the linear IR spectrum on the microsecond time scale (Fig. 8) results from the motion of electrons in the PCBM domains. This process is discussed in the following section.
 Fig. 8  Transient visible pump IR probe spectra collected at several time delays in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend showing that the PCBM negative polaron has negligible contribution in this spectral region on the picosecond-to-nanosecond time scales. The transient IR spectra have been normalized to compare the evolution of the line shapes. The 10-μs transient spectrum was collected with a microsecond transient IR instrument. The linear IR spectrum is overlaid on the transient spectra for comparison. 
3. Free carrier formation dynamics
Polymeric OPV materials are distinguished from their inorganic counterparts because their primary excitations (excitons) and charge carriers (polarons) are localized to a large extent on individual conjugated segments. Polymeric OPV materials also have relatively low dielectric constants. As a consequence, Coulombic interactions between charge carriers can be long-ranged and quite strong.52 Considering a bulk heterojunction polymer blend, the charge carriers that result from interfacial electron transfer from the polymer to the fullerene are initially bound to the interface by a Coulombic potential that can be several tenths of an electron volt.52,53 Binding energies of this order are much larger than thermal energy at room temperature (∼0.025 eV). It is an outstanding question as to why charge separation occurs as readily as is observed in functional OPV devices. The carbonyl bleach spectra in the transient IR data displayed in Fig. 5 provide a means to investigate this question using the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend as a model system.
The fitting procedure used to extract the bleach spectra from the transient IR data generates a unique bleach spectrum for each time delay between the visible pump and the IR probe pulses. Fig. 9A displays the best fit Gaussian line shapes extracted from the transient IR spectra in a two-dimensional surface plot versus the corresponding time delay (horizontal axis). We will refer to the best-fit Gaussian line shapes as the bleach spectra in the subsequent discussion unless otherwise indicated. The time axis has been plotted on a logarithmic scale to highlight the extended time dependence of the bleach spectra. The dashed curve is a guide to the eye that shows the shift of the bleach spectrum at longer time delays toward the equilibrium center frequency of 1740 cm−1 (marked by the horizontal dotted line). Fig. 9B depicts the time dependence of the bleach spectrum quantitatively by plotting the center frequency versus the time delay on a logarithmic time axis. The data lead to the surprising conclusion that the carbonyl bleach spectrum immediately following interfacial electron transfer is shifted several wavenumbers to higher frequency relative to the equilibrium line center.76 The subset of molecules that are involved in interfacial electron transfer apparently reside in environments that cause their carbonyl bonds to possess higher frequencies in comparison to the ensemble. Following the initial charge transfer process, the bleach spectrum shifts monotonically toward the equilibrium center on the sub-ps to 10 ns time scales (circled region, Fig. 9B).
 Fig. 9  (A) Two-dimensional surface plot of the carbonyl bleach spectra of the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend versus the corresponding time delay. The horizontal axis represents the time delay on a logarithmic scale. The data indicate that the center frequency of the carbonyl bleach peak shifts to lower frequency and toward the equilibrium value of 1740 cm−1 indicated by the dotted line. The dashed line is a guide to the eye. (B) Plot of the carbonyl bleach center frequency versus corresponding time delay. The shift toward lower frequency highlighted in the circled region results from spatial motion of electrons that diffuse away from the PCBM domain interfaces following the primary interfacial electron transfer event (see text). 
3.1 Correlation of carbonyl frequency with radial position
To elucidate the nature of PCBM molecules that absorb on the higher frequency side of the carbonyl transition, we undertook a linear IR study of CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blends of various composition. Linear IR spectra of four films are represented in Fig. 10. The spectra were collected at room temperature and have been normalized for comparison. The spectrum of a film of pure PCBM (labeled PCBM) appears with a peak at 1735 cm−1. The addition of 3 mass% of polymer relative to PCBM shifts the carbonyl absorption to 1738 cm−1 (spectrum labeled 0.03:1). The addition of significantly more polymer up to a mass ratio of 1:1 results in a further shift of the carbonyl absorption to 1740 cm−1 (spectrum labeled 1:1). The spectrum labeled PPV in Fig. 10 demonstrates that CN-MEH-PPV has little spectral density in this frequency window. The carbonyl absorption exhibits little further blue-shift with continued addition of polymer to the blend. The shift to higher frequency results from perturbation of the carbonyl mode of PCBM by the presence of the polymer rather than from a simple superposition of the polymer absorption. Simple addition of the polymer spectrum to the pure PCBM carbonyl peak cannot explain the direction of the observed shift with increasing polymer content. For comparison, the transient IR spectrum of the carbonyl bleach at 1 ps time delay is included. The comparison shows that the component of the carbonyl bleach spectrum that arises from the addition of polymer to the PCBM film is also the component that is preferentially involved in interfacial electron transfer.
 Fig. 10  Comparison of linear IR spectra of CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend films with various polymer and PCBM content in the region of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM. Spectrum labels: PCBM—spectrum of a film of pure PCBM with no polymer content; 0.03:1 and 1:1—spectra of films with indicated mass ratios of CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM; PPV—spectrum of a pure CN-MEH-PPV film with no PCBM content. The spectrum of the 1-ps bleach from the visible pump IR probe data has been plotted for comparison. This comparison indicates that the addition of CN-MEH-PPV to the PCBM film perturbs the carbonyl stretch of PCBM molecules to higher frequency at the polymer:PCBM interface. As discussed in the text, the perturbation arises in part from a Stark shift as a result of partial charge redistribution at the interface. 
The composition-dependent linear IR study indicates that the carbonyl frequencies of PCBM molecules are correlated with their proximity to the interfaces of the PCBM domains. This correlation is illustrated in Fig. 11. The linear IR spectra in Fig. 10 show that the shift of the carbonyl vibration to a higher frequency arises from a perturbation of the bond by the presence of the polymer. Since molecules near the interfaces of the PCBM domains experience the strongest interactions with the polymer, it follows that these molecules absorb on the higher frequency side of the equilibrium carbonyl transition. This conclusion is supported by the appearance of the carbonyl bleach spectrum at higher frequencies for short delay times as a result of interfacial electron transfer (Fig. 9). Electron transfer is highly distance dependent.127 Therefore, PCBM molecules closest to the interfaces are most likely to be involved in this process on the picosecond time scale. We have verified that the carbonyl bleach spectrum at short time delays is shifted several wavenumbers to a higher frequency relative to the equilibrium spectrum by the use of an internal frequency standard.76
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the correlation of the carbonyl frequency with radial position in the PCBM domains. PCBM molecules near the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interfaces have higher frequency carbonyl stretch vibrations in comparison to molecules that reside in the bulk of the PCBM domains. 
3.2 Mechanism of correlation between frequency and position
The dependence of the carbonyl frequency of PCBM molecules on their proximity to the interfaces may be understood through the vibrational Stark effect.140,141 Interfacial dipoles that form due to spontaneous charge transfer have been measured at a variety of organic–organic electron donor/acceptor junctions with corresponding vacuum-level shifts that can be several tenths of an electron volt.55,80–88 These vacuum-level shifts result from the electrostatic interaction of charge carriers with the dipolar layer because the layer creates an electric field that either impedes or assists the ejection of charge from the interface, depending on the orientation of the dipole. For example, a vacuum-level shift of 0.25 eV was recently reported for interfaces between p-bis[(p-styryl)styryl]benzene and C60 with a corresponding interfacial dipole of 4.7 Debye.55 A vacuum-level shift of 0.6 eV has been reported for P3HT/C60 interfaces.88 In both cases, the negative pole of the dipole resides on the C60 side. Although an interfacial dipole has not been measured between CN-MEH-PPV and PCBM, it is likely that such a dipole exists due to the differences in the ionization potential and electron affinity of the materials.142,143 Thus, we propose that the electric field associated with an interfacial dipole at the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interface results in a vibrational Stark shift of the carbonyl bond. Because the electric field originates at the interface, it naturally falls off quickly with distance from the interface and gives rise to the correlation of the carbonyl frequency with radial position that is observed in CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blends.
To test the validity of this hypothesis, we adopt the parameters for the interfacial dipole considered by Bässler and coworkers in which a partial charge of ∼1.6 × 10−20 C (10% of an elementary charge) was estimated to transfer from p-bis[(p-styryl)styryl]benzene to C60 at a 1 nm separation.55 A model of the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interface is represented schematically in Fig. 12. Each conjugated segment in direct contact with a PCBM domain is assumed to transfer 10% of an elementary charge to the nearest PCBM molecule. Taking the average conjugation length to be 5.5 monomer units and approximating the PCBM domains as spheres with an average radius of 25 nm,76,77 we estimate that 3100 conjugated segments are in contact with each PCBM domain. Allowing these partially charged conjugated segments to be uniformly distributed in a shell of radius R+ = 25.5 nm, we obtain a charge density σ+∼ 10−2 C m−2. The charge density in the outer-most shell of PCBM molecules, σ−, is taken to be slightly higher because the radius of curvature is smaller, R− = 24.5 nm. The total electric field at a test point, 0 = (0,0,z0), generated by this interfacial dipole can be calculated by integrating the field originating from charged area increments dA in the polymer and PCBM layers according to
 Fig. 12  Schematic of an electrostatic model to estimate the electric field at the interfaces of the PCBM domains as a result of an interfacial dipole caused by partial charge-transfer from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM. The PCBM domains are modeled as spheres surrounded by CN-MEH-PPV layers. Charge densities, σ+ and σ−, in the CN-MEH-PPV and PCBM phases, respectively, produce interfacial dipoles parallel to the interface normal. The other labeled quantities refer to the model that is developed in the text. The collective contribution of these dipoles causes surprisingly large electric fields near the interfaces of the domains. The analysis suggests that these large electric fields exist under steady-state conditions without photo-excitation of the polymer blend. 

 

(1)
dQ± = σ±dA = σ±R2± sin(ϕ)dθ dϕ
  The electric field in the fullerene phase is calculated according to eqn (2) by integrating eqn (1) overall all angles θ and ϕ and convolving over approximately one fullerene molecule in the radial coordinate Ez = ∫ dz′ exp(−(z′−z0)2/2σ2)∫∫ dθ dϕ dEz(θ,ϕ,z0)(2)Fig. 13 depicts the calculated electric field, Ez, plotted versus the corresponding radial position, z0, on a semi-log plot. The convolution over z0 is an approximate treatment aimed at accounting for the delocalization of the partial charges over the conjugated polymer and fullerene species. The delocalization of charge has been approximated as a normalized Gaussian function with a full width at half maximum of 0.7 nm—the nucleus to nucleus diameter of a C60 molecule. We adopted a dielectric constant, ε = 4.1, for PCBM.53
Near the interface (at 24.5 nm radial position), the electric field is greater than 107 V m−1. The vibrational Stark tuning rates for carbonyl bonds of acetone and methyl vinyl ketone were recently reported to be approximately 1 cm−1/(108 V m−1).140 To our knowledge the vibrational Stark tuning rates for ester carbonyl bonds have not been reported. Adopting this value for the tuning rate, the variation of the vibrational Stark shift of the carbonyl bond of PCBM versus the radial position can be calculated. The corresponding Stark shifts are displayed on the right-hand ordinate of Fig. 13. Frequency shifts of a significant fraction of a wavenumber near the interfaces of the PCBM domains are predicted from this calculation. This frequency shift suggests that the vibrational Stark effect may be partially responsible for the shift of the carbonyl frequency at the interface that is observed experimentally (cross reference the blue-shift of the bleach spectra relative to the equilibrium center, Fig. 9).
 Fig. 13  Variation of the electric field resulting from the collective addition of the interfacial dipoles versus radial position within the PCBM domains. Surprisingly large electric fields form at the interfaces of the PCBM domains. The right axis displays the corresponding vibrational Stark shifts versus radial position. The calculation demonstrates that the frequency shift arising from the vibrational Stark effect is smaller than the blue-shift of the vibrational frequency of carbonyl bonds at the PCBM domain interfaces (see Fig. 8 and 9). 
At first glance, it appears surprising that the carbonyl vibrational peak shifts to a higher frequency, rather than broadening in the electric fields near the interfaces. For example, vibrational Stark shift measurements show that the carbonyl spectrum broadens rather than shifts140 because some bonds are oriented parallel to the field while others adopt antiparallel or perpendicular geometries. These subsets will experience different Stark shifts according to their orientation because the frequency shift depends on the projection of the electric field onto the transition dipole moment of the vibration. The observation of a shift in frequency suggests a preferential alignment of the bonds in the direction normal to the interface. To determine whether such alignment is possible in this system, we adopted a static dipole moment of 2 Debye for the ester group of PCBM.144 From this dipole moment, the potential energy for angular deviations from the interface normal can be calculated versus the radial position. Near the interface, the potential energy is approximately 0.3 kJ mol−1 which is a substantial fraction of the thermal energy at room temperature (2.4 kJ mol−1). Some degree of alignment at the interface may be expected. However, the potential energy drops rapidly as the radial position approaches the center of the domain. Therefore, it is unlikely that the ester groups would be aligned by the electric field more than a few nanometers from the interface. The observation that the entire carbonyl transition of PCBM shifts to higher frequency by interaction with CN-MEH-PPV (Fig. 10) suggests that nearly all of the carbonyl bonds are influenced by the polymer. Thus, the linear IR spectra indicate that other influences in addition to the vibrational Stark effect may affect the carbonyl frequency. These influences may include changes in the density or molecular order of the PCBM molecules in the nanoscopic domains compared to the bulk. For example, looking carefully at the linear IR spectra in Fig. 10, the carbonyl line shape is asymmetric in the pure PCBM spectrum. A tail extends to lower frequency that is not observed on the higher frequency side of the transition suggesting that dipole–dipole interactions among carbonyl bonds may be present in the film.145 Dipole–dipole interactions in this case are indicative of some degree of molecular ordering.145 With the addition of 3 mass% of CN-MEH-PPV, this tail is less pronounced but still present. At a mass ratio of 1:1, the line shape is largely symmetric suggesting that the dipole–dipole interactions (and molecular order) have been significantly reduced.
3.3 Origin of spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach
The data displayed in Fig. 9 indicate that the carbonyl bleach shifts toward the equilibrium spectrum with increasing time delay between the pump and the probe pulses. We established that the bleach appears blue-shifted relative to the equilibrium center (1740 cm−1) at short time delays because electrons are transferred to PCBM molecules at the interfaces which have higher frequency carbonyl vibrational modes. The time-dependent spectral evolution of the bleach could have numerous causes related to vibrational spectral diffusion within the carbonyl transition, interference from the PCBM negative polaron, thermal redistribution in the film or motion of electrons in the PCBM domains. It has been established that the PCBM negative polaron does not absorb in the spectral region of the carbonyl bleach of neutral PCBM on ultrafast time scales (cross reference Fig. 8).77 Consequently, the spectral evolution of the bleach is not influenced by dynamics of the PCBM negative polaron. We have also demonstrated that the carbonyl stretch of PCBM is very insensitive to temperature—thus the spectral evolution does not result from thermal redistribution.76

Two-dimensional IR spectroscopy was used to examine spectral diffusion in the carbonyl transition on ultrafast time scales.75 Three 2D IR spectra collected at different time delays are represented in Fig. 14A. These spectra show that the carbonyl transition of PCBM is inhomogeneously broadened such that the dynamically broadened line shape is much narrower than the inhomogeneous line shape (giving rise to diagonally elongated peaks). The time evolution of the dynamically broadened line shape is represented in Fig. 14B where horizontal slices taken from the ωm axis at 1740 cm−1 are displayed. The locations in the 2D IR spectra where the slices were extracted are indicated by the horizontal dotted line in each spectrum. Although the spectra do not precisely overlap, due to small variations in the IR pump center frequency, their widths vary less than ±0.3 cm−1—thus demonstrating that negligible spectral diffusion occurs within the carbonyl stretch peak on the picosecond and longer time scale.76 The lower bound on the time scale originates from the self-heterodyned pump–probe experimental approach used to collect the 2D IR spectra.79 The IR pump pulses have a band width of 5 cm−1 with a corresponding 1.5 ps full width at half maximum single-sided exponential time-domain pulse shape. Thus, any spectral diffusion dynamics that might occur on the 1 ps time scale or faster are convolved with the pump pulse duration and are not observed in the 2D IR spectra.
 Fig. 14  (A) 2D IR spectra of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM measured at 1, 3, and 10 ps time delays between the IR pump and probe pulses. (B) 1-Dimensional slices taken from the 2DIR spectra along the ωp frequency axis at an ωm frequency of 1740 cm−1. The linear IR spectrum of the sample is included for comparison. The data show that the dynamic line width of the carbonyl stretch does not increase appreciably with time. This observation indicates that the spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach spectrum toward the equilibrium center frequency with increasing time delay (see Fig. 9) is not a result of spectral diffusion. 
The lack of spectral diffusion in the carbonyl stretch peak is consistent with the correlation between the carbonyl frequency and the radial position established above. For the carbonyl stretch frequency of a given PCBM molecule to adopt a value outside of its dynamic line width, the molecule must diffuse radially. This motion is expected to be extremely slow due to the solidity of the domains and the large molecular weight of PCBM (∼900 Daltons). It should be noted that fast orientational motion of the carbonyl bond occurs on the sub-picosecond time scale.75 This motion may give rise to fast frequency fluctuations that in part determine the dynamic line width observed in the 2D IR data. The lack of spectral diffusion on picosecond and longer time scales demonstrates that the spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach peak in the circled region of Fig. 9B does not result from vibrational dynamics of ground state neutral PCBM molecules.
The physical model represented in Fig. 15 emerges after eliminating alternate explanations for the time-dependent spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach. In the Figure, a portion of a spherical PCBM domain is represented schematically. The spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach results from the motion of electrons that are initially transferred to PCBM molecules at the interfaces. As the electrons diffuse or drift, they restore the neutral ground state absorption of the molecules at the interfaces and reduce the absorption of molecules that reside in more interior locations. This exchange of molecules with higher frequency carbonyl bonds for those with lower frequency bonds gives rise to the spectral shift that is observed in the data. The distribution of carbonyl frequencies at a given time delay is therefore related to the average radial distribution of electrons at that time. Immediately following interfacial electron transfer, geminate electron-hole pairs form. These pairs are Coulombically bound by several tenths of an electron volt.52,53 The rapid time evolution of the carbonyl bleach spectrum suggests that electrons are able to escape the Coulombic potential on the picosecond time scale.
 Fig. 15  This schematic illustration of the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interface summarizes the physical model by which we interpret the time dependent frequency shift of the carbonyl bleach of PCBM (see Fig. 9). Following interfacial electron transfer from CN-MEH-PPV, the data suggest the electrons are able to escape the Coulombic binding energy of the holes surprisingly quickly. An estimate of 1–10 ps for the onset of this free-carrier formation process is obtained from the time evolution of the carbonyl bleach spectrum. 
3.4 Ultrafast charge separation dynamics
Free carrier formation on the picosecond time scale is surprisingly fast considering that the charge carriers must escape from such a deep Coulombic potential. The data suggest a rate ν for free-carrier formation between 1012 and 1011 s−1. A similar rate of charge separation has been observed in RR-P3HT:PCBM blends.120 The highest frequency Franck–Condon active vibrational modes of C60 that are known to be involved in electron transfer are the Ag(2) and T1u(4) modes around 1400 cm−1.146,147 Adopting these modes for PCBM, the maximum electron transfer attempt frequency between PCBM molecules v0 = 4 × 1013 s−1 can be estimated. Taking the simplest Arrhenius picture of an activated process, v = v0 exp(−E‡/kT), and letting the temperature equal 300 K, the data suggest that electrons which transfer on the picosecond time scale experience a barrier, E‡, between 0.1 and 0.15 eV—considerably smaller than the Coulombic binding energy of the electron-hole pairs. The estimated barrier, E‡, would be even smaller if lower frequency vibrations are involved.
The observation of fast charge separation on the picosecond time scale suggests that some fraction of the charge carriers experience an effective activation energy that is significantly smaller than the expected Coulombic barrier to free-carrier formation. One explanation for the reduced barrier is that the electric field arising from the interfacial dipole assists free-carrier formation by decreasing the Coulombic attraction of the electron-hole pairs. This explanation is similar in spirit to a model recently proposed by Bässler and coworkers.55 The potential energy of an electron-hole pair in the presence of an electric field is given by Vtot(r) = VC(r) + VE(r)(3)where VC represents the attraction of the electron to the hole and is given by VC(r) = (1/4π〈ε〉ε0)(qnqp/r)(4)The charges of the electron and hole are qn and qp, respectively. Their separation, r = rn + rp, is defined in terms of their separation from the interface, rn and rp, respectively. For the spatially averaged dielectric constant, 〈ε〉, a value of 3.5 is adopted. The term, VE, describes the influence of the electric field arising from the interfacial dipole VE(r) = rnqnEnz + rpqpEpz.(5) For the purposes of this calculation, we take the electric field, Enz, to be the field in the PCBM domain that is calculated according to eqn (2) and represented in Fig. 13. The electric field, Epz, is the field in the polymer phase and is also calculated according to eqn (2) except with a dielectric constant that is taken to be 3.0 for CN-MEH-PPV. For the purposes of this treatment, we assume that rn = rp, the electron and hole separate symmetrically with respect to the interface. This assumption is implicit when adopting the spatially averaged dielectric constant of 3.5 as this value is the equally weighted average of the dielectric constants of PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV. Numerical values for Vtot(r) in the presence and absence of an interfacial dipolar field are displayed in Fig. 16 where the abscissa represents the separation of the electrons from the PCBM domain interfaces, rn. The calculations indicate that the electric field due to the interfacial dipoles may decrease the Coulombic binding energy by nearly 0.1 eV which at room temperature corresponds to a two orders of magnitude enhancement of the rate of free-carrier formation in comparison to the rate that would be observed in the absence of the interfacial dipolar field. The decrease of the Coulombic binding energy is insufficient to completely account for the reduction of the activation energy that is calculated from the free-carrier formation dynamics, suggesting that other effects may facilitate the escape of the charge carriers from the interface. We should note that the calculated decrease of the Coulombic binding energy would be even greater if the influences of quantum confinement of the electron and hole in the PCBM and polymer phases were included in a manner similar to Bässler and coworkers.55
 Fig. 16  Potential energy versus electron—hole separation at CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interfaces in the presence and absence of the electric field arising from the interfacial dipoles. The interfacial dipolar field reduces the effective Coulombic binding energy by nearly one tenth of an electron volt, which significantly aids the escape of electrons and holes from the interface on ultrafast time scales. 
A complementary explanation to the mechanism described above is that free-carrier formation occurs on ultrafast time scales because the Coulombically bound electron-hole pairs have excess vibrational energy immediately following the interfacial electron transfer reaction. This explanation was recently posited by the Durrant group who found that the free-carrier formation yield under open circuit conditions in polythiophene-based polymer blends with PCBM is correlated with the free-energy difference for the electron transfer reaction.53 The authors suggested that some fraction of the Coulombically bound electron-hole pairs separate from vibrationally hot states and that the excess vibrational energy facilitates free-carrier formation. This explanation is similar in spirit to previous arguments that the excess vibrational energy is transferred to the hole that remains in the polymer.116,148
Both the interfacial dipolar field assisted and the excess vibrational energy assisted free-carrier formation mechanisms are consistent with the experimental observations of the Durrant group.53Polymer blends with greater free-energy differences in the electron transfer reaction are more likely to have excess vibrational energy. They are also likely to have greater interfacial dipoles and associated electric fields due to spontaneous charge transfer. It is likely that both explanations are important. The interfacial dipolar field assisted mechanism however opens the possibility of designing OPV materials that are capable of efficient charge separation while minimizing the “wasted” energy associated with large free-energy differences between the polymer and acceptor LUMO levels. This idea will be explored in the Summary and Outlook section that follows.
3.5 Intra-domain diffusion of free electrons
Following dissociation of the Coulombically bound electron-hole pairs, carriers are free to diffuse through the PCBM domains and polymer matrices, respectively. The diffusion of electrons appears in the frequency shift dynamics of the carbonyl bleach spectra.76 The shift of the carbonyl bleach toward the equilibrium center frequency of 1740 cm−1 (Fig. 8 and 9) indicates that electrons sample the equilibrium distribution of PCBM molecules on the nanosecond to microsecond time scale. This process involves diffusion and/or drift of the electrons throughout the PCBM domains. The molecules themselves are expected to diffuse very slowly. On the basis of the electric field calculation described above, fields in excess of 107 V m−1 occur near the interfaces. Such high fields can drive the drift of electrons very quickly away from the interfaces. For example, adopting a mobility for electrons of 10−5 m2 V−1 s−1,149,150 drift velocities approaching 100 m s−1 are anticipated. It is not possible to accurately determine the effective radial velocity in the domains from the spectroscopic data without independently calibrating the variation of the carbonyl frequency with the radial position. Making a number of assumptions, average radial drift velocities in the 1–2 m s−1 range have been estimated.76 However, this value should be regarded only as a qualitative estimate.
It should be stated that the onset of electron diffusion in PCBM domains cannot be distinguished from free-carrier formation. Free-carrier formation is simply the first step as electrons begin to diffuse. The data in Fig. 9 therefore indicate that electrons begin to diffuse radially into PCBM domains on the picosecond time scale and continue on the nanosecond and perhaps microsecond time scales.
4. Bimolecular charge recombination and trapping
The importance of bimolecular charge recombination in OPV devices depends on the polymer that is used in the active layer. Devices based on blends of RR-P3HT with PCBM yield charge collection efficiencies in excess of 90% under short-circuit conditions.151 In contrast, devices based on MDMO-PPV blended with PCBM have significantly lower collection efficiencies.74 Consistent with these trends, RR-P3HT-based devices exhibit non-Langevin bimolecular charge recombination kinetics in transient photocurrent studies on the several-hundred-microsecond time scale,20–24 while MDMO-PPV-based devices undergo Langevin recombination on time scales that are two orders of magnitude faster.17,23,25 The dielectric properties and charge carrier mobility characteristics of both blends are quite similar. Therefore, Langevin’s theory of bimolecular recombination would predict similar time scales for this process in both blends.152 The reason for qualitatively different bimolecular recombination behavior has not become clear. Insight into this issue can be gained by comparing recent measurements of charge recombination in MDMO-PPV:PCBM blends that were obtained using optical spectroscopy.89,90 Durrant and coworkers observed pump-energy independent bimolecular charge recombination on the 100–400 μs time scale in MDMO-PPV blends with PCBM that were of the similar composition to blends in which recombination was observed on the time scale of a few μs using transient photocurrent methods.25 There are many differences between the optical and photocurrent techniques, but one of the most important of these is that the optical measurements report the recombination kinetics of holes regardless of their mobility while the photocurrent measurements report the kinetics of the most mobile carriers. If charge carriers are deeply trapped in the polymer blend, then the photocurrent measurements will be more strongly affected in comparison to the optical measurements.
It is in the context of divergent measurements of bimolecular charge recombination in PPV-based polymer blends that we presented our recent study of charge recombination in 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blends using a sub-microsecond time resolved IR instrument.77,78 Transient vibrational spectra of the carbonyl bleach of PCBM (the data not their Gaussian fits) are displayed in Fig. 17 for time delays of 2, 10 and 100 μs. The spectra have been shifted by linear offsets and normalized to their maximum positive signal for comparison. Similar to the ultrafast transient IR spectra, the carbonyl bleach results from the transfer of electrons to PCBM molecules from CN-MEH-PPV. The comparison reveals the growth of a new absorption around 1760 cm−1 in proportion to the carbonyl bleach on the time scale of a few microseconds. The new absorption is assigned to the negative polaron of PCBM on the basis of its frequency, line shape, and synchronous decay with the carbonyl bleach peak.77,78 This assignment leads to the obvious question—why does the negative polaron appear on the microsecond time scale when the primary interfacial electron transfer reaction occurs on the picosecond and nanosecond time scales? We should point out that we examined the temperature dependence of the carbonyl stretch and found it to be extremely insensitive to temperature changes.76 The bleach and absorption are not a result of thermal redistribution in the film.
 Fig. 17  Transient IR spectra of the CO stretch of PCBM measured with a microsecond transient IR instrument following photo-excitation of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend at 532 nm. The spectra display the formation of a distinct negative polaron feature at 1760 cm−1 on the microsecond time scale. The amplitude of this feature is negligible on ultrafast time scales (see Fig. 8) indicating that the negative polaron has little-to-no concentration immediately following the photo-excitation event. 

Fig. 18A displays kinetics traces recorded at 1740 and 1760 cm−1 that represent the time dependence of the carbonyl bleach and the negative polaron peaks within the first few hundred microseconds following photo-excitation of the polymer blend at 532 nm. The kinetics traces highlight the decay of the carbonyl bleach due to bimolecular charge recombination and the formation of the negative polaron peak relative to the decaying bleach. The kinetics traces have been scaled to show that they decay synchronously for time delays greater than 100 μs (see Fig. 18B) indicating that the decay of the negative polaron arises from charge recombination with the holes in CN-MEH-PPV. Referring to the ultrafast transient IR spectra displayed in Fig. 8, the negative polaron peak is not present or has a negligible amplitude at 100 ps and 3 ns—indicating that little-or-no negative polaron formation occurs on the 10-ns time scale. However, on the microsecond time scale the negative polaron appears and increases in proportion to the carbonyl bleach within the first 100 μs. The photo-excitation densities and excitation wavelengths used in the ultrafast and microsecond IR experiments are very similar enabling us to compare the transient spectra recorded using these techniques. On the basis of this comparison, we assign an amplitude of zero to the negative polaron peak at the time origin of the microsecond IR experiment. This assignment leads us to model the kinetics of the negative polaron measured at 1760 cm−1 with the equation S(t) = (1 −Ptr(t))n(t).(6)The carbonyl bleach peak was fit with a 75-μs power law decay function to obtain the bimolecular charge recombination kinetics, n(t). Two expressions for Ptr(t) have been used to fit the growth of the negative polaron peak. Fit curves calculated from these expressions are overlaid on the negative polaron kinetics trace in Fig. 18A. The best fit curve (labeled bi–exp) was calculated from a biexponential function with 0.5 and 20 μs time constants each contributing 50% of the amplitude. The second curve (labeled 4 μs power law) was calculated by forcing a power law to fit the rise of the negative polaron peak. The power law functional form was chosen to compare the rise of the negative polaron to the bimolecular charge recombination studies performed using transient photocurrent measurements.17,23,25 Although the fit curve does not describe the data as well as the biexponential function does, the 4-μs time constant provides the best least squares fit for the comparison with the data.
 Fig. 18  (A) Comparison of kinetics traces measured at the bleach (1740 cm−1) and negative polaron (1760 cm−1) vibrational features of PCBM following photo-excitation of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend at 532 nm. The frequencies at which the kinetics are measured are indicated by the dotted lines in Fig. 17. (B) Comparison of the same kinetics traces plotted on a longer time axis. The kinetics traces in both panels have been scaled to demonstrate that the negative polaron decays synchronously with the bleach on the 100 μs and longer time scale after it has completed its growth in proportion to the bleach. Two fit curves are overlaid on the negative polaron kinetics in panel A that represent two models of the growth of this feature (see text). 
The vibrational features in the time-resolved IR spectra exhibit both time scales that have been reported in the literature for bimolecular charge recombination. The time scale on which the carbonyl bleach decays is similar to the power-independent decay kinetics reported by Durrant and coworkers for MDMO-PPV polymer blends with PCBM.89,90 The negative polaron peak grows in on a time scale that is similar to recombination kinetics that have been reported from transient photocurrent measurements.25 While it is possible that the appearance of these time scales is accidental, the likelihood that the reported optical and electrical measurements diverge due to different sensitivity to charge trapping is highly suggestive. Following this line of reasoning, we speculate that the growth of the negative polaron peak on the few microsecond time scale is a result of charge trapping in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend.
The influence of charge trapping on the vibrational characteristics of the carbonyl bond of PCBM can be understood in the following manner. Initially, electrons that transfer to the PCBM domains are mobile. As they move, the electrons modulate the local electric field in the domains because they carry a unit negative charge. We speculate that this rapidly varying electric field causes fast frequency fluctuations of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM molecules because the frequency of this bond is sensitive to the local electric field.141,153,154 The result is a fast free induction decay with a corresponding broad vibrational line shape. Thus, we expect that the negative polaron absorption is present in the 100 ps and 3 ns ultrafast transient IR spectra displayed in Fig. 8, but the line shape is too extended to be clearly distinguished from the polaron absorption of the polymer. However, as electrons become deeply trapped, they stop moving—resulting in a longer free induction decay with a narrower line shape. We expect that the appearance of the well defined peak at 1760 cm−1 on the microsecond time scale results directly from this charge trapping process.
Given that the assignment of the growth of the negative polaron peak to charge trapping is speculative, it is reasonable to describe experiments by which our assertions can be tested. One method to test this hypothesis would be to study the carbonyl stretch of PCBM in CN-MEH-PPV blends using IR spectroelectrochemistry. By tuning the Fermi energy near the conduction band edge with an applied potential, deep electron trap states can be selectively populated. The negative polaron peak should appear at 1760 cm−1. As the Fermi level is raised further by injection of more electrons, the added electrons will occupy states in the transport band. Electrons in these states are mobile and should dephase the carbonyl stretch of the surrounding molecules resulting in saturation of the negative polaron peak. But, the bleach peak should continue to increase in amplitude. These changes in the carbonyl vibrational features with continued increase in the Fermi energy should be easily detected in the IR spectra. We are in the process of performing these experiments which will be reported in a forthcoming publication.
5. Summary and outlook
This review describes our recent investigation of interfacial electron transfer, free-carrier formation, and bimolecular charge recombination and charge trapping in an organic photovoltaic (OPV) polymer blend using ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy. New chemical insight has been gained by probing the dynamics of OPV materials directly through their molecular vibrations. Interfacial dipoles that form due to spontaneous charge transfer at junctions between CN-MEH-PPV and PCBM induce a vibrational Stark shift in the carbonyl vibration of PCBM. This Stark shift provides a unique means to directly examine the diffusion of charge carriers through the spectral evolution of the transient vibrational features. Free carrier formation is surprisingly facile in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend despite the substantial Coulombic barriers arising from the mutual attraction of electrons and holes at the interfaces. The interfacial dipoles that give rise to the vibrational Stark shift reduce the effective Coulombic binding energy because the negative pole of the dipole resides in the PCBM phase and repels electrons from the interface. This observation suggests a new design criterion that may be used to maximize the open-circuit voltage of organic solar cells. In particular, recent evidence suggests that large free-energy differences for the interfacial electron transfer reaction are required to facilitate efficient free-carrier formation because (i) the interfacial dipole and (ii) the excess vibrational energy that facilitate escape from the Coulombic potential both depend on the energy difference. However, if the electron donor/acceptor interface can be engineered to create a substantial interfacial dipole via molecular self-assembly of polar species, then the need for a large free-energy difference may be reduced while still supporting efficient free-carrier formation.
Following free-carrier formation, bimolecular charge recombination and charge trapping occur on much longer time scales in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend. Bimolecular charge recombination is observed on the 75 μs time scale consistent with previously reported recombination kinetics measured in PPV-based OPV materials using optical spectroscopy. However, a distinct vibrational feature appears on the microsecond time scale that is assigned to trapped electrons. This time scale corresponds to the charge carrier lifetime measured in PPV-based OPV materials using transient photocurrent techniques. The transient vibrational spectra suggest that electrons in PPV-based OPV materials may become trapped before they recombine. On the basis of this assignment, two questions naturally arise. What is the chemical nature of the charge traps? Can the charge trapping rate and probability be controlled? It is likely that these questions will be answered as exciting research on charge-carrier dynamics in OPV materials continues into the future.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Camille and Henry Dreyfus New Faculty Awards Program, the Donors of the American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund (grant no. 45293 -G 10), the 3M Corporation Non-Tenured Faculty Award program, and National Science Foundation (grant no. DMR 0213-623) for support of this research.
References
C. Waldauf, P. Schilinsky, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 503 CrossRef .
C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. Alstrup, H. Spanggaard, K. Larsen and E. Kold, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 293 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinsky and C. Waldauf, Mater. Res. Soc. Bull., 2005, 30, 50 Search PubMed .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Guenes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, W. Schwinger, F. Schaeffler, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511, 587 CrossRef .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 014906-10 .
B. P. Rand, J. Xue, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124902-7 .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124903-9 .
K. Sivula, Z. T. Ball, N. Watanabe and J. M. J. Frechet, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 206 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, C. K. Luscombe, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13988 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mozer, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, M. Westerling, A. Pevrikas, R. Osterbacka and G. Juska, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 035217-10 .
A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, R. Osterbacka, M. Westerling and G. Juska, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 112104-3 .
A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Pivrikas, R. Osterbacka, G. Juska, L. Brassat and H. Bassler, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 035214-9 .
A. Pivrikas, G. Juska, A. J. Mozer, M. Scharber, K. Arlauskas, N. S. Sariciftci, H. Stubb and R. Osterbacka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 176806-4 .
G. Sliauzys, G. Juska, K. Arlauskas, A. Pivrikas, R. Osterbacka, M. Scharber, A. Mozer and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511, 224 CrossRef .
G. Juska, K. Arlauskas, J. Stuchlik and R. Osterbacka, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 1167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juska and R. Osterbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 677 Search PubMed .
G. Juska, G. Sliauzys, K. Genevicius, K. Arlauskas, A. Pivrikas, M. Scharber, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci and R. Osterbacka, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 115314-5 .
G. Dennler, A. J. Mozer, G. Juska, A. Pivrikas, R. Osterbacka, A. Fuchsbauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Organic Electronics, 2006, 7, 229 CrossRef CAS .
G. Juska, K. Arlauskas, G. Sliauzys, A. Pivrikas, A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, M. Scharber and R. Osterbacka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 222110-3 .
A. Pivrikas, R. Osterbacka, G. Juska, K. Arlauskas, M. Scharber, A. J. Mozer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nonlinear Opt. Quantum Opt., 2007, 37, 169 Search PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, P. W. M. Blom, C. Melzer, B. de Boer, J. K. J. van Duren and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 795 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mozer, P. Denk, M. C. Scharber, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, P. Wagner, L. Lutsen and D. vanderzande, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5235 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, Mater. Res. Soc. Bull., 2005, 30, 20 Search PubMed .
X.-M. Jiang, R. Osterbacka, O. Korovyanko, C. P. An, B. Horovitz, R. A. J. Janssen and Z. V. Vardeny, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 587 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. Sheng, M. Tong, S. Singh and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 75, 085206-7 .

          J. J. M. Halls and R. H. Friend, in Organic Photovoltaic Devices, ed. M. D. Archer and R. Hill, London,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, K. Pichler, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3120 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stubinger and W. Brutting, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 3632 CrossRef .
S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034907-5 .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom and J. Wildeman, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 045217-6 .
C. L. Yang, Z. K. Tang, W. K. Ge, J. N. Wang, Z. L. Zhang and X. Y. Jian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terao, H. Sasabe and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103515-3 .
D. Y. Kim, J. K. Grey and P. F. Barbara, Synth. Met., 2006, 165, 336 CrossRef .
J. K. Grey, D. Y. Kim, B. C. Norris, W. L. Miller and P. F. Barbara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25568 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu and P. F. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 6936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, D. Hu and P. F. Barbara, Science, 2000, 289, 1327 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Barbara, A. J. Gesquiere, S.-J. Park and Y. J. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 602 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huser, M. Yan and L. J. Rothberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 11187 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huser and M. Yan, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 144, 43 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Q. Nguyen and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5153 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Q. Nguyen, I. B. Martini, J. Liu and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 237 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Schwartz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 141 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Martini, A. D. Smith and B. J. Schwartz, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 035204-12 .
B. A. Gregg, S.-G. Chen and R. A. Cormier, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Arkhipov and H. Bassler, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1152 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bassler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Bredas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen, A. Dhanabalan, P. A. Van Hal and R. A. J. Jannsen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 709 CrossRef CAS .
C. Winder, G. Matt, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, N. S. Sariciftci and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403, 373 CrossRef .
M. Koppe, M. Scharber, C. Brabec, W. Duffy, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
D. Muhlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .
S. K. Lee, N. S. Cho, J. H. Kwak, K. S. Lim, H.-K. Shim, D.-H. Hwang and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511, 157 CrossRef .
M. Scharber, D. Muhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Proc. SPIE, 2006, 6334, 63340  
          K(10)
        .
F. B. Kooistra, J. Knol, F. Kastenberg, L. M. Popescu, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon and J. C. Hummelen, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 551 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, I.-W. Hwang, C. Yang, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Proc. SPIE, 2006, 6334, 63340D-11 .
C. A. Thomas, K. Zong, K. A. Abboud, P. J. Steel and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16440 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Kim, B. C. Thompson, N. Ananthakrishan, G. Padmanaban, S. Ramakrishnan and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3188 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson, Y.-G. Kim, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12714 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Galand, Y.-G. Kim, J. K. Mwaura, A. G. Jones, T. D. McCarley, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yang and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 9132 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Campos, A. Tontcheva, S. Gunes, G. Sonmez, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and F. Wudl, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4031 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 074506-6 .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 2816 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, E. C. P. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 085205-9 .
L. W. Barbour, M. Hegadorn and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24281 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Barbour, M. Hegadorn and J. B. Asbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15884 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Barbour, R. D. Pensack, M. Hegadorn, S. Arzhantsev and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3926 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, K. M. Banyas, L. W. Barbour and J. B. Asbury, Proc. SPIE, 2008, 7034, 703403-8 .
P. Hamm, M. Lim, W. F. DeGrado and R. M. Hochstrasser, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 1907 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, C. I. Wu and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2649 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 5583 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 4515 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill, D. Milliron, J. Schwartz and A. Kahn, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 166, 354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vazquez, W. Gao, F. Flores and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 041306-R .
R. Schlaf, B. A. Parkinson, P. A. Lee, K. W. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2984 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schlettwein, K. Hesse, N. E. Gruhn, P. A. Lee, K. W. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4791 CrossRef CAS .
W. Osikowicz, M. P. de Jong and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
A. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, M. A. Loi, N. S. Sariciftci and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3001 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Nogueira, I. Montanari, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and C. J. Brabec, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1567 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Heimer and E. J. Heilweil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10990 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, C. She and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8979 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, C. She and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7095 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson, X. Ai, D. Chen, D. L. Mohler and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14231 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, N. A. Anderson, E. Hao, A. Xin and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7376 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hao, N. A. Anderson, J. B. Asbury and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10191 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, Y. Wang, E. Hao, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2001, 27, 393 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, E. Hao, Y. Wang, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4545 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, E. Hao, Y.-Q. Wang and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11957 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, R. J. Ellingson, H. N. Ghosh, S. Ferrere, A. J. Nozik and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3110 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, Y.-Q. Wang and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6643 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Ghosh, J. B. Asbury, Y.-X. Weng and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10208 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. J. Nibbering, H. Fidder and E. Pines, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 337 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gabrielsson, F. Hartl, H. Zhang, J. R. Lindsay Smith, M. Towrie, A. J. Vlcek and P. N. Perutz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4253 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Rubstov, N. P. Redmore, R. M. Hochstrasser and M. J. Therien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2684 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Rubstov, Y. K. Kang, N. P. Redmore, R. M. Allen, J. Zheng, D. N. Beratan and M. J. Therien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5022 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Tivanski, C. Wang and G. C. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9051 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, R. A. J. Janssen, N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 49, 5781 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Miranda, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 64, 081201-R .
P. B. Miranda, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 619 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tong, C. X. Sheng, C. Yang, Z. V. Vardeny and Y. Pang, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 155211-8 .
N. A. Anderson, E. Hao, X. Ai, G. Hastings and T. Lian, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 347, 304 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Dhoot, D. S. Ginger, D. Beljonne, Z. Shuai and N. C. Greenham, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 360, 195 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Hwang, Q.-H. Xu, C. Soci, B. Chen, A. K.-Y. Jen, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 563 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gugel and K. Mullen, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 15346 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-H. Xu, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 245417-5 .
R. Pacios, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, T. Virgili, G. Lanzani and C. J. Brabec, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 8105 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Hwang, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4350 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zerza, C. J. Brabec, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 637 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moses, A. Dogariu and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 9373 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moses, A. Dogariu and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 316, 356 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraabel, J. C. Hummelen, D. Vacar, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 4267 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraabel, D. McBranch, N. S. Sariciftci, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 50, 18543 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraabel, C. H. Lee, D. McBranch, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 213, 389 CrossRef .
H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 3534 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wenger, B. S. Leigh, R. M. Villahermosa, H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, Science, 2005, 307, 99 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wenger, H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, Chimia, 2005, 59, 94 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Newton, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 438, 3 CrossRef CAS .
K. Weidemaier, H. L. Tavernier, S. F. Swallen and M. D. Fayer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 1887 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hayashi and S. Kato, J.
Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 3333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponce, H. B. Gray and J. R. Winkler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 8187 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Heitz and M. Maroncelli, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5852 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bittner, K.-D. Irrgang, G. Renger and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 11821 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ahrens, L. E. Sinks, B. Rybtchinski, W. Liu, B. A. Jones, J. M. Giaimo, A. V. Gusev, A. J. Goshe, D. M. Tiede and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8284 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Bradforth, R. Jimenez, F. van Mourik, R. van Grondelle and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16179 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Stevens, C. Silva, D. M. Russell and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 63, 165213-18 .
Q.-H. Xu, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 68, 174303-5 .
E. S. Park and S. G. Boxer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5800 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Suydam and S. G. Boxer, Biochemistry, 2003, 42, 12050 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Cao, J. Gao, D. Wang, G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1999, 99, 243 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Williams, J. Comput. Chem., 1988, 9, 745 CAS .
D. J. Skrovanek, P. C. Painter and M. M. Coleman, Macromolecules, 1986, 19, 699 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kuzmany, R. Pfeiffer, M. Hulman and C. Kramberger, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2004, 362, 2375 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wadayama, K. Aoshima, S. Kawano and A. Hatta, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58, 299 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Rice and Y. N. Garstein, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 53, 10764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chikamatsu, S. Nagamatsu, Y. Yoshida, K. Saito, K. Yase and K. Kikuchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203504-3 .
A. Dzwilewski, T. Wagberg and L. Edman, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 75, 075203-9 .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699 CrossRef CAS .
P. Langevin, Ann. Chem. Phys., 1903, 28, 289 Search PubMed .
T. la Cour Jansen and J. Knoester, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 044502-11 .
T. Hayashi, W. Zhuang and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 9747 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
Table Content:
Ryan D. Pensack	Ryan Pensack earned a bachelor’s degree in chemistry from Rutgers University in Newark, NJ in 2006. At Rutgers, he studied thermally and chemically-induced structural changes occurring in biologically relevant lipid systems using infrared spectroscopy. Currently he is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University. His research interests include examination of the molecular nature of charge traps in organic photovoltaic materials using two-dimensional infrared spectroelectrochemical techniques.
Kyle M. Banyas	Kyle Banyas earned a bachelor’s degree in chemistry at King’s College in Wilkes-Barre, PA in 2007. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Pennsylvania State University in the Department of Chemistry. His research interests include time resolved vibrational spectroscopy of materials to understand bimolecular charge recombination and charge trapping in terms of the underlying molecular structures.
John B. Asbury	John Asbury has been an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University since 2005. He earned a PhD degree in experimental physical chemistry with Tianquan Lian at Emory University in 2001 followed by post-doctoral work with Michael D. Fayer at Stanford University. His research interests include ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy of charge-carrier dynamics, spectroelectrochemical studies of defects and charge traps, and the influence of dielectric properties on charge-carrier dynamics in organic electronic materials.

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of two conjugated polymers and the electron-accepting fullerene, PCBM, that have been extensively studied in organic photovoltaic devices. MDMO-PPV is an amorphous polymer while RR-P3HT is semi-crystalline. The differences in the conformational order adopted by these polymers may strongly influence the charge-carrier dynamics of the corresponding organic photovoltaic devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of key processes leading to charge collection in organic solar cells. (1) Excitons that form from absorption of photons by the polymer must diffuse to an interface for charge separation to occur, usually by interfacial electron transfer. (2) Once electron transfer has occurred, the charge carriers are still bound to the interface by their mutual Coulombic attraction which can be more than ten-times the thermal energy available at room temperature. (3) Finally, charge carriers must diffuse to the electrodes of the device to enter the external circuit. Along the way, they may become trapped and/or recombine (process 3′) leading to reduction in the charge collection efficiency of the device.	 

 	Fig. 3  Diagrams of the beam and sample geometries used for the for (A) 2D IR and (B) visible pump IR probe experiments. These geometries eliminate non-resonant signals that frequently interfere with ultrafast vibrational spectroscopic studies. The symbols represent: etalon—tunable Fabry-Perot interference filter, T—optical delay between the pump and probe pulses, P—polarizer, MCT Array—mercury cadmium telluride multichannel infrared array detector.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Molecular structures of the conjugated polymer, CN-MEH-PPV, and the electron acceptor, PCBM, examined in the experiments reported here. (B) Comparison of the linear IR spectra of the 1:1 polymer blend of CN-MEH-PPV with PCBM compared with the spectrum of the pure polymer. The vibrational feature at 1740 cm−1 in the polymer blend corresponds to the carbonyl (CO) stretch of the methyl ester group of PCBM. The polymer has negligible absorption in this spectral region permitting the charge transfer dynamics in the blend to be investigated through the time evolution of the neutral bleach and negative polaron absorption of PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of visible pump IR probe spectra of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend following optical excitation at 550 nm at several time delays between the pump and probe pulses. The positive-going vibrational feature corresponds to the reduced neutral absorption (bleach) of the carbonyl stretch of the electron acceptor, PCBM. The best fit spectra used to quantify the CO stretch bleach are overlaid on the data.	 

 	Fig. 6  Integrated area of the carbonyl bleach of PCBM versus the corresponding time delay for the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend plotted on a linear time axis. Inset: time dependence of the bleach area of PCBM plotted over a longer time period on a logarithmic time axis. The three regions in the inset correspond to distinct kinetic processes: 1—ultrafast interfacial electron transfer from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM; 2—partial charge recombination due to back electron transfer to CN-MEH-PPV; and 3—a second interfacial electron transfer phase from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM arising from excitations that form throughout the polymer layer and must diffuse to the polymer/PCBM interface to transfer electrons. The fit curve is calculated from a kinetic model that incorporates these processes along with excited state relaxation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Graphical depiction of the kinetic model that was developed to describe the charge transfer processes occurring in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend. The numbers correlate processes in the Figure with the corresponding dynamics in the bleach area kinetics (see Fig. 6). From the kinetic model, we conclude that the second rise in the bleach area on the nanosecond time scale results from diffusion of excitations toward the interfaces. The time scale for this diffusion controlled process corresponds to the excited state lifetime decay of excitons in a pure CN-MEH-PPV film.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transient visible pump IR probe spectra collected at several time delays in the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend showing that the PCBM negative polaron has negligible contribution in this spectral region on the picosecond-to-nanosecond time scales. The transient IR spectra have been normalized to compare the evolution of the line shapes. The 10-μs transient spectrum was collected with a microsecond transient IR instrument. The linear IR spectrum is overlaid on the transient spectra for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Two-dimensional surface plot of the carbonyl bleach spectra of the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend versus the corresponding time delay. The horizontal axis represents the time delay on a logarithmic scale. The data indicate that the center frequency of the carbonyl bleach peak shifts to lower frequency and toward the equilibrium value of 1740 cm−1 indicated by the dotted line. The dashed line is a guide to the eye. (B) Plot of the carbonyl bleach center frequency versus corresponding time delay. The shift toward lower frequency highlighted in the circled region results from spatial motion of electrons that diffuse away from the PCBM domain interfaces following the primary interfacial electron transfer event (see text).	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison of linear IR spectra of CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend films with various polymer and PCBM content in the region of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM. Spectrum labels: PCBM—spectrum of a film of pure PCBM with no polymer content; 0.03:1 and 1:1—spectra of films with indicated mass ratios of CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM; PPV—spectrum of a pure CN-MEH-PPV film with no PCBM content. The spectrum of the 1-ps bleach from the visible pump IR probe data has been plotted for comparison. This comparison indicates that the addition of CN-MEH-PPV to the PCBM film perturbs the carbonyl stretch of PCBM molecules to higher frequency at the polymer:PCBM interface. As discussed in the text, the perturbation arises in part from a Stark shift as a result of partial charge redistribution at the interface.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the correlation of the carbonyl frequency with radial position in the PCBM domains. PCBM molecules near the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interfaces have higher frequency carbonyl stretch vibrations in comparison to molecules that reside in the bulk of the PCBM domains.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of an electrostatic model to estimate the electric field at the interfaces of the PCBM domains as a result of an interfacial dipole caused by partial charge-transfer from CN-MEH-PPV to PCBM. The PCBM domains are modeled as spheres surrounded by CN-MEH-PPV layers. Charge densities, σ+ and σ−, in the CN-MEH-PPV and PCBM phases, respectively, produce interfacial dipoles parallel to the interface normal. The other labeled quantities refer to the model that is developed in the text. The collective contribution of these dipoles causes surprisingly large electric fields near the interfaces of the domains. The analysis suggests that these large electric fields exist under steady-state conditions without photo-excitation of the polymer blend.	 


	(1)
dQ± = σ±dA = σ±R2± sin(ϕ)dθ dϕ

 		 
Ez = ∫ dz′ exp(−(z′−z0)2/2σ2)∫∫ dθ dϕ dEz(θ,ϕ,z0)	(2)

 	Fig. 13  Variation of the electric field resulting from the collective addition of the interfacial dipoles versus radial position within the PCBM domains. Surprisingly large electric fields form at the interfaces of the PCBM domains. The right axis displays the corresponding vibrational Stark shifts versus radial position. The calculation demonstrates that the frequency shift arising from the vibrational Stark effect is smaller than the blue-shift of the vibrational frequency of carbonyl bonds at the PCBM domain interfaces (see Fig. 8 and 9).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) 2D IR spectra of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM measured at 1, 3, and 10 ps time delays between the IR pump and probe pulses. (B) 1-Dimensional slices taken from the 2DIR spectra along the ωp frequency axis at an ωm frequency of 1740 cm−1. The linear IR spectrum of the sample is included for comparison. The data show that the dynamic line width of the carbonyl stretch does not increase appreciably with time. This observation indicates that the spectral evolution of the carbonyl bleach spectrum toward the equilibrium center frequency with increasing time delay (see Fig. 9) is not a result of spectral diffusion.	 

 	Fig. 15  This schematic illustration of the CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interface summarizes the physical model by which we interpret the time dependent frequency shift of the carbonyl bleach of PCBM (see Fig. 9). Following interfacial electron transfer from CN-MEH-PPV, the data suggest the electrons are able to escape the Coulombic binding energy of the holes surprisingly quickly. An estimate of 1–10 ps for the onset of this free-carrier formation process is obtained from the time evolution of the carbonyl bleach spectrum.	 
Vtot(r) = VC(r) + VE(r)	(3)
VC(r) = (1/4π〈ε〉ε0)(qnqp/r)	(4)
VE(r) = rnqnEnz + rpqpEpz.	(5)

 	Fig. 16  Potential energy versus electron—hole separation at CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM interfaces in the presence and absence of the electric field arising from the interfacial dipoles. The interfacial dipolar field reduces the effective Coulombic binding energy by nearly one tenth of an electron volt, which significantly aids the escape of electrons and holes from the interface on ultrafast time scales.	 

 	Fig. 17  Transient IR spectra of the CO stretch of PCBM measured with a microsecond transient IR instrument following photo-excitation of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend at 532 nm. The spectra display the formation of a distinct negative polaron feature at 1760 cm−1 on the microsecond time scale. The amplitude of this feature is negligible on ultrafast time scales (see Fig. 8) indicating that the negative polaron has little-to-no concentration immediately following the photo-excitation event.	 
S(t) = (1 −Ptr(t))n(t).	(6)

 	Fig. 18  (A) Comparison of kinetics traces measured at the bleach (1740 cm−1) and negative polaron (1760 cm−1) vibrational features of PCBM following photo-excitation of the 1:1 CN-MEH-PPV:PCBM polymer blend at 532 nm. The frequencies at which the kinetics are measured are indicated by the dotted lines in Fig. 17. (B) Comparison of the same kinetics traces plotted on a longer time axis. The kinetics traces in both panels have been scaled to demonstrate that the negative polaron decays synchronously with the bleach on the 100 μs and longer time scale after it has completed its growth in proportion to the bleach. Two fit curves are overlaid on the negative polaron kinetics in panel A that represent two models of the growth of this feature (see text).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
