Interfacial friction-induced electronic excitation mechanism for tribo-tunneling current generation   - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8MH01259H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8MH01259H
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1020-1026Interfacial friction-induced electronic excitation mechanism for tribo-tunneling current generation†

        
          
            Jun 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Keren 
            Jiang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lan 
            Nguyen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhi 
            Li
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Thundat
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, New York 14260-4200, USA. E-mail: jliu238@buffalo.edu; tgthunda@buffalo.edu
bDepartment of Chemical and Materials Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G2 V4, Canada
Received 
      5th October 2018
    , Accepted 4th February 2019First published on 4th February 2019AbstractDirect-current (d.c.) electricity generation using a moving Schottky contact is emerging as a new strategy for mechanical energy conversion. Here, we demonstrate the generation of d.c. tunneling current with a density of ∼35 A m−2 at a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) sliding system using micro-tips. The measured current densities were found to be two to three orders of magnitude higher than that observed with the conventional polymer-based triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs). The electromotive force ΔVs* for the tribo-tunneling transport comes from the dynamic electronic excitation at the frictional interface rather than from the electrostatically trapped surface charges as in the case of conventional TENGs. The strong electronic excitation can give rise to a non-equilibrium interfacial charge variation Δσm. Depending on the energy distribution of the excited electrons/holes, Δσm subsequently dissipates non-adiabatically into tunneling current and trapped surface charges, or adiabatically into heat. These fundamental results not only enhance our understanding of the triboelectric phenomenon, but also open up new paths for the development of next-generation mechanical energy harvesting and sensing techniques.

Conceptual insights
Over the last decade, triboelectricity, the appearance of electrical charges on contact, has been pursued as a basis for developing energy harvesting devices based on mechanical vibration/friction. Although the observed triboelectric potential based on polymer materials is very large, the generated current is extremely small because of the limitations imposed by displacement current. From the materials’ point of view, the outer electrons of the atoms are tightly bound and not free to move through the insulating material. We have overcome this electric current limitation by using tribo-tunneling of electrons based on metal–semiconductor frictional contacts. Compared to conventional triboelectric devices, the tunneling current density is two to three orders of magnitude higher and it is continuous and direct. Here we present experimental and theoretical investigations of the physics underlying the current generation and its dependence on material characteristics. This fundamental understanding of the tribo-tunneling will be important in exploring novel semiconductor materials as well as heterojunction structures for scaling and optimizing the concept for practical applications. In addition, this technique also shows promise for applications in sensing.

Understanding the carrier dynamics at a frictional interface is essential for developing novel mechanical energy conversion technologies.1–3 To date, the d.c. generation phenomenon has been observed in various metal–semiconductor moving systems (metal-MoS2 layers,4 metal-Si,5 graphene-Si,6 metal-conducting polymer (PPy),7 SnO2-PPy,8etc.), and different mechanisms have been proposed to explain the generation of high density currents. Unlike a conventional triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) that generates alternating current by dielectric displacement (a.c., J ∼ 0.01–0.1 A m−2), sliding metal–semiconductor frictional contact induces a strong localized electric field and produces high current density (d.c., J of the order of 10 A m−2) through quantum mechanical tunneling.4,5 In particular, it has been found that the electromotive force (emf, measured in volts) in a tribo-tunneling system is related to an electronic excitation process under non-equilibrium conditions, which cannot be explained by the electrostatics-based TENG theory.4,5 Though the triboelectric charge transfer phenomenon via contact electrification has been investigated for years, little is known about the electronic excitation due to frictional contact.1,9
Generally, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) in a conventional TENG is attributed to the separation of two dielectric materials (or a metal and a dielectric material) carrying opposite electrostatic charges.10–12 As illustrated in Fig. 1, when the two bodies in contact are separated horizontally, the induced image charges on the electrodes, positive on one electrode and negative on another, provide the emf for the current flow in the external circuit.4,5Fig. 1c and d show the corresponding situations as marked in Fig. 1a for the dielectric/dielectric and metal/dielectric system, respectively. In contrast, the increasing interfacial potential ΔVs* in the metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) sliding contact (Fig. 1b) shows very different features: (i) ΔVs* is excited at an intimately contacted M–S interface in the absence of changing contact area or separation distance (capacitance C remains constant), and (ii) the sustained d.c. output arises instantaneously irrespective of the sliding direction (Fig. 1e).4,5 However, the Voc is negligible when the two contact bodies are intimately contacted in conventional TENGs (Step 1 in the Fig. 1a): the positive/negative electrostatic charges are confined in a ‘two-dimensional’ interface cancelling each other, and therefore the electrodes are in isopotential.3
 Fig. 1  Schematics of the current and the voltage generation in (a) a conventional TENG and (b) a tribo-tunneling d.c. generator. (c and d) Show the corresponding situations as marked in (a) for the dielectric/dielectric and metal/dielectric system, respectively. Alternating-current (a.c.) electricity can be generated via contact electrification, charge induction and dielectric displacement current. (e) Shows the corresponding situations as marked in (b) for the M–I–S sliding system. Direct-current (d.c.) with high current density is generated by interfacial electronic excitation and quantum tunneling. 
For comparison, we first used Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) to investigate the triboelectric charging effect in conventional TENGs.13–15 In the AFM experiments, a p-type Si substrate (boron-doped, orientation 〈100〉, resistivity: 0.1–1 Ω cm) coated with an aluminum bottom electrode was used. First, a selected area was rubbed with a boron-doped diamond AFM tip, followed by a Peakforce tapping-KPFM scan on an enlarged area (Fig. 2a).14–17 In KPFM measurement, VCPD is expressed by:16,18 (1)where Vsample, Vtip, φtip, and φsample denote the sample surface potential, tip surface potential, tip work function, and sample work function, respectively. In particular, the work function of a non-metallic material surface may be expressed in the form of:19 φsample = (Ec − EF)bulk − eVs + χ − Δϕs,(2)where Ec, EF, and (Ec − EF)bulk represent a conduction band, Fermi energy level, and their difference in the bulk, respectively. Vs is the surface band bending due to the charged surface states, χ is the electron affinity, and Δϕs is the short-range surface electrical dipole (see Fig. S1 in the ESI† for details).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of the KPFM study of triboelectric charge accumulation. A contact mode scan is followed by Peakforce-KPFM characterization. The rubbed area is marked by a dashed square. Peakforce setpoint: 5 nN; Scan rate: 1 Hz; Boron-doped diamond conductive AFM probe resonance frequency f0 = 97 kHz, spring constant k = 5.4 N m−1. (b) Contact force F-dependent KPFM surface potential distribution. (c and e) Illustrate the principle of Peakforce tapping C-AFM and contact-C-AFM mode, respectively. (d and f) Show the tunneling current signal under Peakforce tapping mode (Peakforce = 300 nN) and contact mode (F = 300 nN), respectively. The tribo-tunneling current is only generated under continuous sliding. (g–j) External bias-dependent C-AFM current output with F = 500 nN. The Voc is determined to be 300–400 mV. 
As shown in Fig. 2b, the contrast of contact potential difference, VCPD, can be observed on the rubbed area, which is associated with the increased local surface charge density (Δσ). Considering the electrical routing in the experiment (from sample to tip), a larger φsample and hence a smaller Vs is predicted on the rubbed area, indicating positive charge (i.e. hole) accumulation at the native silicon oxide surface. As the contact force F increases, it can be seen that ΔVCPD of the rubbed area increases from ∼40 mV to ∼96 mV, which can be considered as due to the increased microscopic contact area between the tip and the substrate, and the enhanced charge transfer under compression between the tip and the substrate surface atoms.20,21 In dielectric material based TENGs, those trapped surface charges induce image charges on the bottom electrode, generating voltage when the contact materials are separated vertically in distance or horizontally in area (Fig. 1c and d).
We also investigated the characteristics of ΔVs*, which accounts for the tribo-tunneling current. Fig. 2d and f show the C-AFM tunneling current signal under Peakforce tapping mode (Fig. 2c) and contact mode (Fig. 2e), respectively. Under the Peakforce tapping mode, the AFM probe and samples are intermittently brought into contact while the tip is scanned across the sample off resonance at 1 kHz (the resonance frequency is ∼97 kHz), and with the feedback loop controlling the maximum force on the tip (Peak force) for each individual cycle (see Fig. S4 in the ESI†). It can be seen that C-AFM current is generated only under continuous sliding of the contact (Fig. 2f), indicating that a strong lateral interfacial atomic interaction is required for triggering the electronic excitation. It should be noted that the negative current direction here refers to the current flowing from the tip to the sample in the external circuit (i.e. the electron tunneling from the tip into the sample at the contact), which was ambiguous previously.5
We determined the ΔVs* of the tribo-tunneling current using a null method. In a d.c. generator system like a solar cell, the value of Voc can be determined by applying external bias to nullify the current output. Fig. 2g–j show the C-AFM current distribution with varying external bias Vbias (F = 500 nN). The Voc is estimated to be 300–400 mV when the current signal diminishes to ∼0. Notably, the value of ΔVs* is 3–4 times higher than that of the ΔVCPD under the same force (96 mV). The physical difference between ΔVs* and ΔVCPD is more evident from the microscopic experimental data (Fig. 3a), where a gold-coated spring connector with tip diameter ∼59 μm is used to control the contact force in the measurement. It can be seen that the sliding movement induces Voc of magnitude around 300–400 mV that immediately decays to zero under static conditions (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Macroscopic measurement setup. (b) Voc output in the macroscopic measurement. The time periods of frictional movements are marked as yellow. The contact force F = 0.5 N. (c) Current signal I at electrical load R = 100 kΩ, 1 MΩ and 10 MΩ. (d) Current density J and power density as a function of R. The data are fitted with eqn (S3) and (S4) in the ESI;† proposed energy band diagram of the contact system (e) under equilibrium, n-type Si, (f) under friction, n-type Si. (g) The comparison of charge density σ and short-circuit Jsc reported in the conventional TENGs and this work. Note: the σ refers to the dynamic, non-equilibrium interfacial excitation charge density in the tribo-tunneling systems, and the electrostatic, equilibrium surface charge density in the conventional TENGs, respectively. The references for the data points are marked in the brackets. 
The current density (J) and power density as a function of electric load R are collected under F = 0.5 N and shown in Fig. 3c. The short-circuit current Isc is measured to be ∼100 nA, which corresponds to Jsc ∼ 35 A m−2 considering a circular contact interface with a diameter of ∼50 μm (Fig. 3a). Here, the parameter fill factor (FF), defined as the ratio of the maximum power to the product of Voc and Isc in a solar cell, is adopted to characterize the quality of power generation in the tribo-tunneling system:22 FF = Pmax/(IscVoc),(3)Accordingly, the calculated FF is ∼0.23, and the lower value can be attributed to the large contact resistance of the point-plane interface. Previously, we have reported the Jsc of ∼2.5 A m−2 and the power density of ∼0.3 W m−2 in the MIS system by a multimeter probe with a tip diameter ∼1 mm, and FF of ∼0.34.5 Therefore, it is suggested that the reducing tip radius could enhance the d.c. density, which is in good agreement with our AFM results of the tribo-tunneling systems.4,5 However, the internal energy conversion efficiency may be influenced by the increased contact resistance in the sharp point contact.
We shall now discuss the mechanism of the ΔVs* generation in sliding MIS contacts. Neglecting the bulk defects within the thin oxide layer, from charge neutrality we can express the interfacial charge as:19,23 σm + σss + σsc = 0,(4)where σm, σss, and σsc denote the charge density at a metal surface, Si–SiOx interface and Si surface depletion layer (SCR), respectively (Fig. 3e). Empirically, the sign of σm depends on the relative potential values of the contact materials in the triboelectric series, which is described by different contact electrification theories such as electron transfer, ion transfer, and mass transfer.9 It is known from the KPFM results that σm < 0, which corresponds to electron transfer from the oxide surface to the metal, leaving excess electrons on the metal side and holes on the oxide surface. This is understandable when the metal Fermi-level EF is lower than the Eo of the oxide surface before contact.
Under frictional motion, atomic distance between the two contact materials may be “squeezed” periodically, considering the existence of microscopic nanogaps from surface roughness. At atomic level, periodically changing atomic distance is also expected by the “stick-slip” Prandtl–Tomlinson model.1,24 Consequently, electronic excitation of energetic electrons/holes to higher/lower energy distribution spectra may be induced, when the symmetry of interfacial electrostatic equilibrium is interrupted on and off.25 Here we assume a non-equilibrium charge density increase Δσ that can dissipate through (Fig. 3f): Δσm = Δσm,tunnel + Δσm,acc + Δσm,phonon,(5)where Δσm,tunnel, Δσm,acc, and Δσm,phonon denote the portion of Δσm dissipating into tunneling current, surface charge accumulation, and heat, respectively. Among the three terms, and Δσm,tunnel and Δσm,acc, are the results of non-adiabatic energy conversion into energetic carriers deviated from the Oppenheimer approximation.25 For the electrons with sufficient energy to overcome the Schottky barrier (marked as red in the energy distribution spectrum in Fig. 3f), they can pass through the thin oxide layer via quantum mechanical tunneling into the semiconductor side (“forward” tunneling), which corresponds to Δσm,tunnel. The ones with insufficient energy for tunneling, but enough energy for contact electrification (it also has an energy barrier as predicted by density function theory (DFT) calculations20) will be trapped at the surface states (Δσm,acc), or “back” tunneling into the metal side.9,26 The tribo-tunneling generator uses Δσm,tunnel as the d.c. source, of which the tunneling current I can be calculated by:25,27,28 (6)where d is the oxide thickness, Φ is the Schottky energy barrier height, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. α and β are parameters which are associated with surface state density and effective contact area.
In eqn (6), the first and second exponential components correspond to the exponential decayed probability of quantum tunneling as a function of forbidden region distance (one-dimensional)5 and the thermionic emission of hot carriers through the Schottky barrier, respectively. A similar situation can be found in catalytic reaction of molecules on the Schottky junctions.25,29,30 The chemically induced electronic excitation is manifested as exoelectron emission, surface chemiluminescence, and “hot electron” tunneling current25—in analogy with tribo-exoelectron,31,32 triboluminescence,33–35 and the tribo-tunneling current of the MIS junction in our case.
As the T increases, one would expect an enhanced thermionic emission from eqn (6) as well as a decreased semiconductor resistance, which is supposed to enhance the tribo-tunneling power output. On the other hand, we shall see that T may influence the thermodynamic equilibrium process: when the T is sufficiently high, the thermodynamic via energy level alignment between the two materials may be achieved much faster. If the charge transfer is associated with the extent of asymmetry of surface potential under dynamic motion (which has been proposed in many contact electrification studies1,9), one may expect a weaker electronic excitation.
As summarized in Fig. 3g, the J of tunneling d.c. is about 2–3 orders’ higher than dielectric a.c. density in conventional TENGs.11,36–41 Moreover, the current output exhibits a sustained feature under continuous or a relatively fast reciprocating sliding fashion, while the dielectric a.c. manifests itself as transient output as a function of time.3,5 In conventional TENGs, the maximum electrostatic Δσm achieved by external charge injection is ∼1 mC m−2, which approaches the dielectric air break down limitation.36–38 The quantification of Δσm in the tribo-tunneling transport may need further scrutiny into the space where the voltage is built up. If we assume the voltage is built up capacitively across the 1.6 nm surface oxide, the dynamic Δσm is estimated to be as high as 6.5 mC m−2, using Voc = 300 mV, d = 1.6 nm, ε = 3.9, and ε0 = 8.85 × 10−12 F m−1. A more plausible scenario is that the Voc is exerted on the Si depletion layer with the width on the order of 100 nm. Accordingly, Δσm would be on the order of 0.1–1 mC m−2.
The dependence of Voc signals on the Si doping type and resistivity are summarized in Fig. 4a. It can be seen that the tip-surface electronic interaction exhibits only a weak dependency on Si doping type or concentration, which may be related to the Fermi-level pinning at the Si surface with 1–2 nm native oxide.23,42–44 The Fermi-level pinning effect can be inferred from the KPFM measurement of the surface potential of Si surfaces where the surface energy level E0 remains relatively constant in all doping type/concentrations (Fig. 4b). Specifically, the thin native oxide on the Si surface plays an important role in generating the interfacial electronic excitation, which is reflected in the increasing Voc output as a function of increasing thickness of oxide deposited with atomic layer deposition (ALD).5 For comparison we removed the native oxide on a 0.1–1 Ω cm p-type Si by HF etch and measured the Voc signal (Fig. 4c). The measured Voc direction reverses right after the etching (∼5 min) and restores after 20 h of exposure to ambient air (oxide growth). This indicates that the electronic excitation induces opposite interfacial potential difference with and without surface native oxide (Fig. 4d). It is assumed that the removal of surface oxide may weaken the Fermi-level pinning effect, which in turn reverses the surface potential difference between the metal and the p-Si surface resulting in the opposite σm (>0, electron transfer from the metal to sample surface) (Fig. 4e and f). As a result, Δσm may be interpreted as increasing “hot” holes as illustrated in Fig. 3f. This is in good agreement with the observed Voc direction reversal in the combination of contact materials for the tribo-tunneling systems with different work functions.5,6
 Fig. 4  (a) Si doping type/concentration-dependent voltage output; the data sets are shifted in the y-axis for better visualization. (b) Experimentally measured and theoretically predicted surface potential difference. (c) Surface oxide removal procedures via HF etching. (d) Voc signal before, after etching (restored in air for 10 min and 21 h); proposed energy band diagram of the contact (c) under friction, p-type Si before etching, and (d) under friction, p-type Si after etching; energy band diagram of the p-type Si contact system (e) before and (f) after HF etching. 
Under Peakforce tapping modes, localized mechanical properties such as elastic modulus, deformation, and adhesion can be extracted from the force curve collected on each cycle (Fig. S4 in the ESI†). As shown in Fig. 5a–c, the reduced modulus and adhesion, and the increased deformation of the rubbed area indicates a possible Si–O surface bond rupture during the friction, increasing the surface state density and thus contributing to the Δσm. As proposed by Grunthaner et al.,45 the excited Si surface with native oxide may induce a large number of Si–O bond cleavages with stationary Si3+ defects (holes) and mobile O− defects (electrons). These charge carriers may quickly recombine releasing heat or take part in electron tunneling, which is in line with our above discussion from an energy band diagram point of view.
 Fig. 5  (a) DMT (Derjaguin–Muller–Toporov) modulus, (b) adhesion, and (c) deformation distribution of the pre-rubbed area under F = 200 nN. (d) Velocity-dependent voltage output. (e) Contact force F-dependent voltage output; the data sets in (d) and (e) are shifted in the y-axis for a better comparison. The zero voltage level for each set of data is marked as a yellow dashed line. (f) Plane–plane structure generator prototype based on ITO/Si sliding contact. The Si sample is driven by an automatic motor system; (g) cyclic testing result. The inset shows the zoomed-in signal as marked by the red frame. The periodic signal is due to the linear reciprocal movement of the motor. 
The Voc outputs for three different sliding speeds v (v1 > v2 > v3) are shown in Fig. 5d. It can be seen that the Voc under the slowest sliding shows a smaller value compared to the other two cases. When the sliding speed/frequency is fast enough (the case with v1), the Voc output becomes continuous, which is in line with the reported result under a circular sliding mode.5 Interestingly, the contact force dependent Voc measurements (Fig. 5e) show that the increasing potential difference is not affected by the contact force in a wide force range. Since the surface oxide is more rigid than organic materials, it may be less prone to a significant contact area change, which has been considered as a main reason why the apparent charge density of polymer material-based contacts is always enhanced with increasing force.9 It is also noted that the Voc signal when the two materials are separated is fluctuated (Fig. 5e). This resembles the Voc output of a conventional vertical mode TENG, where the voltage is now a result of work function difference as well as trapped triboelectric surface charges.11
It should be noted that multiple influences may be exerted by the tip feature: the large curvature of the contact points results in high local pressure and electric field, which can increase the interfacial atomic interaction and thus enhance the electronic interaction and current density output. However, we demonstrated that the plane–plane structure can also be used in designing the tribo-tunneling generator. As shown in Fig. 5f, a prototype was developed using ITO (indium tin oxide, Sigma-Aldrich, surface, resistivity 8–12 Ω sq−1)-coated glass as the moving metal part (Fig. 5f). Fig. 5g shows the Voc output of the generator, where the Si substrate was driven in frictional contact with the ITO glass, by a motor with the speed v of 3 cm s−1. It can be seen that the prototype can generate a sustained signal of 0.2–0.3 V for more than 1000 cycles. Therefore, various configurations such as tip arrays, plane–plane structures, and flexible materials may be used for designing the tribo-tunneling-based energy harvesting devices in the future applications.
Conclusions
In summary, it has been revealed that the tribo-tunneling transport in the metal–insulator–semiconductor sliding system is associated with the friction-induced electronic excitation at the interface. The driving force of the tribo-tunneling transport and dielectric displacement current transport in conventional TENGs is very different: conventional TENGs use electrostatically trapped surface charges as the voltage source, whereas the tribo-tunneling stems from the increasing interfacial charge Δσm under non-equilibrium conditions, which is subsequently dissipated into tunneling current, surface trapped charges, or heat, depending on the energy of the excited electrons/holes. It has been demonstrated that the strong electronic excitation in the MIS sliding system can generate high d.c. current density (J ∼ 35 A m−2), which is 2–3 orders’ higher than the dielectric a.c. output in conventional TENGs. These basic understandings provided a new direction for optimizing and developing next-generation mechanical energy conversion technologies based on MIS sliding systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the funding support from the RENEW (Research and Education in Energy, Environment and Water) Institute, University at Buffalo, SUNY, and the Canada Excellence Research Chair (CERC) program at the University of Alberta. The authors would also like to acknowledge Dr Ankur Goswami for the HF etching experiment.
Notes and references
J. Y. Park and M. Salmeron, Chem. Rev., 2013, 114, 677–711 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Chen and L. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2250–2282 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9533–9557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, A. Goswami, K. Jiang, F. Khan, S. Kim, R. McGee, Z. Li, Z. Hu, J. Lee and T. Thundat, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Miao, K. Jiang, F. Khan, A. Goswami, R. McGee, Z. Li, L. Nguyen, Z. Hu and J. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 320–326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, Y. Lu, S. Feng, Z. Hao and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1804398 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shao, J. Fang, H. Wang, L. Dai and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1461–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shao, J. Fang, H. Wang, H. Zhou and T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8267–8273 RSC .
J. Lowell and A. Rose-Innes, Adv. Phys., 1980, 29, 947–1023 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 447–458 RSC .
G. Zhu, Z.-H. Lin, Q. Jing, P. Bai, C. Pan, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 847–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niu, Y. Liu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6184–6193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Zi, G. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2528–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Yang, G. Zhu, S. Niu, Z.-H. Lin, Y. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1567–1572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhou, Y. Liu, G. Zhu, Z.-H. Lin, C. Pan, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2771–2776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Prashanthi, Z. Li, R. T. McGee, K. Ahadi and T. Thundat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 22772–22777 RSC .
S. Kim, T. Y. Kim, K. H. Lee, T.-H. Kim, F. A. Cimini, S. K. Kim, R. Hinchet, S.-W. Kim and C. Falconi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Sadewasser and T. Glatzel, Kelvin probe force microscopy, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
L. Kronik and Y. Shapira, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1999, 37, 1–206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Wang, H. Li, F. Wang, W. Yang and Y. Hu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 607–616 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Tcho, W.-G. Kim, S.-B. Jeon, S.-J. Park, B. J. Lee, H.-K. Bae, D. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, World Scientific,  2003 Search PubMed .
A. Cowley and S. Sze, J. Appl. Phys., 1965, 36, 3212–3220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshizawa and J. Israelachvili, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11300–11313 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nienhaus, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 45, 1–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lowell, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1979, 12, 1541 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Meyer, H. J. Hug and R. Bennewitz, Scanning probe microscopy: the lab on a tip, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, I. I. Nedrygailov, Y. K. Lee, C. Lee, H. Choi, J. S. Choi, C.-G. Choi and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1650–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gergen, H. Nienhaus, W. H. Weinberg and E. W. McFarland, Science, 2001, 294, 2521–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Park, H. Lee, J. R. Renzas, Y. Zhang and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2388–2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tagawa, M. Mori, N. Ohmae, M. Umeno and S. Takenobu, Tribol. Int., 1993, 26, 57–60 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabinowicz, Sci. Am., 1977, 236, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirai, T. Nakanishi, Y. Kitagawa, K. Fushimi, T. Seki, H. Ito and Y. Hasegawa, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 7277–7281 CrossRef .
A. J. Walton, Adv. Phys., 1977, 26, 887–948 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Camara, J. V. Escobar, J. R. Hird and S. J. Putterman, Nature, 2008, 455, 1089 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, T. Z. Bu, X. D. Yang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 625–633 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Dai, Z. Zhao, A. Wang, T. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 88 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin, C. Liu, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6720–6728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai, G. Zhu, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Q. Jing, W. Yang, J. Ma, G. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6361–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, S. Wang, S. Niu, L. Lin, Q. Jing, J. Yang, Z. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6599–6607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Xie, Q. Jing, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2226–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 717 CrossRef .
H. Hasegawa and H. Ohno, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1986, 4, 1130–1138 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mönch, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1999, 17, 1867–1876 CrossRef .
F. Grunthaner and P. Grunthaner, Mater. Sci. Rep., 1986, 1, 65–160 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8mh01259hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Conceptual insights
Over the last decade, triboelectricity, the appearance of electrical charges on contact, has been pursued as a basis for developing energy harvesting devices based on mechanical vibration/friction. Although the observed triboelectric potential based on polymer materials is very large, the generated current is extremely small because of the limitations imposed by displacement current. From the materials’ point of view, the outer electrons of the atoms are tightly bound and not free to move through the insulating material. We have overcome this electric current limitation by using tribo-tunneling of electrons based on metal–semiconductor frictional contacts. Compared to conventional triboelectric devices, the tunneling current density is two to three orders of magnitude higher and it is continuous and direct. Here we present experimental and theoretical investigations of the physics underlying the current generation and its dependence on material characteristics. This fundamental understanding of the tribo-tunneling will be important in exploring novel semiconductor materials as well as heterojunction structures for scaling and optimizing the concept for practical applications. In addition, this technique also shows promise for applications in sensing.


 	Fig. 1  Schematics of the current and the voltage generation in (a) a conventional TENG and (b) a tribo-tunneling d.c. generator. (c and d) Show the corresponding situations as marked in (a) for the dielectric/dielectric and metal/dielectric system, respectively. Alternating-current (a.c.) electricity can be generated via contact electrification, charge induction and dielectric displacement current. (e) Shows the corresponding situations as marked in (b) for the M–I–S sliding system. Direct-current (d.c.) with high current density is generated by interfacial electronic excitation and quantum tunneling.	 
	(1)
φsample = (Ec − EF)bulk − eVs + χ − Δϕs,	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of the KPFM study of triboelectric charge accumulation. A contact mode scan is followed by Peakforce-KPFM characterization. The rubbed area is marked by a dashed square. Peakforce setpoint: 5 nN; Scan rate: 1 Hz; Boron-doped diamond conductive AFM probe resonance frequency f0 = 97 kHz, spring constant k = 5.4 N m−1. (b) Contact force F-dependent KPFM surface potential distribution. (c and e) Illustrate the principle of Peakforce tapping C-AFM and contact-C-AFM mode, respectively. (d and f) Show the tunneling current signal under Peakforce tapping mode (Peakforce = 300 nN) and contact mode (F = 300 nN), respectively. The tribo-tunneling current is only generated under continuous sliding. (g–j) External bias-dependent C-AFM current output with F = 500 nN. The Voc is determined to be 300–400 mV.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Macroscopic measurement setup. (b) Voc output in the macroscopic measurement. The time periods of frictional movements are marked as yellow. The contact force F = 0.5 N. (c) Current signal I at electrical load R = 100 kΩ, 1 MΩ and 10 MΩ. (d) Current density J and power density as a function of R. The data are fitted with eqn (S3) and (S4) in the ESI;† proposed energy band diagram of the contact system (e) under equilibrium, n-type Si, (f) under friction, n-type Si. (g) The comparison of charge density σ and short-circuit Jsc reported in the conventional TENGs and this work. Note: the σ refers to the dynamic, non-equilibrium interfacial excitation charge density in the tribo-tunneling systems, and the electrostatic, equilibrium surface charge density in the conventional TENGs, respectively. The references for the data points are marked in the brackets.	 
FF = Pmax/(IscVoc),	(3)
σm + σss + σsc = 0,	(4)
Δσm = Δσm,tunnel + Δσm,acc + Δσm,phonon,	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Si doping type/concentration-dependent voltage output; the data sets are shifted in the y-axis for better visualization. (b) Experimentally measured and theoretically predicted surface potential difference. (c) Surface oxide removal procedures via HF etching. (d) Voc signal before, after etching (restored in air for 10 min and 21 h); proposed energy band diagram of the contact (c) under friction, p-type Si before etching, and (d) under friction, p-type Si after etching; energy band diagram of the p-type Si contact system (e) before and (f) after HF etching.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) DMT (Derjaguin–Muller–Toporov) modulus, (b) adhesion, and (c) deformation distribution of the pre-rubbed area under F = 200 nN. (d) Velocity-dependent voltage output. (e) Contact force F-dependent voltage output; the data sets in (d) and (e) are shifted in the y-axis for a better comparison. The zero voltage level for each set of data is marked as a yellow dashed line. (f) Plane–plane structure generator prototype based on ITO/Si sliding contact. The Si sample is driven by an automatic motor system; (g) cyclic testing result. The inset shows the zoomed-in signal as marked by the red frame. The periodic signal is due to the linear reciprocal movement of the motor.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8mh01259h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
