Perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR02543H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR02543H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8752-8780Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPerovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials†
Nurxat Nuraje*a and 
Kai Su*b
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: nurxat@mit.edu
bBASF Corporation, 500 White Plains Road, Tarrytown, NY 10591, USA. E-mail: kai.su@basf.com
Received 
16th May 2013
, Accepted 20th June 2013First published on 26th June 2013AbstractIn this review, the main concept of ferroelectricity of perovskite oxides and related materials at nanometer scale and existing difficulties in the synthesis of those nanocrystals are discussed. Important effects, such as depolarization field and size effect, on the existence of ferroelectricity in perovskite nanocrystals are deliberated. In the discussion of modeling works, different theoretical calculations are pinpointed focusing on their studies of lattice dynamics, phase transitions, new origin of ferroelectricity in nanostructures, etc. As the major part of this review, recent research progress in the facile synthesis, characterization and various applications of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials, such as BaTiO3, PbTiO3, PbZrO3, and BiFeO3, are also scrutinized. Perspectives concerning the future direction of ferroelectric nanomaterials research and its potential applications in renewable energy, etc., are presented. This review provides an overview in this area and guidance for further studies in perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials and their applications.
1 Introduction
1.1 Ferroelectricity
As one of the important topics in modern physics, ferroelectricity has attracted much attention since around 100 years ago.1 Pioneering studies on ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides occurred in the period of 1940s to 1960s, mainly on barium titanate, strontium titanate, lead titanate, etc.2–7 In those early times, scientists did very interesting studies io perovskite-type ferroelectrics. For example, in von Hippel's research, phase transitions at Curie temperatures for different perovskite-type ferroelectrics were clearly observed and an extremely high dielectric constant, more than 11000, was also observed in a material of “71% BaTiO3 and 29% SrTiO3”.2 Other materials were also thoroughly studied in the reference. Since then, ferroelectrics and their physics have been studied systematically through experimental physics, computer modeling, material synthesis, wet-chemical synthesis, etc. Since the early 1990s, the origin of ferroelectricity in macroscopic scale has been fundamentally understood.8 The industrial applications of ferroelectrics at that time include Multi-Layer Ceramic Capacitors (MLCCs), transducers and actuators, catalysts, etc.9,10 On the other hand, demanding advances in nano-science and technology revealed a so-called size effect in perovskite-type oxides.11–30 The size effect indicates the disappearance of ferroelectricity in perovskite-type oxides with dimensions smaller than a critical value. The reason why it happens is still uncertain in the scientific community, even though many hypotheses have been proposed. In this review, different hypotheses are discussed and readers can refer to original research studies for details. In addition, the influence of depolarization on the formation of ferroelectric perovskite oxides is explored. Some computational modeling progress in this area is also discussed. The second important part of the progress is the advancement of the synthesis and applications of ferroelectric perovskite oxide in nanometer scale. Important progress in this area, mainly from 1990s to now, is reviewed thoroughly.
In the first part of this review, we introduce important topics in the perovskite-type ferroelectrics at nanometer scale, including “Fundamentals of ferroelectricity” in Section 1.2, “Barium titanate, strontium titanate and their solid solutions in nanometer scale” in Section 1.3, “Size effects of ferroelectric nanomaterials properties” in Section 1.4 and “Computation and modeling works in perovskite-type ferroelectrics” in Section 1.5. The discussion of the fundamentals gives the readers a brief overview of ferroelectric physics, which can further guide the process design of the synthesis of ferroelectric perovskite oxides in both macroscopic and nanometer scales. Perovskite oxides are the major topic in ferroelectricity. Although extensive research works have been done on other types of ferroelectric materials, for example polymeric/organic ferroelectrics, they are not the major interest for this review. Readers can refer to other studies in this field.31–48
In the second part of this review, we present a detailed discussion on the synthesis, fabrication, characterization and applications of ferroelectric perovskite oxides. As a whole account, this review summarizes the major progress in the field of ferroelectric perovskite-type oxides in nanometer scale and provides guidance for further research in this area.
1.2 Fundamentals of ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides
Ferroelectric materials exhibit a spontaneous dipole moment; their orientations can be switched by the application of an external electrical field, i.e., the coercive field. In a typical ferroelectric perovskite oxide, a phase transition from a cubic phase at a higher temperature to a tetragonal phase at a lower temperature is usually observed. This transition point is called the Curie temperature, Tc. Scheme 1 shows the lattice units of barium titanate, one of the most widely studied ferroelectric perovskite oxides, in both cubic (paraelectric) and tetragonal (ferroelectric) phases. The cubic phase, Scheme 1(a), exhibits an induced polarization, which returns to zero when the external field is removed; while the tetragonal phases retain a spontaneous polarization, the two variants, Scheme 1(b) and (c), have a 180° difference in direction due to the off-center position of the titanium ion. Because of the distinctive physics of ferroelectric perovskite oxides, they have been attracting extensive research interest in the fields of high-K materials, electromechanical transducers, and ferroelectric random access memories, or FeRAM.9,49–52 The first observation of ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides occurred in the 1940s.2 The perovskite oxides have the chemical formula ABO3. In the case of BaTiO3, as shown in Scheme 1(a), “A” atoms or barium are located at the corner positions, “B” atom or titanium is located at the body center position and oxygen atoms are located at the face-centered position. With the application of the coercive field, the “B” atom moves off-center according to the direction of the external field. Because of the relatively small atom size and high charge of Ti4+, the atom off-center effect can store a large amount of potential energy. This is a microscopic view of a capacitor in a lattice. According to electronic physics, the capacitance of the bulk cubic barium titanate is given by  where C is the capacitance; A is the area of the face of the barium titanate cube, εr is the relative static permittivity, or dielectric constant, of barium titanate; ε0 is the dielectric constant of the air (ε0 ≈ 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1); and d is the edge length of the barium titanate cube. Therefore, barium titanate usually has a very large dielectric constant.2,9,30
 Scheme 1  Lattice units of barium titanate in both cubic, paraelectric (a), and tetragonal, ferroelectric (b and c), phases. The two polarization variants (b) and (c) have 180° difference in polarization direction due to the off-center position of the Ti4+. In (b) the polarization is down and in (c) it is up. 
In addition to the high dielectric constant, phase transitions in ferroelectric perovskite oxide materials are also interesting. Using barium titanate and strontium titanate as examples, the phase transitions are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Phase transitions in ferroelectric barium titanate and strontium titanate26,53




Ferroelectricity
Ferroelectric
Paraelectric




Phase transformation




BaTiO3
<130 °C (Curie temperature)
130–1432 °C


SrTiO3
<−168 °C (Curie temperature)
>−168 °C




Table 1 summarizes the cubic–tetragonal phase transitions of perovskite oxides barium titanate and strontium titanate.26,53 The Curie temperatures for barium titanate and strontium titanate are ∼130 °C and −168 °C, respectively. Since the tetragonal phase is ferroelectric below the Curie temperature, barium titanate is ferroelectric at room temperature, while strontium titanate is paraelectric at room temperature.
Another interesting phenomenon of ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides is the giant dielectric constant at its Curie temperature. As early as 1940s, von Hippel discovered the giant dielectric constant effect in barium titanate, strontium titanate, 75% BaTiO3-25% SrTiO3 and 71% BaTiO3–29% SrTiO3 at their Curie temperatures. Furthermore, by tuning the ratio between barium titanate and strontium titanate, the Curie temperature can be changed to room temperature, which makes the material a high-K material at room temperature.54–59 Su et al. recently published a synthesis process for solid solutions of barium titanate and strontium titanate with different Ba/Sr molar ratios. The characteristics of this material will be further discussed in Section 1.3.
Besides barium titanate and strontium titanate, other perovskite oxides include BaZrO3, PbTiO3, PbZrO3, Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3, LiNbO3, CaTiO3, etc.54,60–71
1.3 Barium titanate, strontium titanate and their solid solutions in nanometer scale
Barium titanate (BaTiO3, BTO) and strontium titanate (SrTiO3, STO) are among the most widely studied ferroelectric perovskite oxides. The Tc of BTO is ∼400 K; and ∼105 K for STO. Thus, at room temperature, BTO is ferroelectric and STO is paraelectric. Barium–strontium titanate (BaxSr1−xTiO3, BST) refers to a series of solid solutions of BTO and STO. The ferroelectric properties of BSTs can be optimized by adjusting the molar ratio, x. With the current rapid advances in nanoscience, BTO, STO and BST crystals in nanometer scale with high quality and low defects are highly desirable systems for fundamental as well as technological investigations.
In the past, most synthetic procedures for the preparation of perovskite crystals included high temperature (∼1000 °C) sintering followed by annealing. Recently, extensive efforts have been focused on the establishment of moderate reaction conditions, especially lowering the synthesis temperature for high-quality nanocrystals.21,28,61,72–81 Various methods for the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals have been developed, including co-precipitation,22,82 sintering of organometallic precursors,83 hydrothermal and solvothermal methods,14,61,76,77,84,85 sol–gel process,72,86 and procedures mediated by molten composite-hydroxide, etc.81 Recent interest in nanoscience led to extensive efforts focusing on obtaining BTO and STO nanocrystals based on the understanding gained from bulk crystals.49,87 The synthesis of BST nanocrystals with systematic composition variation has not been reported.
There are special issues in preparing ferroelectric nanocrystals due to their very high surface to volume ratio. The impurity ions on the surface of the nanostructures may form a depolarization field preventing the growth of the tetragonal phase.28,49,88,89 The tetragonal polymorph was usually obtained upon cooling the products to room temperature after sintering at ∼1000 °C. Although approaches with the trend towards low-temperature synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals have been developed, most of the synthetic temperatures were higher than the Curie temperature (∼130 °C) of BTO.61,77,81 One recent room temperature synthesis of ferroelectric nanocrystals with diameters from 6 to 12 nm using a bolaamphiphilic peptide ring as the template was discussed.28 The peptide ring at the equatorial position prevented the approach of impurity ions to the particle surface from the lateral directions providing an asymmetric environment conducive for the growth of the tetragonal polymorph. A fungus-mediated biological route toward the synthesis of tetragonal barium titanate nanoparticles of sub-10 nm dimensions under ambient conditions was also reported.79 Most recently, a bio-inspired process has been applied for the room-temperature synthesis of BTO from a bimetallic alkoxide precursor.80 Nonaqueous approaches have also been developed to synthesize nanocrystalline BTO, STO, and Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3 mixed-metal oxide using elemental alkaline earth metals as starting materials.61,77 The resulting BTO and BST nanocrystals were found to be cubic.58 Based on a reaction between a metallic salt and a metallic oxide, nanometer-sized BTO and Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3 have also been synthesized in a solution of composite-hydroxide eutectic at ∼200 °C.81 One reverse micelle route performed on a bench top at 80 °C gives high-quality nanocrystalline BSTs with variable compositions leading directly to nanocrystals with giant dielectric constant.30 This finding is significant in providing, through a readily accessible synthesis route, novel particles with sizes down to the 10 nm level for nanoelectronics.
BTO/STO artificial superlattices in thin films have been fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on many substrates.90 The PLD method can be used to fabricate BTO/STO superlattices with stacking periodicity varying from 1:1 to 125:125. In X-ray diffraction (XRD), the BTO/STO superlattices showed both BTO and STO characteristic peaks, while BST solid solutions from the solvothermal method77 and our present system only showed characteristic peaks for the BST nanocrystals, indicating the atomically mixed nature of the Ba2+ and Sr2+ sites.
1.4 Size effects of ferroelectric nanomaterials properties
As we discussed previously, perovskite oxides, barium titanate, strontium titanate and their solid solutions, are of critical importance for both fundamental and technical studies in the subject of high-K materials. Extensive efforts have been made to develop efficient methods for the synthesis of high-quality ferroelectric perovskite nanocrystals (Section 2). These developments were primarily based on early works in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The landmark reports include a treatise in 1946 by von Hippel and coworkers illustrating the origin of a remarkable dielectric behavior and higher values of polarization than those of titanium dioxide observed in bulk titanates.2 The then “new” mechanism, “In the ionic crystal lattices dipole moments are created by the displacing of ions from their equilibrium positions”, is now widely accepted as the origin of the high values of dielectric constant. In 1951, Matthias discussed, in his review paper, the relationship between the ferroelectricity and the phase transitions in perovskite type titanates.3 In barium titanate, for example, a paraelectric cubic structure form is stable above its Curie temperature, 130 °C, whereas a tetragonal ferroelectric structure form takes over at the temperature range of 0 to 130 °C. The tetragonal polymorph is decisively important for the spontaneous polarization by a distortion of titanium ions from the centrosymmetric to an asymmetric position within the TiO6 octahedra.8–10,49,91 Although a wide variety of synthetic methods have been reported for titanates, there are two crucial issues with regard to the development of their fabrication: (1) the size effect of titanates in the nanometer scale; and (2) synthesis conditions, especially the synthesis temperature.14,20–22,27,57,61,72–86,92–118
The first crucial issue is the size effect of titanates in nanometer regime. High-quality titanate nanocrystals are required for the next generation of electronics and semiconducting industry. The paraelectric cubic barium titanate crystal lattice belongs to the centrosymmetric Pm3m space group, whereas the ferroelectric tetragonal one belongs to the non-centrosymmetric P4mm space group (lattice units c > a: c = 4.036 Å; a = 3.992 Å).72 The ratio of “c/a” is defined as “tetragonality”. For bulk ferroelectric barium titanate crystals, the tetragonality is usually measured by techniques including X-ray diffraction (XRD), neutron powder diffraction or Raman spectroscopy.58,119,120 For example, in XRD, the peaks for lattice indices 200 and 002 are usually distinct with observable splitting. With the decrease in the particle size, a diminishing of ferroelectricity or tetragonality has been observed in previously synthesized barium titanate nanoparticles. As shown in Fig. 1, the critical size for the disappearance of ferroelectricity was around 30 nm. The origin for the size effect is still not established, although two main reasons were suggested: (1) it is the intrinsic nature of the nanoparticles smaller than the critical size; (2) the impurity surface ions form a local depolarization field preventing the formation of the tetragonal phase. Recently, we observed the ferroelectric tetragonal phase in barium titanate nanocrystals with particle size as small as 6 nm.28 This finding provided the evidence that the diminishing of ferroelectricity in previous reported studies may not be inherent to the system. Special techniques, including ultraviolet Raman spectroscopy and the atomic pair distribution function (PDF) technique, have been developed; they could be very useful as methods to further substantiate the ferroelectricity observed in our barium titanate nanocrystals.120
 Fig. 1  Size effects in barium titanate nanoparticles. The change of particle size of barium titanate with its lattice axial ratio (a) and with lattice constant (b).26 Reproduced with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
Additional important issues include the synthesis temperature. Lower synthesis temperature is preferred and the final titanate product should be the tetragonal polymorph. For barium titanate, the tetragonal polymorph is thermodynamically stable at room temperature. However, the synthesis approaches at low temperature usually result in the formation of the cubic polymorph. A sintering process, at around 1000 °C, followed by annealing through the Curie temperature, was requisite for obtaining the tetragonal polymorph. The high-temperature sintering process not only is energy-consuming but results in agglomerations, which deteriorate the size distribution of the final products. For crystals in nanometer scale, the agglomeration is a more serious concern with regard to the particle distribution and size level. Previously, various synthesis methods have been developed, including co-precipitation,22,82 sintering of coordinate precursors,83 hydrothermal and solvothermal methods,14,61,76,77,84,85 sol–gel process,72,86 liquid–solid–solution (LSS) phase transfer,117 seed-mediated growth in aqueous system,121 and procedures mediated by molten composite-hydroxide.81 In co-precipitation, sintering of coordinate precursors and sol–gel processes using titanium alkoxides and barium salts, organic capping reagents were usually employed to coordinate the metal ion or stabilize the particles against agglomeration. Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods involved high-pressure approaches by using titanium alkoxide or oxide gels as the precursor and barium salt or hydroxide as the barium source.72 The procedures mediated by molten composite-hydroxide avoided the use of organic capping reagents and were based on a reaction between a metallic salt and a metallic oxide in a solution of molten mixed potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide eutectic at ∼200 °C.81
In addition to the efforts of synthesizing titanates by using traditional chemical methods, biomimetic methods provided an environmentally benign alternative.28,79,80 In 2006, we reported our “Room temperature synthesis of ferroelectric barium titanate nanoparticles using peptide nanorings as templates”. Later in that year, a vapor-diffusion sol–gel route,80 and a fungus-mediated approach,79 were also reported as room-temperature syntheses of barium titanate under biomimetic or bioinspired conditions.
1.5 Computational modeling in perovskite-type ferroelectrics
First-principles computational methods have been extensively used in the study of ferroelectric perovskite-type oxides.122,123 These has greatly expanded our theoretical understanding of this important class of materials. Major focuses of the modeling work have been on their lattice dynamics, phase transitions, dielectric and piezoelectric properties, and the study of defects and surfaces. Since the 1990s, when nanoscience emerged, attention has been increasingly focused on the crystal structure, phase transition and size effect on ferroelectricity of perovskite-type oxides.124 Those modeling studies on materials at nanometer scale usually use several experimental techniques, for example X-ray diffraction, and a calculation model, for example Rietveld or pair distribution function (PDF), to simulate the experimental result.58,124
Important studies include a paper from Fu and Bellaiche.87 In this paper, the authors investigated, from first principles, the ferroelectric properties of BaTiO3 colloidal nanoparticles—and, in particular, to answer whether there is ferroelectricity in ferroelectric nanoparticles and how these particles respond to applied electric fields.87 In addition, they also developed a first-principles derived effective-Hamiltonian approach coupled with Monte Carlo simulations. The effective Hamiltonians of previous works, which are derived from first principles and possess a comparable accuracy, have been successfully applied to many ferroelectric materials, including simple BaTiO3, PbTiO3, and KNbO3 systems, and complex Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 and Pb(Sc,Nb)O3 solid solutions. Based on the calculations, it was found that (i) large ferroelectric off-center displacements exist in very small (<5 nm) dots. This result solves a long-standing puzzling question in experiments, namely, whether there exists ferroelectricity in colloidal ferroelectric dots under zero field. This discovery also opens a possibility of tremendous increase in ferroelectric-memory density. (ii) Ferroelectric displacements in dots exhibit an unusual and hitherto unknown vortex pattern. This pattern is found to cause rather peculiar field-induced polarization responses. (iii) The ferroelectric instability in dots is found to be robust against the organic capping materials. (iv) The poling field is predicted to decrease drastically with increasing size, which is important for practical controls of FE nanostructures by use of external electric fields. (v) The polarization responses of FE dots at stage II are found to be strongly nonlinear, while the electromechanical responses in dots are found to be remarkably smaller than those in the bulk.87
The example of pioneer modeling works opened a door and provided theoretical endorsement for chemists to synthesize ferroelectric perovskite oxides in nanoscale. Accordingly, many studies have reported successful syntheses of ferroelectric nanomaterials since 2006.28,79
The combination of experimental techniques and modeling was used for the crystal structure and phase transition (paraelectric–ferroelectric) studies.58,124 In Smith's paper, it was found that BaTiO3 nanoparticles underwent a cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition over a wide temperature range, in contrast to the sharp transition found in the bulk material. The XRD data show that the tetragonal metric was reduced from the bulk value with decreasing size, but particles as small as 26 nm remain in the tetragonal phase until near the bulk transition temperature. By using a combination of Rietveld and PDF analysis of synchrotron X-ray diffraction data, they established a trend of increasing distortion in Ba–Ti distances and titanium off-centering with decreasing particle size. It was concluded that although the smaller particles have a greater distortion, a loss of coherence relative to the bulk material is responsible for decreased c/a values. These results significantly contrast with the accepted wisdom that BaTiO3 becomes less distorted for smaller particle sizes.
In Petkov's paper, the atomic arrangement in nanocrystalline BaxSr1−xTiO3 (x = 1, 0.5, 0) was studied by synchrotron radiation scattering experiments and Rietveld and atomic PDF techniques. The materials were found to possess an atomic arrangement well defined over 2–2.5 nm distances and resembling the one occurring in the crystalline perovskites. Although the structural coherence length in the nanostructured materials is greatly reduced, their structure still may be described in terms of a repetitive unit cell containing only a few atoms. SrTiO3 and Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3 possessed atomic arrangements that were cubic type at both short and longer range interatomic distances. The local symmetry with nanocrystalline BaTiO3 was tetragonal but the slight tetragonal distortions seemed to average out and the structure of the material was better described in terms of a cubic-like ordering at longer range distances. That is presumably the reason nanocrystalline BaTiO3, similarly to SrTiO3 and Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3, does not show spontaneous polarization at room temperature.58
Those pioneer modeling works are very important for both fundamental ferroelectricity at nanometer scale and applications for electronic industry. Using the Multi-Layer Ceramic Capacitor (MLCC) industry as an example, the particle size of the MLCC materials is currently larger than 1 μm. The progress in miniaturization of particle size depends on the smallest particle size which can be the critical size of the ferroelectricity. If the modeling work suggests the disappearance of ferroelectricity in nanometer scale occurs at 40 nm, then that may be the smallest size for further development of MLCCs.
2 Synthesis methods of ferroelectric nanomaterials
Over the last decade, nanomaterials have received extensive studies from the scientific and engineering viewpoints. They exhibit different properties from those of bulk materials due to their small size and large surface-to-volume ratios, and become promising candidates for nanometer scale electronic, optical, and mechanical devices. In the past, ceramic methodology was usually utilized to produce perovskite oxides. The individual metal oxide components or their precursors are stoichiometrically mixed and heated together to form perovskite oxides. Since it requires long diffusion distances and high temperatures, the drawbacks of this method include poorly-controlled crystal morphology, grain size, and grain shape of the final material. Therefore, various other synthetic methods for perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials have been developed.27,72,125 The techniques include high-temperature sintering,75,83 sol–gel technique,86,125,126 hydrothermal synthesis,14,73,76,84,85,121,127,128 solvothermal synthesis,58,61,129 emulsion precipitation method,130,131 reverse-microemulsion,131 electrospinning method,118 supercritical fluids,116 nanotubes/template,28,126,132 sol precipitation,127,133,134 pyrolysis and decomposition of bimetallic alkoxide precursors in the presence of coordinating ligands,72,73 liquid–solid–solution (LSS) phase transfer,117 composite-hydroxide-mediated approach,81 bioinspired synthesis methods,79,135 etc. In this review, we introduce the most common techniques for synthesis of perovskite nanomaterials, and discuss the differences between them.
2.1 Ceramic methods
The ceramic method is a high-temperature solid-state reaction. In this method, to synthesize ABO3 perovskite materials, near-stoichiometric ratios of A- and B-containing precursors are sintered in a crucible at temperatures above the eutectic point of the binary system. The final products of this method are subject to parameters such as particle size, morphology, purity, and chemical composition of the precursors since the parameters influence the atomic diffusion during the solid state reaction. The ceramic method cannot provide control over the oxide grain size at the nanometer scale, with grains typically >1 μm, due to the absence of control of nucleation and growth. The method is usually applied to the synthesis of perovskite BiFeO3 powders.136,137 Recently, Mao, et al.75 investigated the fabrication of BaTiO3 nanomaterials in the presence of NaCl and a nonionic surfactant. Using this method, BaTiO3 nanowires were obtained having diameters from 50 to 80 nm and an aspect ratio larger than 25, and also SrTiO3 nanocubes with a mean edge length of 80 nm.
2.2 Sol–gel/sol-precipitation synthesis
In this wet chemical method,138–141 precursors including metal oxides and metal chlorides form a colloid system through undergoing hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions, which can be accelerated by an acid or base. After the reactions, the colloid system consists of solid particles from 1 nm to 1 μm dispersed in a solvent. When temperature increases, the particles precipitate and solvent evaporates. This method produces variable grain sizes ranging from tens of nanometers to a few microns. However, the grain size usually increases with sintering. The ideal synthetic pathway for these perovskite nanomaterials is to obtain the appropriate grain size, shape, and crystallinity in the absence of an additional sintering step. Modified sol–gel techniques were developed to synthesise barium titanate nanoparticles.72,73 In these techniques, hydrolysis of metal alkoxide precursors was performed with the aid of hydrogen peroxide at a temperature of 100 °C and oleic acid was applied as a passivating ligand. Crystalline nanoparticles between 4 and 12 nm with the cubic phase were obtained by adjusting experimental parameters, such as the BaTi(OR)6/oleic acid ratio and the amount of peroxide solution. Spherical BaTiO3 nanoparticles between 40 and 250 nm were obtained through another modified sol–gel method.142 In this technique, mixtures of titanyl acylate with barium acetate formed a gel in the aqueous solution of acetic acid. Addition of potassium hydroxide (KOH) further catalyzed the formation of BaTiO3. Cubic crystalline structure of BaTiO3 powder with a particle size of 40–250 nm formed at 45 °C. The cubic crystalline structure of barium titanate particles transformed to a tetragonal structure upon heating to 1000 °C for 1 hour. BaZrO3 nanoparticles with sizes in the range of 30–40 nm were prepared by a sol–gel process.143 Sol–gel methods were also utilized to synthesize BiFeO3 nanomaterials.144–147
The sol-precipitation process is similar to the sol–gel process.127,133 The differences of strong alkaline conditions and the control of the reaction temperature lead to formation of crystalline perovskite nanomaterials at low temperature (Fig. 2). However, in the sol–gel process, amorphous gel is further crystallized at high temperature, e.g. 600–700 °C. Without any post-treatment, a one-step sol-precipitation method was applied to produce cubic phase barium titanate nanoparticles with an average diameter of 20 nm at 80 °C for 5 hours.127 The BaTiO3 nanoparticles formed under strong alkaline conditions and showed no aggregation. The same method was applied to produce strontium titanate nanoparticles of 40–60 nm in size.133
 Fig. 2  Flow charts for SrTiO3 synthesis. (a) Sol–gel process, (b) sol-precipitation.133 Reprinted with permission from Springer, Copyright © Springer. 
2.3 Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis
The hydrothermal method,128 also called the autoclave method, is similar to the solvothermal method. The only difference is that the precursor solution for a hydrothermal method is usually an aqueous medium, while that for a solvothermal method is usually an organic medium. They are very popular methods for synthesizing perovskite nanomaterials, because the synergetic effects from solvent, temperature, and pressure can offer stable final products and prevent the formation of unwanted compounds. Hydrothermal synthesis is also used to prepare BaTiO3,115,148 BiFeO3,149,150 Ba1−xSrxTiO3,151–153 SrTiO3,115,154–156 PbTiO3,157–162 and PbZr1−xTixO3 nanomaterials.163–166 A composite system of SrTiO3/BiFeO3 was synthesized via the hydrothermal synthesis method and investigated for photocatalytic activities.167 In this synthesis, BiFeO3 was firstly sonicated in ethanol and added to a HNO3/H2O/CH3CH2OH solution containing TiO2 (sol) and aqueous Sr2+. NaOH was then added to the solution to slowly precipitate Sr2+ at pH 13. The filtrate was heated to 240 °C under hydrothermal conditions to crystallize the SrTiO3. The particle sizes/morphologies, optical absorption, and photocatalytic properties were studied. The hydrothermal synthesis was reported to fabricate lead titanate,158,159 and lead zirconate titanate (PZT) powders with acicular morphology.157,159,163,168 The phase composition and morphology of PZT particles in the method were dependent on the tetramethylammonium hydroxide pentahydrate (TMAH) concentration as shown in Fig. 3.168 At high TMAH concentration, cubic-shaped PZT were formed mainly via a dissolution–precipitation process. At lower TMAH concentration, the acicular shape was preserved, resulting in the PZT powder with acicular morphology.
 Fig. 3  Proposed PZT particle formation mechanism under hydrothermal conditions using TMAH as an organic mineralizer.168 Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, Copyright © Elsevier. 
Single crystalline tetragonal PZT nanorods with diameters of 150–175 nm and lengths of 1–1.6 μm were fabricated in the addition of polymers such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polyacrylic acid (PAA).163 Hydrothermal reaction was conducted at 200 °C for 12 hours.
Bao et al.153 reported the controlled synthesis of barium titanate nanostructures using Na2Ti3O7 nanotubes and nanowires as synthetic precursors through the autoclave method. In this method, they successfully synthesized BaTiO3 nanoparticles with various morphologies, including nanowires, nanosheets, nanocubes, hexagonal nanoparticles, nanorods, starfish-like nanostructures and sword-like nanostructures. It was found that the shape of the various BaTiO3 products was dependent on the concentration of Ba(OH)2, the temperature and the nature of the precursors (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  TEM and HRTEM images of BaTiO3 nanostructures prepared at different conditions from Na2Ti3O7 nanotubes: (a1) and (a2) show hexagonal BaTiO3 nanoparticles [in 0.2 M Ba(OH)2 at 80 °C] and (a3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure; (b1) and (b2) show coral-like nanostructures of assembled nanorods [in 0.1 M Ba(OH)2 at 120 °C] and (b3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure. TEM and HRTEM images of BaTiO3 nanostructures prepared from Na2Ti3O7 nanowires: (c1) and (c2) show starfish-like BaTiO3 nanoparticles [in 0.2 M Ba(OH)2 at 80 °C] and (c3) shows their crystalline structure; (d1) and (d2) show sword-like BaTiO3 nanostructures [in 0.1 M Ba(OH)2 at 120 °C] and (d3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure.153 Reprinted with permission from ACS, Copyright © ACS. 
The solvothermal method was reported to produce BaTiO3 and BaZrO3 as representatives of the perovskite family by Niederberger et al.61 and Huang et al.169 Metallic barium and titanium isopropoxide (Ti(OiPr)4) were used as precursors in benzylic alcohol for this synthesis. Nanoparticles with average size of 6 nm were produced through C–C coupling between benzylic alcohols and alkoxide molecules at 200–220 °C. Nanowires of PZT were reported by a solvothermal technique.165
2.4 Microemulsion method
Reverse microemulsion methods were applied for the synthesis of perovskite nanomaterials by several groups.131,170 The microemulsion technique is of great attraction since the nanosized aqueous droplets act as nano-reactors for the synthesis of nanoparticles. In the reverse microemulsion system, water phase is a dispersed phase which is surrounded by the continuous phase which is oil. The size of the nano-reactor (water phase) is controlled by the ratio between water and the surfactant. The chemical reaction occurs inside the water phase, which prevents impurities from approaching. Su et al.131 developed a reverse microemulsion system containing oil phase (cyclohexane), nonionic surfactant (Triton X-100), co-surfactant (n-butanol) and water phase, for the synthesis of BaTiO3, SrTiO3, and BaxSr1−xTiO3. The size of the above nanomaterials was controlled via controlling the ratio between water and the surfactant. The highest dielectric constant value was reported when x equals 0.7. Chen and Zhu170 also reported fabrication of nanorods of Ba0.7Sr0.3TiO3 with a diameter of 60–100 nm and a length of 450–1200 nm using a similar method at room temperature, which show a single-crystalline tetragonal structure.170 In the synthesis of bismuth ferrite nanoparticles via this technique,171 a microemulsion system consisting of CTAB/water/isooctane/butanol was designed. Microemulsion A contains bismuth nitrate and ferric nitrate in the water phase, while microemulsion B contains oxalic acid in the water phase. Microemulsions A and B were mixed under stirring and precipitation occurred with time. Pure bismuth ferrite nanoparticles were obtained after calcination at a temperature of 400 °C.171
2.5 Template synthesis
The template method involves the use of nanoporous silicon, polycarbonate, alumina, etc., as templates, which fill up with the suitable polymeric precursors. The solution containing the template is then heat treated to form the ferroelectric materials. The template is then removed by etching. Synthesis of ferroelectric nanostructures through templating can provide the following advantages: (a) the structure of the nanoarray is subject to the structure of the template, (b) the channels of the template control the dimension of the materials, (c) pore walls of template prevent the aggregation of the material and (d) a large amount of nanowires or nanotubes can be produced. The technique was applied for the fabrication of perovskite nanomaterials such as BaTiO3,126,132,172–174 Ba1−xSrxTiO3,175 BiFeO3,176–180 PbTiO3,126,181–184 PbZrO3,185 and PbZr1−xTixO3.132,172,186–195 In combination with the sol–gel technique (Fig. 5), multiferroic BiFeO3 nanotubes were produced.78,126,176,187,196 Size, shape, and structural properties of the final products are simply controlled by the used templates. In these methods, since capillary force in the templates is the only driving force, the sol concentration is another important parameter for a successful fabrication. If the concentration of the sol is too high, it is very difficult to fill up the template, especially a template with a small pore diameter. On the other hand, if the concentration of the sol is too low, serious shrinkage and cracking may occur during annealing.
 Fig. 5  Multiferroic bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) nanotubes have been synthesized using a modified template methodology.176 Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Polycarbonate membranes with pore sizes of 100 or 200 nm were used as templates for electrophoretic growth193 of PZT nanorods197 and lead titanate.182 The same method was also applied to fabricate barium titanate nanotubes.126,132,198 Nanorings of perovskite PZT with internal diameters down to ∼5 nm and ring thicknesses of ∼5 to 10 nm were fabricated as nanoporous alumina membranes made on silicon substrates as template were immersed in a precursor solution.199 Block copolymers were reported to self-assemble as template and nucleation sites for growth of patterned BaTiO3 at nanometer scale.200
2.6 Electrospinning method
The electrospinning method was recently developed to fabricate one-dimensional ferroelectric perovskite nanomaterials such as nanowires or nanofibers. In this approach, the formation of electrospinning fibers is dependent on the uniaxial stretching (or elongation) of an electrified jet derived from a highly viscous polymer solution. The evaporation of solvent prompted the formation of solid fibers. In this method, as usual, polymer was dissolved in organic solvent to obtain a homogenous solution. Then, perovskite powder was added to the polymer solution to form composites. The mixture was transferred to a syringe which was mounted on an electrode. A high voltage between syringe and collector was applied to electrify pendent droplets of the solution from the syringe. As a result, the electrified jet experiences a stretching and whipping process, which led to the formation of long and thin threads.201 The electrospinning technique was applied to fabricate BaTiO3 nanofibers in combination with sol–gel methods.118,202–204 The final diameter of the fibers was between 80 and 190 nm.118 Various nanowires consisting of perovskite materials such as PbTiO3,205 PbZr1−xTixO3,168,206–210 Ba1−xSrxTiO3,211 and BiFeO3,212 were produced by the electrospinning technique and investigated for different applications.
2.7 Bio-inspired synthesis methods
The above synthesis methods of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials require temperatures higher than 100 °C and/or extreme pH conditions. The ideal synthesis methods need to be performed under benign and facile conditions, which include room temperature, ambient pressure, and near-neutral pH. The development of benign synthetic techniques is also important from the viewpoint of green-chemistry principles, and potential to scale up in energy-efficient ways. Therefore, several innovative research works have been performed to realize the goal of low temperature synthesis of these nanocrystals. Biomineralizing molecules extracted or adopted from biological systems have been applied to catalyze and template the formation of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials.213,214
Nuraje et al.28 have fabricated BaTiO3 nanocrystals at room temperature using synthetic peptides to facilitate nucleation and growth. In this method (Fig. 6), oligopeptide bolaamphiphilic molecules were self-assembled as nano-rings, which effectively avoid the influence of effects of depolarization fields and provide a pure environment for formation of ferroelectric nanocrystals. The chelation between carboxylate groups and Ti4+ ions was considered to be an important step for formation of nanorings. The diameters of the resulting nanocrystals were between 6 and 12 nm. XRD analysis of the nanomaterials confirmed the existence of the tetragonal phase. Electrostatic-force microscopy was utilized to demonstrate polarization switching of nanoparticles.
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the nanoring structure of the precursors that self-assemble with the peptide.28 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Bansal et al.79 used a biological approach to synthesize BaTiO3 nanocrystals by incubating Ba(O2CCH3)2 and K2TiF6 with a pathogenic fungus, Fusarium oxysporum, for 24 hours at room temperature. The extracted fungal mycelia from F. oxysporum acted as both a hydrolyzing agent and structure directing template in the precipitation of ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanoparticles. The hydrolytic enzymes in F. oxysporum performed a crucial role in conversion of the TiF62− feedstock via the hydrolysis of Ti–F bonds. This synthesis produced BaTiO3 nanocrystals with diameters between 4 and 5 nm.
In a different approach for biological synthesis of BaTiO3 ferroelectric nanocrystals, the phage-display method135 was applied to identify the biomolecules with specific affinities for crystalline BaTiO3 as shown in Table 2. The specific peptides were used to synthesis ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanocrystals at room temperature and near-neutral pH. The size of produced ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanocrystals at ambient conditions was 50–100 nm. The formed BaTiO3 particles have ferroelectric properties as they show polarization hysteresis in Fig. 7.135
Table 2 Barium titanate peptides.135 Data reproduced with permission from ACS, copyright © American Chemical Society




Peptide
Amino acid sequence
pIa




a Isoelectric point calculated using pI/mass program at http://ca.expasy.org.




BT1
HQPANDPSWYTG
5.1


BT2
NTISGLRYAPHM
8.8




 Fig. 7  Polarization versus applied electric field.135 Reprinted with permission from ACS, copyright © American Chemical Society. 
Nuraje et al.215 used genetically modified-M13 (AEEE) virus as template to grow perovskite nanowires of strontium titanate and bismuth ferrite (Fig. 8). SrTiO3 and BiFeO3 nanowires were successfully fabricated with templating on the viruses. SrTiO3 nanoparticles were around 5 nm in diameter and possessed cubic phase structure. The same M13 viruses were also applied to grow multiferroic bismuth ferrite nanowires. The resulting virus-templated nanoparticles were between 10 and 30 nm in diameter.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme for growth of strontium titanate nanowires. (b) TEM and HRTEM images of strontium titanate nanowires.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3 Fabrication of nanostructured ferroelectric materials
Ferroelectric oxides have been widely studied for applications in non-volatile data storage devices due to their reversible spontaneous polarization properties. Especially, with increasing demand for ultrafast portable electronic devices, which have ultrahigh-density data storage and low power consumption, it is essential to develop ferroelectric capacitors at nanometer scale. Therefore, the fabrication of ferroelectric nanostructures is not only important to the development of non-volatile data storage devices, but also enables us to understand the fundamental physics of ferroelectrics at nanometer scale which include surface properties, strain effects from substrates, and size reduction. A thin film of perovskite ferroelectric materials is usually fabricated via different deposition techniques including pulsed laser deposition, solution deposition, etc. Pulsed laser deposition216 was applied to deposit bismuth ferrite thin films with 300 nm thickness on strontium titanate [001] substrates with a 248 nm wavelength KrF Lambda-Physik laser. BFO thin films were fabricated by RF magnetron sputtering deposition217 on vicinal STO (001) substrates.
Fabrication of ferroelectric nanostructures usually consists of two methods: top-down approach and bottom-up approach. In this section, the advantages and limitations of the top-down and bottom-up approaches are discussed.
3.1 Top-down approaches218,219
The top-down approach involves the construction of small size structures from large size structures through etching and removal of parts. In this method, lithography usually is applied to produce structures with assistance from energetic particles such as photons, ions, or electron beams. Focused ion beam (FIB) milling and electron beam (EB) direct writing (EBDW) are popular techniques for fabrication of ferroelectric nanostructures with controlled size and shape. During the construction procedure of ferroelectric nanostructures, pre-grown metal–organic precursor films were annealed at high temperature for crystallization after FIB or EBDW were applied to create certain structures. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 9,218–220 a pre-grown ferroelectric capacitor with the film stacking configuration of top electrode/ferroelectric/bottom electrode layers was prepared. For preparation of ferroelectric films in stacking configuration, film deposition techniques such as pulsed laser deposition (PLD) or metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) techniques are applied to grow an excellent quality of metal–organic films. The surface of the top electrode is covered with a thin protecting layer of platinum which avoids the ion beam penetration. Then, desired shape and feature size of ferroelectric nanostructures to the bottom electrode are manufactured by ion-beam milling. The diameter of the ion beam is 6 nm. Therefore, the ferroelectric nanostructures with feature sizes smaller than 100 nm are easily produced. FIB based nanofabrication provides advantages in production of ferroelectric ultrahigh density non-volatile memories without changes of the chemical composition of the starting ferroelectric material. Ganpule et al.218 fabricated ferroelectric Pb(Nb0.04Zr0.28Ti0.68)O3 and SrBi2Ta2O9(SBT) capacitors with sizes ranging from 1 μm2 to 0.01 μm2.
 Fig. 9  Two typical example of top-down approaches for nanostructured ferroelectrics: (a) focus ion beam (FIB) milling,218 (b) EB direct writing (EBDW).220 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
In contrast to the FIB technique, the EBDW technique does not require a mask for generation of ferroelectric nanostructures. After a metal–organic precursor thin film is deposited on the top of the bottom electrode, the desired configurations are generated by irradiation of the EB over the sample surface with induced chemical reactions. The structures are further established by dissolving the unexposed areas in a specific solvent. The resulting metal–organic patterns are annealed to ferroelectric oxide at high temperature. Alexe et al.220,221 created patterns of ferroelectric SBT and Pb(Zr0.7Ti0.3)O3 (PZT) with a pattern density of ca. 1 Gbit cm−2. Conventional EB lithography was utilized to fabricate PZT nano-islands with different feature sizes.222 The ferroelectric nano-islands with feature sizes below 300 nm exhibited very high piezo-response.
Advantages of top-down approaches are to precisely position and control the shape and size of nanostructured ferroelectrics. However, drawbacks of the techniques are the time-consuming and low-throughput character of these processes.
3.2 Bottom-up approaches223,224
Building blocks such as atoms, molecules, or nanoparticles are self-assembled to form ferroelectric nanostructures. In comparison to the top-down approach for nano-fabrications, this approach possesses certain merits. Ferroelectric nanomaterials can be directly manipulated at the nanometer scale. In addition, the formed nanostructures are made of single crystalline ferroelectric nanomaterials and do not possess lattice defects near the surface. Demerits of the bottom-up nano-fabrication exist in control of size and shape as well as precise positioning of ferroelectric nanomaterials since they rely on either thermodynamically driven reorganization or self-assembly processes.
To construct ferroelectric nanostructures, bottom-up approaches have been explored extensively. Among them, chemical solution deposition (CSD)225 and MOCVD226 are popular techniques using the microstructural instability of thin precursor films at high temperatures, which drive to minimize their interface energy between the film and the substrate under a certain film thickness (Fig. 10). Both the size and shape of the resulting ferroelectric nanostructures are controlled by the initial film thickness, the annealing temperature, and the crystallographic orientations of the substrate. Fujisawa et al.227 used MOCVD to construct PTO nanostructures (thickness = 1.7 nm, diameter = 38 nm), which exhibited ferroelectric polarization switching behaviour. Chemical solution deposition (CSD) was applied to create ferroelectric PTO nanostructures.228 The authors also investigated extensively the size effect and also the structure–property relationships of PTO nano-islands using synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) and found an abrupt increase of piezoresponse with decrease of the size of PTO. The phenomena were explained by the reduced substrate clamping effect and the reduced a-domain contribution. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was applied to investigate the effect of disorders at the interface between the ferroelectric nano-islands and the underlying oxide substrate on the polarization instability.229 The interfacial dislocation accounts for the low mobility of twin walls in films and ferroelectric polarization in nanometer scale ferroelectrics.230
 Fig. 10  Two typical examples of bottom-up approach: (a) chemical solution deposition (CSD)225 and (b) metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).226 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
3.3 Combination of both top-down and bottom-up approaches231–240
Ferroelectric nanostructures were also constructed with combination of both top-down and bottom-up approaches. In detail, this novel method use advantages of both top-down and bottom-up approaches to grow ferroelectric nanomaterials selectively in predefined locations. Fig. 11 shows that ferroelectric materials have been grown selectively onto prepatterned seeds.232,238 In this method, EB lithography was applied to create TiO2 patterns which have been widely employed as seed patterns for growth of PTO because TiO2 dots trap the PbO molecules. Either sputtering or CSD techniques were applied to deposit ferroelectric materials onto TiO2 seed patterns. Selective growth of ferroelectrics was done using a combination of a mask and physical vapor deposition (PVD) by several groups.233–237 This approach used metal membranes with hierarchically organized arrays of nanotubes, hexagonally close-packed arrays of microspheres, and oxide membranes perforated with nano-holes as stencil masks for the deposition of ferroelectric materials. Block-copolymer micelles were employed as templates for growth of PTO nano-grains arrays with uniform diameter (≈2 nm) and thickness (≈7 nm) on a single crystal substrate. Then, PTO precursors attached to the cores of self-ordered arrays of micelles, and further converted to ferroelectric PTO through an annealing process at high temperature. PTO nano-arrays with extremely small volume (≈2.6 × 103 nm3) demonstrated piezoresponse properties.240 In this approach, the post-annealing process often results in undesired changes of shape or volume of ferroelectric nanostructures.
 Fig. 11  Selective growths of PbTiO3 nano-islands (a)238 and well-ordered large-area arrays of ferroelectric La-substituted Bi4Ti3O12 (BLT) nanostructures prepared by pulsed laser deposition using gold nanotube membranes as masks (b).241 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
Table 3 summarizes advantages and limitations of various approaches for fabrication of nanostructured ferroelectrics of nano-capacitor and nano-island types.219
Table 3 Various approaches for fabrication of nanostructured ferroelectrics of nano-capacitor and nano-island types.219 Data reproduced with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim




Approach
 
Advantages
Disadvantages
Minimum size (nm)
Type




Top-down
FIB
High resolution
Surface damage
70
Island capacitor


Use of high quality film
Low throughput


Uniform size and array


EBDW
High resolution
Volume shrinkage
70
Island


Uniform size and array
Shape change


No etching process
Low throughput


EB-litho
High resolution
Surface damage
100
Island capacitor


Uniform size and array
Low throughput


Etching process


Bottom-up
CSD
Easy process
Difficulty in uniform size, array, and shape
<10
Island


Easy to generate various size and to access to extremely small size


MOCVD
Easy process
Difficulty in uniform size, array, and shape
<10
Island


Easy to generate various size and to access to extremely small size


PLD
Easy process
Difficulty in uniform size, array and shape
<10
Island


Access to extremely small feature


Modified bottom-up
Registered depo
Uniform size and array
Lithoprocess
50
Island


Low throughput


Mask-assisted depo
Uniform size and array on large area
Mask fabrication process
40
Island capacitor


Easy process


High crystallinity


Block copolymer
Uniform size on large area
Difficulty in uniform array and shape
20
Island


Easy process


Access to extremely small feature




4 Characterization of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials
To date various approaches including X-ray diffraction and imaging, optical characterization, scanning probe microscopy, high-resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy, have been developed to probe both the macroscopic and microscopic details of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials. In this review, we want to introduce these techniques and provide general information on them. Recently, transmission electron microscopy has been demonstrated to image the domain wall structure at the atomic scale. However, the techniques applied widely to detect actual functional properties of the domain walls include scanning probe microscopy (SPM) (scanning tunneling microscopy, atomic force microscopy, conducting AFM (c-AFM), and the related piezoresponse force microscopy) techniques.
4.1 High-resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy
The transmission electron microscopy technique is able to probe the lattice distortion across the domain wall and measure the continuous deviation of a set of planes with respect to the undistorted lattice.242–247 At present, the most advanced techniques permit atomic scale resolution at 0.5 Å through aberration-corrected imaging (Fig. 12). The reconstruction approach excludes the effects of objective lens spherical aberrations. Therefore, the projection of the atomic columns is the basis of images to be directly inferred.248
 Fig. 12  Atomic scale TEM image of the PZT nanostructure.247 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright © Nature Publishing Group. 
4.2 Scanning probe microscopy
SPM have been become a revolutionary method in probing non-destructive domain structures of ferroelectric thin films and testing the nanometer scale ferroelectric structures for the first time. It also provides new pathway in nanometer scale domain patterning for potential application in FeRAM,249 and ferroelectric lithography.250 The SPM technique provides information in two different modes which are non-contact and contact based on the property of interaction force, attracting or repelling, between the SPM tip and a sample. In the non-contact mode, the tip is lifted around 10–100 nm from the surface and scans. The interaction between tip and sample includes the long range polarization and electrostatic forces. The change of resonant frequency of the cantilever provides information.251 Therefore, this mode, called electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), can be used to probe the electrostatic field of the surface polarization charges,252,253 and predominantly applied to domain imaging in ferroelectric crystals or in thin films with micrometer-sized grains.254–263 The lateral resolution of this technique in ambient environment is around 40 nm. The approaches, including scanning surface potential microscopy (SSPM) or Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), are able to obtain quantitative information,264–266 and provide important information on the distribution of polarization and screening charges and their evolution during phase transitions. KPFM is to monitor the stability of the ferroelectric domains and control surface electrochemical reactivity.267 Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM) is applied to image trapped charges via measuring local tip–sample capacitance.268 SCM still has difficulty in providing quantitative information since it requires more accurate parameters. Weaknesses of non-contact mode are that it is susceptible to screening effects, sensitive to substrate surface conditions and low resolution.
Although the imaging approach of SPM in contact mode provides a high lateral resolution (below 10 nm), and an effective control of nano-domains, the domain images are difficult to interpret due to the existence of cross-talk between different mechanisms in the domain contrast formation. This approach is classified into static and dynamic. Static approaches, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and lateral (friction) force microscopy (LFM), are restricted to image domain structures consisting of antiparallel c-domains in ferroelectrics. Furthermore, the contact mode image of AFM is applied to observe opposite 180° domains with detection of the static piezoelectric sample deformation while an external DC bias is applied.269–272
Dynamic methods,273 including scanning non-linear dielectric microscopy (SNDM) and piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM), are used to observe the electrical and mechanical response of the sample while an AC voltage applied between a conductive probing tip and a sample. The SNDM method utilizes a special resonator probe which can be operated in the microwave frequency range and map nanometer scale domains for the local voltage-induced change in the sample capacitance in the surface layer of about 10 nm thick.274 Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) (Fig. 13)275,276 is one of the most popular techniques for characterization of ferroelectrics at the nanometer scale, which is based on the piezoelectric deformation of a ferroelectric sample in response to an external electric field (hence the term “piezoresponse”).251 This technique has high spatial resolution, easy implementation, effective manipulation and control of nano-domains and local spectroscopy capabilities. However, there is still debate on whether this technique is able to provide quantitative information.277–279 Deeper understanding of the principles of PFM was recommended in the literature.273,279 Atomic force acoustic microscopy (AFAM) is considered to be another dynamic contact SPM method, which is based on the detection of the cantilever displacement due to the mechanical excitation of the sample while an ultrasonic transducer emits longitudinal waves into the sample.273,280,281
 Fig. 13  (a) PFM amplitude and (b) PFM phase images of a BFO sample with 109° stripe domains, (c) simultaneously acquired c-AFM image of the same area showing that each 109 domain wall is electrically conductive.276 Reprinted with permission from The American Physical Society, copyright © The American Physical Society. 
5 Applications of nanostructured perovskite nanomaterials
Perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials are of great attraction and show potential applications in different fields including solar energy conversion, storage memory, etc., since they have remarkable properties such as ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and nonlinear optical properties.12,282,283 The most widely investigated perovskite materials include BaTiO3, CaTiO3, PbTiO3, PbZrTiO3, KaTaO3, and SrTiO3 along with suitable dopants and multiferroic oxides, BiFeO3, with unique properties of both ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity. The multiferroic materials are BiFeO3, CoFeO3, BiMnO3, TbMnO3, TbMn2O5, YMnO3, LuFeO4 and Ni3B7O13, etc. However, BiFeO3 (BFO) is the only material which gives ferroelectricity and antiferromagnetism at room temperature. One of the promising applications of ferroelectric nanomaterials is a ferroelectric bypass capacitor for 2.3 GHz operation in mobile digital telephones. The product with 6 million chips per month won the Japan Electronic Industry “Product of the Year” award in 1994.12 In this section, some important applications of perovskite ferroelectric materials are introduced. Particularly, this review covers the promising applications of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials for the first time.
5.1 Ferroelectric storage memory
The ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAM)284 are one of the main applications of perovskite materials to replace magnetic core memory, magnetic bubble memory systems, and electrically erasable read-only memory for many applications.12 Especially, during World War II, the discovery of ferroelectric barium titanate (BaTiO3) with robust structure and chemical stability encouraged scientists to develop an electrically switchable and two-state device since such devices were able to encode the 1 and 0 states, which were essential for the Boolean algebra of binary computer memories. The intrinsic nonvolatility (retention of memory when power is out) and radiation hardness of ferroelectric RAMs provide a new pathway to develop novel computer memories. Furthermore, the dynamic random access memory (DRAM) is today's memory core in most electronic systems. Due to leakage of charge, it needs to be renewed thousands of times per second. This process requires more power and therefore drains the battery. Also, it can not store information while the power is off. For example, in computers,284 the startup of the computer needs longer boot-up times since its operating system must be copied from the hard drive. Non-volatile memories provide the solution for this issue. One of the future options for storage memory is ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) which stores data in the polarization state on the ferroelectric material. Development of ferroelectric RAMs could result in significant improvement in weights, space, power supply requirements and speed. Ferroelectric memory was exploited for the first time in integration with silicon CMOS in 1987.29 The ferroelectric material for this memory was PbZr0.5Ti0.5O3 (PZT). Starting from 1992, there have been significant developments in increase of the capacity and reduction of the size of FRAM. The current capacity of FeRAM is 64 Mbytes and the length of the FeRAM is reduced to 0.13 μm in the integrated CMOS transistor gate. For commercial products, so far there have been the following FeRAM memories produced by different companies; a Fujitsu 8-kbit FeRAM in every SONY Playstation 2 consisting of PZT, 32-Mbit PZT FeRAM fabricated at Samsung, and 4-Mbit strontium bismuth tantalate (SBT) FRAMs at Matsushita.285 The tetragonal perovskite structure has two polarization states as shown in Scheme 1. The Ti4+ ions occupy the centers of the cubic structure of lead titanate (PbTiO3); the Pb2+ ions are sited at the corners of the crystalline units; and O2− ions are placed on each face of crystalline units. However, the ferroelectric crystalline structure is stable at room temperature and has a net dipole (spontaneous polarization, Ps) of a few tens of microcoulombs per square centimeter, which is produced primarily by the displacement up or down of the Ti4+ ions. The regions of up and down polarization in a crystal of PbTiO3 are called “ferroelectric domains”. When a large electric field is applied to the specimen (order of a few kilovolts per centimeter), all the domains are directed in the same direction.286 In memory applications, it is important to switch the directions of polarization domains from up (+1) to down (0). As usual, short voltage pulses are applied to write information in such a memory. Each voltage pulse is half of the nominal switching voltage, Vs (Vs = ECd, where d is the film thickness).
In the most current ferroelectric prototype memories, ferroelectric films have been widely applied. FeRAMs demonstrated promising features. In more detail, their write and read cycle times are in the sub-100 ns range and also they have low power consumption. Table 4 shows a set of device parameters for ferroelectric memories during 1989.12 Ferroelectric oxides used in FeRAM devices so far are of thin film types as follows: perovskite structures such as PbZrxTi 1−xO3 (PZT) or BiFeO3; bilayer structures such as SrBi2Ta2O9 (SBT), (BiLa)4Ti3O12 (BLT) or Bi4Ti3O12 (BTO). To construct FeRAM in memory devices, a few properties of the materials are considered.287 A high remnant polarization value Pr is required since it shows the sensing difference between the two states representing 0 and 1. The coercive field Ec is required to be small, which relies on the operating voltage of the FeRAM. The crystallization temperature is also an important parameter to be considered. Table 5 lists the most common materials in FeRAM devices. The lower temperatures provide better incorporation of a ferroelectric material into the device assembly. In addition, fatigue describing the steady loss of remnant polarization is an important criterion to evaluate constructed devices. The reason for fatigue in FeRAM is that oxygen vacancies occur during switching cycles.288 Another factor for polarization decay is imprint, i.e. imperfections of the materials or interface, which is usually caused by hydrogen and plasma processing in capacitor structures.289 In FeRAM production, the goal is to overcome fatigue problems and achieve 1013 cycles. Minimum ten year retention of polarization at 85 °C is required. Fig. 14 shows a 3D FRAM cell with PZT.285 The higher the density of FeRAMs, the more cells. To obtain high density FeRAM, the minimization of cell size is required. The voltage also needs to be reduced as scaling continues as we discussed previously. Therefore, the stability of remnant polarization is a critical issue for future application of FeRAM.286,290
Table 4 Optimum device parameters for ferroelectric memories12




Parameter
Value




Minimum cell size
2 by 2 μm2


Read time
10 ns


Erase/rewrite time
10 ns


Operating temperatures
−100 °C to +300 °C


Minimum access voltage
1.0 V


Activation field
120 kV cm−1


Breakdown voltage
40 V


Fatigue to 50% Q
1012 cycles


Retention
5 years (real time)


Radiation hardness
5 Mrad cm−2 (X-rays)


1011 rad cm−2 s−1 (X-rays)


1014 cm−2 (neutrons)




Table 5 Properties of various ferroelectric materials.29 Data reproduced with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics




Property
PZT
SBT
BLT




Pr (μC cm−2)
10–40
5–10
10–15


Ec (kV cm−1)
50–100
30–75
30–75


Crystallization temperature
450–650
650–800
650–750




 Fig. 14  Samsung 32 Mb ferroelectric random access memories.285 Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright © John Wiley and Sons. 
Other alternative approaches for nonvolatile storage have been developed on the basis of ferroelectric materials, which include ferroelectric field effect transistors (FeFETs), ferroresistive based storage devices, and scanning probe related methods. For the description of these methods, we recommend the following nice review articles12,29,282,283 to readers, as this area is not in the scope of the present article.
Since the density of FeRAM nonvolatile-memory is increased thousands-fold by reading and writing in nanoparticle-based FeRAM, nanowires,74,287 nanotubes,132,291,292 and nanoparticles28,72,125 have been investigated for potential application in storage memory. The 100 nm2 area of nonvolatile polarization domains is equivalent to a data storage density of about 1 terabit cm−2 in a real memory device. Urban et al.73 demonstrated polarization-switching in a nanowire-based system. Individual BaTiO3 nanowires with a diameter of 10 nm were studied for nanoscale ferroelectric switching properties by ultrahigh vacuum electrostatic microscopy.74 Fig. 15 shows the switching polarization directions with external field and that the polarization domains were written and reversed repeatedly on these wires.
 Fig. 15  (a) Three-dimensional topographic image of a BaTiO3 nanowire. (b)–(f) Successive EFM images showing that four distinct polarization domains can be independently manipulated by an external electric field.74 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © American Chemical Society. 
Nuraje et al.28 investigated the synthesis of ferroelectric nanomaterials using peptide template methods at room temperature and polarization response of the free nanoparticles around 12 nm using electrostatic force microscopy. Fig. 16(a) explains the work mechanism of electrostatic force microscopy schematically. In their work, a Vwrite of +12 V between the conductive AFM tip and the substrate containing free nanoparticles was applied first. Then, after the local electric polarization of the nanoparticles on the conductive substrate was written, subsequently the conductive tip with a lower voltage (+2 V), Vprobe, was scanned to probe the polarization using EFM by measuring the shift in the resonance frequency. In the reading step, the conductive AFM tip was raised at a certain height above the nanoparticles to image only the contribution from the local electric polarization of the BaTiO3 nanoparticles. The EFM image of those nanoparticles gave a brighter contrast because of the repulsive electrostatic interaction between the tip and the nanoparticles. The same nanoparticles on the conductive substrate were applied by Vwrite of −12 V to reverse the polarization direction. As shown in Fig. 16(d), the EFM image of those nanoparticles scanned by a Vprobe of 2 V displayed a darker contrast due to the attractive electrostatic interaction. In the control experiments, the tip with Vprobe = −2 V was applied to probe reverse EFM images and confirmed that the probe voltage did not affect with the written polarization.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of manipulating and probing the electric polarization of BaTiO3 nanoparticles with EFM. (b) Topological AFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles; scale bar = 30 nm. (c) EFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles with Vprobe = +2 V after Vwrite = +12 V was applied on the nanoparticles across a conductive AFM tip and a gold substrate; scale bar = 30 nm. (d) EFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles with Vprobe = +2 V after Vwrite = −12 V was applied on the nanoparticles across a conductive AFM tip and a gold substrate; scale bar = 30 nm.28 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5.2 Microsensors and microactuators
Ferroelectric films as functional materials have been extensively explored for various sensor and actuator applications. The development of piezoelectric based microdevices started in the 1990s. The new area called microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) emerged. During the late 1990s, with the mass production of portable telephones, piezoelectric based thin films played vital roles in the miniaturization and better performance of these devices. MEMS include devices or arrays of devices which integrate electronics with other constituents including sensors, transducers, and actuators. Integrated circuit (IC) batch processing techniques are applied for construction of the devices. The merits of piezoelectric devices293 include a high generated force and good actuating range, a wide frequency range of operation, and low power consumption. The well-studied ferroelectric materials are Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) and PbTiO3 for piezoelectric actuator and transducer applications. The cantilevers and membranes are prototype structures in these applications since they are sensitive to residual stresses.294 The piezoelectric based microdevices embrace ultrasonic micromotors,295,296 micropumps and microvalves,297 accelerometers and gyroscopes,298 acoustic sensors,299 sensing and actuating elements in atomic force microscope (AFM) cantilevers,300 and ultrasonic transducers for medical301 and sonar302 applications. PZT is applied in these devices and is a suitable material due to the high piezoelectric and electromechanical coupling coefficients of PZT. The piezofilms differ from piezoelectrics in the clamping of the film by the substrate. The clamping results in a reduction of the out-of-plane longitudinal coefficient of a film sandwiched between two electrodes and deposited on a substrate.
Piezoresponse force microscopy is to measure the piezoresponse of local environments of the materials. The out-of-plane longitudinal coefficient is increased when the lateral clamping is released by fabrication of piezoelements with lateral dimensions of 100 nm or less (Fig. 17).222 The piezoelectric coefficient varies with applied stress or field and is significant in thin films since the applied fields or forces are usually high. Besides, the extrinsic response has to be considered, which is the combination of all nonlattice effects—domain wall movements, and pinning by the substrate and by defects. Piezomicrodevices include cantilever based devices, and membrane structures. The piezoelectric microcantilevers are based on demonstrations of single elements, such as PZT coated Si cantilevers for sensing and actuation in AFM heads300 and the microsystems include arrays of microactuators. LG group reported a cantilever array with integrated heaters and piezoelectric sensors for microcantilever-type data-storage systems303 (Fig. 18). This represents a modification to the IBM Miliped concept which employs resistive sensing. The piezoelectric version is faster and has lower power consumption.
 Fig. 17  Amplitude of piezoresponse of PZT patterns with lateral size of 100–200 nm on SrTiO3 substrate.222 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
 Fig. 18  Partial image of the 100 × 100 thermopiezoelectric cantilever array.29 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
Membrane based devices are also based on single element demonstrators, e.g., micromotors, to membrane arrays. They have been mostly used in ultrasonic applications recently. The integration with CMOS, silicon based microdevices, offers a high precision and a better resolution, and an easy fabrication of transducers. The greatest challenge in fabrication of large membranes is to get uniform thickness using semiconductor on insulator (SOI) wafers (Fig. 19). Yamashita et al.304 demonstrated a ring array of micromachined diaphragms coated with PZT possessing high directivity for a short distance presence sensor in air. The achieved value for PZT film membranes is 3% for clamped membranes and 6% for suspended membranes (Fig. 19) in contrast to the calculated value of 20%.
 Fig. 19  Process flow for the fabrication of suspended membranes.29 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
5.3 Ferroelectric varactors and devices
Although both ferroelectric and paraelectric phases of perovskite materials have been applied in tunable microwave devices,305 the paraelectric phase is often favored due to the absence of hysteresis. Therefore, paraelectric (SrTiO3, KTaO3, and CaTiO3)306 thin films have been investigated for some time. In the thin film devices of these materials, especially BaxSr1−xTiO3 (BST), high electric fields and reasonable tenability are obtained at room temperature at low dc voltages. BaxSr1−xTiO3 has become the ideal choice for industrial applications and the most studied material at microwave frequencies. In addition, the Curie temperature of the materials can be easily tuned by simply varying the Ba composition. The ferroelectric devices rely on parameters including the composition of the film, the strain, defects, electrode/ferroelectric interface chemistry, fabrication method, design, etc. Ferroelectric varactors and devices have parallel-plate or coplanar-plate designs as shown in Fig. 20. The parallel-plate design provides lower tuning voltages, while the coplanar-plate format offers relatively higher tunability.
 Fig. 20  Parallel-plate (a) and coplanar-plate (b) ferroelectric varactors. 
5.4 Solar energy conversion
Perovskite materials have been actively explored for solar energy conversion307–309 since they can have high conduction band gap position, stability, and solar absorption band gap. Among the perovskite materials for solar energy storage, the following perovskite materials have been mostly investigated: PbTiO3,310 SrTiO3,311–313 KTaO3,314 NaTaO3,314 BaTiO3,307 CaTiO3,315 La2TiO5,316 BiFeO3167,179,317 etc. BiFeO3 was investigated for production of oxygen under UV179 conditions. However, Luo and Maggard167 reported that BiFeO3 nanoparticles coated with SrTiO3 can produce H2 under visible light irradiation while pure BiFeO3 failed to generate hydrogen evolution. In this system, a small-bandgap metal oxide, BiFeO3, was utilized as a visible-light sensitizer in a SrTiO3 photocatalytic material. Joshi et al.318 demonstrated the O2 production ability of BiFeO3 nanocubes synthesized via microwave technique in the photocatalytic reaction from an aqueous FeCl3 solution as shown in Fig. 21. Recently Deng et al.317 reported hydrogen generation of BiFeO3 nanoparticles in 1 (M) KOH solution under simulated solar light. However, the results on hydrogen generation of BiFeO3 are contradictory to a previous report.167
 Fig. 21  (a) Photocurrent density–potential curves of BiFeO3 nanocubes (i) and BiFeO3 bulk (ii) thin film electrodes under illumination. (b) Photocatalytic oxygen evolution under visible light irradiation over BiFeO3 nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics. 
Among them, SrTiO3 and NaTiO3 show excellent hydrogen production under UV-light irradiation.307,309 Since most perovskite materials primarily absorb UV light, their harvesting of solar energy is not performed efficiently. In this artificial photosynthesis or water splitting, perovskite nanomaterials absorb the light and generate hole–electron pairs. To reduce the water, the electron–hole pair has to be separated and reach the surface individually as shown in Fig. 22. The excited electron in the conduction band is transported to the surface of the perovskite material and reduces the water into hydrogen gas. At the same time, the hole in the valence band of the perovskite nanomaterials migrated to the surface and oxidizes water into oxygen. As discussed in Fig. 22(B), the three steps are very important to efficiently split water under sunlight exposure. They need to have the right band gap for visible light absorption since UV light is only 4% of the whole sunlight spectrum.309 For efficient charge separation, the small size and high crystallinity of perovskite nanomaterials are important since the small size provides higher diffusion length and electrons or holes easily reach the surface for reaction. The highly crystalline structure avoids electron trapping inside the particles. Kudo and co-workers309,314 investigated the photocatalytic water splitting of perovskite nanomaterials such as NaTaO3, and KTaO3 and reported higher activities under UV irradiation.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of water splitting principle (a) and main steps in electron–hole transport during water splitting (b).308 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © American Chemical Society. 
Construction of active sites on the surface is also important. To utilize the perovskite nanomaterials for water splitting, the following two approaches are applied to design systems. (1) Chemical doping of perovskite nanomaterials with either metallic or non-metallic elements. This approach is to insert an interband between the valence and conduction bands of the perovskite nanomaterials with the valence band of doped elements. For example, SrTiO3 doped with Sb/Cr,319 Ru, Rh and Ir320 produced hydrogen under visible light irradiation. (2) Dye-sensitized perovskite nanomaterials. This approach adopts the concept of dye-sensitized solar cells. In this system, dyes in the hybrid system are applied to absorb the visible light, then the electrons in the excited state of the dye migrate to the conduction band gap of the metal oxides. The separated electrons are further moved to the cocatalyst surface of the metal oxide where water molecules are reduced as shown in Fig. 23(a). Photocatalytic water reduction of biotemplated SrTiO3 nanowires was investigated using methanol as a hole scavenger and Pt nanoparticles as a co-catalyst. Under UV light irradiation, the hydrogen evolution rate of SrTiO3 nanowires is ten times higher than that of titania (Degussa, P-25), and commercial SrTiO3 nanopowders (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.).215 The improved performance of virus-templated SrTiO3 nanoparticles is explained by the smaller particle size which enables electron–hole pairs to reach the surface easily, and by the high crystallinity preventing charge recombination. Under visible light irradiation, Eosin Y dye was used to sensitize SrTiO3 nanowires loaded with Pt nanoparticles and diethanol amine to regenerate the electron deficient dye.
 Fig. 23  (a) Energy band diagram for hydrogen production of dye-sensitized SrTiO3 under visible light irradiation. (b) Hydrogen gas production by water-splitting utilizing virus-templated SrTiO3 nanowires deposited with Pt nanoparticles under UV irradiation and visible light irradiation with dye sensitization.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
For overall water splitting under visible-light irradiation, there are usually two strategies applied as follow. Fig. 24 shows the z-scheme configuration, which does not require an external circuit or wire to transport electrons. The redox mediator carries the charges between two photocatalysts. Kudo and Miseki309 made a significant contribution to the development of a z-scheme system consisting of chemically doped SrTiO3, and tantalate based photocatalysts under solar light. Table 6 provides the overall water splitting performance of different photocatalyts in z-scheme systems.308 The second case is the dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cell,321 which requires an external circuit or wire to transport the electrons from one electrode to the other. In most cases, dye is required to sensitize the porous electrodes made of metal oxide nanoparticles. In this system, it is very important to have a high conduction band position which provides higher open circuit voltage. This indicates that separated electrons are easily transported from the photoelectrode to the counterelectrode and produce hydrogen. In the photoelectrochemical cell system, perovskite nanomaterials such as strontium titanate are good candidates to be investigated. For the water splitting applications of perovskite nanomaterials, the readers are directed to some recent review articles.307–309
 Fig. 24  z-Scheme based water splitting system under visible light irradiation.309 Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 6 z-Schematic photocatalytic system for water splitting to hydrogen and oxygen under visible-light irradiation.308 Data reproduced with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry




H2 photocatalyst
O2 photocatalyst
Mediator
Light source
Incident light
Activity (μmol h−1 g−1)
QY


H2
O2




Pt/TaON (0.2 g)
Pt/WO3 (0.2 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
120
60
0.4 (420 nm)


Pt/CaTaO2N (0.1 g)
Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
43
21
 


Pt/BaTaO2N (0.1 g)
Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
67
33
0.1 (420–440 nm)


Pt./SrTiO3:Cr/Ta (0.2 g)
Pt/WO3 (0.325 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
80
24.6
1 (420 nm)


Pt/ZrO2–TaON (0.025 g)
Pt/WO3 (0.05 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
1040
266
6.3 (420.5 nm)


Pt/TaON (0.05 g)
RuO2/TaON (0.05 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>420 nm
60
30
0–0.2


Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (0.05 g)
BiVO4 (0.05 g)
Fe3+/Fe2+
300 W Xe
>420 nm
378
179
0.3 (420 nm)


Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)
Bi2MoO6 (0.02 g)
Fe3+/Fe2+
300 W Xe
>420 nm
950
445
0.2 (440 nm)


Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)
WO3 (0.02 g)
Fe3+/Fe2+
300 W Xe
>420 nm
390
200
0.2 (440 nm)


Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)
BiVO4 (0.02 g)
Fe3+/Fe2+
300 W Xe
>420 nm
750
360
0.3 (440 nm)


Pt/ZrO2–TaON (0.05 g)
Ir/TiO2/Ta3N5 (0.05 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>400 nm
∼45
∼22
 


Coumarin/Pt/H4Nb6O17 (0.05 g)
IrO2–Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)
IO3−/I−
300 W Xe
>400 nm
48.3
12.1
<0.1 (500 nm)


Ru/SrTiO3:Rh
BiVO4
 
300 W Xe
>400 nm
400
190
1.7 (420 nm)




5.5 Solar electricity
Perovskite nanomaterials are of great attraction for the photovoltaic community to investigate their potential as candidate materials for photovoltaic devices since they have not only semiconducting, ferroelectric properties, but also availability of controlled synthesis methods. With the appearance of global issues in energy, photovoltaic study becomes a critical technique in solving energy issues. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were developed by Grätzel.322 The development of DSSCs shows promise due to low manufacturing costs and considerably high energy-conversion efficiency. A number of different metal oxide nanoparticles and their core–shells, including perovskite nanomaterials, have been explored for potential improvement of DSSC device performance. Briefly, the working principle of DSSCs is described as follows. When sunlight directly enters the DSSC through the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) top coat on the glass surface (working electrode), the dye molecules attached to the surface of semiconductor nanoparticles absorb the light. The photons absorbed by the dye molecules create an excited state of the dye molecules' electrons, where, in turn, these electrons can be injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor nanoparticles. The semiconductor nanoparticles transfer the electrons to the TCO through the conduction band of metal oxides and then to the circuit. At the same time, the dye molecule quickly is regenerated by receiving one electron from iodine in the electrolyte. Then, triiodide recovers through accepting electrons from the counter electrode after following through the external circuit. Anatase TiO2 nanoparticles are often used as a photoelectrode semiconductor material and have produced DSSCs with efficiencies greater than 10%.323 The theoretical maximum open circuit voltage (Voc) of the device can be determined by the difference in energy between the Fermi level of the photoelectrode material (TiO2) and the redox potential of the electrolyte. Grätzel’s group324 investigated the performance of a DSSC using strontium titanate nanocrystals as photoelectrode. In comparison with titania semiconductors, the perovskite strontium titanate (SrTiO3) has similarities in structure and can be considered as a highly doped TiO2 structure. However, strontium titanate has a higher flatband potential and is expected to have a higher Voc for a SrTiO3-based DSSC than for an anatase titania DSSC. At AM1.5, open circuit voltages of a SrTiO3-based DSSC were roughly 100 mV higher than those produced using nanocrystalline titanium dioxide (anatase) as expected. However, photocurrents of SrTiO3 cells were roughly one third of TiO2 (anatase)-based cells. The low photocurrents are explained by the low dye loading and possibly suboptimal dye–oxide interactions in the SrTiO3 system. Jose et al.325 also discussed the poor performance of SrTiO3-based DSSCs and explained it as being due to the specific surface structure of SrTiO3. The energetically favored surface of SrTiO3 is the (001) face which can end with two possible groups, SrO or TiO2. Since the SrO surface is more basic, the surface poorly adsorbs the negatively charged carboxylate group of the sensitizer. In addition to SrTiO3, perovskite BiFeO3 (BFO) recently is also receiving more attention due to its ferroelectric properties and visible light band gaps.326,327 Bulk photocurrent induced by high-energy light illumination without external bias (a photovoltaic (PV) effect) has been studied in ferroelectrics.328 Furthermore, under exposure of a ferroelectric material to ultraviolet light, a high photovoltage was observed in the direction of the electric polarization in an open circuit. Ferroelectric materials show different PV effect distinctly from the typical PV effect in semiconductor p–n junctions.326 There has been much research conducted on Pb-based ferroelectric oxides.329,330 However, they did not show any significant photocurrent,328,330 on the order of a few nanoamperes per cm2, which is attributed to mainly poor bulk conduction of the ferroelectric materials. The PV effect of ferroelectrics is still under debate including the excitation of electrons from asymmetric impurity potentials,326 interfacial effects for polarization-dependent band bending,328 etc. To enhance power conversion efficiency in solar energy applications, small-optical-gap ferroelectrics with good carrier transport properties and large absorption of visible light extending into the red range might be a promising route.
Among the perovskite materials, BiFeO3 are receiving great attention due to a direct bandgap corresponding to the wavelength of visible light, and ferroelectricity. The photovoltaic properties of single crystal and thin film BiFeO3 have been studied by two groups.217,326,327 They proposed a different mechanism for photovoltaic charge separation in BiFeO3 thin films which is the major challenge in both photovoltaic and water splitting, in comparison with conventional solid-state photovoltaics where electron–hole pairs were separated by the electric field in the depletion region, and produced higher voltages than the bandgap. The charge separation occurs at ferroelectric domain walls in multiferroic BiFeO3. Also, the photo-properties of these materials were controlled by controlling the domain structure in such BiFeO3 films. Nuraje et al.215 reported BiFeO3 nanoparticle based solid–liquid junction photovoltaic devices for the first time. Virus-templated BiFeO3 nanoparticles were utilized to fabricate liquid junction solar cells. Under illumination with an AM1.5 solar simulator at 100 mW cm−2, the device achieved an open circuit voltage of 0.578 V and a short circuit current density of 0.735 mA cm−2 (Fig. 25) and solar power conversion efficiency of 0.17%.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram for a liquid junction solar cell made of BFO nanoparticles. (b) Photovoltaic properties of a solar cell using virus-templated BFO nanoparticles as the photoanode.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH. 
6 Conclusion and outlook
In the introduction part of this account we described the fundamentals of ferroelectric nanomaterials, including size effects of ferroelectric nanomaterials properties and computation and modeling theory in perovskite-type ferroelectrics. With guidance of development of modeling theory, various synthesis methods for perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials were introduced for the realization of the synthesis of ferroelectric nanomaterials at low temperature. The different assembly approaches were discussed for the fabrication of devices of ferroelectric nanomaterials. The recent applications of perovskite ferroelectric nanomaterials in storage memory and solar energy conversion were introduced. Therefore, this review will be a good tutorial material for non-expert readers for understanding these topics. Also it provides important updates to experts in these research areas. We are optimistic to see the deeper understanding of the fundamentals of ferroelectric nanomaterials with the development of advanced technology, and believe that ferroelectric nanomaterials have important applications not only in the area of nanoelectronics, but also in energy fields including solar energy, fuel cells, and energy storage.
ReferencesJ. Valasek, Phys. Rev., 1921, 17, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .A. von Hippel, R. G. Breckenridge, F. G. Chesley and L. Tisza, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1946, 38, 1097–1109 CrossRef CAS .B. T. Matthias, Science, 1951, 113, 591–596 CAS .J. Luther Davis and L. G. Rubin, J. Appl. Phys., 1953, 24, 1194–1197 CrossRef .S. Kisaka, S. Ikegami and H. Sasaki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1959, 14, 1680–1685 CrossRef CAS .T. Mitsui and W. B. Westphal, Phys. Rev., 1961, 124, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .G. I. Distler, V. P. Konstantinova, Y. M. Gerasimov and G. A. Tolmacheva, Nature, 1968, 218, 762–765 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Cohen, Nature, 1992, 358, 136–138 CrossRef CAS .N. A. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6694–6709 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef CAS .K. Ishikawa, K. Yoshikawa and N. Okada, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Scott and C. A. Paz de Araujo, Science, 1989, 246, 1400–1405 CAS .M. H. Frey and D. A. Payne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2753–2755 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Dutta, R. Asiaie, S. A. Akbar and W. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1542–1548 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Frey and D. A. Payne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 3158–3168 CrossRef CAS .S. Li, J. A. Eastman, Z. Li, C. M. Foster, R. E. Newnham and L. E. Cross, Phys. Lett. A, 1996, 212, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Shaw, S. Trolier-McKinstry and P. C. McIntyre, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 263–298 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsunekawa, S. Ito, T. Mori, K. Ishikawa, Z. Q. Li and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 3065–3070 CrossRef CAS .M.-C. Wang, F.-Y. Hsiao, C.-S. Hsi and N.-C. Wu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 246, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .K.-M. Hung, W.-D. Yang and C.-C. Huang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 23, 1901–1910 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Urban, J. E. Spanier, L. Ouyang, W. S. Yun and H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Xu and L. Gao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86, 203–205 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Fong, G. B. Stephenson, S. K. Streiffer, J. A. Eastman, O. Auciello, P. H. Fuoss and C. Thompson, Science, 2004, 304, 1650–1653 CrossRef CAS .T. Ohno, D. Suzuki and H. Suzuki, Kona, 2004, 22, 195–201 CAS .N. A. Spaldin, Science, 2004, 304, 1606–1607 CrossRef CAS .M. Yashima, T. Hoshina, D. Ishimura, S. Kobayashi, W. Nakamura, T. Tsurumi and S. Wada, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 014313 CrossRef .L. Huang, Z. Chen, J. D. Wilson, S. Banerjee, R. D. Robinson, I. P. Herman, R. Laibowitz and S. O'Brien, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034316 CrossRef .N. Nuraje, K. Su, A. Haboosheh, J. Samson, E. P. Manning, N. l. Yang and H. Matsui, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 807–811 CrossRef CAS .N. Setter, D. Damjanovic, L. Eng, G. Fox, S. Gevorgian, S. Hong, A. Kingon, H. Kohlstedt, N. Y. Park, G. B. Stephenson, I. Stolitchnov, A. K. Taganstev, D. V. Taylor, T. Yamada and S. Streiffer, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 051606 CrossRef .K. Su and N. L. Yang, Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society, 2006, 231, 15 Search PubMed .Y. Lu, J. Claude, B. Neese, Q. Zhang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8120–8121 CrossRef CAS .L. G. Rosa, J. Xiao, Y. B. Losovyj, Y. Gao, I. N. Yakovkin, X. C. Zeng and P. A. Dowben, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17261–17265 CrossRef CAS .R. C. G. Naber, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom, G. H. Gelinck, A. W. Marsman, F. J. Touwslager, S. Setayesh and D. M. de Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Yablonskii, E. A. Soto-Bustamante, R. O. Vergara-Toloza and W. Haase, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1936–1940 CrossRef CAS .C. Ang and Z. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 979–982 CrossRef CAS .F. Xia, Z. Y. Cheng, H. S. Xu, H. F. Li, Q. M. Zhang, G. J. Kavarnos, R. Y. Ting, G. Abdul-Sadek and K. D. Belfield, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1574–1577 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and N. Paiement, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1891–1894 CrossRef CAS .Q. M. Zhang, V. Bharti and X. Zhao, Science, 1998, 280, 2101–2104 CrossRef CAS .T. Sierra, A. Omenat, J. Barberá and J. L. Serrano, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 752–756 CrossRef CAS .A. Omenat, R. A. M. Hikmet, J. Lub and P. van der Sluis, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 906–909 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Blackwood, Science, 1996, 273, 909–912 CAS .M. Brehmer, R. Zentel, J. Reibel and G. Decher, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 849–852 CrossRef .R. A. M. Hikmet and M. Michielsen, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 300–304 CrossRef CAS .R. Zentel and M. Brehmer, Adv. Mater., 1994, 6, 598–599 CrossRef CAS .S. Kobayashi, S. Ishibashi, K. Takahashi, S. Tsuru and F. Yamamoto, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .H. Poths, R. Zentel, A. Schönfeld, F. Kremer and K. Siemensmeyer, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .M. Marcos, A. Omenat, J. L. Serrano, T. Sierra and A. Ezcurra, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 285–287 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Lovinger, Science, 1983, 220, 1115–1121 CAS .C. H. Ahn, K. M. Rabe and J. M. Triscone, Science, 2004, 303, 488–491 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, J. Wang, S. E. Lofland, Z. Ma, L. Mohaddes-Ardabili, T. Zhao, L. Salamanca-Riba, S. R. Shinde, S. B. Ogale, F. Bai, D. Viehland, Y. Jia, D. G. Schlom, M. Wuttig, A. Roytburd and R. Ramesh, Science, 2004, 303, 661–663 CrossRef CAS .H. Yamada, V. Garcia, S. Fusil, S. Boyn, M. Marinova, A. Gloter, S. Xavier, J. Grollier, E. Jacquet, C. Carrétéro, C. Deranlot, M. Bibes and A. Barthélémy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5385–5390 CrossRef CAS .E. Y. Tsymbal and A. Gruverman, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 602–604 CrossRef CAS .E. K. H. Salje, M. C. Gallardo, J. Jiménez, F. J. Romero and J. d. Cerro, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1998, 10, 5535 CrossRef CAS .H. Tanaka, H. Tabata, K. i. Ota and T. Kawai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 14112–14116 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Hilton and B. W. Ricketts, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1996, 29, 1321 CrossRef CAS .C. T. Lee, M. S. Zhang, Z. Yin and W. Zhu, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 1277–1279 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Xie, Y. M. Dong, C. J. Chen and L. Lin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 811–815 CrossRef CAS .V. Petkov, M. Gateshki, M. Niederberger and Y. Ren, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 814–821 CrossRef CAS .G. Caruntu, R. Rarig Jr, I. Dumitru and C. J. O'Connor, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 752–758 RSC .G. Garnweitner, J. Hentschel, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4594–4599 CrossRef CAS .M. Niederberger, N. Pinna, J. Polleux and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2270–2273 CrossRef CAS .L. N. Korotkov, S. A. Gridnev, S. P. Rogova, N. G. Pavlova and M. A. Belousov, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 3715 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shiratori, A. Magrez, J. Dornseiffer, F.-H. Haegel, C. Pithan and R. Waser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20122–20130 CrossRef CAS .C. Lichtensteiger, J.-M. Triscone, J. Junquera and P. Ghosez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 047603 CrossRef .T. Ahmad and A. K. Ganguli, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 1326–1332 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2194–2199 CrossRef CAS .Z. H. Hu, P. A. Thomas, A. Snigirev, I. Snigireva, A. Souvorov, P. G. R. Smith, G. W. Ross and S. Teat, Nature, 1998, 392, 690–693 CrossRef CAS .I. Vrejoiu, G. Le Rhun, L. Pintilie, D. Hesse, M. Alexe and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1657–1661 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Park, B. Min, K. J. Vahala and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1533–1536 CrossRef CAS .T. Kanai, S. Ohkoshi, A. Nakajima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 487–490 CrossRef CAS .A. Navrotsky, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2787–2793 CrossRef CAS .S. O'Brien, L. Brus and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12085–12086 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Urban, W. S. Yun, Q. Gu and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1186–1187 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Yun, J. J. Urban, Q. Gu and H. Park, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 447–450 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mao, S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15718–15719 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mao, S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2003, 408–409 RSC .M. Niederberger, G. Garnweitner, N. Pinna and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9120–9126 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mao, T.-J. Park and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5721–5735 RSC .V. Bansal, P. Poddar, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11958–11963 CrossRef CAS .R. L. Brutchey and D. E. Morse, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6564–6566 CrossRef CAS .H. Liu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1535–1540 CrossRef CAS .S. Wada, T. Tsurumi, H. Chikamori, T. Noma and T. Suzuki, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 229, 433–439 CrossRef CAS .P. R. Arya, P. Jha and A. K. Ganguli, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 415–423 RSC .P. K. Dutta and J. R. Gregg, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 843–846 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Um and H. Kumazawa, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 1295–1300 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Frey and D. A. Payne, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .H. Fu and L. Bellaiche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 257601 CrossRef .M. Dawber, P. Chandra, P. B. Littlewood and J. F. Scott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, L393–L398 CrossRef CAS .J. Junquera and P. Ghosez, Nature, 2003, 422, 506–509 CrossRef CAS .J. Lee, L. Kim, J. Kim, Y. Kim and D. Jung, in Fundamental Physics of Ferroelectrics 2002, American Institute of Physics, Washington DC,  2002 Search PubMed .C. D. Chandler, C. Roger and M. J. Hampden-Smith, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 1205–1241 CrossRef CAS .P. Gherardi and E. Matijević, Colloids Surf., 1988, 32, 257–274 CrossRef CAS .R. J. P. Corriu, D. Leclercq, P. Lefevre, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 673–674 RSC .H. S. Potdar, S. B. Deshpande, P. D. Godbole, V. J. Gunjikar and S. K. Date, J. Mater. Res., 1992, 7, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .G. Pfaff, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 721–724 RSC .F. Wang and N. Lauri, Mater. Res. Bull., 1994, 29, 451–458 CrossRef .H. S. Potdar, S. B. Deshpande and S. K. Date, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 2795–2797 CrossRef CAS .A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2292–2299 CrossRef .J. Y. Choi, C. H. Kim and D. K. Kim, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 1353–1356 CrossRef CAS .I. J. Clark, T. Takeuchi, N. Ohtori and D. C. Sinclair, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 83–91 RSC .K. M. S. Khalil, Mater. Res. Innovations, 1999, 2, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, J. Fang, S.-C. Ng, L.-M. Gan, C.-H. Chew, X. Wang and Z. Shen, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 82, 873–881 CrossRef CAS .M. Z. C. Hu, G. A. Miller, E. A. Payzant and C. J. Rawn, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 2927–2936 CrossRef CAS .E. Ciftci, M. N. Rahaman and M. Shumsky, J. Mater. Sci., 2001, 36, 4875–4882 CrossRef CAS .T. Lee, N. Yao, H. Imai and I. A. Aksay, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7656–7663 CrossRef CAS .H. Rumpf, H. Modrow, J. Hormes, H.-J. Gläsel, E. Hartmann, E. Erdem, R. Böttcher and K.-H. Hallmeier, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3415–3421 CrossRef CAS .X. Wu, L. Zou, S. Yang and D. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 239, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .I. Soten, H. Miguez, S. M. Yang, S. Petrov, N. Coombs, N. Tetreault, N. Matsuura, H. E. Ruda and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, L. Gao and J. Guo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2002, 85, 727–729 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Perez-Maqueda, M. J. Dianez, F. J. Gotor, M. J. Sayagues, C. Real and J. M. Criado, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2234–2241 RSC .J. Li, Y. J. Wu, H. Tanaka, T. Yamamoto and M. Kuwabara, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 1578–1581 CrossRef CAS .T. Ahmad, G. Kavitha, C. Narayana and A. K. Ganguli, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 1415–1421 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hakuta, H. Ura, H. Hayashi and K. Arai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 840–846 CrossRef CAS .J.-M. Hwu, W.-H. Yu, W.-C. Yang, Y.-W. Chen and Y.-Y. Chou, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 1662–1679 CrossRef CAS .U. A. Joshi and J. S. Lee, Small, 2005, 1, 1172–1176 CrossRef CAS .R. Helen, A. Cyril, L.-S. Anne, E. Catherine, M. Mario and C. François, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1137 CrossRef .X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .J. Yuh, J. C. Nino and W. M. Sigmund, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3645–3647 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Rogan, N. Tamura, G. A. Swift and E. Ustundag, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 379–381 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Tenne, A. Bruchhausen, N. D. Lanzillotti-Kimura, A. Fainstein, R. S. Katiyar, A. Cantarero, A. Soukiassian, V. Vaithyanathan, J. H. Haeni, W. Tian, D. G. Schlom, K. J. Choi, D. M. Kim, C. B. Eom, H. P. Sun, X. Q. Pan, Y. L. Li, L. Q. Chen, Q. X. Jia, S. M. Nakhmanson, K. M. Rabe and X. X. Xi, Science, 2006, 313, 1614–1616 CrossRef CAS .T. Yan, Z.-G. Shen, J.-F. Chen, X.-L. Liu, X. Tao and J. Yun, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1196–1197 CrossRef CAS .D. Vanderbilt, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1997, 2, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .S. Prosandeev, D. Wang, W. Ren, J. Íñiguez and L. Bellaiche, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Smith, K. Page, T. Siegrist, P. L. Redmond, E. C. Walter, R. Seshadri, L. E. Brus and M. L. Steigerwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6955–6963 CrossRef CAS .C. Liu, B. Zou, A. J. Rondinone and Z. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4344–4345 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Hernandez, K.-S. Chang, E. R. Fisher and P. K. Dorhout, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 480–482 CrossRef CAS .F. Guangneng, H. Lixia and H. Xueguang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 279, 489–493 CrossRef .H. Xu and L. Gao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86, 203–205 CrossRef CAS .M. Niederberger, G. Garnweitner, N. Pinna and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9120–9126 CrossRef CAS .F. C. M. Woudenberg, W. F. C. Sager, J. E. ten Elshof and H. Verweij, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 471, 134–139 CrossRef CAS .K. Su, N. Nuraje and N.-L. Yang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11369–11372 CrossRef CAS .Y. Luo, I. Szafraniak, N. D. Zakharov, V. Nagarajan, M. Steinhart, R. B. Wehrspohn, J. H. Wendorff, R. Ramesh and M. Alexe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 440–442 CrossRef CAS .H. Zheng, X. Liu, G. Meng and O. Sørensen, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2001, 12, 629–635 CrossRef CAS .S. Wada, T. Tsurumi, H. Chikamori, T. Noma and T. Suzuki, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 229, 433–439 CrossRef CAS .G. Ahmad, M. B. Dickerson, Y. Cai, S. E. Jones, E. M. Ernst, J. P. Vernon, M. S. Haluska, Y. Fang, J. Wang, G. Subramanyam, R. R. Naik and K. H. Sandhage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 130, 4–5 CrossRef .X. H. Zheng, P. J. Chen, N. Ma, Z. H. Ma and D. P. Tang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2012, 23, 990–994 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Achenbach, W. J. James and R. Gerson, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1967, 50, 437–437 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–gel science: the physics and chemistry of sol–gel processing, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego,  1990 Search PubMed .C. Lemoine, B. Gilbert, B. Michaux, J.-P. Pirard and A. Lecloux, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1994, 175, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .G. Pfaff, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 591–594 RSC .P. D. Godbole, S. B. Deshpande, S. K. Date, R. Nawathey and S. B. Ogale, Ferroelectrics, 1990, 102, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .U.-Y. Hwang, H.-S. Park and K.-K. Koo, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 2168–2174 CrossRef CAS .M. Veith, S. Mathur, N. Lecerf, V. Huch, T. Decker, H. P. Beck, W. Eiser and R. Haberkorn, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 17, 145–158 CrossRef CAS .J.-H. Xu, H. Ke, D.-C. Jia, W. Wang and Y. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 472, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .C. Fu, M. Huo, W. Cai and X. Deng, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 412, 142–145 CrossRef CAS .P. Tang, H. Chen, F. Cao, G. Pan, M. Xu, K. Wang and Y. Tong, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2012, 110–116, 1912–1917 CAS .J. Wei and D. Xue, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 3368–3373 CrossRef CAS .U. A. Joshi, S. Yoon, S. Baik and J. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12249–12256 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Chen, Z. C. Qiu, J. P. Zhou, G. Zhu, X. B. Bian and P. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 126, 560–567 CrossRef CAS .C. Chen, J. Cheng, S. Yu, L. Che and Z. Meng, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 291, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, Y. Wang and X. Wang, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 120, 43–46 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhao, X. Wang, R. Chen and L. Li, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 2329–2332 CrossRef CAS .N. Bao, L. Shen, G. Srinivasan, K. Yanagisawa and A. Gupta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8634–8642 CAS .Y. Jing, S. Jin, Y. Jia, J. Han and J. Sun, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 6315–6317 CrossRef CAS .M. Miyauchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12440–12445 CAS .J. Xie, T. Ji, X. Ou-Yang, Z. Xiao and H. Shi, Solid State Commun., 2008, 147, 226–229 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hu, H. Gu, X. Sun, J. You and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 193120 CrossRef .H. Gu, Y. Hu, J. You, Z. Hu, Y. Yuan and T. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 024319 CrossRef .H. Gu, Y. Hu, H. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Hu, Y. Yuan and J. You, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 293–297 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, R. Saeterli, P. M. rvik, A. Van Helvoort, R. Holmestad, T. Grande and M.-A. Einarsrud, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2538–2541 CrossRef CAS .G. Wang, P. M. Rørvik, A. T. J. van Helvoort, R. Holmestad, T. Grande and M.-A. Einarsrud, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2221 CrossRef CAS .R. Per Martin, A. Åsmund, T. J. v. H. Antonius, H. Randi, T. Thomas, G. Tor and E. Mari-Ann, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 225605 CrossRef .G. Xu, Z. Ren, P. Du, W. Weng, G. Shen and G. Han, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 907–910 CrossRef CAS .Z. Ren, G. Xu, X. Wei, Y. Liu, G. Shen and G. Han, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 2645–2648 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, C. S. Sandu, E. Colla, Y. Wang, W. Ma, R. Gysel, H. J. Trodahl, N. Setter and M. Kuball, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 133107 CrossRef .X. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang and Z. Dong, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 3462–3465 CrossRef CAS .J. Luo and P. A. Maggard, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 514–517 CrossRef CAS .S.-B. Cho, M. Oledzka and R. E. Riman, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 226, 313–326 CrossRef CAS .L. Huang, Z. Jia, I. Kymissis and S. O'Brien, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 554–560 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen and Q. a. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 3378–3380 CrossRef CAS .N. Das, R. Majumdar, A. Sen and H. S. Maiti, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Limmer, S. Seraji, Y. Wu, T. P. Chou, C. Nguyen and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .S. Hirano, S. Shimada and M. Kuwabara, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 783–786 CrossRef CAS .T. Hosokura, Y. Sakabe and M. Kuwabara, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2005, 33, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .S. Singh and S. B. Krupanidhi, Phys. Lett. A, 2007, 367, 356–359 CrossRef CAS .T.-J. Park, Y. Mao and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2708–2709 RSC .X. Y. Zhang, C. W. Lai, X. Zhao, D. Y. Wang and J. Y. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 143102 CrossRef .X. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Dai and C. W. Lai, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2005, 33, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .F. Gao, Y. Yuan, K. F. Wang, X. Y. Chen, F. Chen, J. M. Liu and Z. F. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 102506 CrossRef .J. Wei, D. Xue and Y. Xu, Scr. Mater., 2008, 58, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Hernandez-Sanchez, K.-S. Chang, M. T. Scancella, J. L. Burris, S. Kohli, E. R. Fisher and P. K. Dorhout, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5909–5919 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, M. Steinhart, J. Yu and U. Gösele, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 685–690 CrossRef CAS .L. Liu, T. Ning, Y. Ren, Z. Sun, F. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Xie, L. Song, S. Luo, D. Liu, J. Shen, W. Ma and Y. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 149, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Hsu, I. C. Leu, Y. M. Sun and M. H. Hon, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 1421–1425 CrossRef CAS .S. Singh and S. B. Krupanidhi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2007, 87, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. F. D. Morrison, I. Szafraniak, V. Nagarajan, R. B. Wehrspohn, J. H. W. M. Steinhart, N. D. Zakharov, E. D. Mishina, K. A. Vorotilov, S. N. A. S. Sigov, M. Alexe, R. Ramesh and J. F. Scott, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2003, 4, 114–122 Search PubMed .X. Y. Zhang, X. Zhao, C. W. Lai, J. Wang, X. G. Tang and J. Y. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4190–4192 CrossRef CAS .O. Zhigalina, E. Mishina, N. Sherstyuk, K. Vorotilov, V. Vasiljev, A. Sigov, O. Lebedev, Y. Grigoriev, M. De Santo, R. Barberi and T. Rasing, Ferroelectrics, 2006, 336, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, X. Li, H. Imrane, Y. Chen, T. Goodrich, Z. Cai, K. S. Ziemer, J. Y. Huang and N. X. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 152501 CrossRef .J. Kim, S. A. Yang, Y. C. Choi, J. K. Han, K. O. Jeong, Y. J. Yun, D. J. Kim, S. M. Yang, D. Yoon, H. Cheong, K.-S. Chang, T. W. Noh and S. D. Bu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1813–1818 CrossRef CAS .A. Nourmohammadi, M. Bahrevar, S. Schulze and M. Hietschold, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 4753–4759 CrossRef CAS .A. Nourmohammadi, M. A. Bahrevar and M. Hietschold, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3349–3351 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Limmer, S. Seraji, M. J. Forbess, Y. Wu, T. P. Chou, C. Nguyen and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1269–1272 CrossRef CAS .T. Wen, J. Zhang, T. P. Chou, S. J. Limmer and G. Cao, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2005, 33, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .E. D. Mishina, K. A. Vorotilov, V. A. Vasil'ev, A. S. Sigov, N. Ohta and S. Nakabayashi, J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 2002, 95, 502–504 CrossRef CAS .F. D. Morrison, Y. Luo, I. Szafraniak, V. Nagarajan, R. B. Wehrspohn, M. Steinhart, J. H. Wendroff, N. D. Zakharov, E. D. Mishina, K. A. Vorotilov, A. S. Sigov, S. Nakabayashi, M. Alexe, R. Ramesh and J. F. Scott, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2003, 4, 114–122 CAS .G. S. H. Jang, A. Bernadette, R. Fisher Ellen and P. K. Dorhout, J. Korean Chem. Soc., 2002, 46, 242–251 CrossRef .Y. Luo, I. Szafraniak, V. Nagarajan, R. B. Wehrspohn, M. Steinhart, J. H. Wendorff, N. D. Zakharov, R. Ramesh and M. Alexe, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2003, 59, 1513–1520 CrossRef CAS .X. H. Zhu, P. R. Evans, D. Byrne, A. Schilling, C. Douglas, R. J. Pollard, R. M. Bowman, J. M. Gregg, F. D. Morrison and J. F. Scott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 122913–122913 CrossRef .T. Lee, N. Yao and I. A. Aksay, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3866–3870 CrossRef CAS .D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .J. Yuh, L. Perez, W. M. Sigmund and J. C. Nino, Phys. E, 2007, 37, 254–259 CrossRef CAS .J. Yuh, L. Perez, W. Sigmund and J. Nino, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .J. T. McCann, J. I. L. Chen, D. Li, Z.-G. Ye and Y. Xia, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 424, 162–166 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, D. Zhang, Q. Zhao, C. Wang, W. Zhang and Y. Wei, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .W. Yu and J. S.-A. Jorge, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 32 CrossRef .N. Dharmaraj, C. H. Kim and H. Y. Kim, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3085–3089 CrossRef CAS .X. Shiyou, S. Yong and K. Sang-Gook, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4497 CrossRef .Z. H. Zhou, X. S. Gao, J. Wang, K. Fujihara, S. Ramakrishna and V. Nagarajan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 052902 CrossRef .W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R89 CrossRef CAS .S. Maensiri, W. Nuansing, J. Klinkaewnarong, P. Laokul and J. Khemprasit, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 297, 578–583 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Xie, J. Y. Li, R. Proksch, Y. M. Liu, Y. C. Zhou, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Ou, L. N. Lan and Y. Qiao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 222904 CrossRef .A. R. Tao, K. Niesz and D. E. Morse, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7916–7923 RSC .C. W. Beier, M. A. Cuevas and R. L. Brutchey, Small, 2008, 4, 2102–2106 CrossRef CAS .N. Nuraje, X. Dang, J. Qi, M. A. Allen, Y. Lei and A. M. Belcher, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2885–2889 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Scott, R. Palai, A. Kumar, M. K. Singh, N. M. Murari, N. K. Karan and R. S. Katiyar, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 1762–1768 CrossRef CAS .W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1763–1766 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Ganpule, A. Stanishevsky, Q. Su, S. Aggarwal, J. Melngailis, E. Williams and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 409–411 CrossRef CAS .H. Han, Y. Kim, M. Alexe, D. Hesse and W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4599–4613 CrossRef CAS .M. Alexe, C. Harnagea, D. Hesse and U. Gosele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1793–1795 CrossRef CAS .M. Alexe, C. Harnagea, D. Hesse and U. Gosele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 242–244 CrossRef CAS .S. Buhlmann, B. Dwir, J. Baborowski and P. Muralt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3195–3197 CrossRef CAS .N. Nuraje, K. Su, J. Samson, A. Haboosheh, R. I. Maccuspie and H. Matsui, Supramol. Chem., 2006, 18, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .N. Nuraje, I. A. Banerjee, R. I. MacCuspie, L. T. Yu and H. Matsui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8088–8089 CrossRef CAS .I. Szafraniak, C. Harnagea, R. Scholz, S. Bhattacharyya, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2211–2213 CrossRef CAS .H. F. Hajime Nonomura, M. Shimizu, H. Niu and K. Honda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 42, 5918–5921 CrossRef .H. Fujisawa, M. Okaniwa, H. Nonomura, M. Shimizu and H. Niu, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 24, 1641–1645 CrossRef CAS .H. Han, K. Lee, W. Lee, M. Alexe, D. Hesse and S. Baik, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 5167–5181 CrossRef CAS .M.-W. Chu, I. Szafraniak, R. Scholz, C. Harnagea, D. Hesse, M. Alexe and U. Gosele, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .M.-W. Chu, I. Szafraniak, D. Hesse, M. Alexe and U. Gösele, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 174112 CrossRef .N. Nuraje, S. Mohammed, L. L. Yang and H. Matsui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2546–2548 CrossRef CAS .S. Buhlmann, P. Muralt and S. V. Allmen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2614–2616 CrossRef CAS .W. Lee, M. Alexe, K. Nielsch and U. Gösele, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3325–3327 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Lee, W. Lee, M. Alexe, K. Nielsch, D. Hesse and U. Gosele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 152906 CrossRef .W. Ma, D. Hesse and U. Gösele, Small, 2005, 1, 837–841 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma and D. Hesse, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3214–3216 CrossRef CAS .H. Han, R. Ji, Y. J. Park, S. K. Lee, G. L. Rhun, M. Alexe, K. Nielsch, D. Hesse, U. Gösele and S. Baik, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 015301 CrossRef .S. Clemens, T. Schneller, A. van der Hart, F. Peter and R. Waser, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1357–1361 CrossRef CAS .S. Kronholz, S. Rathgeber, S. Karthäuser, H. Kohlstedt, S. Clemens and T. Schneller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2346–2354 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kim, H. Han, Y. Kim, W. Lee, M. Alexe, S. Baik and J. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2141–2146 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Lee, D. Hesse, M. Alexe, W. Lee, K. Nielsch and U. Gosele, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124302–124306 CrossRef .M. Foeth, A. Sfera, P. Stadelmann and P.-A. Buffat, J. Electron Microsc., 1999, 48, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .E. K. W. Goo, R. K. Mishra and G. Thomas, J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 52, 2940–2943 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Bursill and P. J. Lin, Ferroelectrics, 1986, 70, 191–203 CrossRef CAS .S. Stemmer, S. K. Streiffer, F. Ernst and M. Rüuhle, Philos. Mag. A, 1995, 71, 713–724 CAS .H. Lichte, M. Reibold, K. Brand and M. Lehmann, Ultramicroscopy, 2002, 93, 199–212 CrossRef CAS .C.-L. Jia, S.-B. Mi, K. Urban, I. Vrejoiu, M. Alexe and D. Hesse, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Allen, W. McBride, N. L. O'Leary and M. P. Oxley, Ultramicroscopy, 2004, 100, 91–104 CrossRef CAS .K. Terabe, M. Nakamura, S. Takekawa, K. Kitamura, S. Higuchi, Y. Gotoh and Y. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 433–435 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Kalinin, D. A. Bonnell, T. Alvarez, X. Lei, Z. Hu, J. H. Ferris, Q. Zhang and S. Dunn, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 589–593 CrossRef CAS .Y. Martin, C. C. Williams and H. K. Wickramasinghe, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 61, 4723–4729 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Stern, B. D. Terris, H. J. Mamin and D. Rugar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 2717–2719 CrossRef .L. M. Blinov, R. Barberi, S. P. Palto, M. P. D. Santo and S. G. Yudin, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 3960–3966 CrossRef CAS .P. Lehnen, J. Dec and W. Kleemann, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2000, 33, 1932 CrossRef CAS .E. Z. Luo, Z. Xie, J. B. Xu, I. H. Wilson and L. H. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Hong, S.-i. Park and Z. G. Khim, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1999, 70, 1735–1739 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Eng, M. Bammerlin, C. Loppacher, M. Guggisberg, R. Bennewitz, R. Lüthi, E. Meyer and H. J. Güntherodt, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 140, 253–258 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsunekawa, J. Ichikawa, H. Nagata and T. Fukuda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 137, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Hong, D. S. Kahng, J. C. Shin, H. J. Kim and Z. G. Khim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1998, 16, 2942–2946 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Hong, K. H. Noh, S.-i. Park, S. I. Kwun and Z. G. Khim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 5078–5084 CrossRef CAS .H. Bluhm, A. Wadas, R. Wiesendanger, A. Roshko, J. A. Aust and D. Nam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 146–148 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xie, E. Z. Luo, J. B. Xu, J. An, B. Sundaravel, I. H. Wilson, Z. Y. Wang, X. L. Chen and L. H. Zhao, Phys. Lett. A, 2003, 309, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .G. Zavala, J. H. Fendler and S. Trolier-McKinstry, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 7480–7491 CrossRef CAS .Y. Martin, D. W. Abraham and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 52, 1103–1105 CrossRef .D. A. Bonnell and R. Shao, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2003, 7, 161–171 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Son, S. H. Bang and J. H. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3505–3507 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Giocondi and G. S. Rohrer, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 241–242 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Barrett and C. F. Quate, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 2725–2733 CrossRef CAS .Y.-G. Wang, W. Kleemann, T. Woike and R. Pankrath, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 3333–3336 CrossRef CAS .R. Luthi, H. Haefke, K.-P. Meyer, E. Meyer, L. Howald and H.-J. Guntherodt, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 7461–7471 CrossRef .J. Muñoz-Saldaña, G. A. Schneider and L. M. Eng, Surf. Sci., 2001, 480, L402–L410 CrossRef .H. Bluhm, R. Wiesendanger and K.-P. Meyer, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1996, 14, 1180–1183 CrossRef CAS .A. Gruverman and A. Kholkin, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2006, 69, 2443 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cho and K. Ohara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3842–3844 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Lukas, Nanotechnology, 1999, 10, 405 CrossRef .J. Seidel, P. Maksymovych, Y. Batra, A. Katan, S. Y. Yang, Q. He, A. P. Baddorf, S. V. Kalinin, C. H. Yang, J. C. Yang, Y. H. Chu, E. K. H. Salje, H. Wormeester, M. Salmeron and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 197603 CrossRef CAS .C. Durkan, D. P. Chu, P. Migliorato and M. E. Welland, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 366–368 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 125408 CrossRef .S. Hong, J. Woo, H. Shin, J. U. Jeon, Y. E. Pak, E. L. Colla, N. Setter, E. Kim and K. No, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 1377–1386 CrossRef CAS .X. X. Liu, R. Heiderhoff, H. P. Abicht and L. J. Balk, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, 74 CrossRef CAS .U. Rabe, V. Scherer, S. Hirsekorn and W. Arnold, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1997, 15, 1506–1511 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Scott, Science, 2007, 315, 954–959 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Scott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, R361 CrossRef CAS .C. Andy, D. Jamal, L. Jeong-Soo and M. Meyyappan, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 412001 CrossRef .J. F. Scott, F. D. Morrison, M. Miyake, P. Zubko, X. Lou, V. M. Kugler, S. Rios, M. Zhang, T. Tatsuta, O. Tsuji and T. J. Leedham, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 1691–1701 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Gregg, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 206, 577–587 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Wouters, D. Maes, L. Goux, J. G. Lisoni, V. Paraschiv, J. A. Johnson, M. Schwitters, J.-L. Everaert, W. Boullart, M. Schaekers, M. Willegems, H. V. Meeren, L. Haspeslagh, C. Artoni, C. Caputa, P. Casella, G. Corallo, G. Russo, R. Zambrano, H. Monchoix, G. Vecchio and L. V. Autryve, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 051603 CrossRef .K. Kim and S. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 051604 CrossRef .Y. Shimamoto, K. Kushida-Abdelghafar, H. Miki and Y. Fujisaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 3096–3097 CrossRef CAS .A. Rüdiger and R. Waser, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 449, 2–6 CrossRef .B. I. Seo, U. A. Shaislamov, S. W. Kim, H. K. Kim, B. Yang and S. K. Hong, Phys. E, 2007, 37, 274–278 CrossRef CAS .M. Feng, W. Wang, Y. Zhou and D. Jia, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 52, 120–123 CrossRef CAS .P. Muralt, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2000, 10, 136 CrossRef CAS .J. B. P. Muralt and N. Ledermann, Piezoelectric Materials in Devices: Extended Reviews on Current and Emerging Piezoelectric Materials, Technology, and Applications, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne,  2002 Search PubMed .A. M. Flynn, L. S. Tavrow, S. F. Bart, R. A. Brooks, D. J. Ehrlich, K. R. Udayakumar and L. E. Cross, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 1992, 1, 44–51 CrossRef .M. A. Dubois and P. Muralt, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 1998, 45, 1169–1177 CrossRef CAS .P. Luginbuhl, S. D. Collins, G. A. Racine, M. A. Gretillat, N. F. De Rooij, K. G. Brooks and N. Setter, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 1997, 6, 337–346 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nemirovsky, A. Nemirovsky, P. Muralt and N. Setter, Sens. Actuators, A, 1996, 56, 239–249 CrossRef CAS .N. Ledermann, J. Baborowski, A. Seifert, B. Willing, S. Hiboux, P. Muralt, N. Setter and M. Forster, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2001, 35, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .T. Fujii and S. Watanabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 467–468 CrossRef CAS .J. Baborowski, N. Ledermann, P. Muralt and D. Schmitt, Int. J. Comput. Methods Eng. Sci., 2003, 4, 471–475 CrossRef .J. J. Bernstein, S. L. Finberg, K. Houston, L. C. Niles, H. D. Chen, L. E. Cross, K. K. Li and K. Udayakumar, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 1997, 44, 960–969 CrossRef .Y.-S. Kim, C. Sunyong Lee, W.-H. Jin, S. Jang, H.-J. Nam and J.-U. Bu, Sens. Mater., 2005, 17, 57–63 CAS .K. Yamashita, H. Katata, M. Okuyama, H. Miyoshi, G. Kato, S. Aoyagi and Y. Suzuki, Sens. Actuators, A, 2002, 97–98, 302–307 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Gevorgian and E. L. Kollberg, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2001, 49, 2117–2124 CrossRef CAS .V. V. Lemanov, A. V. Sotnikov, E. P. Smirnova, M. Weihnacht and R. Kunze, Solid State Commun., 1999, 110, 611–614 CrossRef CAS .N. Nuraje, R. Asmatulu and S. E. Kudaibergenov, Curr. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2, 124–146 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .H. G. Kim, O. S. Becker, J. S. Jang, S. M. Ji, P. H. Borse and J. S. Lee, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 1214–1218 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Wrighton, A. B. Ellis, P. T. Wolczanski, D. L. Morse, H. B. Abrahamson and D. S. Ginley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 2774–2779 CrossRef CAS .K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 543–544 RSC .K. Domen, S. Naito, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 92, 433–434 CrossRef CAS .H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4285–4292 CrossRef CAS .H. Mizoguchi, K. Ueda, M. Orita, S.-C. Moon, K. Kajihara, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Mater. Res. Bull., 2002, 37, 2401–2406 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim, D. W. Hwang, H.-G. Kim, S. W. Bae, S. M. Ji and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2488–2489 RSC .J. Deng, S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra, Y. R. Smith and M. Misra, J. Fund. Renew. Energ. Appl., 2011, 1, 1–10 Search PubMed .U. A. Joshi, J. S. Jang, P. H. Borse and J. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 242106 CrossRef .H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5029–5034 CrossRef CAS .R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8992–8995 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Barbé, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157–3171 CrossRef .S. Burnside, J.-E. Moser, K. Brooks, M. Grätzel and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9328–9332 CrossRef CAS .R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S.-W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y. H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Yang, S. J. Lee, S. Yi, B. G. Chae, S. H. Lee, H. J. Joo and M. S. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 774–776 CrossRef CAS .P. Poosanaas, A. Dogan, S. Thakoor and K. Uchino, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 1508–1512 CrossRef CAS .L. Pintilie, I. Vrejoiu, G. L. Rhun and M. Alexe, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 064109 CrossRef .
Footnote† The authors declare no competing financial interests.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 		 

 	Scheme 1  Lattice units of barium titanate in both cubic, paraelectric (a), and tetragonal, ferroelectric (b and c), phases. The two polarization variants (b) and (c) have 180° difference in polarization direction due to the off-center position of the Ti4+. In (b) the polarization is down and in (c) it is up.	 

Phase transformation		
BaTiO3	<130 °C (Curie temperature)	130–1432 °C
SrTiO3	<−168 °C (Curie temperature)	>−168 °C

 	Fig. 1  Size effects in barium titanate nanoparticles. The change of particle size of barium titanate with its lattice axial ratio (a) and with lattice constant (b).26 Reproduced with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 2  Flow charts for SrTiO3 synthesis. (a) Sol–gel process, (b) sol-precipitation.133 Reprinted with permission from Springer, Copyright © Springer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Proposed PZT particle formation mechanism under hydrothermal conditions using TMAH as an organic mineralizer.168 Reprinted with permission from Elsevier, Copyright © Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM and HRTEM images of BaTiO3 nanostructures prepared at different conditions from Na2Ti3O7 nanotubes: (a1) and (a2) show hexagonal BaTiO3 nanoparticles [in 0.2 M Ba(OH)2 at 80 °C] and (a3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure; (b1) and (b2) show coral-like nanostructures of assembled nanorods [in 0.1 M Ba(OH)2 at 120 °C] and (b3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure. TEM and HRTEM images of BaTiO3 nanostructures prepared from Na2Ti3O7 nanowires: (c1) and (c2) show starfish-like BaTiO3 nanoparticles [in 0.2 M Ba(OH)2 at 80 °C] and (c3) shows their crystalline structure; (d1) and (d2) show sword-like BaTiO3 nanostructures [in 0.1 M Ba(OH)2 at 120 °C] and (d3) shows their corresponding crystalline structure.153 Reprinted with permission from ACS, Copyright © ACS.	 

 	Fig. 5  Multiferroic bismuth ferrite (BiFeO3) nanotubes have been synthesized using a modified template methodology.176 Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the nanoring structure of the precursors that self-assemble with the peptide.28 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


BT1	HQPANDPSWYTG	5.1
BT2	NTISGLRYAPHM	8.8

 	Fig. 7  Polarization versus applied electric field.135 Reprinted with permission from ACS, copyright © American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme for growth of strontium titanate nanowires. (b) TEM and HRTEM images of strontium titanate nanowires.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  Two typical example of top-down approaches for nanostructured ferroelectrics: (a) focus ion beam (FIB) milling,218 (b) EB direct writing (EBDW).220 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 10  Two typical examples of bottom-up approach: (a) chemical solution deposition (CSD)225 and (b) metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).226 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Selective growths of PbTiO3 nano-islands (a)238 and well-ordered large-area arrays of ferroelectric La-substituted Bi4Ti3O12 (BLT) nanostructures prepared by pulsed laser deposition using gold nanotube membranes as masks (b).241 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

Top-down	FIB	High resolution	Surface damage	70	Island capacitor
Use of high quality film	Low throughput
Uniform size and array
EBDW	High resolution	Volume shrinkage	70	Island
Uniform size and array	Shape change
No etching process	Low throughput
EB-litho	High resolution	Surface damage	100	Island capacitor
Uniform size and array	Low throughput
Etching process
Bottom-up	CSD	Easy process	Difficulty in uniform size, array, and shape	<10	Island
Easy to generate various size and to access to extremely small size
MOCVD	Easy process	Difficulty in uniform size, array, and shape	<10	Island
Easy to generate various size and to access to extremely small size
PLD	Easy process	Difficulty in uniform size, array and shape	<10	Island
Access to extremely small feature
Modified bottom-up	Registered depo	Uniform size and array	Lithoprocess	50	Island
Low throughput
Mask-assisted depo	Uniform size and array on large area	Mask fabrication process	40	Island capacitor
Easy process
High crystallinity
Block copolymer	Uniform size on large area	Difficulty in uniform array and shape	20	Island
Easy process
Access to extremely small feature

 	Fig. 12  Atomic scale TEM image of the PZT nanostructure.247 Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright © Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) PFM amplitude and (b) PFM phase images of a BFO sample with 109° stripe domains, (c) simultaneously acquired c-AFM image of the same area showing that each 109 domain wall is electrically conductive.276 Reprinted with permission from The American Physical Society, copyright © The American Physical Society.	 

Minimum cell size	2 by 2 μm2
Read time	10 ns
Erase/rewrite time	10 ns
Operating temperatures	−100 °C to +300 °C
Minimum access voltage	1.0 V
Activation field	120 kV cm−1
Breakdown voltage	40 V
Fatigue to 50% Q	1012 cycles
Retention	5 years (real time)
Radiation hardness	5 Mrad cm−2 (X-rays)
1011 rad cm−2 s−1 (X-rays)
1014 cm−2 (neutrons)

Pr (μC cm−2)	10–40	5–10	10–15
Ec (kV cm−1)	50–100	30–75	30–75
Crystallization temperature	450–650	650–800	650–750

 	Fig. 14  Samsung 32 Mb ferroelectric random access memories.285 Reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright © John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Three-dimensional topographic image of a BaTiO3 nanowire. (b)–(f) Successive EFM images showing that four distinct polarization domains can be independently manipulated by an external electric field.74 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of manipulating and probing the electric polarization of BaTiO3 nanoparticles with EFM. (b) Topological AFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles; scale bar = 30 nm. (c) EFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles with Vprobe = +2 V after Vwrite = +12 V was applied on the nanoparticles across a conductive AFM tip and a gold substrate; scale bar = 30 nm. (d) EFM image of barium titanate nanoparticles with Vprobe = +2 V after Vwrite = −12 V was applied on the nanoparticles across a conductive AFM tip and a gold substrate; scale bar = 30 nm.28 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Amplitude of piezoresponse of PZT patterns with lateral size of 100–200 nm on SrTiO3 substrate.222 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 18  Partial image of the 100 × 100 thermopiezoelectric cantilever array.29 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 19  Process flow for the fabrication of suspended membranes.29 Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 20  Parallel-plate (a) and coplanar-plate (b) ferroelectric varactors.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Photocurrent density–potential curves of BiFeO3 nanocubes (i) and BiFeO3 bulk (ii) thin film electrodes under illumination. (b) Photocatalytic oxygen evolution under visible light irradiation over BiFeO3 nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright © American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of water splitting principle (a) and main steps in electron–hole transport during water splitting (b).308 Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Energy band diagram for hydrogen production of dye-sensitized SrTiO3 under visible light irradiation. (b) Hydrogen gas production by water-splitting utilizing virus-templated SrTiO3 nanowires deposited with Pt nanoparticles under UV irradiation and visible light irradiation with dye sensitization.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 24  z-Scheme based water splitting system under visible light irradiation.309 Reprinted with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright © Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Pt/TaON (0.2 g)	Pt/WO3 (0.2 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	120	60	0.4 (420 nm)
Pt/CaTaO2N (0.1 g)	Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	43	21	 
Pt/BaTaO2N (0.1 g)	Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	67	33	0.1 (420–440 nm)
Pt./SrTiO3:Cr/Ta (0.2 g)	Pt/WO3 (0.325 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	80	24.6	1 (420 nm)
Pt/ZrO2–TaON (0.025 g)	Pt/WO3 (0.05 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	1040	266	6.3 (420.5 nm)
Pt/TaON (0.05 g)	RuO2/TaON (0.05 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>420 nm	60	30	0–0.2
Ru/SrTiO3:Rh (0.05 g)	BiVO4 (0.05 g)	Fe3+/Fe2+	300 W Xe	>420 nm	378	179	0.3 (420 nm)
Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)	Bi2MoO6 (0.02 g)	Fe3+/Fe2+	300 W Xe	>420 nm	950	445	0.2 (440 nm)
Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)	WO3 (0.02 g)	Fe3+/Fe2+	300 W Xe	>420 nm	390	200	0.2 (440 nm)
Pt/SrTiO3:Rh (0.02 g)	BiVO4 (0.02 g)	Fe3+/Fe2+	300 W Xe	>420 nm	750	360	0.3 (440 nm)
Pt/ZrO2–TaON (0.05 g)	Ir/TiO2/Ta3N5 (0.05 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>400 nm	∼45	∼22	 
Coumarin/Pt/H4Nb6O17 (0.05 g)	IrO2–Pt/WO3 (0.1 g)	IO3−/I−	300 W Xe	>400 nm	48.3	12.1	<0.1 (500 nm)
Ru/SrTiO3:Rh	BiVO4	 	300 W Xe	>400 nm	400	190	1.7 (420 nm)

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram for a liquid junction solar cell made of BFO nanoparticles. (b) Photovoltaic properties of a solar cell using virus-templated BFO nanoparticles as the photoanode.215 Reprinted with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright © WILEY-VCH.	 
Footnote
† The authors declare no competing financial interests.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
