Quasi-solid-state dye sensitized solar cells with 1,3:2,4-di- O -benzylidene- d -sorbitol derivatives as low molecular weight organic gelators  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B402324B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B402324B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1905-1909Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsQuasi-solid-state dye sensitized solar cells with 1,3:2,4-di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol derivatives as low molecular weight organic gelators

        
          
            Nils 
            Mohmeyer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hans-Werner 
            Schmidt
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shaik M. 
            Zakeeruddin
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      *b
aMacromolecular Chemistry I and Bayreuther Zentrum für Grenzflächen und Kolloide (BZKG), University Bayreuth, D-95447 Bayreuth, Germany. E-mail: hans-werner.schmidt@uni-bayreuth.de;  Fax: +(49) 921 / 55-3206;   Tel: +(49) 921 / 55-3200
bLaboratory for Photonics and Interfaces, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, CH-015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Received 
      16th February 2004
    , Accepted 16th April 2004First published on 18th May 2004Abstract1,3:2,4-Di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS) and its derivatives are efficient gelators to solidify organic solvents over a wide range of polarity. In this paper we demonstrate the usefulness of certain DBS derivatives as efficient gelators to form thermoreversible gels in electrolyte solutions which are of particular interest for solar cell applications. The adjustable, high sol–gel phase transition temperature of 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethylbenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DMDBS) with a 3-methoxypropionitrile-based electrolyte made this particular organic gelator very attractive in dye sensitized solar cells. For example, with an amphiphilic ruthenium dye and a quasi-solid-state gel electrolyte system based on 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethylbenzylidene-D-sorbitol/3-methoxypropionitrile, a stable overall solar energy conversion efficiency of 6.1% was achieved at AM 1.5 sunlight illumination (99.8 mW cm−2).
Introduction
Low molecular weight organic gelators (LMOGs) are organic molecules which are added in small quantities to liquids that form isotropic solutions at elevated temperatures and which form upon cooling a gel. The LMOG molecules are capable of self-organizing into finely dispersed anisotropic aggregates within the organic solvent resulting in a three-dimensional structure and causing the gelation. Very specific and balanced supramolecular interactions of the gelator molecules such as hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, π–π interactions and electrostatic interactions are required for successful formation of the three-dimensional network. Such network structures commonly melt upon heating, but are reformed again during the cooling process, revealing the thermoreversibility of the system. LMOGs constitute an important class of functional materials with a broad range of applications in templated material synthesis, drug delivery systems, personal care products, separation technology and biomimetics.1–7 1,3:2,4-Di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS) is an excellent example of a LMOG and is a versatile gelling agent for a wide range of organic solvents.8–10 The hydrophobic phenyl rings of the DBS molecules in combination with the polar hydroxyl groups facilitate its dissolution into a variety of organic solvents. The particular molecular geometry and the terminal hydroxyl groups forming well-organized hydrogen bonds are responsible for the supramolecular aggregation, the network formation and the gelation of the organic solvents. The aim of this paper is to explore DBS and methyl-substituted DBS derivatives with respect to their gelation ability in several organic solvents of different polarity and electrolyte solutions,11,12 with the goal of using them in dye sensitized solar cells (DSC) as quasi-solid gelled electrolyte. Dye sensitized nanocrystalline solar cells have received great attention due to their high power conversion efficiency and low production cost.13 Additionally, work has been done to replace liquid electrolytes with p-type semiconductors and hole-conducting materials but currently with moderate success.14,15 Recently, the interest in quasi-solid-state dye sensitized solar cells has risen immensely.16–20 The advantage of using LMOGs in dye sensitized solar cells is to contain the volatile organic solvent intact inside the solar cell which may lead to production advantages and to a better performance of the device.19 Of particular interest are sol–gel transition temperatures above 100 °C at low concentrations of gelator and unchanged or even improved overall solar cell performance. In comparison to the literature we could increase the sol–gel transition temperature up to 105 °C, which is of advantage for the long-term stability of the solar cell. Here we report on the structure–property relationship of the commercially available 1,3:2,4-di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS), 1,3:2,4-di-O-methyl-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (MDBS) and 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethyl-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DMDBS) with respect to the gelation capability of several organic solvents and electrolytes and especially their use as quasi-solid-state gelled electrolytes for dye sensitized solar cells.
Results and discussion
Only very special molecules can form gels in different polarity solvents and electrolytes.5,11,12 Especially in electrolytes the gelator molecules have a high tendency to precipitate. One of them, DBS, has shown a very high gelation efficiency in polar as well as non-polar organic solvents.8,9 In this paper we investigated the gelation ability of 1,3:2,4-di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS), 1,3:2,4-di-O-methyl-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (MDBS) and 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethyl-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DMDBS) in different organic solvents, with respect to an application in dye sensitized solar cells. The structures of DBS and its methyl-substituted (MDBS) and dimethyl-substituted (DMDBS) derivatives are shown in Fig. 1. Polarity and melting points of the gelators have a great influence on the gel formation and gel quality.
 Fig. 1  Structures of sorbitol derivatives DBS (a), MDBS (b) and DMDBS (c). 
The results of the gelation tests are summarized in Table 1. Mixtures of 1 wt% of the DBS derivatives in the solvent were heated until a clear solution was obtained and cooled to room temperature with a rate of approximately 5 °C min−1. The gelation ability in the investigated series is strongly influenced by the number of methyl groups, which also correlates with an increase in the melting temperature of the compounds [Tm(DBS)
				= 227 °C, Tm(MDBS)
				= 267 °C, Tm(DMDBS)
				= 277 °C]. The different gelation properties are clearly visible in the apolar solvent p-xylene. DBS forms a very weak gel, the MDBS forms a gel and the dimethyl-substituted DMDBS is fully insoluble in p-xylene. It seems to be that this behavior is correlated with the different melting temperatures of the sorbitol derivatives, whereas the non-polarity of the compounds is increasing. However, with increasing polarity of the solvent the gelation efficiency of DBS decreases. In the most polar solvent for dye sensitized solar cells, γ-butyrolactone, DBS stays in solution after cooling to room temperature. This behavior is caused by the polarity of DBS, because it is too polar to solidify polar solvents. It is necessary to use a slightly more apolar gelator to achieve gelation of polar solvents. With MDBS and DMDBS, weak gels in γ-butyrolactone and highly stable gels in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) were obtained. This supports the requirement of the optimization of the polarity of the gelator molecules with respect to a given organic solvent. In the following the best systems will be discussed in more detail.
Table 1 Properties of DBS and its derivatives at a concentration of 1 wt% in various solvents




Solvent
DBS
MDBS
DMDBS





p-Xylene
Weak gel
Gel
Insoluble


1-Decanol
Gel
Weak gel
Insoluble


Valeronitrile
Weak gel
Weak gel
Gel


3-Methoxypropionitrile
Gel particles
Gel
Gel


γ-Butyrolactone
Solution
Weak gel
Weak gel




The thermal behaviour of MDBS and DMDBS gels in γ-butyrolactone and MPN was investigated by using the dropping ball method to determine the transition temperature (Tgel) from a gel state to liquid state. As shown in Fig. 2 the Tgel values depend on the concentration of gelator, the organic solvent and on the type of DBS derivatives. The value of the transition temperature (Tgel) of the investigated gels of DMDBS and MDBS in γ-butyrolactone increases from 60 to 80 °C in the concentration range from 1 to 2 wt%. The transition temperatures with the MDBS as gelator are in γ-butyrolactone 5 to 10 °C higher than those with DMDBS. In comparison to this the sol–gel transition temperatures of the gels of both sorbitol derivatives in MPN are 15 to 30 °C higher than in γ-butyrolactone. The value of the transition temperature increases also with the gelator concentration. In this case, the transition temperatures (Tgel) are higher for DMDBS compared to MDBS. The transition temperatures of the DMDBS gels are about 10 °C higher. With these results it becomes clear that the influence of an optimization of the polarity of gelator and organic solvent is the important point to in order to obtain stable gels at a low gelator concentration. With the gel system DMDBS/MPN it is possible to realize very high sol–gel transition temperatures up to 112 °C at a concentration of 2 wt%, which are of advantage for the application in dye sensitized solar cells.
 Fig. 2  Dependence of the gel melting temperature (Tgel) of MDBS and DMDBS in γ-butyrolactone (a) and 3-methoxypropionitrile (b) as function of the gelator concentration. 
The morphology of the MDBS and DMDBS gels in MPN was investigated by polarized optical microscopy. The photographs of Fig. 3(a) and (b) were taken between crossed polarizers at room temperature. The photographs of MDBS (a) and DMDBS (b) gels at a concentration of 1.5 wt% show that the gels are strongly birefringent, indicating the crystalline nature of the fibrillar network structure. The photographs of Fig. 3(c) and (d) at a different position of the sample were taken with an additional λ-quarter-wave plate. The Fig. 3(c) and (d) reveal the fibrillar structures of the gelator molecules, which were formed during the cooling process. These fibrillar needles show the high one-dimensional growth.
 Fig. 3  Optical micrographs at room temperature of gels with MDBS at a concentration of 1.5 wt% in MPN (a, c) and of DMDBS (1.5 wt%) in MPN (b, d). The pictures were taken between crossed polarizers at a different area of the sample. Pictures c and d were taken in addition with a λ-quarter-wave plate. The scalebar is 100 μm. 

Fig. 4 shows the results of rheology measurements of MDBS and DMDBS gels in MPN. The viscoelastic behavior of the gels is characterized by the storage modulus G′ which is independent of frequency over the frequency range from 0.01 to 100 Hz. By increasing the gelator concentration from 1.25 to 2.00 wt% the storage modulus G′ increases from 10 to 60 kPa. This indicates that the stability of the gel network and the elastic behavior increases as expected with the gelator concentration. For both gelators MDBS and DMDBS the storage modulus G′ increases with the gelator concentration. At all concentrations the DMDBS system showed a higher G′ than the MDBS system, reflecting that the DMDBS is the stronger gelator for MPN [Fig. 4(c)]. Hence we selected DMDBS as the gelator to solidify MPN-based electrolyte solutions for use in quasi-solid-state dye sensitized solar cells.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the elastic storage modulus G′ profile versus frequency for different concentrations of the MDBS (a) and DMDBS (b) in MPN. (c) Effect of the concentration of DMBDS (■) and MDBS (●) in MPN on the storage modulus G′ at a frequency of 10 Hz. 
DMDBS (1.5 wt%) was mixed with the MPN-based liquid electrolyte, heated until no solid particles were observed and then used for the gelation experiments. The conductivity measurements provide information on the mobility of the ions, their interaction with the solvent and on the ion pairing phenomenon, all of which are expected to affect the photovoltaic performance and in particular the fill factor of the solar cell. Mechanistically, when an ionic transport process involves an intermolecular ion hopping, the conductivity will be determined by the thermal hopping frequency, which leads to an Arrhenius conductivity–temperature behavior.
As is apparent from Fig. 5, the Arrhenius equation cannot be used to describe the conductivity–temperature behavior of the liquid electrolyte and gel electrolyte. A better fit to the data (Fig. 5) is obtained by the Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann (VFT) equation.21 σ(T)
						=
						AT−1/2exp[−B/(T
						−
						T0)](1)
 Fig. 5  Plots of conductivity–temperature data of the liquid and gel electrolytes in the Arrhenius and VFT coordinates. 
 Fig. 6  Typical photocurrent density–voltage characteristic of photovoltaic cells with the gel electrolyte and Z-907 dye at an irradiance of AM 1.5 sunlight (99.8 mW cm−2). The cell area is 0.152 cm2. Data for the corresponding liquid electrolyte were taken from ref. 18. 
In eqn. (1), A and B are constants and T0 is the thermodynamic Kauzmann temperature. T0 in this expression represents the temperature at which ionic mobilities would appear to fall to zero. Additionally, gelation only resulted in a slight decrease in conductivities, e.g. from 10.4 to 10.0 mS cm−1 at room temperature. In fact, the macroscopic viscosity of the gel electrolyte is much higher than that of the blank liquid electrolyte. This discrepancy could be attributed to an open structure of the present gel system. A similar phenomenon was also observed for the diffusion of some electroactive species in other polymer gel systems.22,23

Fig. 6 shows a typical photocurrent density–voltage curve for cells with gel the electrolyte at AM 1.5 sunlight illumination (99.8 mW cm−2). The short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), open circuit potential (Voc) and fill factor (ff) are 12.45 mA cm−2, 718 mV and 0.69, respectively, yielding the overall solar energy conversion efficiency of 6.1%. Almost identical results obtained for cells with the corresponding blank liquid electrolyte indicate that the presence of the gelator has no adverse effect on the conversion efficiency.18 The combination of an amphiphilic Z-907 dye and the gel electrolyte resulted in a stable device performance under 80 °C thermal stress is shown in Fig. 7. The high conversion efficiency of the cell was preserved even under heating at 80 °C for 30 days, maintaining 95% of its initial value after this time period. After the first week of aging the efficiency was moderately enhanced due to an increase in the dye regeneration rate and thus an increase of Jsc and ff values.18
 Fig. 7  Normalized power conversion efficiencies of a quasi-solid-state DSC filled with gel of MPN with 1.5 wt% DMDBS at 80 °C. Between the measurements the cell was also kept in the dark at 80 °C. Data for the corresponding liquid electrolyte were taken from ref. 18. 
Conclusions
From the investigated 1,3:2,4-di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS)-derivatives, the best gelator for forming stable gels with the solvent MPN and MPN-based electrolyte solutions is 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethylbenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DMDBS). The higher Tgel values and the higher viscoelastic behaviour of DMDBS gel in MPN make DMDBS very attractive to gelate electrolyte systems for use in dye sensitized solar cells. The combination of the amphiphilic Z-907 dye with the DMDBS-based quasi-solid-state gel electrolyte yields an overall solar energy conversion efficiency of 6.1% at AM 1.5 sunlight illumination (99.8 mW cm−2). The quasi-solid-state dye sensitized solar cell shows an excellent thermal stability at 80 °C over the investigated one month period.
Experimental section
Materials
γ-Butyrolactone, p-xylene (Merck-Schuchardt), valeronitrile (Fluka AG), 1-decanol (Aldrich), 1,3:2,4-di-O-benzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS) and 1,3:2,4-di-O-methylbenzylidene-D-sorbitol, (MDBS)
					(Ciba, Switzerland), 1,3:2,4-di-O-dimethylbenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DMDBS)
					(Milliken Chemicals, USA) were used as received. MPN (Fluka AG) was distilled and N-methylbenzimidazole (NMBI, Aldrich) was recrystallized before use. 1,2-Dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII)24 and amphiphilic dye Z-907 [Ru(H2dcbpy)(dnbpy)(NCS)2, where H2dcbpy is 4,4′-dicarboxylic acid-2,2′-bipyridine and dnbpy is 4,4′-dinonyl-2,2′-bipyridine]18 were synthesized in our previous work.
Gelation studies
In a typical gelation test, a weighed amount of DBS or its derivatives was mixed with 2 ml of solvent in a test tube with a screw cap, and then the mixture was heated until the solid was completely dissolved. The resulting solution was slowly allowed to cool to room temperature and gelation was visually observed. Gelation was considered to have occurred when a homogenous sample was obtained that exhibited no gravitational flow. The sol–gel phase transition temperature (Tgel) was determined by using the steel ball method as described in the literature.25A steel ball (260 mg) with a diameter of 4.5 mm was placed on the top of the gel and the vial was sealed. The samples were placed in a heating system, which was slowly heated, typically at 5 °C min−1, while the temperature was determined with a temperature sensor that was dipped in a separate vial containing solvent. The Tgel of the gel was defined as the temperature when the steel ball hit the bottom of the vial.
Polarized optical light microscopy
For optical microscopy a piece of the gel was placed on a slide and covered with a cover glass. The gels were examined with a Nikon microscope and the pictures were taken between crossed polarizers.
Rheology measurements
Rheological measurements were carried out with a stress rheometer Haake RS600 with a cone-plate (60 mm diameter). The value of the gap is 0.052 mm. Oscillatory experiments were performed in a 0.001–100 Hz frequency range and at constant stress in the linear regime of deformation (20 Pa for a gel at 1.25 wt% and about 100 Pa for a gel at 2 wt%). The following procedure was used to load the sample: 1.5 ml of MPN solution containing the gelator was placed on the plate which had a temperature about 95 °C and closed with a cone. The system was rapidly cooled to 25 °C when the gap was totally filled with the gel and the measurements were started.
Conductivity measurements
A CDM210 conductivity meter was employed to measure conductivities of the liquid and gel electrolytes. The CDC749 conductivity cell with a nominal cell constant of 1.70 cm−1 was calibrated with 0.1 mol l−1 KCl aqueous solution prior to the experiments. A DT Hetotherm cycle heat pump was used to control the temperature of the electrolytes.
Fabrication of solar cells
A screen-printed double layer of TiO2 particles was used as photoanode. A 10 μm thick film of 20 nm sized TiO2 particles was first printed on the fluorine-doped SnO2 conducting glass electrode and was then further coated by a 4 μm thick second layer of 400 nm light scattering anatase particles (CCIC, Japan). After sintering at 500 °C and cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 electrodes were dye-coated by immersing them into a 0.3 mmol l−1 solution of Z-907 in acetonitrile and tert-butanol (volume ratio: 1∶1) at room temperature for 12 h and then assembled with thermally platinized conducting glass electrodes. The electrodes were separated by a 35 μm thick hot-melt ring (Bynel, DuPont) and sealed up by heating. DMDBS (1.5 wt%) was mixed with the liquid electrolyte consisting of DMPII (0.6 mol l−1), iodine (0.1 mol l−1), NMBI (0.5 mol l−1) in MPN and then heated until no solid was observable. The internal space of the cell was filled with the resulting hot solution using a vacuum pump. After cooling to room temperature, a uniform motionless gel layer was formed in the cells. The electrolyte-injecting hole made with a sand-blasting drill on the counter electrode glass substrate was sealed with a Bynel sheet and a thin glass cover by heating.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
A 450 W xenon light source (Oriel, USA) was used to give an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2
					(the equivalent of one sun at AM 1.5) at the surface of the solar cells. The spectral output of the lamp was matched in the region of 350–750 nm with the aid of a Schott K113 Tempax sunlight filter (Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH, Germany) so as to reduce the mismatch between the simulated and true solar spectra to less than 2%. Various incident light intensities were regulated with neutral wire mesh attenuators. The current–voltage characteristics of the cell under these conditions were obtained by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter (Keithley, USA). This process was fully automated using Wavemetrics software (http://www.wavemetrics.com/). Hermetically sealed cells stored in an oven at 80 °C were used for long-term thermostability tests. All photovoltaic measurements were performed at room temperature.
Acknowledgements
P. W., S. M. Z. and M. G. acknowledge the financial support by the Swiss National Science Foundation and the European office of US Air Force under contact no. F61775-00-C0003. The authors thank Dr M. Thelakkat (macromolecular chemistry I, University of Bayreuth) for helpful discussions and the group of Professor H. Hoffmann (physicochemistry I, University of Bayreuth) for the assistance with the rheological measurements.
References
G. D. Rees and B. H. Robinson, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 608 CAS .
G. Haering and P. L. Luisi, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 5892 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Phillips, W. M. Deen and F. J. Brady, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1990, 139, 363 CAS .
R. J. H. Hafkamp, P. A. Kokke, H. P. M. Geurts, A. E. Rowan, M. C. Feiters, R. J. M. Nolte and I. M. Danke, Chem. Commun., 1997, 545 RSC .
P. Terech and R. G. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 3133 CrossRef .
T. Schamper, M. Jablon, M. H. Randhawa, A. Senatore and J. D. Warren, J. Soc. Cosmet. Chem., 1986, 37, 225 Search PubMed .
U. Beginn and B. Tartsch, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1924 RSC .
S. Yamasaki and H. Tsutsumi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 906 CAS .
D. J. Mercurio and R. J. Spontak, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2091 CrossRef CAS .
F. Silva, M. J. Sousa and C. M. Pereira, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 3095 CAS .
K. Hanabusa, K. Hiratsuka, M. Kimura and H. Shirai, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 649 CrossRef CAS .
F. Placin, J.-P. Desvergne and J.-C. Lassègues, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 117 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan, D. T. Schwartz, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1263 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Kumara, S. Kaneko, M. Okuya and K. Tennakone, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 10493 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Hanabusa, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Chem. Commun., 2002, 374 RSC .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 Search PubMed .
W. Kubo, K. Murakoshi, T. Kitamura, S. Yoshida, M. Haruki, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12809 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, S. Kambe, S. Nakade, T. Kitamura, K. Hanabusa, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4374 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Angell and R. D. Bressel, J. Phys. Chem., 1972, 76, 3244 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Howells, P. J. Zambiano and M. M. Collinson, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 5265 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, I. Gaberman and M. Ciszkowska, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 1343 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bonhôte, A. P. Dias, M. Armand, N. K. Papageorgiou, K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 1168 CrossRef CAS .
J. van Esch, F. Schoonbeek, M. de Loos, H. Kooijman, A.
L. Spek, R. M. Kellogg and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Eur. J., 1999, 5, 937 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structures of sorbitol derivatives DBS (a), MDBS (b) and DMDBS (c).	 


p-Xylene	Weak gel	Gel	Insoluble
1-Decanol	Gel	Weak gel	Insoluble
Valeronitrile	Weak gel	Weak gel	Gel
3-Methoxypropionitrile	Gel particles	Gel	Gel
γ-Butyrolactone	Solution	Weak gel	Weak gel

 	Fig. 2  Dependence of the gel melting temperature (Tgel) of MDBS and DMDBS in γ-butyrolactone (a) and 3-methoxypropionitrile (b) as function of the gelator concentration.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical micrographs at room temperature of gels with MDBS at a concentration of 1.5 wt% in MPN (a, c) and of DMDBS (1.5 wt%) in MPN (b, d). The pictures were taken between crossed polarizers at a different area of the sample. Pictures c and d were taken in addition with a λ-quarter-wave plate. The scalebar is 100 μm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the elastic storage modulus G′ profile versus frequency for different concentrations of the MDBS (a) and DMDBS (b) in MPN. (c) Effect of the concentration of DMBDS (■) and MDBS (●) in MPN on the storage modulus G′ at a frequency of 10 Hz.	 
σ(T)
						=
						AT−1/2exp[−B/(T
						−
						T0)]	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Plots of conductivity–temperature data of the liquid and gel electrolytes in the Arrhenius and VFT coordinates.	 

 	Fig. 6  Typical photocurrent density–voltage characteristic of photovoltaic cells with the gel electrolyte and Z-907 dye at an irradiance of AM 1.5 sunlight (99.8 mW cm−2). The cell area is 0.152 cm2. Data for the corresponding liquid electrolyte were taken from ref. 18.	 

 	Fig. 7  Normalized power conversion efficiencies of a quasi-solid-state DSC filled with gel of MPN with 1.5 wt% DMDBS at 80 °C. Between the measurements the cell was also kept in the dark at 80 °C. Data for the corresponding liquid electrolyte were taken from ref. 18.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
