Nanomanipulation and controlled self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and nanocrystals for plasmonics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00450D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00450D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5672-5716Nanomanipulation and controlled self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and nanocrystals for plasmonics

        
          
            Shangjr 
            Gwo
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Hung-Ying 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng-Hsien 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liuyang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Xiaoqin 
            Li
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Physics, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan. E-mail: gwo@phys.nthu.edu.tw
bNational Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 30076, Taiwan
cDepartment of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: elaineli@physics.utexas.edu
Received 
      10th June 2016
    First published on 13th July 2016AbstractLocalized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs) associated with metallic nanostructures offer unique possibilities for light concentration beyond the diffraction limit, which can lead to strong field confinement and enhancement in deep subwavelength regions. In recent years, many transformative plasmonic applications have emerged, taking advantage of the spectral and spatial tunability of LSPRs enabled by near-field coupling between constituent metallic nanostructures in a variety of plasmonic metastructures (dimers, metamolecules, metasurfaces, metamaterials, etc.). For example, the “hot spot” formed at the interstitial site (gap) between two coupled metallic nanostructures in a plasmonic dimer can be spectrally tuned via the gap size. Capitalizing on these capabilities, there have been significant advances in plasmon enhanced or enabled applications in light-based science and technology, including ultrahigh-sensitivity spectroscopies, light energy harvesting, photocatalysis, biomedical imaging and theranostics, optical sensing, nonlinear optics, ultrahigh-density data storage, as well as plasmonic metamaterials and metasurfaces exhibiting unusual linear and nonlinear optical properties. In this review, we present two complementary approaches for fabricating plasmonic metastructures. We discuss how meta-atoms can be assembled into unique plasmonic metastructures using a variety of nanomanipulation methods based on single- or multiple-probes in an atomic force microscope (AFM) or a scanning electron microscope (SEM), optical tweezers, and focused electron-beam nanomanipulation. We also provide a few examples of nanoparticle metamolecules with designed properties realized in such well-controlled plasmonic metastructures. For the spatial controllability on the mesoscopic and macroscopic scales, we show that controlled self-assembly is the method of choice to realize scalable two-dimensional, and three-dimensional plasmonic metastructures. In the section of applications, we discuss some key examples of plasmonic applications based on individual hot spots or ensembles of hot spots with high uniformity and improved controllability.
Shangjr Gwo
Shangjr Gwo received his PhD in physics from the University of Texas at Austin, USA in 1993. He is currently a chair professor of physics in National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and serves as the director of National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center in Hsinchu Science Park, Taiwan. His research interests include semiconductor material physics, nanophotonics, nanoplasmonics, and surface/interface science. Most recently, his research group works extensively on plasmonic metamaterials composed of colloidal metal nanoparticles and nanocrystals, linear and nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces, plasmonic nanolasers, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and III-nitride nanostructure light-emitting devices. Shangjr Gwo is an elected fellow of the American Physical Society and the Physical Society of the Republic of China.
Hung-Ying Chen
Hung-Ying Chen received his PhD degree in 2009 from the physics department, National Tsing-Hua University in Taiwan, where he worked with Prof. Shangjr Gwo. He is currently an assistant research scholar in the physics department, National Tsing-Hua University. His research interests include fundamental issues in the design, characterization, and applications of optical phenomena manifested in artificially designed or self-assembled nanostructures. Recently, his research focuses on controlling the plasmonic coupling effects of tunable plasmonic nanostructure assemblies for quantitative surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (quantitative SERS).
Meng-Hsien Lin
Meng-Hsien Lin received his PhD degree in 2011 from the Institute of Nanoengineering and Microsystems, National Tsing-Hua University in Taiwan. Then he joined the Department of Physics as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Shangjr Gwo's research group. His general research interests include the controlled synthesis and self-assembly of metallic and dielectric nanostructures. Recently, he has focused his research work on the fabrication and characterization of hybrid nanostructures, including plasmonic nanoparticle films, colloidal metal crystals, as well as 2D semiconductor and organic light emitting materials.
Liuyang Sun
Liuyang Sun received his MS degrees in 2012 from Nanjing University in China, supervised by Prof. Ruwen Peng. He is currently pursuing a PhD in Physics under the supervision of Prof. Xiaoqin Li at the University of Texas at Austin. His research mainly focuses on the optical properties of metal/semiconductor hybrid nanostructures and monolayer materials.
Xiaoqin Li
Xiaoqin Li received her PhD in physics in 2003 from the University of Michigan, where she worked for Prof. Duncan Steel. She is currently an associate professor in the physics department at the University of Texas-Austin. In 2007, she joined the University of Texas-Austin after working with Prof. Steven Cundiff as a postdoctoral researcher at JILA, Colorado. Her research interests include fundamental optical properties of individual semiconductor and metallic nanoparticles or assembled clusters as well as elementary excitations such as phonons, excitons, and magnons in a wide range of materials. Recently, her group has worked on the assembly and characterization of artificial plasmonic nanoclusters, ultrafast spectroscopy studies of exciton physics in atomically thin semiconductors, and controlling magnons in magnetic multilayers.
1. Introduction
Metallic nanostructures excited by photons or electrons under appropriate conditions exhibit strong resonant absorption and scattering properties. These fascinating phenomena have been understood to originate from collective oscillations of conduction electrons relative to the static ionic background,1–4 which are described as the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) modes in metallic nanostructures (Fig. 1a). Since ancient times, the unique optical properties associated with ultrasmall noble-metal nanoparticles (NPs) have been utilized to produce colorful glass art works, such as the famous Lycurgus cup displayed in the British Museum (a dichroic, ruby red (transmission)/green (reflection) glass cup made by the Romans in the 4th century AD) and antique stained glass windows of European cathedrals made with colloidal suspensions of gold and silver NPs (AuNPs, AgNPs) in the medieval period.5 Plasmonics,2 however, is a term coined recently to describe various approaches to manipulate light at subwavelength length scales using collective electron motions excited by light at the metal–dielectric interfaces (surface plasmon polaritons, or SPPs, as illustrated in Fig. 1b), as well as in individual or coupled metallic nanostructures. Interest in plasmonics is surging in recent years because of many important advances in related fields, including chemical synthesis methods for large-scale production of size- and shape-controlled metal NPs (spherical or quasi-spherical shape) and nanocrystals (NCs, polyhedral shape) with tunable plasmonic properties,6–12 advances in bottom-up self-assembly methods,13–19 top-down nanofabrication techniques based on electron and ion beams,20–22 and rapidly improving computation tools allowing the simulations of near-field and far-field electromagnetic fields for relative complex nanostructure geometries.23,24
 Fig. 1  (a) Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) modes of a silver nanosphere (diameter: 50 nm) and a silver nanorod (diameter: 30 nm, length: 230 nm), (b) illustration of electric field distribution (left panel) and dispersion relation (right panel) of propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) on a silver film. 
The presence of localized plasmon resonances in metallic nanostructures makes it possible to concentrate the incident light beyond the diffraction limit, leading to optical field confinement and enhancement in deep subwavelength regions.25–27 The LSPR modes in metallic nanostructures are very efficient in capturing incident light due to a large effective cross-section, as illustrated in Fig. 2a.28 Under resonant illumination by a plane wave, the flow of field lines (i.e. the Poynting vector) is directed toward and into the metal NP. This phenomenon produces an antenna effect, resulting in light concentration from an area that is much larger than the physical size of NP or NC. In addition, plasmon-induced hot carriers29–31 enable efficient optical energy conversions in versatile ways, including photothermal,32–34 photochemical,31,35,36 photocatalytic,30,37,38 and photoelectric29–31,39 processes. To highlight just a few exciting applications, plasmon-enhanced ultrasensitive spectroscopy,40–44 photothermal cancer therapeutics,31,33,45 solar energy conversion and harvesting for photovoltaics and solar fuel generation,29–31,39,45 solar-driven water purification,46,47 plasmonic sensors,48–52 detectors,53,54 and heat-assisted ultrahigh-density data storage55,56 have been demonstrated in the past few years. Moreover, optical information processing based on nonlinear plasmonics,57–59 active plasmonics,60–64 magnetoplasmonics,65–68 and quantum plasmonics69 have recently been proposed and pursued.
 Fig. 2  (a) A metal NP at plasmon resonance can collect light from a large effective area, in comparison to its actual physical size. (b) Tip hot spot is very sensitive to the shape of a nanocrystal. (c) Gap hot spot can be strongly localized at the gap in a plasmonic NP dimer. The resulting enhancement factor can be orders of magnitude larger and highly dependent on the gap size. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 1983 American Association of Physics Teachers. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2012 Annual Reviews. 
Taking surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy or scattering (SERS) as a prime example in plasmonics40–44,70–72 we can immediately recognize the importance of plasmonic “hot spots” in metallic nanostructures for all of the plasmonic applications mentioned above. Fig. 2 shows log-scale color plots of the computed SERS enhancement factor (EF) for an elongated silver NP (spheroid, see Fig. 2b) exhibiting two hot spots at the tips, whereas a spatially more localized and electromagnetic “hotter” region can be obtained in a gap hot spot formed between two near-field-coupled silver nanospheres (plasmonic dimer, Fig. 2c73). Due to the strong dependence of the EF on NP shape (tip hot spot) and gap distance (gap hot spot), it is clear that uniform hot-spot properties across the SERS substrate are necessary for reproducible results. However, due to the stochastic nature of hot spots on conventional SERS substrates, comprised of randomly formed (e.g. nanoroughened noble-metal films) or lithographically patterned noble-metal nanostructures, only part of the analytes can be accounted for, making quantitative SERS measurements very challenging.74–77 To date, most of the plasmonic applications are related to the control and generation of plasmonic hot spots, which requires the design and fabrication of metallic nanostructure ensembles with tunable optical and plasmonic properties. In this review, the major themes are devoted toward this direction.
Several reviews have been written on various subjects of plasmonics.78–83 In the current review we focus on how to create plasmonic metastructures, such as clusters (zero-dimensional (0D) and one-dimensional (1D) metamolecules), two-dimensional (2D) metasurfaces, and three-dimensional (3D) metamaterials (or supercrystals) using colloidal metal NPs and NCs as the fundamental building blocks (plasmonic meta-atoms). Here, metastructures are defined as artificially structured media composed of subwavelength-sized meta-atoms with tunable optical (plasmonic) properties and interaction strength (plasmonic coupling). Importantly, the electromagnetic response of the entire metastructure arises from the collective responses of constituent meta-atoms. Recently, metamaterials84–88 and metasurfaces89–99 have enabled control over the flow of light, providing the possibility of realizing artificial optical media with unconventional indices of refraction ranging from the negative index,100 the near-zero index (i.e. near-zero effective permittivity or epsilon-near-zero)101–105 to the ultrahigh index.106 Ultimately, these novel artificial optical media could revolutionize the science and technology of photonics in the important areas of super-resolution imaging,100,107 nanolithography,107 integrated nanophotonics,45 nonlinear photonics,108–113 transformation optics,114,115 and so on. In this review, we aim to answer the following questions: What are the challenges one faces in nanomanipulation and large-scale self-assembly? And what are the new functionalities one can realize by taking advantage of the tunable coupling among the plasmonic meta-atoms?
This review is organized in the following way. In Section 2, we introduce the fundamental plasmonic properties of metal NPs, including basic mechanisms and important material issues. In Section 3, we review various chemical synthesis methods, as well as surface functionalization and passivation techniques, for size- and shape-controlled colloidal NPs and NCs (gold, silver, and related composite nanomaterials). Some recent developments for synthesizing large-scale, single-crystalline colloidal metal plates are also presented, which allow the fabrication of plasmonic structures by top-down nanofabrication techniques based on a high-quality material platform.113 Then, in Section 4 we introduce the theoretical concepts of plasmonic coupling and their relevance in controlling and engineering plasmonic hot spots. We then explain how experimentally we can control and observe near-field coupling among plasmonic NPs and NCs in order to create new properties and functionalities. In this review, we present both top-down and bottom-up approaches for fabricating plasmonic metastructures. In Section 5, we discuss how NP clusters can be assembled using a variety of manipulation methods, including mechanical manipulation by probe tips using an atomic force microscope (AFM) or in a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as well as using optical-beam- and electron-beam-based tweezers. We provide a few examples of NP clusters with designed properties realized in plasmonic NP clusters assembled using manipulation methods. Controlled self-assembly is the method of choice to realize scalable 1D, 2D, and 3D plasmonic metastructures with programmable plasmonic coupling. We devote Section 6 to various NP/NC self-assembly techniques and optical characterization techniques for these plasmonic metastructures. In Section 7, we highlight a few important applications enabled by plasmonic metastructures. Finally, we finish this review by offering a few remarks and perspectives on the remaining challenges and potential applications.
2. Meta-atom building block: fundamentals
The significant progress of colloidal chemistry in reproducible synthesis of the size-, shape-, and composition-controlled metal NPs and NCs, as well as the advances in ultrahigh-resolution lithographic techniques have contributed greatly to the rapid development of plasmonics in the past few decades. For example, it is now possible to synthesize size- and shaped-controlled gold, silver, and related heterogeneous NPs and NCs in large quantities using a variety of chemical methods.6–8 The precise control of their size, shape, and composition allows us to precisely tailor their plasmonic resonances.116 In addition, surface functionalization schemes of NPs and NCs make them promising candidates as building blocks for the bottom-up assembly of plasmonic metastructures. Alternatively, complicated plasmonic nanostructures and metastructures can also be designed and fabricated by top-down lithographic techniques using high-quality metal thin films117–120 or large-scale colloidal metal crystals.113,121–123 Considering practical applications, facile large-area fabrication of NP arrays and films is also very desirable. Recently, both laser124–126 and microwave plasma127 processing techniques have been developed to provide new possibilities for this purpose. In this section, we present first the theoretical background for understanding the LSPR properties of metal NPs (spherical or quasi-spherical, typically polycrystalline). Both the electrodynamic modeling of spherical metal particles by Mie theory and the quasi-static approximation for metal NPs are introduced for a general understanding of plasmon resonances in metal NPs. We then discuss some material issues for plasmonic applications, including intrinsic optical properties of fundamental plasmonic metals (gold, silver, copper, and aluminum) and the importance of material quality due to the differences in growth and synthesis techniques. In Section 3, we will review various colloidal chemistry approaches to synthesize gold and silver NPs and NCs in different sizes and shapes and with different surface functionalization techniques.
2.1. Mie theory and quasi-static approximation
In 1908, Gustav Mie published a seminal paper on the calculations of scattering and internal fields of a spherical particle in a homogenous medium.128 The importance of the Mie theory is that it can give analytic solutions of Maxwell's equations for spherical, ellipsoidal, and cylindrical scattering geometries in homogenous media.3,129,130 Moreover, it can be used to explain the peculiar optical phenomena observed by Michael Faraday for a suspension solution of gold colloids.131 Only in a few cases, particularly for NPs smaller than ∼2 nm (i.e. the nonlocality length5), quantum mechanical calculations are necessary to achieve more accurate results. In the Mie theory, the scattering and internal fields are expanded as infinite series of vector spherical harmonic functions. Therefore, the computation based on the Mie theory is complicated and a large number of terms (dipole, quadrupole, octupole, and other higher-order modes) is required for accurate calculations of particle properties with a large size parameter x = ka, where a is the particle radius and k = εdk0 is the wavenumber in the surrounding medium.129
Fortunately, in the case that the spherical particle size is much smaller than the wavelength of light in the surrounding medium (i.e. particle diameter D = 2a ≪ λ), the quasi-static approximation can be applied to understand the basic optical properties of metal NPs (D < 100 nm) in the visible and near infrared (NIR) regions.2,132,133 In particular, it is instructive to understand the origin of plasmon resonance and why it is sensitive to the refractive index of the surrounding medium. In this size regime, the phase of the harmonically oscillating electromagnetic field is practically constant over the whole NP volume, so that one can calculate the spatial electromagnetic field distribution by using the electrostatic equation. The harmonic time dependence (e−iωt) can then be added to the electrostatic solution.
In the quasi-static approximation, a metal NP illuminated by an external plane wave (E0) behaves as a simple radiating dipole with a dipole moment p = εmε0α(ω), and the polarizability α(ω) is given by  where εm(ω) denotes the complex dielectric function of the metal NP and εd is the real dielectric function of the surrounding medium (for simplicity, εd is assumed to be a positive constant). In general, the optical characteristics of a metal can be described by the spectral dependent dielectric function (i.e. the complex permittivity), εm(ω) = εm′(ω) + iεm′′(ω), where the real part of dielectric function εm′(ω) describes the strength of the polarization induced by an external electric field and the nonzero imaginary part of dielectric function εm′′(ω) indicates the material loss for a positive εm′′(ω). The dielectric function measured for a metal is a fundamental material quantity, which can be related to its electronic structure and describes its optical (plasmonic) properties. In Section 2.2, we will discuss four fundamental plasmonic materials (gold, silver, copper, and aluminum) in terms of their dielectric functions.
The power removed from the incident electromagnetic field due to the presence of a spherical metal NP results from both absorption and scattering (i.e. dipole radiation) processes. The sum of absorption and scattering is defined as extinction. Therefore, we can express the extinction cross-section as σext = σsca + σabs, where in the quasi-static approximation the scattering and absorption cross-sections can be calculated as follows:2,133    From the expressions for α(ω), σsca, and σabs, we can immediately reach the following important optical characteristics for metal NPs:
(i) The cross-sections and polarizability of metal NP show resonant behavior when |εm(ω) + 2εd| is minimized, i.e. [εm′(ω) + 2εd]2 + [εm′′(ω)]2 is minimized. Recognizing that εm′ < 0 and |εm′| ≫ εm′′ for good metals and assuming that εm′′(ω) does not change much in the vicinity of the resonance, the resonance condition means that a negative εm′ is necessary and εm′(ω) = −2εd, which corresponds to the resonance condition for the dipole LSPR mode. One important consequence of the resonance condition is the strong dependence on the dielectric environment, such that the resonance redshifts as εd is increased. As a result, metal NPs are the ideal platform for optical sensing of small changes in the refractive index of surrounding medium (LSPR sensors).
(ii) The magnitude of the cross-sections at resonance is limited by a non-vanishing imaginary part of ε(ω), i.e. Im[ε(ω)] = ε′′(ω) ≠ 0. For metals with very small ε′′ (e.g. silver), the plasmon resonance is strong with a large cross-section and a high resonance quality factor Q. In addition, material quality also plays an important role, which will be discussed in Section 2.2.
(iii) In comparison to the scattering cross-section, the absorption cross-section has a different size scaling relation such that σabs scales with a3, whereas σsca scales with a6. Consequently, for large metal NPs (roughly D > 130 nm and D > 60 nm for gold and silver NPs, respectively133) extinction is dominated by scattering, and for small metal particles absorption is more dominant. As a result, large metal particles (D > 100 nm) are preferred for the observation and manipulation of single metal particles using far-field optical techniques.134–136
In the quasi-static dipole approximation, the driving internal field can be solved to be homogeneous over the whole volume of the NP, such that  From this equation, it is clear that the internal field is strongly enhanced at plasmon resonance. Also, considering that the skin depth of noble metals is about 25 nm over the entire optical frequency range, the strict quasi-static size regime should be D < 25 nm. For small NPs in the quasi-static regime, the plasmon resonance frequency and linewidth are nearly independent of the particle size. In contrast, the plasmonic resonances in large particles are influenced by retardation effects and strongly dependent on the particle size, such that the resonance redshifts with increasing particle size.116 For the non-spherical metal nanocrystals, the nanocrystal shape also plays an important role in plasmon resonances. For example, metal nanowires have both transverse and longitudinal resonances. The transverse mode can be understood by the quasi-static approximation. In contrast, the longitudinal modes have a strong dependence on the nanowire length.80 As the nanowire length increases (larger aspect ratio at a fixed nanowire diameter), high-order plasmon resonances appear due to retardation effects, such that the resonance of each high-order-mode red shifts with increasing nanowire length.
Mie theory and quasi-static approximation give us useful insights into how metal NPs behave in terms of wave scattering and absorbing in an incident electromagnetic field. However, a precise quantitative analysis of plasmonic properties would require a detailed knowledge of comprising material. In the next section, we will discuss how intrinsic properties and growth/synthesis quality affect the plasmonic properties of metal NPs.
2.2. Material issues

2.2.1. Intrinsic properties. 
Here, we focus on the intrinsic optical properties of four fundamental plasmonic metals, gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu), and aluminum (Al), which have low plasmonic losses εm′′ related to their low resistivity (high electric conductivity). Fig. 3 shows dielectric functions for Au, Ag, Cu, and Al in the ultraviolet (UV), visible, and NIR spectral regions based on reported experimental data reported in the literature.119,137,138 As shown in Fig. 3b, Ag can be considered the best plasmonic metal since the imaginary part of its dielectric function is very small over the complete visible and NIR wavelength range. However, in the UV region at wavelengths below 300 nm, Al is a better plasmonic metal than Ag, and in the red and NIR regions both Au and Cu are reasonably good plasmonic metals. For long-wavelength applications, such as surface-enhanced infrared absorption and thermal imaging in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) spectral region, low-loss surface phonon polariton modes supported by polar dielectric crystals (e.g. silicon carbide) are interesting alternatives to the metal-based plasmonic systems.139
 Fig. 3  Intrinsic optical properties of four representative plasmonic metals (gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu), aluminum (Al)). Both the real (a) and imaginary (b) parts of the experimental dielectric functions are shown as functions of incident light wavelength in free space. Silver can be considered as the best plasmonic metal in the full visible range due to its minimal plasmonic damping (small imaginary part). These plots are based on experimental data reported in ref. 119, 137 and 138. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH, 1972 American Physical Society, 1998 Optical Society of America. 
In Fig. 3, we can also find that interband transitions play an important role in the deviation of the dielectric functions from a simple Drude model.2 For noble metals, interband transitions have a threshold behavior. When the incident photons have a photon energy (wavelength) higher (shorter) than ∼2.5 eV (∼500 nm) for Au and ∼4.0 eV (∼300 nm) for Ag, they will predominantly excite electron–hole pairs.140–143 In Au, this phenomenon results from a transition between the 5d band (filled band) and the hybridized 6sp band (unfilled conduction band), starting from energies higher than ∼2.5 eV. This threshold behavior means that plasmon resonances can be observed only for incident photon energies lower than the interband transition energy (red and NIR for Au). In contrast, Al has a narrow-band behavior in its interband transition, such that it can exhibit surface plasmon resonances at wavelengths longer or shorter than the interband transition band at ∼1.5 eV (∼800 nm).144,145
To date, Au and Ag are two most used metals for plasmonic applications due to their low plasmonic losses in the optical frequency regime. However, due to the presence of interband transitions, Au and Ag cannot be used in the UV range, where Al exhibits both εm′ < 0 and a relatively low εm′′. This is why Al is such an appealing material for UV-plasmonics.145–148 Moreover, Al has other additional advantages, such as natural abundance, low cost, and excellent manufacturability. Recently, Al and Cu are becoming increasingly important for complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) compatible plasmonic applications.149,150 Besides Au, Ag, Cu, and Al, there is also increasing interest in alternative plasmonic materials based on transition metal nitrides (e.g. titanium nitride,151,152 zirconium nitride, chromium nitride, hafnium nitride), transparent conducting oxides (indium tin oxide,153,154 doped zinc oxide,155etc.), self-doped (p type) copper(I) sulphide (Cu2−xS) and copper(I) selenide (Cu2−xSe) semiconductor nanocrystals,156,157 and graphene.158,159 We would like to refer the reader to available reviews in the literature for more detailed information about these alternative plasmonic materials.160,161
Besides their intrinsic optical properties, there are also other important material considerations for plasmonic applications. We summarize relevant material information in the following:
Au: although Ag has a better plasmonic performance, Au is still the plasmonic material of choice due to its excellent chemical stability and biological compatibility. At present, a variety of chemical synthesis methods are available to synthesize size- and shape-controlled Au NPs and NCs in large quantities.6,7 Moreover, various versatile and facile surface functionalization schemes6,7 have been developed for Au NPs and NCs, making them the most popular building blocks for the bottom-up assembly of plasmonic metastructures. However, similar to Ag, Au suffers from high material cost and incompatibility with the CMOS processes. Also, the material quality of polycrystalline Au thin films is important in fabricating plasmonic nanostructures with high reproducibility using top-down lithographic techniques.
Ag: Ag has the best performance in the full visible spectral region. The imaginary part of the dielectric function of Ag is about one order of magnitude smaller that of Au and Cu in the visible frequency range. In addition, synthesis and functionalization of Ag nanocrystals with various sizes and shapes have been demonstrated by colloidal chemistry.8 It is well documented that polycrystalline Ag thin film growth is susceptible to dewetting and grain-boundary pinning issues.120 Moreover, Ag nanostructures and thin films are known to easily degrade in ambient air by sulfidation and/or oxidation.8 It has been demonstrated that this issue can be overcome by deposition of a surface passivation layer (e.g. conformal alumina (Al2O3) or silica (SiO2) coating by atomic layer deposition (ALD)) on top of the Ag surface.113
Cu: Cu has the second-best conductivity among metals (only next to Ag). Therefore, Cu is expected to exhibit promising plasmonic properties. Indeed, εm′′ of Cu is comparable to that of gold in the visible red and NIR regions. Considering the high material cost of Au and Ag, Cu could be a good candidate to replace Au and Ag as a plasmonic material if the performance of Cu is acceptable. In comparison to Ag, Cu has the advantage of weaker tendency to dewet, leading to smoother film morphology.120 For commercial applications, it is also important to realize that Cu is used extensively in CMOS devices. However, the complication is that fabricating plasmonic devices with Cu is challenging because it easily oxidizes under ambient conditions. Recently, it has been demonstrated that this issue can also be overcome by adding a passivation oxide layer (SiO2) on top of the Cu surface.150
Al: Al is a promising material for commercial plasmonic applications (especially in the UV region) despite its large εm′′ values in the visible region. Moreover, it has been reported that Al performs very well for applications in metal-enhanced fluorescence,162 deep-UV Raman scattering,163 nonlinear plasmonics,164–166 and CMOS-compatible color filters.149,167,168 Al is extremely reactive and highly sensitive to residual gases in the film deposition chamber.120 Published results showed that a native oxide layer is formed on a pristine Al surface within a few hours of air exposure, with a thickness stabilizing at 2.5–3.0 nm.146 The oxide layer can remain stable for a very long period of time, indicating that the native oxide acts as a passivation layer preventing further oxidation. No bulk oxidation is therefore observed, in striking contrast to the oxidation of Ag. Recently, the successful synthesis of high-quality Al nanocrystals has been demonstrated by McClain et al.169


2.2.2. Material quality. 
The performance of plasmonic meta-atoms depends not only on the intrinsic properties of comprising materials, but also on their material quality. It has been found that material quality strongly depends on synthesis, deposition, and fabrication processes.113,117–120,123 For example, although Au and Ag are the preferred material choices for low-loss plasmonics in the visible region, most of Au and Ag plasmonic nanostructures fabricated by lithographic methods are based on granular or polycrystalline films, where surface roughness and grain boundaries lead to strong scattering losses and short SPP propagation length. To illustrate the importance of material quality, Fig. 4a and b shows the real and imaginary parts of the silver dielectric function using three different datasets.119,137,170,171 It is immediately clear that the imaginary part reported by Johnson and Christy (JC)137 and Wu et al.119 are consistently smaller than that reported in the Palik's handbooks.170,171 Actually, these differences result directly from the material quality of Ag thin-film samples. To show the consequence, Fig. 4c and d plots the normalized scattering and absorption cross sections calculated for the Ag NP using three different Ag datasets in the quasi-static approximation.
 Fig. 4  The real part (a) and imaginary part (b) of the dielectric function of silver from three different datasets.119,137,170 The error bars show the measurement uncertainties for the JC data. The normalized scattering cross-section (c) and absorption cross section (d) calculated for Ag and Au NPs in the quasi-static approximation. Three different datasets are compared for Ag. The normalized cross-sections of Au NP are one to two orders of magnitude smaller than Ag due to larger material loss (intrinsic). 
Recognizing the limitations of polycrystalline materials prepared by conventional deposition methods, extensive research efforts have been devoted to chemical synthesis and thin-film growth techniques to fabricate single-crystalline Au121,122 and Ag113,172 nanostructures, as well as Ag thin films.118,119 For example, Au colloidal crystals and Ag epitaxial films with ultrasmooth surfaces have been used and shown to greatly enhance the performance of plasmonic nanolasers.173–175 Recently, Wang et al. reported the synthesis of giant colloidal Ag single crystals with millimeter lateral size and tens of microns in thickness.113 Long SPP propagation distance (low plasmonic loss) is important for SPP-based nanophotonic circuitry consisting of complex components such as plasmonic interferometers and modulators.176 Using the giant colloidal Ag single crystals synthesized by Wang et al., long SPP propagation decay lengths beyond 100 μm in the red wavelength region have been observed (see Fig. 5). These values even exceed the predicted propagation lengths using the widely cited JC optical constants,137 which have been extensively used to design and model plasmonic devices and metamaterials.
 Fig. 5  SPP propagation lengths measured on giant colloidal silver single crystals. Two methods are used for these measurements: (1) white light interference (black dots) using a planar Fabry–Pérot double-slit interferometry setup and (2) direct scattered intensity method at fixed laser wavelengths (blue squares). This plot shows SPP propagation lengths measured with both methods, in comparison with those reported for different Ag samples in the visible range (red circle: ref. 118, open triangle: ref. 117, black star: ref. 119, black circle: ref. 123, pink inverted triangle: ref. 137). The error bars shown for method 1 represent the standard deviations of measurement values from several double-slit structures. The predicted propagation length using the JC Ag data was calculated by the eigenmode method for an air/5 nm-Al2O3/Ag planar structure, and the error bars are from the JC data. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Improvements in plasmon-enhanced nonlinear generation using single-crystalline materials can be even more dramatic due to low material losses and the possibility of high-fidelity nanofabrication, as nonlinearity is proportional to higher orders of the local field enhancement. Fig. 6 shows the importance of lithographic resolution as well as material quality based on the available literature results177,178 of nonlinear signal generation using bowtie plasmonic antenna arrays fabricated on polycrystalline Au films. In these results, strong nonlinear signals are generated only at randomly distributed hot spots in the arrays of Au bowtie antennas, despite the recent advances in high-fidelity nanofabrication based on focused ion-beam (FIB) milling.178 In fact, the observed strong signal quenching in some antennas by Kollmann et al. was suggested to originate from the adverse material quality of polycrystalline Au film, i.e. the effects of film grain boundaries in the gap regions.178
 Fig. 6  (a) Gold bowtie antenna arrays with a nominal 20 nm gap size were fabricated by electron-beam lithography on a polycrystalline gold film. The two-photon photoluminescence (TPPL) emission nonuniformity is due to the variation of actual gaps present in this array. (b and c) Gold bowtie antenna arrays with uniform 20 nm (<6 nm) gaps were fabricated by focused gallium-ion- and helium-ion-beam milling, respectively, on polycrystalline gold films. Spatially resolved maps of third-harmonic generation (THG) from the gold bowtie antenna arrays show strong quenching in some antenna regions due to the effects of film grain boundaries in the gap regions. Panel (a) is adapted from ref. 177. Copyright 2005 American Physical Society. Panels (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 178. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In comparison, colloidal silver crystals reported by Wang et al.113 have the unique capability of fabricating highly uniform and tunable nanostructure arrays through FIB milling. As a result, spatially uniform and spectrally tunable nonlinear signal generation can be achieved by using these nanostructure arrays. In contrast to nonlinear signal generation using local hot spots on either randomly roughened metal films or top-down fabricated plasmonic antenna arrays, the fabrication method based on the single-crystalline material platforms can lead to signal generation over a larger sample area with dramatically improved uniformity and controllability.

3. Synthesis of size- and shape-controlled metal nanoparticles and nanocrystals
The unique plasmonic properties of colloidal metal NPs and NCs depend strongly on their size, shape, and composition.116,130,179 Furthermore, the bottom-up assembly techniques require building blocks with precisely controlled geometry, symmetry, and functionalities. Therefore, narrow size and shape distributions are necessary not only to control the particle plasmonic properties (e.g. resonance peak position and shape), but also to enable the bottom-up assembly of plasmonic metastructures using metal nanocrystals as meta-atoms. Otherwise, it would be very difficult to realize plasmonic metastructures with designable and reproducible properties since the plasmonic resonances and hot spots are very sensitive to detailed structural features of metal meta-atoms, such as facets, edges, vertices, and surface roughness, as well as their overall size and shape. In this section, we will focus on the size- and shape-controlled synthesis of Au and Ag NPs and NCs because of their excellent plasmonic properties and the availability of facile chemical synthesis methods. We will present two techniques for (1) spherical, polycrystalline metal NPs synthesized by the citrate–tannic method (Au NPs) and surface functionalized with alkanethiols by the Brust method (Au and Ag NPs) and (2) shape-controlled Au and Ag NCs synthesized by the polyol process. Additionally, we will give a simple overview of available surface functionalization schemes.
3.1. Citrate/tannic-acid and Brust methods for metal nanoparticles
The most widely used chemical routes for the synthesis of size-controlled, water-soluble AuNPs are as follows: (1) citrate method of Turkevich et al.,180–183 (2) citrate/tannic-acid method.184,185 In both methods, chloroauric acid (H[AuCl4]) is used as the gold precursor. The advantage of the second method is that the addition of tannic acid allows a precise NP size control by using a single parameter (i.e. the concentration of tannic acid). In the citrate/tannic-acid method, tetrachloroaurate ions ([AuCl4]−) are reduced in an aqueous solution by trisodium citrate and tannic acid, with both acting as the reducing agents of tetrachloroaurate ions and the stabilization agents preventing the AuNPs from aggregation. Using the citrate/tannic acid method and varying only the tannic acid concentration, the mean diameters of synthesized AuNPs in different aqueous solutions can be controlled from 3 to 20 nm with a typical size deviation less than 10%. The size monodispersity achieved by the citrate–tannic acid method is an important first step for the self-assembly of plasmonic metastructures using colloidal AuNPs.
The second important step to assemble NP metastructures is a reliable and versatile surface functionalization scheme for metal NPs. In 1994, Brust and Schiffrin186 introduced a two-phase (two immiscible phases) method to produce small (∼3–6 nm in diameter) AuNPs capped with alkanethiols (CH3(CH2)nSH) in an organic solvent (e.g. toluene). The NP products of the Brust method are very stable, which can be repeatedly dried and re-dispersed in organic solvents. In the conventional one-step, two-phase Brust method for the synthesis of AuNPs with a protection monolayer of alkanethiols, the tetrachloroaurate ions in the aqueous solution are transferred to the organic solution (toluene) using a phase transfer agent, tetraoctylammonium bromide ([CH3(CH2)7]4NBr, TOAB). The phase-transferred tetrachloroaurate ions are reduced by a strong reducing agent [sodium borohydride (NaBH4) in water] in the presence of alkanethiols. A strong reducing agent is used here because the reduction reaction occurs at the interface between two phases. The AuNPs are generated in the organic solution phase, with the particle surfaces coated with hydrophobic alkanethiolate molecules, which are used for particle stabilization and surface passivation.
In order to produce larger AuNPs and AgNPs with good size monodispersity, a modified two-step, two-phase method has also been developed for synthesizing thiol-capped AuNPs and AgNPs with a narrow size distribution by Tzeng et al.187,188 In this approach, AuNPs are first synthesized by trisodium citrate and tannic acid in an aqueous solution. The average particle diameter can be controlled from 3 to 20 nm with a size monodispersity <10%. In the second step, the aqueous AuNPs are transferred to toluene using TOAB as the transfer agent. Large AuNPs in water are difficult to be phase-transferred to a nonpolar organic solvent. In order to transfer larger AuNPs (>10 nm) into the toluene phase, it is necessary to heat the mixture at elevated temperatures, which requires special attention due to safety concern.
In comparison, for the synthesis of monodispersed, alkanethiol-capped AgNPs with an average NP size tunable from a few nanometers to ∼20 nm in diameter, the preparation method is similar to the case of AuNPs except that the first NP synthesis step is a polyol process. For the growth of AgNPs,189 a polyol solution of the silver precursor is prepared. Typical polyols used for this synthesis include ethylene glycol (EG) or diethylene glycol (DEG) and the silver precursor used for synthesizing AgNPs is silver nitrate (AgNO3). Colloidal AgNPs are created by mixing a silver nitrate precursor/DEG solution with a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)/DEG solution at an elevated temperature (near the boiling temperature of DEG). Here, the PAA polymer is used as the stabilization agent. In the second step, an AgNP/DEG solution is transferred to the toluene solution using TOAB as the transfer agent and thiol as the final surface passivation agent.190
The alkanethiol-capped AuNPs and AgNPs are excellent building blocks for the self-assembly of NP films and metastructures because the size monodispersity and soft thiolate shells of Au and Ag NPs facilitate the large-scale (on the order of cm2) self-assembly of close-packed NP superlattices with uniform packing properties.190 Furthermore, the thiolate capping layers on AuNPs and AgNPs provide the needed chemical stability, reduced surface charge, and tunability of interparticle separation via the carbon chain length of alkanethiol molecules.191 In the case of citrate-reduced AuNPs, the original charge state is negatively charged because the citrate ions function as the surface stabilization agent for AuNP suspension in aqueous solutions. It has been confirmed that water-soluble AuNPs selectively adsorb onto a positively charged self-assembled monolayer (SAM) in a sparse random pattern because of strong electrostatic interactions of AuNPs with the SAM surface (attractive) and repulsive interactions between adsorbed AuNPs on the SAM surface.192 In contrast, in the case of the thiolate-capped AuNPs and AgNPs in toluene, the NP surfaces are close to charge neutralization, thereby allowing the self-assembly of close-packed NP monolayers.191
However, in the Brust method, the TOAB molecules turn out to be exceedingly difficult to be exchanged completely by thiol molecules. Therefore, the thiolate-capped AuNPs and AgNPs synthesized by the Brust method are slightly positively charged, as confirmed by the experimental result reported by Tzeng et al.187 It was conjectured that the remaining TOAB molecules on the thiolate-capped NPs result in the observed charge inversion. For the long-term stability of NP monolayers, these TOABs can cause some complications. Martin et al. removes the need for the TOAB transfer agent by generating “naked” AuNPs in water by reducing tetrachloroaurate ions with sodium borohydride without any stabilizer such as citrate.193 These AuNPs can then be phase transferred from a water and acetone mixture to hexane with alkanethiol molecules, which can bind covalently to the particle surfaces. However, using their method, the synthesized NP size is rather small, which can only be tuned from 3 to 5 nm.
The citrate/tannic-acid method is ideal for synthesizing size-monodispersed AuNPs of 3–20 nm in diameter. In the case of larger AuNPs produced by the citrate-based methods, size polydispersity and non-spherical particle shape (large eccentricity) become quite obvious when particle sizes are larger than 30 nm. In order to synthesize spherical AuNPs with narrow size distributions, seeded growth techniques offer some possibilities. For example, Perrault and Chan have reported a synthesis route using the seed-mediated growth technique, which can produced water-soluble AuNPs in the size range of 50–200 nm.194 However, precise shape control is challenging for large AuNPs produced by the citrate-based methods due to their polycrystalline nature. To produce large, single-crystalline noble-metal crystals, the combination of the polyol process and seeded growth techniques discussed below can offer versatile solutions for growing both size- and shape-controlled colloidal noble-metal crystals with large crystal sizes on the order of a few hundreds of nm.
3.2. Polyol synthesis method for metal nanocrystals
As discussed earlier in Section 2.1, Au and Ag particles on the order of 100 nm or larger are important for many far-field optical applications because the far-field scattering cross-section exceeds the absorption cross-section for large Au and Ag particles. In this size regime, both size and shape controls become major concerns for particle synthesis.
In terms of shape control, polyol reactions are arguably the most successful chemical synthesis routes for producing noble-metal colloids with controllable shapes.8,10,11,195–197 Typical polyol solutions include ethylene glycol, 1,2-propylene glycol, or 1,5-pentanediol and polyol reactions employ polymers such as poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) as a surface capping agent. The metal precursor for reduction (metal salt) is dissolved in a polyol liquid that is heated to near the solution reflux temperature because a high and precise reaction temperature is needed for the reduction reaction in polyol processes.
The role of the PVP polymer is to act as a stabilizing agent, preventing the aggregation of metal particles and maintaining a colloidal suspension. In addition, PVP is used as a shape-control agent, promoting metal reduction onto specific crystal facets. PVP has been shown to stabilize the low surface-energy facets of the face-center (fcc) crystal system. Therefore, it can enable the formation of nanocrystals bound by {111}, {100} and {110} facets. PVP has been demonstrated as an excellent shape control agent for Au and Ag, and their alloys. Synthetic procedures have been developed for a variety of crystal shapes,11,12 including rods, wires, hexagonal/triangular plates, cubes, octahedral, tetrahedral, icosahedra, and other polyhedral (see Fig. 7 for some examples195,198–205). These shapes are mostly terminated by {111} and {100} crystal facets. Polyhedral nanocrystals are almost exclusively single-crystalline, whereas one-dimensional rods and wires can be twinned nanostructures, consisting of multiple single-crystalline domains. Achieving monodispersity in size and shape requires the optimization of multiple reaction parameters and has been successfully demonstrated for both Au and Ag nanocrystals. Moreover, seed-mediated growth for large and uniformly sized/shaped Au and Ag nanocrystals has also been realized.206–209
 Fig. 7  Examples of Au and Ag nanocrystal shapes produced by different synthesis methods. (a) Truncated octahedra (single-crystalline), (b) tetrahedra (single-crystalline), (c) cubes (single-crystalline), (d) octahedra (single-crystalline), (e–g) triangular and hexagonal plates (single-crystalline or twinned), (h) rods (single-crystalline), (i and j) wires (single-crystalline or twinned). All figures are adapted with permission from ref. 195 and 198–205. Copyright (2003, 2006, 2007, 2008) Wiley-VCH. Copyright (1999, 2005, 2006) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2003 Nature Publishing Group. 
The interparticle plasmonic coupling changes significantly with nanoscale variations in the interparticle gap and relative orientation. Therefore, the ideal particles for the fabrication of plasmonic metastructures using nanomanipulation or self-assembly techniques might not be polyhedral NPs discussed above, but smooth spherical particles without facets and grain boundaries. However, spherical single-crystals are not stable under equilibrium conditions. Under or close to thermal equilibrium conditions, nanocrystals tend to adopt polyhedral morphologies to minimize their surface energy. As a result, metal NPs grown near thermal equilibrium form facets, edges, and vertices. Recently, a chemical method210 has been demonstrated for the synthesis of ultrasmooth, spherical, single-crystalline Au particles by using a cyclic process of slow anisotropic growth followed by slow isotropic chemical etching, which can selectively remove facets, edges, and vertices. This cyclic process is scalable up to particle sizes of 200 nm and possibly even larger. Similar chemical etching techniques have also been developed for Ag nanocrystals.211,212 These techniques can be very useful for the nanomanipulation and controlled self-assembly of metal NPs into plasmonic metastructures.
Due to their excellent material quality, it has been recently reported that large Au and Ag colloidal crystals (e.g. single-crystalline hexagonal/triangular plates) are superior material platforms for the top-down nanofabrication of plasmonic nanostructure arrays and metasurfaces.113,122Fig. 8 shows a recent example of millimeter-sized Ag single-crystalline plates grown by using a catalyzed polyol process at room temperature.113 It was found that the key step to grow such large-sized crystals is to kinetically control the nucleation and growth process. For growing larger crystals, the growth rate needs to be very slow. Surprisingly, the room-temperature-grown Ag single-crystalline plates exhibit excellent material properties, as indicated by the record-long SPP propagation lengths on their surfaces and uniform nonlinear signal emission from plasmonic metasurfaces fabricated on these plates by FIB milling.
 Fig. 8  Giant (millimeter-sized) colloidal silver single crystals. (a and b) Optical microscopy (OM) images of colloidal Ag single crystals in solution and on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO)-coated quartz substrate, respectively. (c) SEM image showing a modified Ag crystal sidewall by focused ion-beam (FIB) milling. (d) X-ray diffraction (XRD) wide-scan pattern shows only the Ag(111) peak. The FWHM of the Ag(111) peak determined by high-resolution XRD is less than 0.05°. (e) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Ag crystal. (f) Selected area electron diffraction pattern. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Precise composition control of metal NPs and NCs is also very important to create tailored meta-atoms for specific applications using plasmonic metastructures.213,214Fig. 9 illustrates some representative examples for this purpose.215–224 These experimental results show that a shell layer, such as metal, silica, or semiconductor, can be used to coat metal NPs and NCs with additional functionalities. Alternatively, metal nanoshells can be coated on silica cores or metal nanoshells can be synthesized with hollow cores.8 The outer shell can protect the core metallic material from chemical reactions. Moreover, it can be used to modify the plasmon resonance in comparison to the bare metal NP/NC of the same size, and to functionalize the NP/NC surface according to the needs of different applications. To perform the controlled (or programmable) self-assembly of metal NPs and NCs, it is important to functionalize their surfaces with molecules with specific functionalities. Fig. 10 shows a variety of possible surface functionalization schemes, which can facilitate the controlled self-assembly of plasmonic metastructures via surface functionalized meta-atoms.225,226
 Fig. 9  Heterogeneous nanocomposites. (a–c) Metal/metal core–shell particles, (d–f) metal/oxide core–shell structures, (g–i) semiconductor/semiconductor heterostructures, and (j–l) metal/semiconductor core–shell particles. All figures are adapted with permission from ref. 215–224. Copyright (2005, 2007, 2009, 2010) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 10  Illustrations of different surface functionalization schemes: (a) hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces of close-packed Au NP monolayer films, (b) gap control between NPs, and (c) selective bonding between NPs. (b) Adapted from ref. 225. Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Adapted from ref. 226. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
4. Plasmonic coupling: theoretical concepts and experimental techniques
The spectral features of LSPR resulting from a single metal NP are determined by its size, shape, material composition, and the surrounding dielectric environment. However, when multiple metal NPs are positioned in close proximity, individual LSPRs are coupled to one another due to electromagnetic interactions. The coupling effects are fundamentally important for applications since they can be used to control plasmonic resonances and to generate plasmonic hot spots with strong field localization and enhancement (see Fig. 2). Considering the simplest case of a NP dimer consisting of two spherical NPs, as illustrated in Fig. 11, one can already recognize the importance of interparticle coupling effect on the surface plasmon resonance.227–229 In a NP dimer, the coupling is manifested as far-field interference when the gap size is much greater than the wavelength. In the other limit of extremely small gap size (s) below ∼1 nm, electron quantum tunneling becomes important. Most recent studies, including the majority of those discussed in the current review, are concerned with the intermediate regime, where the plasmonic resonances strongly depend on the near-field coupling between neighboring NPs. In this intermediate regime, dipole–dipole interaction is a good approximation to describe the spectral shift of the dimer's plasmonic resonance as the interparticle distance reduces. In the longitudinal coupling geometry, where the E-field polarization of the incident light is along the axis of the dimer, a pronounced red shift of the dimer's plasmon resonance is observed with decreasing distance, as shown in Fig. 12.230 In the transverse coupling geometry, where the E-field polarization of the incident light is perpendicular to the axis of the dimer, a weaker but distinct blue resonance shift is observed.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram for the gap-dependent plasmonic coupling in NP dimers. When the separation of two metal NPs is large enough, the plasmonic coupling can be considered as dipole–dipole interaction (far field coupling region). When the separation is reduced to the near-field coupling region, the dimer plasmons can form bonding and anti-bonding modes (hybridization of individual NP plasmons). A scaling relation has been reported for NP dimers in the near-coupling region, indicating that the NP separation (s) needs to be less than 20% of the NP diameter (D). If the gap is reduced to less than ∼1 nm, quantum tunneling and nonlocal effects start to play an important role in plasmonic coupling effects. 
 Fig. 12  Dependence of the NP coupling effects on the excitation field polarization. Two Au disks with diameter 150 nm, height 17 nm were fabricated using e-beam lithography. The LSPR is kept near 780 nm when the distance between the disks is far (∼450 nm), regardless of the incident light polarization. As the center-to-center distances were reduced to 300, 200 and 150 nm, the spectra exhibit (a) a red shift for polarization along the dimer axis and (b) a blue shift for polarization perpendicular to the dimer axis. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science. 
A more general and powerful model for describing plasmon resonances for couple NPs is the plasmon hybridization model introduced by Nordlander et al.231–233 In the case of a NP with simple geometry (a sphere or a shell), it has been shown that both microscopic ab initio electronic structure calculations and macroscopic electromagnetic theory can be used to predict coupled plasmon resonances. The convergence of microscopic and macroscopic theories provides a rigorous foundation of the hybrization model. In this model, the interaction between NPs leads to the hybridization of electronic wavefunctions or plasmonic modes similar to the energy-level hybrizations in molecules. Again, we discuss the simplest case of two coupled NP spheres (denoted as α and β), as illustrated in Fig. 13.234,235 The single NP modes for the longitudinal and transverse polarizations (denoted by L and T) are degenerate. For two coupled identical NPs excited by longitudinal polarized light, a bonding mode  with a lower energy and an anti-bonding mode  with a higher energy are formed, where the subscripts “+” and “−” denote in-phase and out-phase coupling between the two modes. In the case of transverse excitation, the bonding mode is out-phase  and the anti-bonding mode is in-phase . The plasmonic interaction for the transverse polarization is weaker than that in the longitudinal polarization, leading to the energy diagram shown in Fig. 13a. This diagram also illustrates that the two modes (ψL−, ψT−) are optically dark because the dipole oscillations are out of phase. In contrast, the two bright modes (ψL+, ψT+) lead to either a red or blue shift in plasmon resonances for longitudinal and transverse polarization excitations, respectively. The hybridization model is rather general for modeling different plasmonic coupling configurations. For example, the energy diagram shown in Fig. 13(b) based on the hybridization model can also describe the plasmon resonances in a dimer consisting of two different NPs (heterodimer).235
 Fig. 13  Hybridization of LSPRs for (a) two identical spherical NPs and (b) two different NPs (size, shape, composition). Similar to the hybridization of atomic orbitals, the new plasmon resonance modes due to two coupled NPs can be constructed by taking linear combinations of their individual LSPR modes, forming bonding and anti-bonding states. Some of them, e.g. ψL−, ψT− in (a), are optically dark due to the out of phase dipole oscillations. (b) With small gap size and strong coupling interaction, several of the antibonding plasmon modes could exhibit the anti-crossing behavior with the bonding modes. (a) Redrawn according to ref. 234. (b) Adapted with permission with permission from ref. 235. Copyright (2006, 2010) American Chemical Society. 
The hybrization method provides a simple guiding principle to predict coupled plasmonic resonance modes for rather complex plasmonic metastructures.233 Accurate numerical calculcations, however, are still necessary for predicting the local field strengths of the hot spots in metallic NP metastructures in order to reach a quantitative understanding of plasmonic effects in many important applications. Fortunately, some widely available commercial software programs, based on finite-element or finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) methods, are available for computing local electromagnetic fields in plasmonic metastructures, which is a key enabling element promoting the rapid growth of the research field of plasmonics.
To exploit collective plasmonic properties in plasmonic metastructures, two kinds of bottom-up assembly techniques can be employed, including precise, one-by-one nanomanipulation techniques and large-scale self-assembly techniques. Fig. 14 and 15 show the plasmonic coupling effects of single plasmonic metastructures, which include Au octahedron dimers207 and Au cube antenna arrays208 prepared using a multiple-probe nanomanipulator inside a SEM (details to be discussed in Section 5). A total internal reflection (TIR) spectroscopic set-up was used for these measurements. In this set-up, the sample to be measured is placed in the optical evanescent field at the surface of a glass prism (a propagating surface wave). The sample is illuminated in the TIR geometry from the prism back side by using a halogen white-light lamp (Fig. 14) or a wavelength-tunable laser beam from a monochromator-connected supercontinuum fiber laser (Fig. 15). The evanescent waves created at the prism surface are scattered by the plasmonic metastructures, and the scattering signal is gathered by a microscope objective for spectroscopic analysis and far-field optical imaging.
 Fig. 14  Using the nanomanipulation technique, two gold octahedral crystals (side length: 150 nm) can be positioned along their major axes with precisely controllable tip-to-tip separations (s) from 25 nm to 125 nm. Total-internal-reflection (TIR) measurement geometry allows for the observation of both the “dark” mode with anti-phase dipole coupling and the “bright” mode with in-phase dipole coupling. Moreover, the theoretically predicted plasmonic hybridization effects between two plasmonic crystals can be directly confirmed. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  Precisely assembled gold cube chains using the nanomanipulation technique. (a) Gold cube chains are assembled with varying chain lengths and intercube separations (from left to right, 45–210 nm). (b) Optical scattering images of coupled (intercube tip-to-tip separation: 70 nm) and uncoupled (intercube tip-to-tip separation: 210 nm). For the coupled chain case at the plasmon resonance wavelength (red incident light), the incident energy is completely absorbed in the cube chain, showing a “dark” mode image. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 14 and 15 show the scattering measurement results for the coupled plasmon modes excited by the dominant transverse-magnetic (TM)-polarized (i.e. p-polarized in the TIR incident plane) near-field component of the incident light. The incident light direction is oriented to be parallel (“dark” mode) and perpendicular to the dimer axis (Fig. 14) and parallel to the chain direction in Fig. 15. For both incident orientations, the plasmonic coupling geometries correspond to the transverse coupling modes shown in Fig. 13a. In the conventional case of plasmonic coupling between two small NPs (size ≪ light wavelength), plasmonic “dark” modes cannot be observed in the far-field scattering measurements because the anti-phase coupling results in the cancellation of the radiating dipoles. In contrast, owing to the TIR excitation geometry and large-sized crystals used here, retardation effects can be used for an appropriate inter-crystal separation range, such that anti-phase-coupled “dark” modes in the plasmonic dimer become observable in the far-field, as demonstrated in the scattering images shown in Fig. 14, acquired with two incident orientations (parallel and perpendicular to the dimer long axis) for the same plasmonic dimer.
For the transverse and longitudinal coupling modes shown in Fig. 12, the spectral shifts of coupled plasmon energies with respect to varying inter-crystal separations are in the opposite trend. This phenomenon can also be observed by manipulating the Au octahedral crystals with varying tip-to-tip separations (s). For the case of incident light along the dimer long axis, a large red shift of the coupled plasmon peaks in the scattering spectra is observed when the crystal separation in the dimer is decreased. By contrast, for the scattering spectra taken with the incident light perpendicular to the dimer long axis, a blue shift of the coupled plasmon peaks is observed when the crystal separation in the dimer is decreased. These results agree well with the predictions of the plasmon hybridization model, demonstrating that plasmon resonances are controllable to a high degree of precision via tuning of the localized surface plasmon coupling strength (separation gap size) between two coupling crystals.

Fig. 15 shows the optical scattering measurement results for characterizing the linear Au cube chains prepared by using the nanomanipulation technique.208 In these measurements, the incident light direction is aligned to be parallel to the chain, and the scattered light is collected through a polarizer parallel to the chain axis (longitudinal polarization). This polarization is chosen because it can be related to the plasmonic waveguiding mode, which propagates along the light incident direction toward the distal end of the chain. Under near-field coupling and resonance (free-space wavelength of the incident laser at 650 nm) conditions, we can clearly observe the occurrence of the dark plasmon propagating mode inside the chain, which exhibits no far-field radiation, and is therefore free from the effects of radiative damping. In contrast, under nonresonant (free-space wavelength of the incident laser at 450 nm) conditions, the Au cubes behave as individual light scattering centers, and the grating effects result in the scattering patterns observed in the far-field optical images.
Besides the dimer and chain examples discussed above, bottom-up self-assembly techniques developed for colloidal NPs and nanocrystals can also be applied to fabricate large-scale plasmonic metastructures with high structural controllability for collective plasmonic coupling effects. For example, by changing the size, shape, and composition of colloidal NPs, as well as the interparticle separation (i.e. the plasmonic coupling strength), 2D NP assemblies can exhibit collective, designable plasmonic properties. Fig. 16 shows a collective plasmonic coupling example for a 2D hexagonal close-packed NP superlattice composed of AuNPs, which is formed by using the self-assembly technique.190,191 Experimentally, near-field coupling is very difficult to achieve for ultrasmall (∼6 nm) colloidal NPs due to the short spatial range (<2 nm) of the evanescent near fields surrounding individual NPs. In this example, it is clear that self-assembly is the method of choice to realize uniform plasmonic metastructures when strict size limitations, such as large-scale structures and small interparticle gaps, are required for applications.
 Fig. 16  Optical properties of decoupled and coupled gold NPs. (a) TEM image showing Au NPs with a mean diameter of 6.1 ± 0.3 nm and the absorbance spectrum indicates the plasmonic resonance of individual, decoupled gold NPs in aqueous solutions is at 522 nm. (b) 2D hexagonal close-packed AuNP superlattice formed by using the self-assembly technique. The absorbance spectrum superlattices red shift to 580 nm because of the collective plasmonic coupling effects. 
5. Nanomanipulation of plasmonic nanocrystals
A rather straightforward method for assembling small clusters of coupled plasmonic nanostructure is nanomanipulation. There are two classes of manipulation methods: (i) contact manipulation by pushing the NPs or NCs using AFM tips or SEM nanomanipulators and (ii) non-contact manipulation via optical tweezers or a focused electron beam. While these manipulation methods are quite time-consuming and may not be suitable for producing plasmonic clusters in large quantities or on large scales, they have some unique advantages in the assembly of simple model systems to demonstrate the controllable and designed properties.
5.1. Contact manipulation using a single scanning probe (AFM)
Since its invention in the eighties, scanning probe microscopy has been used to modify surfaces with atomic resolution in addition to simply imaging and characterizing surfaces.236–241 While the capability of manipulating individual atoms is impressive, manipulating objects with diameters ranging from a few nanometers to tens of nanometers in ambient environments poses its own challenges and has unique applications in nanotechnology.
AFM is particularly suitable for nanomanipulation tasks. Two AFM manipulation protocols are typically applied. The most commonly used “pushing-after-imaging” protocol (Fig. 17a) proceeds as follows.242 First, NPs are imaged with the feedback engaged, and a specific NP is selected to be manipulated. Next, a line is drawn that starts behind the chosen NP and ends at the target position using a commercial manipulation software. After positioning the tip behind the NP, the tip moves along the trajectory defined by the line on the screen and pushes the NP upon contact. The z feedback is disengaged in this pushing step. Once the tip reaches the target position, the AFM probe is pulled away and the feedback is re-engaged. After the pushing step, the sample is imaged again. This multi-step procedure is repeated if the NP is not at the targeted position. An early example of manipulating Au nanoclusters on an atomically smooth WSe2 substrate is shown in Fig. 17b.243
 Fig. 17  Illustrations and examples of two AFM nanomanipulation methods. (a) Push-after-imaging method and (b) an example of assembled Au clusters (9–20 nm in height) arranged on a WSe2 substrate. In this method, the AFM tip makes physical contact with the NP with the feedback turned off during the pushing step. (c) Push-while-imaging method. After kicking a chosen NP, the AFM tip continues to scan in the imaging mode with the feedback on. The selected NP with reduced friction (following a kicking step) moves along the direction perpendicular to the fast scanning direction of the tip. (d) 8 Au NPs (10 nm diameter) arranged in a straight line on a quartz substrate using the pushing-while-imaging method. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 1995 American Institute of Physics. 
In the “pushing-after-imaging” method, the biggest inefficiency arises from the fact that the AFM is used either as imaging or as a manipulation tool, but not both simultaneously unless more than one AFM tip is used.244 Pushing small NPs over a relatively long distance often fails when the NP rolls off to the side of the tip. A second manipulation method, “pushing-while-imaging”, has been developed to overcome some shortcomings of the first method. This second method takes advantage of two empirical rules of friction.245,246 First, kinetic friction is lower than static friction.247 Secondly, the longer the two surfaces in contact, the stronger the friction becomes.248 This second effect is particularly pronounced at the nanoscale.
There are two steps in the “pushing-while-imaging” manipulation method. In the first step, one still has to apply the “pushing-after-imaging method” to kick a chosen NP in a random direction. The static friction experienced by this chosen NP is greatly reduced following this initial movement. In the second step, one can manipulate the NP controllably in the tapping mode with the feedback engaged. If the scanning rate exceeds a threshold value, the chosen NP starts to move in the direction perpendicular to the fast scanning axis, as illustrated in Fig. 17c. Once the target position is reached, the scanning rate is abruptly reduced well below the threshold value, and the NP stops moving. The other NPs will remain stationary because they experience higher friction. A ghost trace is often observed following the trajectory of the moving NP, making it easy to follow its position as illustrated in Fig. 17c. An example of moving small NPs over relatively large distances is presented in Fig. 17d, in which 8 NPs (∼10 nm in diameter) are arranged in a straight line with a few nanometer error in position.242
Beyond these basic nanomanipulation methods, automatic manipulation protocols have been implemented with some success.249,250 For example, in a method called “sequential parallel pushing”, one scan line perpendicular to the pushing direction is used to determine the lateral coordinate of the NP without fully locating the NP center. The longitudinal position of the NP is inferred from the position where the tip loses contact with the NP through analyzing the vibration amplitude of the cantilever in real time. This method can reduce the manipulation time by up to a factor of 4 compared to the target oriented pushing. An example of an image consisting of 170 NPs (∼50 nm in diameter) is shown in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  An image consisting of latex 170 NPs (∼50 nm diameter) assembled with the “sequential parallel pushing” automated nanomanipulation method. The figure is adapted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2012 IEEE. 
Much progress in AFM-based nanomanipulation has been made in the past two decades. For example, AFM has been used to manipulate nano-sized objects of various shapes (e.g. spheres, rods, wires and tubes).249,251–260 Simple 3D manipulations have been demonstrated such as pushing a NP across a step or over other particles.249,261 However, manipulation of nano-objects with high success rates and accuracy remains challenging due to the lack of predictive understanding of adhesion and friction on the nanoscale.262–265
In addition to using the AFM tip as a robotic arm, one can also functionalize the tip with a metallic sphere, rod, or nanotube.266–278 The functionalized tip is then used as part of a reconfigurable plasmonic nanostructure to investigate interaction with other plasmonic nanostructures or emitters. In one study by Savage and coworkers, two AFM tips were functionalized by a gold NP of 150 nm diameter and brought into contact gradually as illustrated in Fig. 19a–c.276 Simultaneous electrical conductance and optical scattering measurements were performed as the tips gradually approached each other as shown in Fig. 19c. The coupling between the two NPs moved through three regimes: near-field coupling, quantum tunneling regime, and physical contact. Before the two spheres made physical contact (d = 0), indicated by a surge in the conductance, a quantum tunneling regime exists at d ∼ dQR as shown in Fig. 19d and e. The key features of this regime are distinct scattering spectra, which can only be predicted using quantum theory. Classical theory would predict a divergent resonance shift. By identifying this regime experimentally, the researchers estimated a fundamental limit to plasmonic field confinement on the order of 10−8λ3 for visible light. This field confinement is approximately 6 orders of magnitude stronger than that achieved in photonic crystal cavities. We will discuss a few other examples of plasmonic nanostructures assembled with AFM manipulation methods in the section on applications.
 Fig. 19  An example of investigating NP coupling in the quantum tunneling regime by a type of AFM manipulation. (a) Schematics of the experiment where two NPs were attached to two AFM tips and brought in close proximity to each other in a controlled way. (b) Optical image of the two AFM tips in dark field microscopy. The inset is a false-colored scanning electron microscopy image of a typical tip, end radius R = 150 nm. (c) Schematics of the coupling regimes between two NPs investigated in the experiment. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
5.2. Contact manipulation using a multiple-probe nanomanipulator (SEM)
Complementary to AFM nanomanipulation, sophisticated nanomanipulators can be readily integrated with an optical microscope or inside a SEM chamber for the purpose of assembling plasmonic nanostructures as shown in Fig. 20. Such a manipulator typically consists of multiple probes with both coarse motion control in the range of a few millimeters and fine motion control with a few nanometers of accuracy.188,279–281 The key advantages of the SEM manipulation method include: (i) the simultaneous acquisition of an image for real-time feedback during the manipulation process, (ii) the high spatial resolution of SEM enabling potentially better accuracy in controlling the dimensions of the assembled structures, (iii) the capability of readily performing in situ electronic and optoelectronic measurements using conducting manipulator probes. The main disadvantage of the SEM manipulation is the possible damage to the metallic structures introduced by the high-energy electron beam used for the imaging purpose. This issue has been alleviated since recent SEM systems have been developed to have reasonable imaging resolution using a low-energy electron beam.
 Fig. 20  (a) A picture of a nanomanipulator system inside an SEM chamber. (b) A close-up view of the central part of the nanomanipulator. The SEM electron column is also visible in this photo. 
Multiple-probe nanomanipulators can be operated in different modes to assemble NPs. In addition to the method of pushing upon contact, one may use a pick-and-place method for small NPs. By applying appropriate voltage, it is possible to pick up a small NP via electrostatic force or by polarizing a NP in a non-uniform electric field. The challenge in the pick-and-place method is to reliably drop off a NP. When using a multi-probe manipulator, one probe can be used to pick up a NP and another probe can be used to slightly change the NP orientation or rub it off the first probe at the desired location.
In the example shown in Fig. 21, a four-probe manipulator was used to measure the orientation dependent properties of Cu2O nanocrystals.280 Initially, a current is passed through the tungsten tips to remove the surface oxidation layers of the NCs. Next, one probe touched a single Cu2O nanocrystal and moved it to the desired orientation. The electrostatic force between the probe and the nanocrystal was strong enough to lift the nanocrystal away from the substrate and suspend it in the SEM chamber. Taking electrical measurements on a suspended NC avoids current leakage through the substrate and allows the NC properties to be measured accurately. The second probe then approaches the NP from the desired facet. The nonlinear I–V curve was caused by the Schottky barriers due to the work function difference between the nanocrystal and the tungsten probes. From the electrical measurements, it can be concluded convincingly that cubic Cu2O nanocrystals show much smaller conductivity than the octahedron Cu2O nanocrystals. Furthermore, a multiple-probe SEM manipulator has been used to align two single-crystalline gold triangular plates with different orientations or different gap spacing in a bow-tie antenna geometry as shown in Fig. 22.188 In a different example, a 3D pyramid built with relatively large gold NPs using large colloidal gold NPs is shown in Fig. 22d. Such a 3D pyramid may exhibit isotropic optical properties as discussed in some theoretical studies.282
 Fig. 21  Examples of investigating single NP conductivity properties with multiple probes inside a SEM chamber. (a) Pristine Cu2O nanocube. (b) Au–Cu2O core–shell nanocube. The bright spot at the center of the particle is the gold core. The inset shows the corresponding TEM image of the particle. The octahedral gold nanocrystal core is precisely positioned such that its corners are directed perpendicularly to the {100} faces of the nanocube. (c) Pristine Cu2O octahedron. (d) Au–Cu2O core–shell octahedron. Two tungsten probes are in contact with the nanocrystals. (e) Conductivity measurements of individual NPs of different shape and composition. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  Examples of building 2D and 3D plasmonic nanostructures using multiple probes inside a SEM chamber. (a) The process of manipulation of two gold triangular plates. FE-SEM images of (b) a bow-tie nanoantenna, (c) a metal–insulator–metal plasmonic waveguide defined by the spacing between two gold triangular plates, and (d) 3D pyramidal structure consisting of large colloidal gold NPs. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
5.3. Non-contact manipulation using an electron beam
An electron beam has been used to observe plasmonic modes in nanostructures and manipulate small NPs.208,283–287 In modern electron microscopes, electron beams focused down to the sub-nanometer scale are routinely used. Upon incidence on a metallic surface, the high-energy electrons (typically in the energy range of tens of keV and at a beam current of several nA) can excite surface plasmon modes. The incident electrons are directed to a precise location on a plasmonic nanostructure, and serve as broadband point dipole sources that couple to and interrogate the local plasmon modes. Two techniques are typically used to study extract information following this interaction: electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)288,289 and cathodoluminescence (CL).290 In EELS, energy loss of an electron beam following transmission through a thin sample is measured and peaks in the transmission spectrum correspond to plasmonic modes excited in the sample. CL experiments are typically conducted in SEM chambers. Local surface plasmons can generate light emission to free space. Direct transition in metal following e-beam excitation can also decay via light emission. Both processes contribute to signals collected in CL experiments. Historically, the first evidence of plasmonic modes was reported in the 50s and 60s using electron-beam based experiments.291,292
Charged particles traveling near metallic NPs are known to exert a force on NPs (Fig. 23a). This force depends on the plasmonic modes excited by the incident e-beam, which, in turn, depends on the impact parameter b defined as transverse distance between the incident e-beam and the NP. This dependence can be described by the schematics shown in Fig. 23b.283 The ratio of the impact parameter b to the NP radius R determines the efficiency of exciting different modes. When the impact parameter is large, the NP size can be considered small, leading to predominantly a dipole mode. An attractive force is produced between the point charge and the induced dipole, moving the NP toward the incident e-beam. When the impact factor is small, higher-order plasmonic modes are excited. Surprisingly, a repulsive force is produced between the e-beam and the NP, pushing the NP away.
 Fig. 23  Nanomanipulation of NPs with an electron beam. (a) Illustration of manipulating a NP with an electron beam. (b) The force exerted by an electron beam on a single NP and a dimer may change direction. The force on a single NP changes from attractive to repulsive as the distance or impact parameter b reduces. The plasmonic modes also induced changes from dipole to multipolar modes. A similar situation arises when the electron beam passes through the side of the NP pair. When the electron beam passes between a pair of NP, anti-bonding modes are excited and repulsive force is produced. (c) Calculated momentum transfer for an isolated 1 nm radius Au sphere (red), electron passing from the side of a pair of 1 nm radius spheres separated by d = 0.25 nm (blue) and 0.5 nm (green) as a function of the impact parameter. Electron beam passing between a NP pair forces them apart. (d) Aberration-corrected TEM images of a silver nanosphere dimer, with particles converging and coalescing under the influence of the electron beam. The particles are 9 nm in diameter and supported on an 8 nm-thick SiO2 membrane substrate. Scale bars in the top and bottom rows equal 5 and 2 nm, respectively. (a–c) Adapted with permission from ref. 283. (d) Adapted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright (2011, 2013) American Chemical Society. 
The simplest situation considered above can be extended to the case of an e-beam passing by a pair of NPs. When the electron beam passes through on one side of the NP pair and the impact factor is large, dipole modes are excited in both NPs, leading to an attractive force between them. In contrast, when the e-beam passes in between the NP pair at a small impact factor, the repulsive force between the beam and both NPs pushes the NPs apart. The force (or momentum transfer) between the e-beam and a NP (or a pair of NPs) is plotted in Fig. 23c as a function of the impact parameter.
The interaction between an e-beam and a NP pair has been used to controllably and systematically vary the gap size between two Ag NPs of 10 nm diameter from a few nanometers to the sub-nanometer scale until the two NPs eventually coalesce into a single NP,293 as shown in Fig. 23d. During the manipulation, EELS was used to probe the evolution of the surface plasmon modes. When the gap size is above 1 nm, the plasmonic modes can be well modeled by using the classical boundary element method. The experimental observation clearly deviates from the classical theory at a gap size of 0.5 nm. At this distance, the quantum tunneling effect becomes important and the local field enhancement between the two NPs saturates.294
5.4. Non-contact manipulation using optical tweezers
Optical tweezers use strongly focused light to exert force on an object. The optical force is typically decomposed into two components: a gradient force in the direction of light intensity gradient and a scattering force in the direction of light propagation as illustrated in Fig. 24a.286,295–312 In the seminal work by Ashkin et al. and many experiments that soon followed, optical tweezers were used to manipulate dielectric particles.313 Initially, metallic particles were considered difficult to use if not, impossible to trap. Because metallic particles are highly reflective, they tend to be pushed out of the focus. Svoboda and Block first trapped metallic NPs far from the plasmonic resonance.300 By choosing an infrared laser far from the plasmon resonance where a gold NP has a large refractive index, the gradient force on the gold NP is actually larger than that on a dielectric NP of the same size. It has been shown that metallic NPs as small as 5 nm can be trapped using optical tweezers.301
 Fig. 24  Illustration and example of an optical nanomanipulation method. (a) Optical force on a single NP. In regions close to the focus, both radial and vertical intensity gradients draw a small particle toward the focus, making stable particle trapping possible. In regions away from the focus (distance on the order of the wavelength), the beam radiation pressure tends to push the particle along the beam propagation direction. (b) Example of optical tweezer manipulation of nanowires using a Bessel beam with a specially designed intensity and polarization pattern. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2003 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission ref. 304. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The polarizability of a metallic NP changes sign near the plasmonic resonance, leading to a corresponding change in the sign of the gradient force. Thus, the optical gradient force on a metallic NP can be either attractive or repulsive depending on the laser wavelength relative to the plasmon resonance.314–316 Nonspherical metallic NPs and NCs have more than one plasmonic resonance, which respond to polarized light in distinct ways. For example, the optical force on a nanorod depends on the orientation of the rod relative to the polarization of the trapping laser.314 By using a Bessel beam with extended focal depth, individual Ag nanowires of several micron length have been positioned and oriented with a precision of approximately 1° (Fig. 24b).304
Large scale patterning may be realized by creating optical traps using a patterned surface as shown by Chen et al.317 By creating a 2D square lattice of gold nanostructures and illuminating the structure with a Gaussian beam, nanospheres of 100 and 500 nm were guided, trapped, and arranged in the periodic plasmonic potential as illustrated in Fig. 25a–d. Such plasmonic potential traps offer subwavelength spatial features and avoid the complex set-up for typical optical tweezer experiments. Stehle et al. have investigated the interaction between Bose–Einstein condensates of rubidium atoms with the optical field of plasmonic gratings.318 The reflection of cold atoms was used to measure the strength of the optical near-field. When the laser power incident on the plasmonic grating is varied, the evanescent wave potential strength is tuned. As the cold atoms approach the plamonic grating, the matter wave diffracted off the grating. The diffraction patterns can be controlled by near-field strength as illustrated in Fig. 25e–g.
 Fig. 25  Examples of plasmonic optical traps. (a) Experimental setup used to excite a lithographically defined square plasmonic lattice for optical trapping. (b) Simulated time-averaged electric field intensity enhancement and intensity profiles of the optical lattice for a plane 90 nm above the substrate under Gaussian illumination. (c) Trajectory of nanospheres entering the array from the edge and attracted to the central region. (d) Successive fluorescence images of trapping multiple 500 nm nanospheres in a hexagonal plasmonic lattice. (e–g) Trapping and manipulating cold atoms in subwavelength plasmonic potential. (e) Schematic side view of excitation of SPPs with Kretschmann configuration and interaction with the Bose–Einstein condensate of cold atoms. (f) A grid of nominally 200 μm-long, 2 μm-wide gold stripes with 2 μm spaces used to shape an optical field on the subwavelength scale. (g) Bose–Einstein condensate of cold atoms diffracts from the plasmonic potential. The occupancy of different diffraction orders can be controlled by incident laser power. (a–c) Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Adapted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Optical tweezers have been used to investigate coupling between two metallic NPs by Prikulis et al.307 By immobilizing one NP and moving the other NP with the optical tweezers, the scattering spectra changed as the two NPs were brought closer. More complex 2D patterns of Au NPs have been created by optical trapping and an appropriate deposition procedure with high precision.299,319
6. Controlled self-assembly of plasmonic nanoparticles and nanocrystals
The strong dependence of surface plasmon resonances and near-field enhancements on the details of gaps or void spaces (hot spots) between constituent building blocks in the plasmonic metastructures makes it an important task to accurately control the assembly of plasmonic building blocks, such as colloidal noble-metal NPs and shape-controlled NCs. However, the precise control of plasmonic hot spots is very challenging due to the demanding requirements for assembly precision and material quality. In the case of plasmonic building blocks synthesized by the most established colloidal chemistry methods, the scaling relation between the size of building blocks and the spatial range of the evanescent near fields (Fig. 11) requires the spatial resolution for gap control better than 1 nm for size-controlled AuNPs (AgNPs) synthesized using the combined citrate/tannic-acid (polyol) and Brust method (particle size 3–20 nm, gap size <5 nm) and better than 10 nm for the shape-controlled noble-metal NPs synthesized using the polyol process (particle size ∼100 nm, gap size is about a few tens of nm). These resolution requirements cannot be met reliably even by the state-of-the-art lithographic methods, such as electron-beam lithography (EBL), FIB milling, and scanning probe lithography. Moreover, it is time-consuming and cost-ineffective to make large metastructures one-by-one using the lithographic methods. Therefore, for most practical applications, self-assembly is the method of choice to realize uniform plasmonic metastructures with large structure size and small interparticle gap size. In particular, self-assembly can meet the requirements of efficiency, robustness, and reproducibility for practical applications.
Considering the breadth of the topic (self-assembly of nanomaterials), it would not be possible to provide an exhaustive review including all significant topics. Instead, we will focus here on some selected self-assembly methods, which can have immediate plasmonic applications. For example, we will give some working examples, which can be used for assembling plasmonic meta-atoms (complex nanostructures) into large-scale plasmonic metasurfaces and metamaterials. These metastructures can serve as plasmonic substrates in many fundamental studies and technological applications related to light-based science and technology, including ultrahigh-sensitivity spectroscopies, energy harvesting, nanoscale light sensing and optical signal transduction, integrated nano-optics, and super-resolution imaging. Some of these applications will be discussed in the next section.
6.1. Overview of controlled self-assembly techniques
In general, self-assembly refers to the spontaneous process by which discrete building blocks organize themselves into ordered macroscopic structures due to direct interactions between building blocks and/or indirectly through external forces and the environment.15,16,320–325 In order to exploit self-assembly for plasmonic applications and to ensure efficient scaling, a high-level control of these driving forces in self-assembly processes is needed. This is the reason why “controlled” is emphasized here for the self-assembly methods with programmability and scalability. In order to control the self-assembly process, it is important to modulate the internal interactions and external forces that drive the self-assembly process, by either the use of surface chemistry, templating, or by external physical forces (electrostatic, magnetic, thermal, or flow). Fig. 26 shows some examples of the controlled assembly of macroscale building blocks ranging from millimeter to the centimeter scale. Interestingly, many of these assembly concepts are also applicable to the controlled assembly of nanoscale building blocks.
 Fig. 26  Examples of 3D structures via the controlled assembly of macroscale building blocks ranging from millimeter to the centimeter scale. (a) Controlled 3D assembly using anisotropic 0D building blocks (nanoblock™, http://www.diablock.co.jp/nanoblock/), (b) controlled 3D assembly using 1D chains of anisotropic 0D building blocks (magnetic spheres made of rare earth alloys), (c) controlled 3D assembly using 2D templates. 
In this section, we will focus on the controlled self-assembly of colloidal NPs. The interactions between colloidal NPs in a solution or at a liquid/solid interface are very complex and involve various kinds of forces, such as van der Waals (vdW), electrostatic, solvation/depletion, frictional/lubrication, convective, and capillary forces.15 An effective way to prevent NP aggregation caused by strong attractive forces (e.g. vdW forces) between NPs is to coat them with charged ions (e.g. stabilizing citrate ions on AuNPs) or soft organic shells (e.g. alkanethiolates on AuNPs and AgNPs, PVP on AuNCs and AgNCs). In general, NPs coated with soft organic shells involve the following interactions: (i) attractive van der Waals forces between NPs and surface ligands; (ii) repulsive steric interactions between surface ligands; (iii) repulsive electrostatic forces between charged NP surfaces. These soft shells can be tailored to provide the appropriate balance (repulsive electrostatic or steric forces vs. attractive vdW forces) to direct the assembly of highly ordered NP structures.326 In addition, they can be functionalized to provide the chemical specificity for bonding or the capability of high-precision interparticle gap control (e.g. via the carbon chain length of alkanethiolates). Recently, DNA-based functionalization and assembly strategies have emerged as a promising approach for the programmable self-assembly of NP supercrystals. DNA has the distinct advantages of simple synthesis, wide availability, complementary base-pairing interactions, and programmable features. A number of novel plasmonic structures have been demonstrated via the programed hybridization of complementary DNA strands, ranging from dimers to 3D supercrystals.326–332 To control the plasmonic hot spots, DNA is also particularly useful because its length (number of bases) can be fine-tuned to the desired interparticle gaps using specific interactions by the DNA sequence. However, its structural flexibility also causes some issues of gap size rigidity. At present, DNA-programed self-assembly of novel NP structures is a rapidly evolving research frontier and we would like to refer the readers to several excellent reviews available in the literature.17,333,334
In terms of surface functionalization, the soft organic shells on colloidal NPs can be chemically modified so that molecular interactions can be tailored and used to create ordered assemblies of NPs. Recent advances in this research area have focused on designing particles with morphological (e.g. faceted nanocrystals335–338) or functional features that result in directional (anisotropic) NP interactions. Anisotropic interactions are typically created by modifying NP's surfaces with ligands localized on specific surface regions. Among them, Janus particles with two chemically or physically different surface regions14,339 and DNA-engineered NPs340,341 are two prime examples. In particular, the DNA technique has enabled the assembly of NPs with highly directional interactions, similar to the valence bonding of atoms due to hybridized atomic orbitals. As a result, complex or low-coordination NP structures are now possible in the colloidal domain.340
Other interesting possibilities based on chemical surface functionalization include photo-switchable molecules for reversible assembly and biomolecules (e.g. streptavidin–biotin, antibody–antigen) for biological functionalities.6 Alternatively, particles with specific physical properties can be designed to maximize their interactions with external directing fields e.g. the self-assembly of magnetite nanocubes into quasi-1D helical superstructures in an external magnetic field.342 Confined geometries, such as solid/liquid, air/liquid, and liquid/liquid interfaces, as well as patterned templates and micro flow channels are also very useful to achieve controlled assembly of ordered NP structures.
For plasmonic applications with an emphasis on plasmonic hot spot engineering, we will focus here on two capillary self-assembly techniques (dewetting and Langmuir–Blodgett techniques, see Fig. 27). Using both techniques, colloidal NPs are assembled at the air/liquid/solid interface driven by capillary and thermodynamic forces.190,191,343–348 The dewetting technique, involving drying-mediated (evaporation-induced) assembly of colloidal particles, is a very simple method of assembling 2D ordered particle arrays on solid surfaces. In this process, the relatively weak attractive forces between NPs in the solution become important when the solvent is evaporated. This self-assembly mechanism was interpreted by Denkov et al.349,350 to occur at the evaporation front passing over the surface at a controlled rate, where the particles dispersed in the solution are pulled toward the drying front and then deposited there as the drying front becomes very thin.322 The Langmuir–Blodgett technique is also a type of the interfacial assembly process. First, surface-passivated NPs (e.g. alkanethiolate-passivated AuNPs or AgNPs) are prepared under appropriate conditions to float over the liquid surface. A well-ordered NP monolayer can then spontaneously form at the air–liquid interface, which can be transferred using either horizontal or vertical lift-off to a solid substrate such as quartz. Large-area NP films of various core materials can also be prepared via the Langmuir–Blodgett technique.
 Fig. 27  Two examples of capillary self-assembly methods for the large-area assembly of 2D ordered colloidal NP arrays on solid substrates. (a) Dewetting technique, where the NP monolayer is formed at the moving front of the evaporating droplet containing a suspension of colloidal NPs. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett technique, where the NP monolayer is formed at the moving front of the upward-drawing substrate. Typically, large-scale and more ordered NP structures could be formed by using the second approach. 
6.2. Self-assembly of 2D and 3D colloidal NP metastructures
The dewetting method can be easily implemented for the large-area assembly of 2D ordered colloidal NP or NC arrays on solid substrates with very high precision in controlling gap sizes between NPs or NCs. Depending on the NP/NC and surfactant concentration, solvent evaporation rate, ionic strength (electrolyte solution), and other solution conditions, metal NPs or NCs can be assembled into well-ordered one-, two-, and three-dimensional plasmonic NP/NC metastructures. For example, a thiol-passivated AuNP and AgNP superlattice monolayer can be formed at the moving front of the evaporating droplet containing a suspension of colloidal NPs. The inter-particle gap sizes in these NP superlattices can be precisely regulated by the length of alkanethiolate ligands on the NP surfaces. Moreover, the shape anisotropy of metal NCs can be used to create special packing arrangements.

Fig. 28 shows a series of 2D hexagonal close-packed AuNP superlattices formed on quartz with an average Au core size of 10.5 nm. In this example, the heated solvent temperature controls the evaporation rate of the dewetting process and the kinetic process of superlattice formation.191 To control the interparticle gap size, the Au NP surfaces for different 2D superlattices are coated with various alkanethiolate ligands, ranging from twelve- (C12, dodecanethiolote), fourteen- (C14, tetradecanethiolate), and sixteen- (C16, hexadecanethiolate) to eighteen-carbon (C18, octadecanethiolate) chain length. Analyzed by high-resolution SEM images, the interparticle gap size can be controlled at an atomic resolution from 3.4 nm (C18) to 2.3 nm (C12), which cannot be achieved using any available lithographic techniques. The collective plasmon resonance changes from 575 nm (C18) to 607 nm (C12) accordingly, confirming a red-shift due to near field coupling between NPs. This study shows the distinct advantage of the controlled self-assembly method for fabricating designed plasmonic metastructures with an unprecedented spatial resolution in gap control. Moreover, this technique is scalable to centimeter-sized structures by using the Langmuir–Blodgett technique, which has better controllability than the dewetting technique. In the next section, we will present an important application of 2D hexagonal close-packed AgNP superlattices for quantitative SERS, which requires uniform, controllable and tunable hot substrates to detect all analyte molecules in a wide area with high sensitivity.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic showing a 2D NP superlattice assembled by using the dewetting process. In this example, the solvent heating temperature controls the evaporation rate of the dewetting process. (b) SEM image of a hexagonal close-packed AuNP (average core diameter: 10.5 nm) superlattice on quartz. In this image, the NP surface is coated with octadecanethiolate ligands. (c) The interparticle gap can be precisely tuned by using alkanethiols with various carbon chain lengths, ranging from a twelve- (C12), fourteen- (C14), and sixteen- (C16) to a eighteen-carbon (C18) chain. The gap size can be controlled with an atomic resolution from 3.4 nm (C18) to 2.3 nm (C12). (d) Corresponding changes in collective plasmon resonances are from 575 nm (C18) to 607 nm (C12). Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
The shape anisotropy of various metal NCs synthesized with high monodispersity in size and shape opens another interesting pathway to assemble 3D NC supercrystals with a variety of packing arrangements. Fig. 29 and 30 show examples of Au and Ag NCs assembled with polyhedra (cube, rhombic dodecahedra, octahedra) and nanorod morphologies.351–353 Since the LSPR of NC building blocks is a function of size, shape, and material composition, the assemblies of Au and Ag NCs into 3D highly ordered plasmonic supercrystals can have a wide range of collective plasmon resonances, opening up new opportunities for synthesizing broadband plasmonic metastructures.
 Fig. 29  Examples of 3D supercrystals composed of building blocks based on colloidal gold and silver polyhedra. Here, both the SEM images of actual supercrystals with different kinds of nanocrystals and the schematics of packing arrangements are shown. Supercrystals were assembled from (a) silver cubes, (b) gold rhombic dodecahedra, (c) silver octahedra, and (d) gold octahedra. Scale bars are 500 nm in (a) and (c). (a and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 30  3D supercrystals composed of gold nanorods via the dewetting process. (a) Evolution of the gold nanorod supercrystals at different stages of droplet drying, showing the growth process, the formation of sharp edge, and the final formation of different supercrystal geometries. (b) SEM images of a gold nanorod superlattice. (c) SEM image of a gold nanorod supercrystal with the smectic-A liquid crystal phase. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH. 
6.3. Layer-by-layer self-assembly of 3D plasmonic metatructures
In order to realize large-scale 3D self-assembly of plasmonic metastructures, the layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly technique introduced by Decher354 in 1997 is a very versatile approach that can offer controllability, simplicity, flexibility, and scalability not possible using other self-assembly techniques. In the earlier implementation of the LbL assembly technique, electrostatic interactions were used to assemble alternatively deposited positively charged polymer layers (binder layers) and negatively charged NPs. This LbL approach has been applied to assemble a wide range of plasmonic nanomaterials into multilayered heterostructures.355–369 Moreover, using LbL assembly, various optical and electronic devices with engineered properties have been demonstrated. However, electrostatic assembly via charged polymer binders has its limitations in two aspects: (i) the thickness of the binder layer prevents near-field coupling between neighboring metal NP layers; and (ii) long-range ordering in the NP layer is not possible because of the strong electrostatic interactions.
For this reason, it would be better to develop an “epitaxial” growth method of NP films without the need for a binder layer. This “molecular beaker epitaxy” (“MBE”) is analogous to conventional molecular beam epitaxy for growing semiconductor and metal heterostructure films, but without the need for using expensive and complicated ultra-high vacuum systems. To meet this requirement, we have developed a simple and efficient method for synthesizing large-area (>1 cm2), 3D AuNP and AgNP supercrystal films.190 In this approach, Janus NP (top face solvent-phobic and bottom face solvent-philic) films with a large number of close-packed NP monolayers can be formed using LbL assembly from suspensions of thiolate-coated AuNPs or AgNPs (see Fig. 31). To create the Janus NP monolayers, Lin et al. applied a simple and scalable air plasma technique370 to modify (i.e. oxidation of the surface functional groups) the surfaces of closed-packed, thiolate-coated AuNP or AgNP monolayers after every LbL assembly step. It has been demonstrated that these NP films can act as 3D plasmonic metastructures showing transverse (intralayer) and longitudinal (interlayer) near-field coupling effects (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  3D plasmonic crystals assembled from colloidal gold and silver NPs. (a) Schematic illustration of the plasma-assisted LbL assembly process. SEM image obtained from the first monolayer of AuNPs after plasma treatment. The in-plane lattice constant determined by Fourier transform analysis is ∼9 nm, and the measured core diameter of gold NPs is ∼6 nm. The layer-forming process can be repeated to form multilayered NP films. (b) Contact angle measurements on an octadecanethiolate-coated AgNP supercrystal film deposited on an ITO-coated silica substrate before (left) and after (center) air-plasma treatment. The supercrystal surface changes from hydrophobic (110°) to hydrophilic (20°) after an air-plasma treatment for 5 s. The contact angle recovers to 110° after deposition of an additional AgNP monolayer (the fifth monolayer, right). (c) Optical reflection from AgNP (∼6 nm diameter) films with thicknesses of 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15 ML in sequence. The reflection colors result from the combined effect of two plasmonic resonance bands (the transverse-mode at 468 nm and the longitudinal-mode that periodically varies according to the layer number). Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In contrast to conventional polyelectrolyte-mediated LbL assembly processes, this approach allows for the formation of longitudinal plasmonic modes originating from the near-field coupling between NP monolayers because of the extremely small interlayer gap size. A clear spectral dependence on the number of NP monolayers has been confirmed. Moreover, a universal scaling relation was found between the spectral positions of the reflectance dips related to the longitudinal modes and the number of NP monolayers. This relation can be understood in terms of the formation of a plasmonic Fabry–Pérot nanocavity along the longitudinal direction that allows for the formation of standing plasmon waves under resonant conditions. The realization of 3D plasmonic coupling in the LbL-assembled Au/Ag NP supercrystals enables the broadband tuning of collective plasmon response over a wide spectral range (visible and near-IR), which is otherwise not possible using 2D Au or Ag NP superlattices in the ultrasmall size regime (<20 nm in NP diameter). Furthermore, according to our recent studies, the LbL-assembly technique can provide a unique pathway to fabricate conformal plasmonic metastructures on curved and artificially structured surfaces. The conformal possibility is very useful, for example, for super-resolution optical imaging using a hyperlens approach based on plasmonic metamaterials.371
6.4. Patterned self-assembly of 2D/3D plasmonic metastructures
The Langmuir–Blodgett and LbL assembly techniques can also be used to fabricate 2D and 3D patterned metal NP metastructures on solid substrates. In a work reported by Liao et al.,372 the transfer of metal NPs from a NP film prepared by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique at a liquid–air interface is carried out using a patterned poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) soft stamp (see Fig. 32). The soft stamp method for NP transfer is a fast, robust, and scalable technique, which can preserve the original packing ordering in the NP film as well as the pattern on the soft stamp.
 Fig. 32  2D patterning technique to transfer AuNPs from a NP film prepared by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique at a liquid–air interface to a solid substrate. A patterned poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) soft stamp is used as the vehicle to transfer AuNPs from the liquid surface to the substrate surface. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2006 the Wiley-VCH. 
For more complicated composite structures, it has been found that the LbL self-assembly technique can be applied for the fabrication of NP heterostructures, such as metal–insulator–metal (MIM) layered plasmonic structures composed of two NP supercrystal layers and a dielectric (e.g. SiO2, Al2O3) interlayer stacked in between. In comparison to metal films, the plasmonic resonances and dispersion relations of metal NP supercrystals can be precisely engineered by the size, shape, composition of constituent NPs and the interparticle/interlayer separation. Also, it is possible to deposit NP supercrystal layers onto substrates with various metal overlayers, which in turn can function as plasmonic perfect absorbers in designated spectral regions.95,96 These NP heterostructures are very useful for fundamental studies and plasmonic applications related to the unusual light propagation properties such as negative refractive index107 and slow light.373
Furthermore, by utilizing a combined top-down and bottom-up fabrication approach, it is possible to design and fabricate patterned plasmonic metastructures with flexibility in design. For example, by combing the LbL self-assembly technique with photolithography, patterned 3D NP supercrystal structures can be fabricated by the LbL deposition of AuNP layers followed by the LbL removal of AuNPs using the air plasma technique with a patterned etch mask.370 The desired structure patterns can be fabricated by using a resist mask patterned by photolithography (see Fig. 33).
 Fig. 33  (a) Plasmonic metal–insulator–metal (MIM) heterostructure composed of one insulator gap layer (SiO2) sandwiched by two NP supercrystal layers. (b) Plasmonic waveguide array fabricated by the LbL deposition of AuNP layers followed by the LbL removal of AuNPs using the air plasma technique. The waveguide array structure can be fabricated using a resist mask patterned by photolithography (or electron-beam lithography). 
7. Applications
In this section, we discuss a few selected applications of metamolecules assembled by using the nanomanipulation methods and metasurfaces created by using the controlled self-assembly methods.
7.1. Plasmon-enhanced photovoltaics
Most commercial solar cells based on crystalline Si include a ∼200 μm thick absorption layer because of the small absorption coefficient of Si as an indirect gap semiconductor. Reducing the Si layer thickness below the carrier diffusion length (i.e.several microns) not only reduces the cost but also increases charge collection efficiency. Incorporating plasmonic NPs or films improves photovoltaic devices by increasing light trapping efficiency.39,126,374–388 First, plasmonic NPs placed at the semiconductor interface increase preferential scattering into semiconductors, effectively increasing the optical interaction length. Second, the enhanced near-field of small NPs may increase light absorption of the surrounding semiconductor medium. Third, light trapping may also occur via the excitation of SPPs at the metal/semiconductor interfaces. Such SPPs effectively concentrate and guide light inside the semiconductor layer. Finally, hot electron generation in plasmonic NPs has been investigated recently as an alternative mechanism to improve photovoltaics.389–393
Hägglund and coworkers have demonstrated the impressively high absorption of visible light using an absorber/spacer/reflector structure as illustrated in Fig. 34a.379 The absorber layer consisting of dense, hexagonal Au dot arrays was produced using the undirected self-assembly of block copolymers as shown by the cross-sectional TEM view in Fig. 34b. The plasmonic resonance of the array is comparable or better than those produced using electron beam lithography. Subsequently, the arrays were coated with SnSx, ZnO, or Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition. A layer of ion-beam deposited SiO2 acted as the spacer layer between the absorber layer and the Al reflector. A maximum of >90% absorption in a volume-equivalent ∼2 nm thick gold was demonstrated as shown in Fig. 34c.
 Fig. 34  A planar plasmonic structure for improved absorption. (a) Illustration of an absorber/spacer/reflector structure. (b) The cross-sectional TEM image of hexagonal Au dot arrays produced using undirected self-assembly block copolymers. (c) >90% absorption was demonstrated at the plasmonic resonance by comparing absorption spectra from structures with/without the Au NP arrays (red and green curves). Reflection measurement is shown as the blue curve. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Using a plasmonic back reflector consisting of self-assembled AgNPs for light trapping, Tan and coworkers demonstrated a thin film Si solar cell with performance comparable to state-of-the-art random textures in amorphous silicon solar cells.380 A different design of the back plane reflector using self-assembled arrays of dielectric nanospheres in a continuous metal layer has also been shown to increase the photocurrent and the external quantum efficiency for thin film Si solar cells.377,381 By incorporating both Ag and Au NPs with different plasmonic resonances, Lu and coworkers showed a 20% enhancement in power conversion efficiency in polymer solar cells382 (Fig. 35a). More recently, ion-assisted aerosol lithography of metal NPs enabled controllable three-dimensional multiscale structures, leading to increased light scattering and absorption efficiency over a broad spectral range and improved power conversion efficiency of Si thin film solar cells385 (Fig. 35b).
 Fig. 35  (a) Ag and Au NPs with different plasmonic resonances were incorporated in a polymer solar cell leading to 20% improvement in power conversion efficiency. (b) SEM image of a three-dimensional multiscale structure fabricated using ion-assisted aerosol lithography of metal NPs for enhancing light scattering and absorption efficiency; (c) cross-sectional image of the 3D plasmonic structure in (b) for improved solar cell performance. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing. 
Another mechanism for plasmonic NPs to enhance photovoltaic performance is via hot electron generation. Following the excitation of LSPR modes, the energy is dissipated via either radiative or non-radiative decay processes. In the non-radiative decay process, surface plasmons first decay to single-electron excited states, if the electron energy exceeds the work function of the materials, photoemission may follow. If the plasmonic nanostructure is placed in contact with a semiconductor, hot electrons with enough energy to overcome the Schottky barrier are injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor, leaving the metallic nanostructure positively charged. An electron-donor solution or a hole transporting material is required to transport the generated holes and to sustain an electric current. This hot electron injection mechanism offers a completely new scheme for solar energy conversion, thus, raising significant recent interest.
Early hints of surface-plasmon induced charge separation came from the observation of photocurrent generated in TiO2 with a layer containing Au or Ag NPs under visible light illumination. Because of the large band-gap (3.3 eV) of TiO2, photocurrents in TiO2 are usually only observable with UV-light illumination. Zhao and coworkers suggested LSPRs as a possible mechanism for the unexpected photocurrent.394 In another experiment, Ag/Au NPs absorbed onto porous TiO2 were placed in contact with an electron-donor solution in a photovoltaic cell. The measured incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency varied as a function of wavelength and closely matched the extinction spectrum of the NP, establishing the critical role of LSPRs in photocurrent generation as shown in Fig. 36.37
 Fig. 36  Plasmon induced charge separation in TiO2 films loaded with AuNPs improves the performance of a photovoltaic cell. (a) Illustration of the charge transfer process initiated by light induced charge separation in Au NPs in the presence of electron donors. (b) The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of incident photon wavelength. This dependence matches the extinction spectrum of the Au NPs. Inset: SEM image of the Au–TiO2 film. Figures are adapted from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Because the efficiency of hot electron generation is closely related to the plasmonic decay processes, this process depends on the shape of the NPs. For example, the photoelectron generation process is more efficient in small spherical NPs with a diameter of ∼15 nm than bigger NPs that exhibit more efficient radiative decay. Similarly, nanorods can lead to better hot electron generation efficiency due to modified decay dynamics and multiple plasmonic resonances leading to enhanced absorption over a broader spectral range.
7.2. Plasmonic rulers
The key idea incorporated in optical spectroscopic rulers is to transduce changes in spatial arrangement into spectral differences. The most widely applied spectroscopic ruler is fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET),395–398 which measures the distance between two labeling molecules (e.g. green fluorescent proteins), referred to as the donor and the acceptor by monitoring the fluorescence intensity from the acceptor molecule. FRET has widespread applications in biochemical science, e.g. as a quantitative sensor for ion concentration (e.g. Ca2+) in cells, organisms, and tissues. Because the energy transfer efficiency is proportional to the sixth power of the distance between the two molecules, FRET can only be used to estimate inter-chromophoric distances below a few nanometers.
The development of plasmonic rulers is mainly motivated by the desire to search for new optical labels that are more photochemically stable and to allow for longer observation periods and longer interaction distance (10–100 nm). Plasmonic rulers make use of plasmonic resonances in noble metal NPs. It has been successfully applied to investigate the kinetics of DNA hybridization, the dynamics of DNA bonding and cleavage, and the activity of enzymes. In the example shown in Fig. 37, two gold NPs were attached to a DNA to monitor its configurational changes.399 The plasmonic resonance exhibited a clear blue shift when the two NPs were pushed apart due to hybridization of the doubled stranded DNA upon addition of complementary DNAs.
 Fig. 37  A plasmonic ruler consisting of two Au NPs used to monitor DNA cleavage. (a) A red shift of the LSPR was observed as the two NPs moved closer following a doubled stranded DNA cleavage. (b) Spectral change in the scattering spectrum as a function time used to monitor the DNA configuration changes. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 399. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
There has been a long-standing effort to extend the 1D nature of FRET to 3D by measuring the polarization of anisotropic fluorescent molecules.400–402 A previously demonstrated 3D plasmonic ruler was based on a large array of plasmonic elements, thus unsuitable for local orientation sensing at the single molecule level.403 By choosing two coupled NPs with distinct optical properties, one can determine the relative orientation between the two. Such an orientation sensor has been termed as a plasmonic protractor, as demonstrated in Fig. 38. A nanorod has a narrow “dark” resonance in the visible wavelength range, which corresponds to a quadrupole-like charge distribution. This quadrupole mode cannot be excited directly by the incident light. Instead, it can be excited effectively via near-field coupling to the nanosphere. The interference between the bright, dipole mode of the sphere and the dark, quadrupole mode of the rod leads to the Fano resonance. The strength of this Fano resonance, however, depends on the angle of the polarizer in the path of the incident light and the angle of the analyzer in the path of the collected scattered light as illustrated in Fig. 38.404 This polarization dependence allows us to determine the orientation of the Fano axis.
 Fig. 38  A plasmonic orientation sensor based on two dissimilar NPs. (a) A plasmonic nanosphere coupled to a nano rod can be used as an orientation sensor. Depending on whether the incident and detection polarization of light is parallel (perpendicular) to the Fano axis (a line that connects the tip of the nanorod to the center of the sphere), a Fano resonance is present (absent) in the calculated scattering spectrum. Measured scattering spectra as a function of (b) incident and (c) detection light polarization. One can identify an angle that leads to the strongest Fano resonance, which in turn defined a plane parallel to the Fano axis. (d) Using polarization resolved scattering spectra, the intersection of the two planes identified in (b) and (c) can be used to uniquely define the Fano axis, which can be used to define the relative orientation between the sphere and rod. (e) An illustration of how such orientation sensors consisting of quantum dots and a spherical NP may be used to monitor configuration changes of molecules functionalized with a few quantum dots. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 404. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
7.3. Plasmon-controlled fluorescence
One application of plasmonics relevant to quantum physics is controlling the emitter properties. The large photonic density of states as well as the ultrasmall, subwavelength optical mode volume associated with plasmonic nanostructures and cavities make them attractive alternatives to traditional dielectric cavities in exploring quantum electrodynamics (QED) phenomena.405 A plasmonic cavity influences both the absorption and subsequent decay dynamics of an emitter. The PL emission rate can be written as γPL = γexcY, where γexc is the excitation rate and  is the quantum yield determined by the ratio of decay rates. κr is the radiative decay rate, and κnr is the nonradiative decay rate. By enhancing the E-field strength of the near field, a plasmonic NP or cavity increases the absorption rate of the emitter. The NP also enhances the radiative decay rate of the emitter via the Purcell effect and the non-radiative decay via energy transfer between the emitter and the NP.
A simple model system consisting of a dipole emitter near a spherical AuNP was examined.406 The properties of the dipole are taken to be typically of a colloidal semiconductor quantum dot, which has near unity quantum yield. We plot the modification factor η in the total decay rate ηt, the radiative decay rate ηr, and the non-radiative decay rate ηnr as a function of the distance d between the dipole and the NP of 35 nm diameter as shown in Fig. 39a. The modification factors are defined as the ratio between the rates for the coupled NP-dipole system and the dipole alone. As the distance decreases, all these decay rates increase. While the modification in the radiative decay ηr is moderate, the modification in the non-radiative decay is drastic, especially when the distance is reduced below 10 nm. This rapid increase in the non-radiative decay rate arises from the energy transfer between the dipole emitter and the NP. One can further calculate the modification in the PL intensity ηPL, which is the product of the modification in the excitation rate ηexc and quantum yield ηY, as a function of the NP and dipole distance as shown in Fig. 39b. Because of the rapid increase in the nonradiative decay rate at small distances, quantum yield ηY decreases monotonically as the NP approaches the dipole. The excitation rate, on the other hand, increases due to increasing local E-field strength. The PL intensity, calculated by the product of the quantum yield and excitation rate, displays a modest increase followed by a decrease at small distances.
 Fig. 39  Calculations of the modified decay dynamics and PL rate enhancement of a QD (approximated as a dipole) when placed near a metallic NP. (a) The enhancement factor of the radiative (red), nonradiative (blue), and total decay rate (black) of a point dipole as its distance to a spherical Au NP (35 nm diameter) is changed. (b) PL emission rate enhancement (black) is the product of excitation rate enhancement (blue) and quantum yield modification factor (red). In PL emission intensity exhibits non-monotonic behavior. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
AFM manipulation has been used to investigate the dynamics of a single colloidal semiconductor QD coupled to a gold NP in a controllable manner.406 Reversible changes in lifetime and blinking behavior have been observed as the NP is moved toward or away from the QD, as shown in Fig. 40. Blinking refers to the phenomenon that a single emitter stochastically switches between bright and dark fluorescence periods, typical of individual colloidal QDs and other single emitters. In one particular example when the QD lifetime is reduced nearly 100 fold, QD blinking essentially disappeared. The disappearance of blinking can be understood in the following way. As the NP approaches the QD, the rapidly increasing energy transfer between the QD and NP becomes the dominant non-radiative decay channel that competes with other non-radiative decay processes including the ones responsible for blinking. Similarly, photoluminescence from a nitrogen vacancy center in a nano-diamond exhibited a reduced lifetime when the nano-diamond was sandwiched between two gold NPs manipulated by an AFM.407
 Fig. 40  Modified QD lifetime and blinking behavior when an Au NP is pushed toward a QD using an AFM tip. (a and b) AFM images of a quantum dot near two Au NPs. QD emission as a function of time and histograms for (c) a bare QD and (d) a QD coupled to a NP showing diminished blinking. Lifetime measurements of (e) a bare QD and (f) a QD coupled to a NP showing nearly 2 orders of magnitude reduction in lifetime. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
While many experiments have reported the PL intensity enhancement of emitters near plasmonic NPs, clusters, or rough films, the intensity modification factors depend on the NP size and the NP-emitter distance sensitively.408–420 The non-monotonic behavior in PL intensity as an emitter approaches a plasmonic NP was first convincingly demonstrated by Anger and coworkers.421 The PL intensity of a single molecule was monitored as an AuNP (diameter of 80 nm) attached to an AFM tip approached. PL intensity from the single molecule first increased and was then quenched at very short distances as shown in Fig. 41. The PL intensity enhancement near plasmonic structures is the strongest for emitters with poor quantum efficiency to begin with.422–424
 Fig. 41  An example of modified properties of an emitter when an Au NP approaches. (a) A gold NP was attached to the tip of a probe and aligned to the focus of a microscope objective. The sample stage was scanned to bring a single molecule to the focus. (b) The fluorescence intensity from the molecule was measured as the metallic NP approached the surface in a precisely controlled manner. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 421. Copyright 2006 American Physical Society. 
7.4. Designed plasmonic metamolecules and circuits
Metamaterials represent man-made materials exhibiting novel properties that do not exist in natural materials.91,425–434 Metamolecules function as building blocks for metamaterials. Plasmonic NP clusters exhibit rich optical properties enabled by near-field coupling between NPs. One example is self-assembled NP clusters consisting of three or more NPs.435 As shown by Fan and coworkers, a trimer is one of the simplest geometries that supports interesting resonances. Through a calculation performed in the quasistatic limit, a number of resonances and their spectral shifts as a function of gap between NPs are predicted, as shown in Fig. 42a. The scattering spectrum from such a structure is still dominated by the electric dipole mode. If a polarizer is inserted in the detection path to minimize scattering from the electric dipole mode, a magnetic dipole resonance can be observed at a longer wavelength, in good agreement with the calculated spectrum shown in Fig. 42b. Such strong magnetic dipole resonances in the optical frequency range do not exist in natural materials mainly because the sizes of atoms and molecules are much smaller than the wavelength of light.436,437
 Fig. 42  Electric and magnetic LSPR modes in a self-assembled trimer cluster. (a) Calculated LSPRs as a function of the gap size in a trimer with the local electric field distribution shown in the inset. (b) Measured and calculated scattering spectrum that identifies a magnetic dipole mode in the infrared spectral region. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 435. Copyright 2010 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Another example is a metamolecule consisting of four NPs assembled via AFM nanomanipulation, as shown in Fig. 43. Compared to other NP cluster geometries, a four-NP metamolecule has some unique properties. First, the four-NP ring geometry features a reduced radiative loss compared to odd-numbered nanorings due to cancellation of higher order multipolar terms.438 More importantly, the magnetic resonance may be tuned over a wide range and spectrally overlapped with the electric dipole resonance by simply adjusting the gap sizes between the NPs. Having spectrally overlapped electric and magnetic transitions allows for the manipulation of both permittivity and permeability of metamaterials consisting of such metamolecule building blocks. The spectrally narrow, dark magnetic resonance manifests itself as a Fano resonance via interference with the broad electronic dipole transition. In perfectly symmetric ring geometry, incident electromagnetic wave would excite both electric and magnetic dipole transitions. However, these modes are orthogonal and additively contribute to the total scattering cross section without interference as illustrated in Fig. 43a.439 In a ring assembled with AFM, small deviations from a perfectly symmetric ring lead to the near-field interaction between the magnetic and electric modes and produce the characteristic Fano resonance (Fig. 43b–d).
 Fig. 43  A metamolecule consisting of 4 NPs assembled with AFM nanomanipulation designed to support spectrally overlapped electric and magnetic resonances. (a) In a perfectly symmetric 4 NP ring, the electric and magnetic modes are orthogonal and additively contribute to the scattering spectrum. (b) Either NP or gap size variations introduce asymmetry and lead to interference between the two modes. (c) Measured and (d) simulated scattering spectra confirming the origin of the magnetic-based optical Fano resonance in the asymmetric 4 NP ring. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
A powerful concept that has emerged in nanophotonics is that of photonic circuits. Although electronic devices operate by controlling electromagnetic waves, the distributed systems can be modularized by lumped circuit elements such as capacitors, inductors, and resistors. It is a tantalizing question to ask: can one design and model photonic systems using similar concepts as proposed by Engheta and coworkers.440–443 In this model, dielectric NPs act as capacitors and metallic NPs behave like inductors due to the positive or negative real permittivity constant. Resistors represent loss due to the negative imaginary part of the permittivity constant as illustrated by Fig. 44a.
 Fig. 44  Illustration of the photonic circuit concept. (a) The impedance of a subwavelength NP at optical frequency can be defined as the ratio between the optical electric potential drop and the displacement current flowing through the NP. Depending on the permittivity of material, the NP may act as a lumped circuit element: a capacitor or an inductor. The loss can be modeled as a resistor. (b) Vacuum or dielectric medium does not conduct electric current, which is confined to conducting wires in conventional circuits. (c) Analogously, a medium with epsilon near zero (ENZ) may confine electromagnetic waves. Photonic circuit elements and waveguides placed inside such an ENZ medium closely resemble electric circuits. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2007 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2012 by IEEE. 
One of the simplest plasmonic circuits is an antenna. Merlein and coworkers have demonstrated a tunable gold bow-tie antenna consisting of two triangle flakes fabricated using colloidal lithography as shown in Fig. 45.444 The evaporation mask consists of four polystyrene sphere leaving residues visible in AFM images. The gap size between two triangles can be controlled using the AFM nanomanipulation method. When the gap size was reduced to ∼45 nm, a new resonance near 670 nm emerged in addition to the resonance at 710 nm. Both a blue shifted mode at ∼702 nm and another resonance near 940 nm were observed when the two triangles were pushed into each other. Simulations were performed for triangle flakes with two different cross-sections (Fig. 45). Full three-dimensional shapes of the triangles (e.g. the tiled side walls) have to be taken into account in the calculation to reproduce the experimental observations as shown in Fig. 45. Furthermore, it has been shown that the resonance frequency of plasmonic antenna arrays can be tuned by loading the bowtie antennas with dielectric NPs.445
 Fig. 45  A plasmonic antenna with its resonance tuned by changing the gap size using AFM nanomanipulation method. (a–c) AFM images and the corresponding scattering spectra as the gap size was reduced. (d) Illustration of two different side-wall shapes considered in simulation. (e) Simulated spectra can reproduce the measured scattering spectra only when the titled side-walls were taken into account. Figures are adapted from ref. 444. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group. 
Shi et al. further demonstrated the modular assembly of a photonc circuit analogous to electrical circuits using AFM manipulation.446 After identifying NPs with appropriate impedance using scattering measurements, the chosen NPs are assembled into appropriate geometry to realize the designed circuit. In the example shown in Fig. 46a, three metallic NPs (Au NPs) and one dielectric NP (Al2O3 NP) are assembled into a close-packed cluster. Depending on the direction and the polarization of the incident light relative to the cluster, different circuits (Fig. 46b) are invoked to predict the qualitative features of the scattering spectra (Fig. 46c and d). For some polarization angles, a simple circuit model based on series and parallel connections between circuit elements does not exist, highlighting the rich optical properties of these NP clusters. To expand simple photonic circuits to a larger scale, the critical missing piece is an “insulating” matrix in which photonic circuits are embedded. In conventional electronic circuits, electric currents are channeled by conducting wires in insulating dielectric medium. The analog of an optical insulator would be a man-made medium called epsilon-near-zero medium, which is an active research area, as illustrated in Fig. 44b and c.
 Fig. 46  An example of a photonic circuit consisting of three metallic NPs and one dielectric NP. (a) An illustration of the NP cluster geometry and the AFM image of the cluster (three Au NPs and one Al2O3 NP) assembled with AFM manipulation. (b) Different circuit models used to predict the scattering spectra corresponding to different incident light directions and polarization. (c) Measured and (d) simulated scattering spectra as a function of incident light polarization. Only for selected polarizations, the spectra can be described qualitatively with a simple circuit model. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 446. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
7.5. Plasmonic metasurfaces for nonlinear optics
Nonlinear optical processes play an important role in photonics, including frequency conversion, generation of ultrashort laser pulses, all-optical signal processing, and ultrafast switching.57,447,448 However, material nonlinearities are inherently weak. Thus, high-power lasers and special nonlinear crystals are typically required to observe the nonlinear optical effects. Therefore, plasmonic nanostructures are very useful in enhancing intrinsically weak nonlinear optical processes. Moreover, nonlinear optical processes, such as second-harmonic generation (SHG), third-harmonic generation (THG), four-wave mixing (FWM), and the Kerr effect, superlinearly depend on the electromagnetic field intensity and can be tremendously strengthened in appropriate material environments that provide surface plasmon resonances for large field enhancements.57–59
The unique advantage of plasmonic metasurfaces for nonlinear optics mainly lies in the possibility of engineering plasmonic resonances by controlling the size, shape, and composition of meta-atoms (e.g. asymmetric shapes,449,450) their geometric arrangements (e.g. chiral arrangements451–454), as well as their in-plane coupling and dielectric surroundings. Fig. 47 shows some of these examples in the literature for applications of plasmonics in nonlinear optics. Moreover, future on-chip nonlinear optical systems call for uniformly hot surfaces with precisely engineered plasmonic properties. The recent developments in plasmonic metasurfaces can fulfill these requirements. In general, plasmonic metasurfaces consist of arrays of 1D metallic nanostructures (e.g. nanoslits, nanogrooves, nanoribs) or 2D metallic nanostructures (i.e. subwavelength “meta-atoms”, such as nanoholes, nanoprotrusions, nanoantennas, split-rings, NPs) supported on solid substrates or embedded in optical films. Plasmonic metasurfaces exhibit collective and tunable resonance properties controlled by in-plane plasmonic coupling. In the past few years, plasmonic metasurfaces have been demonstrated to produce a range of unique linear and nonlinear optical properties unattainable with naturally occurring materials.89–92,95,96,98,109,111,190,191 In comparison to engineered linear properties, nonlinear optical applications are still not fully explored and we expect plenty of opportunities for this important emerging field.
 Fig. 47  2D plasmonic metasurfaces and 3D plasmonic nanostructures for plasmon-enhanced second-harmonic generation (SHG). (a) SEM image of a plasmonic metasurface composed of G-shaped gold unit cells (side length ∼1 μm). The yellow lines are added around the edges of the structures in order to improve the visibility. (b) Metasurface composed of L-shaped gold nanostructures with a 250 nm arm length and a 100 nm arm width. (c) SEM images of a chiral metasurface structure composed of right-handed twisted gold crosses. The inset shows a close-up image. (d) Top-down (left) and tilted (right) SEM images of individual gold nanocups oriented at 30° and 0° to the substrate normal. The gold nanocups were fabricated by the deposition of a 35 nm thick gold layer using an electron-beam evaporator at different deposition angles onto silica NPs (120 nm in diameter). Figures are adapted with permission from (a) ref. 450, (b) ref. 451, (c) ref. 452, and (d) ref. 449. Copyright (2009, 2011, 2012) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2009 Optical Society of America. 
Traditional nonlinear optics requires the phase matching conditions. The green laser pointer can be taken as an example58 for SHG applications. In a commercially available green laser pointer, a diode laser emitting at the near-infrared wavelength (1064 nm) is converted to 532 nm green light by a frequency-doubling crystal. However, this conversion process requires nonlinear crystals such that they must have the same refractive indices at 1064 nm (fundamental mode) and 532 nm (second-harmonic mode) to fulfill the phase matching conditions, i.e. the generated SHG light propagates in phase with the light at the fundamental frequency. Moreover, the SHG efficiency is very low, resulting in an expensive, electric power inefficient, and bulky green laser pointer on the market.
For plasmon-enhanced nonlinear optical processes by metallic nanostructures, strict phase-matching is no longer a prerequisite since the metallic nanostructures can facilitate the formation of subwavelength hot spots to enhance the nonlinear processes.57–59 In this case, mode-matching conditions are more important than phase-matching conditions. The design of multi-resonant nanostructures has been proven to be a very efficient approach to achieve plasmonic mode-matching.59,455–457 For SHG, the electromagnetic properties of a plasmonic system can be specifically optimized at the fundamental and second-harmonic wavelengths in order to reach an efficient excitation at the fundamental wavelength and a maximal emission at the second-harmonic wavelength. As an alternative approach to plasmonic mode-matching, optical zero-index metamaterials have recently been demonstrated for phase-mismatch-free nonlinear propagation.108
The plasmonic resonances on the metasurfaces can be designed to operate at a single wavelength, multiple wavelengths, or a wide spectral region at which the nonlinear response needs to be enhanced over a large sample area. In a recent work by Wang et al., using a precisely engineered plasmonic metasurface patterned with a V-shaped nanogroove array on giant (millimeter-scaled) colloidal silver single-crystalline plates,113 it has been demonstrated that double resonances at both fundamental and second-harmonic wavelengths can be designed and realized for strong plasmon-enhanced SHG at 532 nm (see Fig. 48). In the commonly used plasmonic metals (Au, Ag, Cu, and Al), the comprising atoms are organized in a face-centered cubic lattice, which is centrosymmetric. Therefore, SHG is forbidden in these bulk materials in the electric dipole approximation. To generate SHG, symmetry breaking originating from the metal surface,458,459 local geometry,460–464 or asymmetric meta-atom shape59,449,450 is necessary. In this aspect, the asymmetric geometry of the V-shaped nanogroove structure is an effective approach for plasmon-enhanced SHG. Moreover, the multiple-resonance structures can also exhibit Fano resonances to obtain sharper resonances.59 Hybrid nanostructures, composed of a plasmonic part for the enhancement of the electric field and an additional nonlinear material with a noncentrosymmetric atomic lattice for efficient SHG, have also been proposed and demonstrated for efficient nonlinear conversion at the nanoscale.465–467
 Fig. 48  Spatially uniform SHG emission from the silver metasurface patterned with a double resonant V-shaped nanogroove array. (a and b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the focused ion-beam (FIB)-milled nanogroove surface, which exhibits double plasmonic resonances at λ1 = 532 nm (SHG wavelength) and λ2 = 1064 nm (incident pulsed laser wavelength). (c) Optical reflectance spectra at normal incidence show the strong dependence of reflectance on the incident light polarization. The blue curve is measured using horizontally (H) polarized white light (the electric field is perpendicular to the nanogroove). In comparison, the vertically (V) polarized white light (electric field parallel to nanogroove) has reflectance close to unity (red curve). The insets show the optical microscopy (OM) reflection images. (d) The SHG emission at 532 nm is also strongly H-polarized with a large polarization ratio. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In the work by Wang et al.,113 the ability to precisely tune the resonances on these plasmonic metasurfaces is shown in Fig. 49. By varying only the nanogroove depth (100–175 nm) in the nanogroove array with other structure parameters fixed, the short-wavelength (λ1) resonance can be tuned across the full visible spectrum, including blue (440 nm, structure I, depth = 100 nm), green (532 nm, structure V, depth = 140 nm), and red (624 nm, structure X, depth = 175 nm). These results demonstrate that this type of plasmonic metasurface design is suitable for broadband applications in the full visible frequency range, in strong contrast to conventional nonlinear crystals. It was also found that the SHG intensity is very sensitive to the detuning of plasmonic resonance, as shown in Fig. 49e. Judging from the SHG emission image at 532 nm (green) obtained by raster scanning a focused 1064 nm pulsed laser across the mode-matched structure (structure V), the spatial distribution of SHG intensity is quite uniform with a standard deviation of less than 10% over the entire patterned area. The small SHG intensity variation demonstrates the importance of high-quality, single-crystalline material platforms (in this work, large Ag colloidal single-crystalline plates) to fabricate plasmonic metasurfaces for spatially uniform and spectrally tunable nonlinear signal generation over a large sample area.
 Fig. 49  SHG emissions from a series of double resonant silver metasurfaces. (a and b) SEM images of nanogroove arrays with different nanogroove depths. (c) Corresponding OM reflection images of nanogroove structures acquired using H-polarized, normal incident white light. The reflection colors of the OM images depend on the spectral positions of plasmonic resonances. By varying only the nanogroove depth (100–175 nm), the λ1 resonance can be tuned across the full visible spectrum, including blue (440 nm, structure I), green (532 nm, structure V), and red (624 nm, structure X). (d) Corresponding SHG emission images obtained by raster scanning a focused laser (pulsed) at 1064 nm. (e) SHG spectra of the nanogroove structures shown in (a). The SHG signal is maximized when the excitation laser wavelength (1064 nm) and the SHG emission wavelength (532 nm) match with the double resonant plasmonic modes supported by the nanogroove array. The inset shows the variation of the SHG peak intensity at 532 nm measured for nanogroove arrays with different depths. According to this plot, a 1.5 nm variation of the nanogroove depth from the optimized depth can lead to about 10% decrease in the SHG intensity. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
7.6. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
One of the most important applications of plasmonics is SERS, which exploits the enormously large enhancement of the Raman scattering signal by placing Raman-active molecules (analytes) within the near-field region of noble-metal nanostructures. This enhancement is largely due to the excitations of LSPR modes at the noble-metal nanostructures, which are suspended in a solution (metal colloids) or supported on a SERS substrate consisting of a nanoscale roughened noble-metal surface or ensembles of specifically designed nanostructures.468–471 SERS has continuingly received extensive attention because of its great potential for ultrasensitive detection down to the single-molecular level (SM-SERS).73,472–478 In the SERS measurements, excitations of LSPR modes in noble-metal nanostructures significantly enhance and localize the incident electromagnetic field at nanoscale hot spots. The Raman scattering intensity of molecules, which are placed in close proximity to the hot spots of the SERS substrate, can be dramatically amplified with an enhancement factor frequently above 106. Until now, full control over the formation of plasmonic hot spots has remained as one of the major driving forces behind the design of highly sensitive, uniform, and robust SERS substrates with precisely tuned plasmonic properties.132,479
In many aspects, the most fundamental metric for SERS is the Raman enhancement factor (EF), which quantifies the amplification of the Raman signal for a specific molecular vibrational mode.480–482 The Raman EF associated with an analyte molecule in the vicinity of a plasmonic hot spot can be approximated to be on the order of |E|4. Therefore, the SERS signal is extremely sensitive to the local field enhancement, similar to the SHG case. In the gaps (hot spots) of closely positioned noble-metal NPs, the value of EF can be as large as 1010 at the plasmon resonance. In a comprehensive study by Le Ru and Etchegoin,480 they concluded that Raman EFs as low as 107, as opposed to the factor of 1014 initially claimed for the SM-SERS studies, are sufficient for the observation of single-molecule SERS signals. However, this EF value is for molecules with large Raman scattering cross-section, such as crystal violet (CV) and rhodamine-6G molecules, and the required minimum EF for SM-SERS is strongly analyte specific.
Although SERS was discovered more than forty years ago, quantitative SERS measurements remain still very challenging. Quantitative SERS at the single-molecule level is crucial for the precise determination of analyte concentration, which is very useful for biological and chemical sensing applications. For this reason, it is important to have all of the analyte molecules on the SERS substrates to be detected and accounted for. However, due to the stochastic nature of hot spots on conventional SERS substrates comprised of randomly formed or specifically fabricated noble-metal nanostructures (see Fig. 50 for some examples in the literature483–486), only a few experimental reports in the literature are focused on quantitative SERS measurements.74–77
 Fig. 50  Examples of SERS substrates. (a) SEM image of a silver nanowire monolayer deposited on a silicon wafer. (b) Nanostructured silicon surface consisting of a square lattice of inverted square pyramidal pits with a 2 μm pitch, and pit depths ranging from 0.7 μm to 1.0 μm. (c) Array of gold islands with an average diameter of 100 nm and an average thickness of 80 nm. (d) SEM images of an array of silver nanoclusters. The scale bar in the inset is 30 nm. Figures are adapted with permission from (a) ref. 483, (b) ref. 484, (c) ref. 485, and (d) ref. 486. Copyright (2003, 2012) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2006 Optical Society of America. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. 
Several major technical challenges need to be addressed to realize quantitative SM-SERS in an efficient and reliable way. First of all, uniform hot-spot properties across the SERS substrate is an important prerequisite for quantitative measurements. However, the required top-down nanofabrication precision to create metal nanostructure arrays with uniform hot spot properties is very difficult to achieve, if not totally impossible. The layer-by-layer assembled colloidal gold and silver NP films introduced in Section 6 appear to be a good solution for this challenge because they show a strong, uniform, and tunable plasmonic response.190,191 Moreover, this NP self-assembly method can also be scaled up to fabricate SERS substrates with a large detection area (>1 cm2). Recently, Chen et al. have adopted this approach to fabricate NP metasurfaces for quantitative SM-SERS detection and have confirmed that it is a simple, robust SERS method for quantitative measurements at the single-molecule level.77 In this experimental demonstration (Fig. 51 and 52), colloidal AgNPs are chosen as the meta-atom building blocks of plasmonic metasurfaces (see Fig. 51a and b) because of their superior plasmonic properties among all plasmonic metals.
 Fig. 51  Single monolayer of close-packed AgNPs as a SERS metasurface. (a) SEM image of a close-packed AgNP monolayer film on quartz. (b) Transmission and reflection photographs of a large-area (1 × 1 cm2) AgNP monolayer film on quartz, illustrating the effects of collective plasmonic resonance. (c) Schematic of the SERS detection geometry. The analyte layer composed of crystal violet (CV) molecules embedded in spin-on-glass (SOG). The cross-sectional SEM image shows that the thicknesses of the CV/SOG layer and AgNP film are about 5 nm and 6 nm, respectively. (d) Raman spectra (vertically offset for clarity) obtained from a CV/SOG layer on top of an AgNP film, a bare AgNP film, and a bare CV layer. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 52  Raman enhancement factor of the SERS substrate composed of close-packed AgNPs. (a) SERS mapping near the edge of an AgNP monolayer film. The whole area is covered by a CV/SOG layer with an estimated molecule areal density of 5000 μm2. (b) Two Raman spectra (vertically offset for clarity) were obtained from a 5000 molecules per μm2 CV/SOG layer on top of an Ag NP film and a 500000 molecules per μm2 CV/SOG layer on quartz, respectively. (c) A raster-scanning image shows that the standard deviation of Raman intensity is only 4.3%. (d) The normalized CV intensity at 1177 cm−1 as a function of CV molecules. The areal densities of CV molecules were varied from 5 to 5000 molecules per μm2. These data were collected from two different Raman instruments. The error bars represent the standard deviations of SERS intensities at different sample locations. The error bars are larger at ultralow density levels due to the statistical nature of ensemble measurements. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The second technical challenge is to obtain a reproducible SERS signal. For this purpose, spectral matching of the hot spots on the SERS substrate with the laser excitation wavelength is necessary. For the NP array structures, this requirement involves the tunable interparticle separation across the SERS substrate. As discussed earlier, one of the main advantages of using alkanethiolate surface ligands for assembling NP superlattices, besides protecting the Ag NPs from degradation in ambient environment and regulating the formation of plasmonic hot spot arrays, is that the interparticle gap can be controlled with an atomic-scale precision by using different alkanethiolate carbon chain lengths.191 By changing the near-field coupling strength (i.e. interparticle separation) between adjacent NPs, one can vary the collective plasmon resonances of close-packed Ag NP films to match with the excitation laser wavelength used for SERS measurements. In the NP self-assembly method, the plasmonic peak position can be tuned precisely and uniformly across the SERS substrate by varying the carbon-chain length of alkanethiolate ligands and the resulting interparticle spacing. This plasmonic coupling effect can be readily visualized by the purple and green colors displayed in the transmission and reflection photographs, respectively, as shown in Fig. 51b.
Furthermore, control over the optimized separation between the analytes and the hot spots is necessary because the SERS signal can be dramatically changed when the location of the analyte relative to the hot spot is only slightly varied on the nanometer scale. In SERS measurements, the overall signal intensity is the sum of signals from all the analytes on the whole detection area covered by the excitation laser beam. In a study by Fang et al.,481 it has been shown that the local Raman EFs on Ag-film-on-nanosphere SERS substrates exhibit a broad distribution ranging from 104 to 1010. Notably, one-half of the overall SERS signal comes from the hot spots with enhancement factors greater than 108, which only account for less than 1% of total hot spots. These findings answer most of the questions about the inhomogeneous nature of the SERS substrates reported in the literature. Over the years, many research efforts have been devoted to SERS substrates providing the largest magnitude of SERS enhancement. In contrast, the strategy proposed by Chen et al. for reliable quantitative SERS measurement is to avoid anomalously hot detection sites (traditional hot spots) by using an ultrathin analyte-embedding dielectric layer, and position analytes in a uniform hot zone, which is several nanometers above the AgNP superlattice film (see Fig. 51c). Using this plasmonic metasurface approach, the achieved Raman enhancement factor is sufficiently high (>1.2 × 107) and spatially uniform (<5%) for single-molecule detection (see Fig. 52a–c).
The third technical barrier for quantitative SM-SERS concerns the measurement of absolute SERS signals. The Raman scattering intensity typically depends on various instrumental conditions, rendering it difficult to reproduce the signal even for the same sample. A solution for this problem is to establish internal standards, which can come from the SERS signals of independent and stable components included in the sample. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the SERS signal of passivating alkanethiolate ligands on the Ag NP surfaces can be used as a stable internal calibration standard for quantitative SM-SERS measurements.77 In their work, the capability of quantitative SERS detection at the SM level is demonstrated by measuring the areal density of crystal violet molecules embedded in an ultrathin (5 nm) spin-on-glass hot zone, which is a uniform plasmon-enhanced region with a well-controlled spatial separation above the Ag NP monolayer. The quantitative SERS measurement results show a linear response over a wide dynamic range of analyte concentrations (5–5000 molecules per μm2, see Fig. 52d).
8. Conclusions and outlook
One of the ultimate goals of plasmonics is the spectral and spatial control of plasmonic coupling and hot spot generation, which requires precise design, fabrication, and assembly of metallic meta-atoms into metastructures. For the spectral control, it is necessary to have microscopic control over plasmonic building blocks (meta-atoms) in terms of their size, shape, symmetry, composition, and inter-meta-atom coupling strength. For the spatial control, it is important to have macroscopic control over the spatial uniformity of hot spots in plasmonic metastructures formed by coupling of constituent meta-atoms. In this review, we have presented two complementary approaches based on the nanomanipulation and controlled self-assembly of metal nanocrystals synthesized by colloidal chemistry. The plasmonic meta-atoms are easy and widely available to produce, controllable in size and shape, of high crystalline quality, and give us flexibility in material choices (alloys, core–shell structures, surface functionalization schemes).
It is clear that controlled self-assembly is the method of choice to realize scalable two-dimensional and three-dimensional plasmonic metastructures. In this review, we have shown some simple, robust, and scalable self-assembly approaches for plasmonic metastructures composed of colloidal noble-metal NPs or NCs. Regarding the future perspective of self-assembly approaches, the layer-by-layer assembly technique of plasmonic NPs/NCs and other materials simultaneously can provide a unique pathway to fabricate conformal plasmonic heterostructures on curved and artificially structured surfaces with unique plasmonic metastructure properties. In addition to being used as building blocks, it is also a promising approach to utilize top-down lithographic techniques to fabricate plasmonic metastructures using large colloidal noble-metal crystals, synthesized by bottom-up chemistry methods with unprecedented material quality. This combined approach allows the design flexibility of meta-atoms and coupling mechanisms for plasmonic metastructures, and at the same time fulfills the stringent requirements for both material properties and quality.
Regarding the future perspective of nanomanipulation approaches, while there have been efforts to develop arrays of tips to be used in scanning-probe-based nanomanipulation applications, nanomanipulation is likely to remain as a unique tool for fundamental research on individual metamolecules and hybrid nanostructure assemblies. AFM-based nanomanipulation combines the advantages of top-down and bottom-up fabrication techniques. The individual components are synthesized using solution-based chemical methods. The typical assembly process relies on a single scanning probe. Although the single-probe assembly process is a serial, slow process, it provides the flexibility of selecting different types of NPs and varying the geometry of a cluster. Promising future technical developments in this area include manipulation of nano-objects with different shapes and rigidity, more refined and automated nanomanipulation protocols, exploring new probe tips with the capability of picking up and releasing NPs on demand, and simultaneous transport/optical measurements during manipulation processes. Nanomanipulation methods may be applied to address key scientific challenges in materials science in the mesoscopic regime. For example, while many previous studies have investigated both individual and ensembles of nanostructures, relatively little effort has been devoted to understand how collective excitations and properties emerge in nanomaterials consisting of 10–1000 NP or NC building blocks with designed coupling properties.
Acknowledgements
S. Gwo, H.-Y. Chen, and M.-H. Lin acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) in Taiwan through research grants MOST-104-2628-M-007-001 and MOST-104-2633-M-007-001. L. Sun and X. Li acknowledge financial support from NSF DMR-1306878 and Welch Foundation F-1662. The collaboration between National Tsing-Hua University and The University of Texas at Austin is facilitated by the Global Networking Talent (NT 3.0) Program, Ministry of Education in Taiwan.
References

          U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters, Springer,  1995 Search PubMed .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .

          M. Quinten, Optical Properties of Nanoparticle Systems: Mie and Beyond, Wiley-VCH,  2011 Search PubMed .

          L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edn,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. I. Stockman, Phys. Today, 2011, 64, 39–44 CrossRef .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhao, N. Li and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 638–665 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Glotzer and M. J. Solomon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 557–562 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Min, M. Akbulut, K. Kristiansen, Y. Golan and J. Israelachvili, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 527–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Nie, A. Petukhova and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 15–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Jones, N. C. Seeman and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1260901 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. V. Prasad, C. M. Sorensen and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1871–1883 RSC .
M. P. Pileni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1965–1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Lindquist, P. Nagpal, K. M. McPeak, D. J. Norris and S.-H. Oh, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 036501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Walia, C. M. Shah, P. Gutruf, H. Nili, D. R. Chowdhury, W. Withayachumnankul, M. Bhaskaran and S. Sriram, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 011303 Search PubMed .
A. A. Tseng, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2004, 14, R15–R34 CrossRef CAS .
V. Myroshnychenko, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, I. Pastoriza-Santos, A. M. Funston, C. Novo, P. Mulvaney, L. M. Liz-Marzán and F. J. G. de Abajo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1792–1805 RSC .
M. R. Gonçalves, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 213001 CrossRef .
M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 137404 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Bohren, Am. J. Phys., 1983, 51, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 809–810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Chiu, H.-Y. Chen, C.-F. Hsiao, M.-H. Lin and S. Gwo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2442–2448 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moskovits, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1985, 57, 783–826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, N. K. Grady, J. Kundu, C. S. Levin, J. B. Lassiter and N. J. Halas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 898–911 RSC .

          E. Le Ru and P. Etchegoin, Principles of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Related Plasmonic Effects, Elsevier Science & Technology Books,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. R. Lombardi and R. L. Birke, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 734–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Sonntag, J. M. Klingsporn, A. B. Zrimsek, B. Sharma, L. K. Ruvuna and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1230–1247 RSC .
J. A. Dionne, A. Baldi, B. Baum, C.-S. Ho, V. Janković, G. V. Naik, T. Narayan, J. A. Scholl and Y. Zhao, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 1138–1145 CrossRef .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, C. Feronti, A. D. Neumann, A. Dong, K. Schell, B. Lu, E. Kim, M. Quinn, S. Thompson, N. Grady, P. Nordlander, M. Oden and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11677–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Cao, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2002, 297, 1536–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Ray, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5332–5365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, M. L. Tang, M. Hentschel, H. Giessen and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Lin, H.-W. Ting, C.-Y. Wang, S. Gwo, L.-J. Chou, C.-J. Tsai and L.-J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2723–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Challener, C. Peng, A. V. Itagi, D. Karns, W. Peng, Y. Peng, X. Yang, X. Zhu, N. J. Gokemeijer, Y. T. Hsia, G. Ju, R. E. Rottmayer, M. A. Seigler and E. C. Gage, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 220–224 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zijlstra, J. W. M. Chon and M. Gu, Nature, 2009, 459, 410–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kauranen and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 737–748 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Valev, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15454–15471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Butet, P.-F. Brevet and O. J. F. Martin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10545–10562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Krasavin and N. I. Zheludev, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1416–1418 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pacifici, H. J. Lezec and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 402–406 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. MacDonald, Z. L. Sámson, M. I. Stockman and N. I. Zheludev, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Temnov, G. Armelles, U. Woggon, D. Guzatov, A. Cebollada, A. Garcia-Martin, J.-M. Garcia-Martin, T. Thomay, A. Leitenstorfer and R. Bratschitsch, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Temnov, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 728–736 CrossRef CAS .
G. Armelles, A. Cebollada, A. García-Martín, J. M. García-Martín, M. U. González, J. B. González-Díaz, E. Ferreiro-Vila and J. F. Torrado, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2009, 11, 114023 CrossRef .
V. Bonanni, S. Bonetti, T. Pakizeh, Z. Pirzadeh, J. Chen, J. Nogues, P. Vavassori, R. Hillenbrand, J. Akerman and A. Dmitriev, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Armelles, A. Cebollada, A. García-Martín and M. U. González, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 10–35 CrossRef .
F. Pineider, C. de Julián Fernández, V. Videtta, E. Carlino, A. al Hourani, F. Wilhelm, A. Rogalev, P. D. Cozzoli, P. Ghigna and C. Sangregorio, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 857–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Tame, K. R. McEnery, S. K. Ozdemir, J. Lee, S. A. Maier and M. S. Kim, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fleischmann, P. J. Hendra and A. McQuillan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 26, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jeanmaire and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 84, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 65–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. J. Bell and N. M. S. Sirimuthu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1012–1024 RSC .
A. März, K. R. Ackermann, D. Malsch, T. Bocklitz, T. Henkel and J. Popp, J. Biophotonics, 2009, 2, 232–242 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shen, X. Lin, C. Jiang, C. Li, H. Lin, J. Huang, S. Wang, G. Liu, X. Yan, Q. Zhong and B. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7308–7312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, M.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Wang, Y.-M. Chang and S. Gwo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13698–13705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Murray and W. L. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3771–3782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lal, S. Link and N. J. Halas, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 641–648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelton, J. Aizpurua and G. Bryant, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 136–159 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, K. Ray, M. Chowdhury, H. Szmacinski, Y. Fu, J. Zhang and K. Nowaczyk, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1308–1346 RSC .
M. I. Stockman, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 22029–22106 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sonnefraud, A. Leen Koh, D. W. McComb and S. A. Maier, Laser Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 277–295 CrossRef .
J. Valentine, S. Zhang, T. Zentgraf, E. Ulin-Avila, D. A. Genov, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nature, 2008, 455, 376–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Cai and V. M. Shalaev, Optical Metamaterials: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. M. Soukoulis and M. Wegener, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 523–530 CAS .
O. Hess, J. B. Pendry, S. A. Maier, R. F. Oulton, J. M. Hamm and K. L. Tsakmakidis, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 573–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Baev, P. N. Prasad, H. Ågren, M. Samoć and M. Wegener, Phys. Rep., 2015, 594, 1–60 CrossRef .
N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, F. Capasso and Z. Gaburro, Science, 2011, 334, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2013, 339, 1232009 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Meinzer, W. L. Barnes and I. R. Hooper, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 889–898 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Chen, K.-Y. Yang, C.-M. Wang, Y.-W. Huang, G. Sun, I. D. Chiang, C. Y. Liao, W.-L. Hsu, H. T. Lin, S. Sun, L. Zhou, A. Q. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 225–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Genevet and F. Capasso, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2015, 78, 024401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Rozin, D. A. Rosen, T. J. Dill and A. R. Tao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Akselrod, J. Huang, T. B. Hoang, P. T. Bowen, L. Su, D. R. Smith and M. H. Mikkelsen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8028–8034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov and Y. Kivshar, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 958–967 CrossRef .
A. A. High, R. C. Devlin, A. Dibos, M. Polking, D. S. Wild, J. Perczel, N. P. de Leon, M. D. Lukin and H. Park, Nature, 2015, 522, 192–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, K.-Y. Yang, C.-M. Wang, T.-K. Juan, W. T. Chen, C. Y. Liao, Q. He, S. Xiao, W.-T. Kung and G.-Y. Guo, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6223–6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 39663969 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Argyropoulos, P.-Y. Chen, G. D'Aguanno, N. Engheta and A. Alù, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 045129 CrossRef .
E. J. R. Vesseur, T. Coenen, H. Caglayan, N. Engheta and A. Polman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 013902 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Maas, J. Parsons, N. Engheta and A. Polman, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 907–912 CrossRef CAS .
N. Engheta, Science, 2013, 340, 286–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Kita, P. Muñoz, O. Reshef, D. I. Vulis, M. Yin, M. Lončar and E. Mazur, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 738–742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, S. H. Lee, Y. Kim, S. B. Kang, J. Shin, M. H. Kwak, K.-Y. Kang, Y.-H. Lee, N. Park and B. Min, Nature, 2011, 470, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2005, 308, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Suchowski, K. O'Brien, Z. J. Wong, A. Salandrino, X. Yin and X. Zhang, Science, 2013, 342, 1223–1226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, M. Tymchenko, C. Argyropoulos, P.-Y. Chen, F. Lu, F. Demmerle, G. Boehm, M.-C. Amann, A. Alu and M. A. Belkin, Nature, 2014, 511, 65–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lapine, I. V. Shadrivov and Y. S. Kivshar, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2014, 86, 1093–1123 CrossRef CAS .
P.-Y. Chen, C. Argyropoulos, G. D'Aguanno and A. Alù, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS .
N. Segal, S. Keren-Zur, N. Hendler and T. Ellenbogen, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 180–184 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, L. Sun, W.-L. Chen, Y.-M. Chang, H. Ahn, X. Li and S. Gwo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kraft, J. B. Pendry, S. A. Maier and Y. Luo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 245125 CrossRef .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nagpal, N. C. Lindquist, S.-H. Oh and D. J. Norris, Science, 2009, 325, 594–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, P. Ambwani, M. Manno, N. C. Lindquist, P. Nagpal, S.-H. Oh, C. Leighton and D. J. Norris, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3988–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Zhang, N. M. Estakhri, Y. Zhao, J. Kim, M. Zhang, X.-X. Liu, G. K. Pribil, A. Alù, C.-K. Shih and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6106–6110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. McPeak, S. V. Jayanti, S. J. P. Kress, S. Meyer, S. Iotti, A. Rossinelli and D. J. Norris, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 326–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Wiley, D. J. Lipomi, J. Bao, F. Capasso and G. M. Whitesides, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3023–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Huang, V. Callegari, P. Geisler, C. Brüning, J. Kern, J. C. Prangsma, X. Wu, T. Feichtner, J. Ziegler, P. Weinmann, M. Kamp, A. Forchel, P. Biagioni, U. Sennhauser and B. Hecht, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 150 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-W. Chang, F.-C. Lin, C.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Su, J.-S. Huang, T.-P. Perng and T.-J. Yen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11791–11798 CAS .
M. J. Beliatis, S. J. Henley and S. R. P. Silva, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 1362–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Henley, M. J. Beliatis, V. Stolojan and S. R. Silva, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1054–1059 RSC .
M. J. Beliatis, S. J. Henley, S. Han, K. Gandhi, A. Adikaari, E. Stratakis, E. Kymakis and S. R. P. Silva, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8237–8244 RSC .
C.-Y. Hsu, J.-W. Huang, S. Gwo and K.-J. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2009, 21, 035302 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Mie, Ann. Phys., 1908, 377–445 CrossRef CAS .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1983 Search PubMed .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1857, 147, 145–181 CrossRef .
F. Wang and Y. R. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 206806 CrossRef PubMed .
E. T. Yu, D. Derkacs, S. H. Lim, P. Matheu and D. M. Schaadt, Proc. SPIE, 2008, 7033, 70331V CrossRef .
P. Zijlstra and M. Orrit, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2011, 74, 106401 CrossRef .
A. Crut, P. Maioli, N. Del Fatti and F. Vallee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3921–3956 RSC .
J. Olson, S. Dominguez-Medina, A. Hoggard, L. Y. Wang, W. S. Chang and S. Link, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 40–57 RSC .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370–4379 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Rakić, A. B. Djurišić, J. M. Elazar and M. L. Majewski, Appl. Opt., 1998, 37, 5271–5283 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Francescato, J. D. Caldwell, V. Giannini, T. W. W. Maß, O. J. Glembocki, F. J. Bezares, T. Taubner, R. Kasica, M. Hong and S. A. Maier, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 718–724 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ehrenreich and H. R. Philipp, Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 1622–1629 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Cooper, H. Ehrenreich and H. R. Philipp, Phys. Rev., 1965, 138, A494–A507 CrossRef .
R. L. Olmon, B. Slovick, T. W. Johnson, D. Shelton, S.-H. Oh, G. D. Boreman and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 235147 CrossRef .
H. U. Yang, J. D'Archangel, M. L. Sundheimer, E. Tucker, G. D. Boreman and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 235137 CrossRef .
H. Ehrenreich, H. R. Philipp and B. Segall, Phys. Rev., 1963, 132, 1918–1928 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gérard and S. K. Gray, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 184001 CrossRef .
C. Langhammer, M. Schwind, B. Kasemo and I. Zorić, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1461–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ekinci, H. Solak and J. Löffler, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 083107 CrossRef .
M. W. Knight, N. S. King, L. Liu, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 834–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yokogawa, S. P. Burgos and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4349–4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Fedyanin, D. I. Yakubovsky, R. V. Kirtaev and V. S. Volkov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 362–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Naik, J. L. Schroeder, X. Ni, A. V. Kildishev, T. D. Sands and A. Boltasseva, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 478–489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kinsey, M. Ferrera, G. V. Naik, V. E. Babicheva, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 12238–12247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Teranishi, M. Eguchi, M. Kanehara and S. Gwo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10238–10242 RSC .
A. K. Pradhan, R. M. Mundle, K. Santiago, J. R. Skuza, B. Xiao, K. D. Song, M. Bahoura, R. Cheaito and P. E. Hopkins, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6415–6420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deka, A. Genovese, Y. Zhang, K. Miszta, G. Bertoni, R. Krahne, C. Giannini and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8912–8914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. García de Abajo, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 135–152 CrossRef .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Naik, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3264–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ray, M. H. Chowdhury and J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 6480–6487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Jha, Z. Ahmed, M. Agio, Y. Ekinci and J. F. Löffler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1966–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Krause, C. W. Teplin and C. T. Rogers, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS .
M. Castro-Lopez, D. Brinks, R. Sapienza and N. F. van Hulst, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4674–4678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, L. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Brown, S. Mukherjee, N. S. King, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6000–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Olson, A. Manjavacas, L. Liu, W.-S. Chang, B. Foerster, N. S. King, M. W. Knight, P. Nordlander, N. J. Halas and S. Link, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14348–14353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, L. Zhang, D. Zhu, X. M. Goh, Y. M. Wang, K. Kumar, C.-W. Qiu and J. K. W. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4023–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. McClain, A. E. Schlather, E. Ringe, N. S. King, L. Liu, A. Manjavacas, M. W. Knight, I. Kumar, K. H. Whitmire, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2751–2755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids I, Academic Press, San Diego,  1985 Search PubMed .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids II, Academic Press, San Diego,  1991 Search PubMed .
H. Ditlbacher, A. Hohenau, D. Wagner, U. Kreibig, M. Rogers, F. Hofer, F. R. Aussenegg and J. R. Krenn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 257403 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Wu, C.-T. Kuo, C.-Y. Wang, C.-L. He, M.-H. Lin, H. Ahn and S. Gwo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4256–4260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lu, J. Kim, H.-Y. Chen, C. Wu, N. Dabidian, C. E. Sanders, C.-Y. Wang, M.-Y. Lu, B.-H. Li, X. Qiu, W.-H. Chang, L.-J. Chen, G. Shvets, C.-K. Shih and S. Gwo, Science, 2012, 337, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lu, C.-Y. Wang, J. Kim, H.-Y. Chen, M.-Y. Lu, Y.-C. Chen, W.-H. Chang, L.-J. Chen, M. I. Stockman, C.-K. Shih and S. Gwo, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4381–4388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Barnes, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2006, 8, S87–S93 CrossRef .
P. J. Schuck, D. P. Fromm, A. Sundaramurthy, G. S. Kino and W. E. Moerner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 017402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kollmann, X. Piao, M. Esmann, S. F. Becker, D. Hou, C. Huynh, L.-O. Kautschor, G. Bösker, H. Vieker and A. Beyer, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4778–4784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong and M. S. Leite, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 507–513 CrossRef CAS .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55–75 RSC .
G. Frens, Nature, 1973, 241, 20–22 CAS .
J. Kimling, M. Maier, B. Okenve, V. Kotaidis, H. Ballot and A. Plech, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15700–15707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, K. S. Gandhi and R. Kumar, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 3128–3136 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mühlpfordt, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 1982, 38, 1127–1128 CrossRef .
J. W. Slot and H. J. Geuze, Eur. J. Cell Biol., 1985, 38, 87–93 CAS .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801–802 RSC .
S. D. Tzeng, K. J. Lin, J. C. Hu, L. J. Chen and S. Gwo, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1147–1151 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gwo, M.-H. Lin, C.-L. He, H.-Y. Chen and T. Teranishi, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8902–8908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Ge, D. Lim, T. Zhang and Y. Yin, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1524–1529 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Lin, H.-Y. Chen and S. Gwo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11259–11263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Chen, S.-D. Tzeng, H.-Y. Chen, K.-J. Lin and S. Gwo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 824–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Chen, S.-D. Tzeng, M.-H. Lin and S. Gwo, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7819–7824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Martin, J. I. Basham, P. Chando and S.-K. Eah, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7410–7417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Perrault and W. C. W. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17042–17043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kim, S. Connor, H. Song, T. Kuykendall and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 3673–3677 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, K. L. Shuford, M. Chen, E. J. Lee and S. O. Cho, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1760–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tao, P. Sinsermsuksakul and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4597–4601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 765–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, J. M. McLellan and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2416–2420 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, J. E. Millstone, S. Li and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8436–8439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kan, X. Zhu and G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Y. C. Cao, E. Hao, G. S. Métraux, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2003, 425, 487–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dumestre, B. Chaudret, C. Amiens, M. Respaud, P. Fejes, P. Renaud and P. Zurcher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5213–5216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Yang, H. Kobori, C.-L. He, M.-H. Lin, H.-Y. Chen, C. Li, M. Kanehara, T. Teranishi and S. Gwo, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 632–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, C.-L. He, C.-Y. Wang, M.-H. Lin, D. Mitsui, M. Eguchi, T. Teranishi and S. Gwo, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8223–8229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, C. Z. Huang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1941–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lee, N. B. Schade, L. Sun, J. A. Fan, D. R. Bae, M. M. Mariscal, G. Lee, F. Capasso, S. Sacanna and V. N. Manoharan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11064–11070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1580–1582 RSC .
C. M. Cobley, M. Rycenga, F. Zhou, Z.-Y. Li and Y. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16975–16982 CAS .
Y.-C. Tsao, S. Rej, C.-Y. Chiu and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 396–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ross, J. C. Ku, B. Lee, C. A. Mirkin and G. C. Schatz, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2790–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Lu, K. S. Prasad, H.-L. Wu, J.-a. A. Ho and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14546–14553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Carroll, D. M. Hudgins, S. Spurgeon, K. M. Kemner, B. Mishra, M. I. Boyanov, L. W. Brown III, M. L. Taheri and E. E. Carpenter, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6291–6296 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kuo, T.-E. Hua and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17871–17878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, M. Achermann, L. P. Balet, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 544–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, W. Shim, H. Seo, J. Hyun Bae, J. Sung, S. H. Choi, W. K. Moon, G. Lee, B. Lee and S. W. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1267–1269 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, B. Wang, J. Zeng, X. Wang, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3684–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Sun, Q. Lu, F. Zeng and D. Su, Small, 2012, 8, 1167–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-J. Kuo, C.-L. Kuo, C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3625–3630 CAS .
J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, A. Cheng, J. Brownell, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Science, 2009, 323, 112–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mastroianni, S. A. Claridge and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8455–8459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lamprecht, G. Schider, R. Lechner, H. Ditlbacher, J. Krenn, A. Leitner and F. Aussenegg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4721–4724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, K. L. Kelly and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7343–7350 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rechberger, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn, B. Lamprecht and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Commun., 2003, 220, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Science, 2003, 302, 419–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nordlander, C. Oubre, E. Prodan, K. Li and M. I. Stockman, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 899–903 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18243–18253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Brown, H. Sobhani, J. B. Lassiter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 819–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Stroscio and D. M. Eigler, Science, 1991, 254, 1319–1326 CAS .
D. M. Eigler and E. K. Schweizer, Nature, 1990, 344, 524–526 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Manoharan, C. P. Lutz and D. M. Eigler, Nature, 2000, 403, 512–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sugimoto, M. Abe, S. Hirayama, N. Oyabu, O. Custance and S. Morita, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 156–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sugimoto, P. Pou, O. Custance, P. Jelinek, M. Abe, R. Perez and S. Morita, Science, 2008, 322, 413–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oyabu, Ó. Custance, I. Yi, Y. Sugawara and S. Morita, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 176102 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, D. C. Ratchford and X. Li, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2989–2994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schaefer, R. Reifenberger, A. Patil and R. Andres, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1012–1014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, D. Haliyo and S. Régnier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153106 CrossRef .
R. W. Carpick and M. Salmeron, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1163–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. G. Requicha, Proc. IEEE, 2003, 91, 1922–1933 CrossRef .
D. Dietzel, M. Feldmann, H. Fuchs, U. D. Schwarz and A. Schirmeisen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 053104 CrossRef .
R. D. Boone, K. J. Nadelhoffer, J. D. Canary and J. P. Kaye, Nature, 1998, 396, 570–572 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. G. Requicha, in Nanotechnology, ed. R. Waser, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, vol. 3, pp. 239–273 Search PubMed .
K. Xu, A. Kalantari and X. Qian, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2012, 11, 666–675 CrossRef .
T. R. Ramachandran, C. Baur, A. Bugacov, A. Madhukar, B. E. Koel, A. Requicha and C. Gazen, Nanotechnology, 1998, 9, 237–245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1992, 257, 375–377 CAS .
R. Luthi, E. Meyer, H. Haefke, L. Howald, W. Gutmannsbauer and H. J. Guntherodt, Science, 1994, 266, 1979–1981 CAS .
D. M. Schaefer, R. Reifenberger, A. Patil and R. P. Andres, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1012–1014 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hertel, R. Martel and P. Avouris, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 910–915 CrossRef CAS .
S. Decossas, F. Mazen, T. Baron, G. Brémond and A. Souifi, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 1272–1278 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hsieh, S. Meltzer, C. R. C. Wang, A. A. G. Requicha, M. E. Thompson and B. E. Koel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 231–234 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, N. Xi and G. Li, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., 2006, 3, 208–217 CrossRef .
T. Junno, K. Deppert, L. Montelius and L. Samuelson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 3627–3629 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gnecco, A. Rao, K. Mougin, G. Chandrasekar and E. Meyer, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 215702 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Baur, A. Bugacov, B. E. Koel, A. Madhukar, N. Montoya, T. R. Ramachandran, A. A. G. Requicha, R. Resch and P. Will, Nanotechnology, 1998, 9, 360–364 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schirmeisen and U. D. Schwarz, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2373–2382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rao, M. L. Wille, E. Gnecco, K. Mougin and E. Meyer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 193405 CrossRef .
D. Dietzel, T. Monninghoff, C. Herding, M. Feldmann, H. Fuchs, B. Stegemann, C. Ritter, U. D. Schwarz and A. Schirmeisen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 035401 CrossRef .
J. Hou, L. Q. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, Z. D. Wang, N. Xi, Y. C. Wang, C. D. Wu, Z. L. Dong and S. Yuan, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., 2013, 10, 285–295 CrossRef .
X. Cui, W. Zhang, B.-S. Yeo, R. Zenobi, C. Hafner and D. Erni, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 8309–8316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kalkbrenner, M. Ramstein, J. Mlynek and V. Sandoghdar, J. Microsc., 2001, 202, 72–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, P. Steinvurzel, T. Yang and K. B. Crozier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 171107 CrossRef .
N. Hayazawa, T.-a. Yano and S. Kawata, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43, 1177–1182 CAS .
N. C. Lindquist, J. Jose, S. Cherukulappurath, X. Chen, T. W. Johnson and S.-H. Oh, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 453–477 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Park, J.-Y. Kim, E. Lee, H.-K. Choi, W.-H. Park, J. Kim and Z. H. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2012, 33, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sqalli, I. Utke, P. Hoffmann and F. Marquis-Weible, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1078–1083 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Cui and O. J. F. Martin, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1338–1342 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 081101 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Huth, A. Chuvilin, M. Schnell, I. Amenabar, R. Krutokhvostov, S. Lopatin and R. Hillenbrand, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1065–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Savage, M. M. Hawkeye, R. Esteban, A. G. Borisov, J. Aizpurua and J. J. Baumberg, Nature, 2012, 491, 574–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Savage, M. M. Hawkeye, B. F. Soares and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 053110 CrossRef .
A. Weber-Bargioni, A. Schwartzberg, M. Schmidt, B. Harteneck, D. Ogletree, P. Schuck and S. Cabrini, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 065306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. A. Weir, D. P. Sierra and J. F. Jones, A Review of Research in the Field of Nanorobotics, Sandia Report,  2005 Search PubMed .
C. H. Kuo, Y. C. Yang, S. Gwo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1052–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lu, M.-Y. Lu, Y.-C. Yang, H.-Y. Chen, L.-J. Chen and S. Gwo, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7640–7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alu and N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 024304 CrossRef .
P. E. Batson, A. Reyes-Coronado, R. G. Barrera, A. Rivacoba, P. M. Echenique and J. Aizpurua, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3388–3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Chen, C.-Y. Wang, Y.-J. Hong, Y.-T. Kang, S.-E. Lai, P. Chang and T.-R. Yew, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31652–31656 RSC .
M. J. Lagos, A. Reyes-Coronado, P. M. Echenique, J. Aizpurua and P. E. Batson, Microsc. Microanal., 2014, 20, 576–577 CrossRef .

          V. P. Oleshko and J. M. Howe, in Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics, ed. P. W. Hawkes, Elsevier Academic Press,  2013, vol. 179, pp. 203–262 Search PubMed .
H. Zheng, U. M. Mirsaidov, L. W. Wang and P. Matsudaira, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5644–5648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. García de Abajo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 209–275 CrossRef .

          H. Froitzheim, in Electron Spectroscopy for Surface Analysis, ed. H. Ibach, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1977, pp. 205–250 Search PubMed .

          B. G. Yacobi and D. B. Holt, Cathodoluminescence Microscopy of Inorganic Solids, Springer,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. J. Powell and J. B. Swan, Phys. Rev., 1959, 115, 869–875 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Teng and E. A. Stern, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1967, 19, 511–514 CrossRef .
J. A. Scholl, A. Garcia-Etxarri, A. L. Koh and J. A. Dionne, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 564–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Marinica, A. K. Kazansky, P. Nordlander, J. Aizpurua and A. G. Borisov, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Moffitt, Y. R. Chemla, S. B. Smith and C. Bustamante, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2008, 77, 205–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. B. Keir and C. Neuman, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 2787–2809 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Grier, Nature, 2003, 424, 810–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dienerowitz, J. Nanophotonics, 2008, 2, 021875 CrossRef .
K. Dholakia and P. Reece, Nano Today, 2006, 1, 18–27 CrossRef .
K. Svoboda and S. M. Block, Opt. Lett., 1994, 19, 930–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Ke and M. Gu, Appl. Opt., 1999, 38, 160–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Zhan, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 3377–3382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, M. Sajjan and N. F. Scherer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 143901 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yan, J. E. Jureller, J. Sweet, M. J. Guffey, M. Pelton and N. F. Scherer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5155–5161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu and M. Kall, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 246802 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tong, V. D. Miljkovic and M. Kall, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 268–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prikulis, F. Svedberg, M. Käll, J. Enger, K. Ramser, M. Goksör and D. Hanstorp, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 115–118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shoji, M. Shibata, N. Kitamura, F. Nagasawa, M. Takase, K. Murakoshi, A. Nobuhiro, Y. Mizumoto, H. Ishihara and Y. Tsuboi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2500–2506 CAS .
P. J. Pauzauskie, A. Radenovic, E. Trepagnier, H. Shroff, P. Yang and J. Liphardt, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 97–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Guffey and N. F. Scherer, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4302–4308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Grzegorczyk, J. Rohner and J. M. Fournier, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 023902 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dienerowitz, M. Mazilu, P. J. Reece, T. F. Krauss and K. Dholakia, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 4991–4999 Search PubMed .
A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm and S. Chu, Opt. Lett., 1986, 11, 288–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Zelenina, R. Quidant, G. Badenes and M. Nieto-Vesperinas, Opt. Lett., 2006, 31, 2054–2056 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Halterman, J. M. Elson and S. Singh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 075429 CrossRef .
J. R. Arias-González and M. Nieto-Vesperinas, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2003, 20, 1201–1209 CrossRef .
K. Y. Chen, A. T. Lee, C. C. Hung, J. S. Huang and Y. T. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4118–4122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Stehle, H. Bender, C. Zimmermann, D. Kern, M. Fleischer and S. Slama, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 494–498 CrossRef CAS .
K. Munechika, Y. Chen, A. F. Tillack, A. P. Kulkarni, I. J.-L. Plante, A. M. Munro and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2598–2603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boncheva and G. M. Whitesides, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 736–742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kinge, M. Crego-Calama and D. N. Reinhoudt, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 20–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3591–3605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, G. Li and Z. Tang, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 564–585 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tan, M. J. Campolongo, D. Luo and W. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 268–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, M. J. Campolongo, J. J. Cha, S. J. Tan, C. C. Umbach, D. A. Muller and D. Luo, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 519–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Macfarlane, B. Lee, M. R. Jones, N. Harris, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2011, 334, 204–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Barrow, X. Wei, J. S. Baldauf, A. M. Funston and P. Mulvaney, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1275–1284 CrossRef PubMed .
K. L. Young, M. B. Ross, M. G. Blaber, M. Rycenga, M. R. Jones, C. Zhang, A. J. Senesi, B. Lee, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 653–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nickel and T. Liedl, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 746–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. O'Brien, M. R. Jones, B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 833–839 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cademartiri and K. J. Bishop, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 2–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tao, P. Sinsermsuksakul and P. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 435–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Henzie, M. Grünwald, A. Widmer-Cooper, P. L. Geissler and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Huang and S. Thoka, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lee, W. Shi, H. K. Lee, R. Jiang, I. Y. Phang, Y. Cui, L. Isa, Y. Yang, J. Wang, S. Li and X. Y. Ling, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, J. He, S. A. Deshmukh, P. Kanjanaboos, G. Kamath, Y. Wang, S. K. Sankaranarayanan, J. Wang, H. M. Jaeger and X. M. Lin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 912–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. R. Breed, V. N. Manoharan, L. Feng, A. D. Hollingsworth, M. Weck and D. J. Pine, Nature, 2012, 491, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. van Anders, N. K. Ahmed, R. Smith, M. Engel and S. C. Glotzer, ACS Nano, 2013, 8, 931–940 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Singh, H. Chan, A. Baskin, E. Gelman, N. Repnin, P. Král and R. Klajn, Science, 2014, 345, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taleb, C. Petit and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2214–2220 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3358–3371 CrossRef CAS .
N. Goubet, H. Portalès, C. Yan, I. Arfaoui, P.-A. Albouy, A. Mermet and M.-P. Pileni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3714–3719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, N. Schaeffer and M.-P. Pileni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14773–14784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wen and S. A. Majetich, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8868–8876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. Chen, B. T. Diroll and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1291–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Denkov, O. D. Velev, P. Kralchevsky, I. Ivanov, H. Yoshimura and K. Nagayama, Nature, 1993, 361, 26 CrossRef .
P. A. Kralchevsky and K. Nagayama, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 23–36 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Liao, Y.-S. Lin, K. Chanda, Y.-F. Song and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2684–2693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, S. Guo, Y. Ji, C. Guo, X. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Wu and Q. Liu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11394–11400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ming, X. Kou, H. Chen, T. Wang, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, J. Y. Chen and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9831–9836 CrossRef .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
N. Malikova, I. Pastoriza-Santos, M. Schierhorn, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3694–3697 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Aroca, P. J. Goulet, D. S. dos Santos, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla and O. N. Oliveira, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 378–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, T. Sasaki and Y. Bando, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10382–10388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4547–4553 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Cheng, T. Wang, Y. Wang, E. Wang and S. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19385–19389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vial, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4606–4611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ray, R. Badugu and J. R. Lakowicz, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5902–5909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. W. Lee, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2993–3001 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan and C. M. Li, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7578–7585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Zhao, Y. HeeáJang, S. OukáKim and D. HaáKim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2006–2012 RSC .
L. Guo, G. Chen and D.-H. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 5147–5153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sakai, T. Sasaki, K. Matsubara and T. Tatsuma, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4371–4378 RSC .
A. Cunningham, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl and T. Bürgi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8955–8960 CAS .
L. Shen, L. Rapenne, P. Chaudouet, J. Ji and C. Picart, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 388, 56–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kozlovskaya, E. Kharlampieva, B. P. Khanal, P. Manna, E. R. Zubarev and V. V. Tsukruk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7474–7485 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Lin, C.-F. Chen, H.-W. Shiu, C.-H. Chen and S. Gwo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10984–10991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Lee, Y. Xiong, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2007, 315, 1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, L. Bernard, M. Langer, C. Schönenberger and M. Calame, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2444–2447 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karalis, E. Lidorikis, M. Ibanescu, J. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 063901 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pillai, K. Catchpole, T. Trupke and M. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093105 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17491–17496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Li, L. Shen, W. Guo and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8224–8231 CAS .
C. E. R. Disney, S. Pillai, C. M. Johnson and M. A. Green, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1108–1116 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 133–146 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hägglund, G. Zeltzer, R. Ruiz, I. Thomann, H.-B.-R. Lee, M. L. Brongersma and S. F. Bent, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3352–3357 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, R. Santbergen, A. H. M. Smets and M. Zeman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4070–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. van Lare, F. Lenzmann, M. A. Verschuuren and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4846–4852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, Z. Luo, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Mendes, S. Morawiec, F. Simone, F. Priolo and I. Crupi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4796–4805 RSC .
K. Ha, E. Jang, S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, M. S. Jang, H. Choi, J.-S. Cho and M. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 055403 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Mendes, S. Morawiec, T. Mateus, A. Lyubchyk, H. Águas, I. Ferreira, E. Fortunato, R. Martins, F. Priolo and I. Crupi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 135202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. Stokes, B. Jia, S. Fan and M. Gu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4939 CAS .
W. Zi, X. Ren, F. Xiao, H. Wang, F. Gao and S. F. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 957–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard Iii and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, H. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Huang, G. Chen, H. Wei, X. Su, X. Zeng, Z. Xia and W. Wen, Plasmonics, 2015, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. O. Govorov and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6181–6194 CAS .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 277, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ha, T. Enderle, D. Ogletree, D. Chemla, P. Selvin and S. Weiss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 6264–6268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Heim and R. Y. Tsien, Curr. Biol., 1996, 6, 178–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Clegg, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 1995, 6, 103–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Sekar and A. Periasamy, J. Cell Biol., 2003, 160, 629–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sönnichsen, B. M. Reinhard, J. Liphardt and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 741–745 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ha, T. A. Laurence, D. S. Chemla and S. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6839–6850 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sick, B. Hecht and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 4482–4485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prummer, B. Sick, B. Hecht and U. P. Wild, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 9824–9829 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, M. Hentschel, T. Weiss, A. P. Alivisatos and H. Giessen, Science, 2011, 332, 1407–1410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shafiei, C. Wu, Y. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev, P. Putzke, A. Singh, X. Li and G. Shvets, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Yao, J. Rho, X. Yin and X. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 450–454 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ratchford, F. Shafiei, S. Kim, S. K. Gray and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1049–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schietinger, M. Barth, T. Aichele and O. Benson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1694–1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aslan, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6247–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aslan, Z. Leonenko, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3157–3162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Munechika and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 690–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. H. Chowdhury and J. R. Lakowicz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, N. K. Grady and N. J. Halas, Small, 2008, 4, 1716–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mackowski, S. Wormke, A. J. Maier, T. H. P. Brotosudarmo, H. Harutyunyan, A. Hartschuh, A. O. Govorov, H. Scheer and C. Brauchle, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 558–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, N. K. Grady, J. R. Cole, A. Joshi and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 744–752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, K. Li, G. G. Gurzadyan, X. Lu and B. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11302–11309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Capehart, M. P. Coyle, J. E. Glasgow and M. B. Francis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3011–3016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Jin, N. Fahruddin and J. X. Zhao, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1584–1591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Naiki, A. Masuhara, S. Masuo, T. Onodera, H. Kasai and H. Oikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2455–2459 CAS .
K. Sugawa, T. Tamura, H. Tahara, D. Yamaguchi, T. Akiyama, J. Otsuki, Y. Kusaka, N. Fukuda and H. Ushijima, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9997–10010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bek, R. Jansen, M. Ringler, S. Mayilo, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 485–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 113002 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ming, H. Chen, R. Jiang, Q. Li and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 191–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, Y. Shen, S. D'Auria, J. Malicka, J. Fang, Z. Gryczynski and I. Gryczynski, Anal. Biochem., 2002, 301, 261–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aslan, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, E. Matveeva, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 55–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jahani and Z. Jacob, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 23–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luk'yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, D. A. Genov, Y. Wang, M. Liu and X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 047401 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Schurig, J. Mock, B. Justice, S. A. Cummer, J. B. Pendry, A. Starr and D. Smith, Science, 2006, 314, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry and M. C. Wiltshire, Science, 2004, 305, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, W. Fan, N. Panoiu, K. Malloy, R. Osgood and S. Brueck, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 137404 CrossRef PubMed .

          N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowski, Metamaterials: Physics and Engineering Explorations, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
X. Xiong, W.-H. Sun, Y.-J. Bao, M. Wang, R.-W. Peng, C. Sun, X. Lu, J. Shao, Z.-F. Li and N.-B. Ming, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 075119 CrossRef .

          C. Caloz and T. Itoh, Electromagnetic Metamaterials: Transmission Line Theory and Microwave Applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. Sihvola, Metamaterials, 2007, 1, 2–11 CrossRef .
J. A. Fan, C. Wu, K. Bao, J. Bao, R. Bardhan, N. J. Halas, V. N. Manoharan, P. Nordlander, G. Shvets and F. Capasso, Science, 2010, 328, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Merlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 1693–1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. D. Landau, J. S. Bell, M. J. Kearsley, L. P. Pitaevskii, E. M. Lifshitz and J. B. Sykes, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, Elsevier Science,  1984 Search PubMed .
A. Alù and N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 085112 CrossRef .
F. Shafiei, F. Monticone, K. Q. Le, X.-X. Liu, T. Hartsfield, A. Alù and X. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 95–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Engheta, A. Salandrino and A. Alù, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 095504 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Engheta, Science, 2007, 317, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alu and N. Engheta, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 307–310 CrossRef CAS .
N. Engheta, IEEE Microw. Mag., 2012, 13, 100–113 CrossRef .
J. Merlein, M. Kahl, A. Zuschlag, A. Sell, A. Halm, J. Boneberg, P. Leiderer, A. Leitenstorfer and R. Bratschitsch, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 230–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye and P. Van Dorpe, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7205–7211 RSC .
J. Shi, F. Monticone, S. Elias, Y. Wu, D. Ratchford, X. Li and A. Alu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3896 CAS .

          Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley-Interscience,  2003 Search PubMed .

          R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, Elsevier Science,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. K. Grady, C. Ayala-Orozco and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5519–5523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Husu, R. Siikanen, J. Mäkitalo, J. Lehtolahti, J. Laukkanen, M. Kuittinen and M. Kauranen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 673–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Valev, N. Smisdom, A. Silhanek, B. De Clercq, W. Gillijns, M. Ameloot, V. Moshchalkov and T. Verbiest, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3945–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Decker, M. Ruther, C. Kriegler, J. Zhou, C. Soukoulis, S. Linden and M. Wegener, Opt. Lett., 2009, 34, 2501–2503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Valev, A. Silhanek, N. Verellen, W. Gillijns, P. Van Dorpe, O. Aktsipetrov, G. Vandenbosch, V. Moshchalkov and T. Verbiest, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 127401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Valev, J. J. Baumberg, C. Sibilia and T. Verbiest, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2517–2534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aouani, M. Navarro-Cia, M. Rahmani, T. P. Sidiropoulos, M. Hong, R. F. Oulton and S. A. Maier, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4997–5002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. W. Hahn and J. Y. Lee, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 4856–4870 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Thyagarajan, S. Rivier, A. Lovera and O. J. Martin, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 12860–12865 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Simon, D. Mitchell and J. Watson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1974, 33, 1531–1534 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Grosse, J. Heckmann and U. Woggon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 136802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Coutaz, M. Neviere, E. Pic and R. Reinisch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 22272232 CrossRef .
A. Bouhelier, M. Beversluis, A. Hartschuh and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 013903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mühlschlegel, H.-J. Eisler, O. Martin, B. Hecht and D. Pohl, Science, 2005, 308, 1607–1609 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Jin, Y. J. Kim, I. Y. Park, Y. Kim and S. W. Kim, Nature, 2008, 453, 757–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, A. De Castro and Y. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, A. P. Vasudev and M. L. Brongersma, Science, 2011, 333, 1720–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aouani, M. Rahmani, M. Navarro-Cía and S. A. Maier, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 290–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lehr, J. r. Reinhold, I. Thiele, H. Hartung, K. Dietrich, C. Menzel, T. Pertsch, E.-B. Kley and A. Tünnermann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1025–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou and B. Ren, Nature, 2010, 464, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, K.-S. Jeon, J.-H. Hwang, H. Kim, S. Kwon, Y. D. Suh and J.-M. Nam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 452–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lai, S. W. Chen, M. Hayashi, Y. J. Shiu, C. C. Huang, W. T. Chuang, C. J. Su, H. C. Jeng, J. W. Chang and Y. C. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2544–2552 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Tan, H.-Y. Chen, H.-S. Chen, S. Gwo and L.-J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13759 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, Y. Wang, H. Kneipp, L. T. Perelman, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1667–1670 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, E. J. Bjerneld, M. Käll and L. Börjesson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 4357–4360 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Le Ru, M. Meyer and P. Etchegoin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Dieringer, R. B. Lettan, K. A. Scheidt and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 16249–16256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, K.-S. Jeon, H. M. Kim, J.-M. Nam and Y. D. Suh, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 60–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Dong, S. Jiang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liao, J. Aizpurua and Y. e. Luo, Nature, 2013, 498, 82–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sharma, M. F. Cardinal, S. L. Kleinman, N. G. Greeneltch, R. R. Frontiera, M. G. Blaber, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
E. Le Ru, E. Blackie, M. Meyer and P. G. Etchegoin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13794–13803 CAS .
Y. Fang, N.-H. Seong and D. D. Dlott, Science, 2008, 321, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 631–640 CrossRef .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Perney, J. J. Baumberg, M. E. Zoorob, M. D. Charlton, S. Mahnkopf and C. M. Netti, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 847–857 CAS .
G. Das, F. Mecarini, F. Gentile, F. De Angelis, H. M. Kumar, P. Candeloro, C. Liberale, G. Cuda and E. Di Fabrizio, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1693–1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Cho, Y. Kim and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 249–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Shangjr Gwo
	Shangjr Gwo received his PhD in physics from the University of Texas at Austin, USA in 1993. He is currently a chair professor of physics in National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and serves as the director of National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center in Hsinchu Science Park, Taiwan. His research interests include semiconductor material physics, nanophotonics, nanoplasmonics, and surface/interface science. Most recently, his research group works extensively on plasmonic metamaterials composed of colloidal metal nanoparticles and nanocrystals, linear and nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces, plasmonic nanolasers, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and III-nitride nanostructure light-emitting devices. Shangjr Gwo is an elected fellow of the American Physical Society and the Physical Society of the Republic of China.

Hung-Ying Chen
	Hung-Ying Chen received his PhD degree in 2009 from the physics department, National Tsing-Hua University in Taiwan, where he worked with Prof. Shangjr Gwo. He is currently an assistant research scholar in the physics department, National Tsing-Hua University. His research interests include fundamental issues in the design, characterization, and applications of optical phenomena manifested in artificially designed or self-assembled nanostructures. Recently, his research focuses on controlling the plasmonic coupling effects of tunable plasmonic nanostructure assemblies for quantitative surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (quantitative SERS).

Meng-Hsien Lin
	Meng-Hsien Lin received his PhD degree in 2011 from the Institute of Nanoengineering and Microsystems, National Tsing-Hua University in Taiwan. Then he joined the Department of Physics as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Shangjr Gwo's research group. His general research interests include the controlled synthesis and self-assembly of metallic and dielectric nanostructures. Recently, he has focused his research work on the fabrication and characterization of hybrid nanostructures, including plasmonic nanoparticle films, colloidal metal crystals, as well as 2D semiconductor and organic light emitting materials.

Liuyang Sun
	Liuyang Sun received his MS degrees in 2012 from Nanjing University in China, supervised by Prof. Ruwen Peng. He is currently pursuing a PhD in Physics under the supervision of Prof. Xiaoqin Li at the University of Texas at Austin. His research mainly focuses on the optical properties of metal/semiconductor hybrid nanostructures and monolayer materials.

Xiaoqin Li
	Xiaoqin Li received her PhD in physics in 2003 from the University of Michigan, where she worked for Prof. Duncan Steel. She is currently an associate professor in the physics department at the University of Texas-Austin. In 2007, she joined the University of Texas-Austin after working with Prof. Steven Cundiff as a postdoctoral researcher at JILA, Colorado. Her research interests include fundamental optical properties of individual semiconductor and metallic nanoparticles or assembled clusters as well as elementary excitations such as phonons, excitons, and magnons in a wide range of materials. Recently, her group has worked on the assembly and characterization of artificial plasmonic nanoclusters, ultrafast spectroscopy studies of exciton physics in atomically thin semiconductors, and controlling magnons in magnetic multilayers.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) modes of a silver nanosphere (diameter: 50 nm) and a silver nanorod (diameter: 30 nm, length: 230 nm), (b) illustration of electric field distribution (left panel) and dispersion relation (right panel) of propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) on a silver film.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A metal NP at plasmon resonance can collect light from a large effective area, in comparison to its actual physical size. (b) Tip hot spot is very sensitive to the shape of a nanocrystal. (c) Gap hot spot can be strongly localized at the gap in a plasmonic NP dimer. The resulting enhancement factor can be orders of magnitude larger and highly dependent on the gap size. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 1983 American Association of Physics Teachers. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2012 Annual Reviews.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Intrinsic optical properties of four representative plasmonic metals (gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu), aluminum (Al)). Both the real (a) and imaginary (b) parts of the experimental dielectric functions are shown as functions of incident light wavelength in free space. Silver can be considered as the best plasmonic metal in the full visible range due to its minimal plasmonic damping (small imaginary part). These plots are based on experimental data reported in ref. 119, 137 and 138. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH, 1972 American Physical Society, 1998 Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 4  The real part (a) and imaginary part (b) of the dielectric function of silver from three different datasets.119,137,170 The error bars show the measurement uncertainties for the JC data. The normalized scattering cross-section (c) and absorption cross section (d) calculated for Ag and Au NPs in the quasi-static approximation. Three different datasets are compared for Ag. The normalized cross-sections of Au NP are one to two orders of magnitude smaller than Ag due to larger material loss (intrinsic).	 

 	Fig. 5  SPP propagation lengths measured on giant colloidal silver single crystals. Two methods are used for these measurements: (1) white light interference (black dots) using a planar Fabry–Pérot double-slit interferometry setup and (2) direct scattered intensity method at fixed laser wavelengths (blue squares). This plot shows SPP propagation lengths measured with both methods, in comparison with those reported for different Ag samples in the visible range (red circle: ref. 118, open triangle: ref. 117, black star: ref. 119, black circle: ref. 123, pink inverted triangle: ref. 137). The error bars shown for method 1 represent the standard deviations of measurement values from several double-slit structures. The predicted propagation length using the JC Ag data was calculated by the eigenmode method for an air/5 nm-Al2O3/Ag planar structure, and the error bars are from the JC data. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Gold bowtie antenna arrays with a nominal 20 nm gap size were fabricated by electron-beam lithography on a polycrystalline gold film. The two-photon photoluminescence (TPPL) emission nonuniformity is due to the variation of actual gaps present in this array. (b and c) Gold bowtie antenna arrays with uniform 20 nm (<6 nm) gaps were fabricated by focused gallium-ion- and helium-ion-beam milling, respectively, on polycrystalline gold films. Spatially resolved maps of third-harmonic generation (THG) from the gold bowtie antenna arrays show strong quenching in some antenna regions due to the effects of film grain boundaries in the gap regions. Panel (a) is adapted from ref. 177. Copyright 2005 American Physical Society. Panels (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 178. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples of Au and Ag nanocrystal shapes produced by different synthesis methods. (a) Truncated octahedra (single-crystalline), (b) tetrahedra (single-crystalline), (c) cubes (single-crystalline), (d) octahedra (single-crystalline), (e–g) triangular and hexagonal plates (single-crystalline or twinned), (h) rods (single-crystalline), (i and j) wires (single-crystalline or twinned). All figures are adapted with permission from ref. 195 and 198–205. Copyright (2003, 2006, 2007, 2008) Wiley-VCH. Copyright (1999, 2005, 2006) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2003 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Giant (millimeter-sized) colloidal silver single crystals. (a and b) Optical microscopy (OM) images of colloidal Ag single crystals in solution and on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO)-coated quartz substrate, respectively. (c) SEM image showing a modified Ag crystal sidewall by focused ion-beam (FIB) milling. (d) X-ray diffraction (XRD) wide-scan pattern shows only the Ag(111) peak. The FWHM of the Ag(111) peak determined by high-resolution XRD is less than 0.05°. (e) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Ag crystal. (f) Selected area electron diffraction pattern. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 9  Heterogeneous nanocomposites. (a–c) Metal/metal core–shell particles, (d–f) metal/oxide core–shell structures, (g–i) semiconductor/semiconductor heterostructures, and (j–l) metal/semiconductor core–shell particles. All figures are adapted with permission from ref. 215–224. Copyright (2005, 2007, 2009, 2010) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustrations of different surface functionalization schemes: (a) hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces of close-packed Au NP monolayer films, (b) gap control between NPs, and (c) selective bonding between NPs. (b) Adapted from ref. 225. Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Adapted from ref. 226. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram for the gap-dependent plasmonic coupling in NP dimers. When the separation of two metal NPs is large enough, the plasmonic coupling can be considered as dipole–dipole interaction (far field coupling region). When the separation is reduced to the near-field coupling region, the dimer plasmons can form bonding and anti-bonding modes (hybridization of individual NP plasmons). A scaling relation has been reported for NP dimers in the near-coupling region, indicating that the NP separation (s) needs to be less than 20% of the NP diameter (D). If the gap is reduced to less than ∼1 nm, quantum tunneling and nonlocal effects start to play an important role in plasmonic coupling effects.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dependence of the NP coupling effects on the excitation field polarization. Two Au disks with diameter 150 nm, height 17 nm were fabricated using e-beam lithography. The LSPR is kept near 780 nm when the distance between the disks is far (∼450 nm), regardless of the incident light polarization. As the center-to-center distances were reduced to 300, 200 and 150 nm, the spectra exhibit (a) a red shift for polarization along the dimer axis and (b) a blue shift for polarization perpendicular to the dimer axis. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science.	 

 	Fig. 13  Hybridization of LSPRs for (a) two identical spherical NPs and (b) two different NPs (size, shape, composition). Similar to the hybridization of atomic orbitals, the new plasmon resonance modes due to two coupled NPs can be constructed by taking linear combinations of their individual LSPR modes, forming bonding and anti-bonding states. Some of them, e.g. ψL−, ψT− in (a), are optically dark due to the out of phase dipole oscillations. (b) With small gap size and strong coupling interaction, several of the antibonding plasmon modes could exhibit the anti-crossing behavior with the bonding modes. (a) Redrawn according to ref. 234. (b) Adapted with permission with permission from ref. 235. Copyright (2006, 2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Using the nanomanipulation technique, two gold octahedral crystals (side length: 150 nm) can be positioned along their major axes with precisely controllable tip-to-tip separations (s) from 25 nm to 125 nm. Total-internal-reflection (TIR) measurement geometry allows for the observation of both the “dark” mode with anti-phase dipole coupling and the “bright” mode with in-phase dipole coupling. Moreover, the theoretically predicted plasmonic hybridization effects between two plasmonic crystals can be directly confirmed. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Precisely assembled gold cube chains using the nanomanipulation technique. (a) Gold cube chains are assembled with varying chain lengths and intercube separations (from left to right, 45–210 nm). (b) Optical scattering images of coupled (intercube tip-to-tip separation: 70 nm) and uncoupled (intercube tip-to-tip separation: 210 nm). For the coupled chain case at the plasmon resonance wavelength (red incident light), the incident energy is completely absorbed in the cube chain, showing a “dark” mode image. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Optical properties of decoupled and coupled gold NPs. (a) TEM image showing Au NPs with a mean diameter of 6.1 ± 0.3 nm and the absorbance spectrum indicates the plasmonic resonance of individual, decoupled gold NPs in aqueous solutions is at 522 nm. (b) 2D hexagonal close-packed AuNP superlattice formed by using the self-assembly technique. The absorbance spectrum superlattices red shift to 580 nm because of the collective plasmonic coupling effects.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustrations and examples of two AFM nanomanipulation methods. (a) Push-after-imaging method and (b) an example of assembled Au clusters (9–20 nm in height) arranged on a WSe2 substrate. In this method, the AFM tip makes physical contact with the NP with the feedback turned off during the pushing step. (c) Push-while-imaging method. After kicking a chosen NP, the AFM tip continues to scan in the imaging mode with the feedback on. The selected NP with reduced friction (following a kicking step) moves along the direction perpendicular to the fast scanning direction of the tip. (d) 8 Au NPs (10 nm diameter) arranged in a straight line on a quartz substrate using the pushing-while-imaging method. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 1995 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 18  An image consisting of latex 170 NPs (∼50 nm diameter) assembled with the “sequential parallel pushing” automated nanomanipulation method. The figure is adapted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2012 IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 19  An example of investigating NP coupling in the quantum tunneling regime by a type of AFM manipulation. (a) Schematics of the experiment where two NPs were attached to two AFM tips and brought in close proximity to each other in a controlled way. (b) Optical image of the two AFM tips in dark field microscopy. The inset is a false-colored scanning electron microscopy image of a typical tip, end radius R = 150 nm. (c) Schematics of the coupling regimes between two NPs investigated in the experiment. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) A picture of a nanomanipulator system inside an SEM chamber. (b) A close-up view of the central part of the nanomanipulator. The SEM electron column is also visible in this photo.	 

 	Fig. 21  Examples of investigating single NP conductivity properties with multiple probes inside a SEM chamber. (a) Pristine Cu2O nanocube. (b) Au–Cu2O core–shell nanocube. The bright spot at the center of the particle is the gold core. The inset shows the corresponding TEM image of the particle. The octahedral gold nanocrystal core is precisely positioned such that its corners are directed perpendicularly to the {100} faces of the nanocube. (c) Pristine Cu2O octahedron. (d) Au–Cu2O core–shell octahedron. Two tungsten probes are in contact with the nanocrystals. (e) Conductivity measurements of individual NPs of different shape and composition. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Examples of building 2D and 3D plasmonic nanostructures using multiple probes inside a SEM chamber. (a) The process of manipulation of two gold triangular plates. FE-SEM images of (b) a bow-tie nanoantenna, (c) a metal–insulator–metal plasmonic waveguide defined by the spacing between two gold triangular plates, and (d) 3D pyramidal structure consisting of large colloidal gold NPs. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Nanomanipulation of NPs with an electron beam. (a) Illustration of manipulating a NP with an electron beam. (b) The force exerted by an electron beam on a single NP and a dimer may change direction. The force on a single NP changes from attractive to repulsive as the distance or impact parameter b reduces. The plasmonic modes also induced changes from dipole to multipolar modes. A similar situation arises when the electron beam passes through the side of the NP pair. When the electron beam passes between a pair of NP, anti-bonding modes are excited and repulsive force is produced. (c) Calculated momentum transfer for an isolated 1 nm radius Au sphere (red), electron passing from the side of a pair of 1 nm radius spheres separated by d = 0.25 nm (blue) and 0.5 nm (green) as a function of the impact parameter. Electron beam passing between a NP pair forces them apart. (d) Aberration-corrected TEM images of a silver nanosphere dimer, with particles converging and coalescing under the influence of the electron beam. The particles are 9 nm in diameter and supported on an 8 nm-thick SiO2 membrane substrate. Scale bars in the top and bottom rows equal 5 and 2 nm, respectively. (a–c) Adapted with permission from ref. 283. (d) Adapted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright (2011, 2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Illustration and example of an optical nanomanipulation method. (a) Optical force on a single NP. In regions close to the focus, both radial and vertical intensity gradients draw a small particle toward the focus, making stable particle trapping possible. In regions away from the focus (distance on the order of the wavelength), the beam radiation pressure tends to push the particle along the beam propagation direction. (b) Example of optical tweezer manipulation of nanowires using a Bessel beam with a specially designed intensity and polarization pattern. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright 2003 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Adapted with permission ref. 304. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Examples of plasmonic optical traps. (a) Experimental setup used to excite a lithographically defined square plasmonic lattice for optical trapping. (b) Simulated time-averaged electric field intensity enhancement and intensity profiles of the optical lattice for a plane 90 nm above the substrate under Gaussian illumination. (c) Trajectory of nanospheres entering the array from the edge and attracted to the central region. (d) Successive fluorescence images of trapping multiple 500 nm nanospheres in a hexagonal plasmonic lattice. (e–g) Trapping and manipulating cold atoms in subwavelength plasmonic potential. (e) Schematic side view of excitation of SPPs with Kretschmann configuration and interaction with the Bose–Einstein condensate of cold atoms. (f) A grid of nominally 200 μm-long, 2 μm-wide gold stripes with 2 μm spaces used to shape an optical field on the subwavelength scale. (g) Bose–Einstein condensate of cold atoms diffracts from the plasmonic potential. The occupancy of different diffraction orders can be controlled by incident laser power. (a–c) Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Adapted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 26  Examples of 3D structures via the controlled assembly of macroscale building blocks ranging from millimeter to the centimeter scale. (a) Controlled 3D assembly using anisotropic 0D building blocks (nanoblock™, http://www.diablock.co.jp/nanoblock/), (b) controlled 3D assembly using 1D chains of anisotropic 0D building blocks (magnetic spheres made of rare earth alloys), (c) controlled 3D assembly using 2D templates.	 

 	Fig. 27  Two examples of capillary self-assembly methods for the large-area assembly of 2D ordered colloidal NP arrays on solid substrates. (a) Dewetting technique, where the NP monolayer is formed at the moving front of the evaporating droplet containing a suspension of colloidal NPs. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett technique, where the NP monolayer is formed at the moving front of the upward-drawing substrate. Typically, large-scale and more ordered NP structures could be formed by using the second approach.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic showing a 2D NP superlattice assembled by using the dewetting process. In this example, the solvent heating temperature controls the evaporation rate of the dewetting process. (b) SEM image of a hexagonal close-packed AuNP (average core diameter: 10.5 nm) superlattice on quartz. In this image, the NP surface is coated with octadecanethiolate ligands. (c) The interparticle gap can be precisely tuned by using alkanethiols with various carbon chain lengths, ranging from a twelve- (C12), fourteen- (C14), and sixteen- (C16) to a eighteen-carbon (C18) chain. The gap size can be controlled with an atomic resolution from 3.4 nm (C18) to 2.3 nm (C12). (d) Corresponding changes in collective plasmon resonances are from 575 nm (C18) to 607 nm (C12). Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Examples of 3D supercrystals composed of building blocks based on colloidal gold and silver polyhedra. Here, both the SEM images of actual supercrystals with different kinds of nanocrystals and the schematics of packing arrangements are shown. Supercrystals were assembled from (a) silver cubes, (b) gold rhombic dodecahedra, (c) silver octahedra, and (d) gold octahedra. Scale bars are 500 nm in (a) and (c). (a and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  3D supercrystals composed of gold nanorods via the dewetting process. (a) Evolution of the gold nanorod supercrystals at different stages of droplet drying, showing the growth process, the formation of sharp edge, and the final formation of different supercrystal geometries. (b) SEM images of a gold nanorod superlattice. (c) SEM image of a gold nanorod supercrystal with the smectic-A liquid crystal phase. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Adapted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 31  3D plasmonic crystals assembled from colloidal gold and silver NPs. (a) Schematic illustration of the plasma-assisted LbL assembly process. SEM image obtained from the first monolayer of AuNPs after plasma treatment. The in-plane lattice constant determined by Fourier transform analysis is ∼9 nm, and the measured core diameter of gold NPs is ∼6 nm. The layer-forming process can be repeated to form multilayered NP films. (b) Contact angle measurements on an octadecanethiolate-coated AgNP supercrystal film deposited on an ITO-coated silica substrate before (left) and after (center) air-plasma treatment. The supercrystal surface changes from hydrophobic (110°) to hydrophilic (20°) after an air-plasma treatment for 5 s. The contact angle recovers to 110° after deposition of an additional AgNP monolayer (the fifth monolayer, right). (c) Optical reflection from AgNP (∼6 nm diameter) films with thicknesses of 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15 ML in sequence. The reflection colors result from the combined effect of two plasmonic resonance bands (the transverse-mode at 468 nm and the longitudinal-mode that periodically varies according to the layer number). Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  2D patterning technique to transfer AuNPs from a NP film prepared by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique at a liquid–air interface to a solid substrate. A patterned poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) soft stamp is used as the vehicle to transfer AuNPs from the liquid surface to the substrate surface. (b) Adapted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright 2006 the Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Plasmonic metal–insulator–metal (MIM) heterostructure composed of one insulator gap layer (SiO2) sandwiched by two NP supercrystal layers. (b) Plasmonic waveguide array fabricated by the LbL deposition of AuNP layers followed by the LbL removal of AuNPs using the air plasma technique. The waveguide array structure can be fabricated using a resist mask patterned by photolithography (or electron-beam lithography).	 

 	Fig. 34  A planar plasmonic structure for improved absorption. (a) Illustration of an absorber/spacer/reflector structure. (b) The cross-sectional TEM image of hexagonal Au dot arrays produced using undirected self-assembly block copolymers. (c) >90% absorption was demonstrated at the plasmonic resonance by comparing absorption spectra from structures with/without the Au NP arrays (red and green curves). Reflection measurement is shown as the blue curve. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Ag and Au NPs with different plasmonic resonances were incorporated in a polymer solar cell leading to 20% improvement in power conversion efficiency. (b) SEM image of a three-dimensional multiscale structure fabricated using ion-assisted aerosol lithography of metal NPs for enhancing light scattering and absorption efficiency; (c) cross-sectional image of the 3D plasmonic structure in (b) for improved solar cell performance. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2016 IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 36  Plasmon induced charge separation in TiO2 films loaded with AuNPs improves the performance of a photovoltaic cell. (a) Illustration of the charge transfer process initiated by light induced charge separation in Au NPs in the presence of electron donors. (b) The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of incident photon wavelength. This dependence matches the extinction spectrum of the Au NPs. Inset: SEM image of the Au–TiO2 film. Figures are adapted from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  A plasmonic ruler consisting of two Au NPs used to monitor DNA cleavage. (a) A red shift of the LSPR was observed as the two NPs moved closer following a doubled stranded DNA cleavage. (b) Spectral change in the scattering spectrum as a function time used to monitor the DNA configuration changes. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 399. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 38  A plasmonic orientation sensor based on two dissimilar NPs. (a) A plasmonic nanosphere coupled to a nano rod can be used as an orientation sensor. Depending on whether the incident and detection polarization of light is parallel (perpendicular) to the Fano axis (a line that connects the tip of the nanorod to the center of the sphere), a Fano resonance is present (absent) in the calculated scattering spectrum. Measured scattering spectra as a function of (b) incident and (c) detection light polarization. One can identify an angle that leads to the strongest Fano resonance, which in turn defined a plane parallel to the Fano axis. (d) Using polarization resolved scattering spectra, the intersection of the two planes identified in (b) and (c) can be used to uniquely define the Fano axis, which can be used to define the relative orientation between the sphere and rod. (e) An illustration of how such orientation sensors consisting of quantum dots and a spherical NP may be used to monitor configuration changes of molecules functionalized with a few quantum dots. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 404. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 39  Calculations of the modified decay dynamics and PL rate enhancement of a QD (approximated as a dipole) when placed near a metallic NP. (a) The enhancement factor of the radiative (red), nonradiative (blue), and total decay rate (black) of a point dipole as its distance to a spherical Au NP (35 nm diameter) is changed. (b) PL emission rate enhancement (black) is the product of excitation rate enhancement (blue) and quantum yield modification factor (red). In PL emission intensity exhibits non-monotonic behavior. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 40  Modified QD lifetime and blinking behavior when an Au NP is pushed toward a QD using an AFM tip. (a and b) AFM images of a quantum dot near two Au NPs. QD emission as a function of time and histograms for (c) a bare QD and (d) a QD coupled to a NP showing diminished blinking. Lifetime measurements of (e) a bare QD and (f) a QD coupled to a NP showing nearly 2 orders of magnitude reduction in lifetime. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  An example of modified properties of an emitter when an Au NP approaches. (a) A gold NP was attached to the tip of a probe and aligned to the focus of a microscope objective. The sample stage was scanned to bring a single molecule to the focus. (b) The fluorescence intensity from the molecule was measured as the metallic NP approached the surface in a precisely controlled manner. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 421. Copyright 2006 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 42  Electric and magnetic LSPR modes in a self-assembled trimer cluster. (a) Calculated LSPRs as a function of the gap size in a trimer with the local electric field distribution shown in the inset. (b) Measured and calculated scattering spectrum that identifies a magnetic dipole mode in the infrared spectral region. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 435. Copyright 2010 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 43  A metamolecule consisting of 4 NPs assembled with AFM nanomanipulation designed to support spectrally overlapped electric and magnetic resonances. (a) In a perfectly symmetric 4 NP ring, the electric and magnetic modes are orthogonal and additively contribute to the scattering spectrum. (b) Either NP or gap size variations introduce asymmetry and lead to interference between the two modes. (c) Measured and (d) simulated scattering spectra confirming the origin of the magnetic-based optical Fano resonance in the asymmetric 4 NP ring. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 44  Illustration of the photonic circuit concept. (a) The impedance of a subwavelength NP at optical frequency can be defined as the ratio between the optical electric potential drop and the displacement current flowing through the NP. Depending on the permittivity of material, the NP may act as a lumped circuit element: a capacitor or an inductor. The loss can be modeled as a resistor. (b) Vacuum or dielectric medium does not conduct electric current, which is confined to conducting wires in conventional circuits. (c) Analogously, a medium with epsilon near zero (ENZ) may confine electromagnetic waves. Photonic circuit elements and waveguides placed inside such an ENZ medium closely resemble electric circuits. (a) Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright 2007 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b and c) Adapted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright 2012 by IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 45  A plasmonic antenna with its resonance tuned by changing the gap size using AFM nanomanipulation method. (a–c) AFM images and the corresponding scattering spectra as the gap size was reduced. (d) Illustration of two different side-wall shapes considered in simulation. (e) Simulated spectra can reproduce the measured scattering spectra only when the titled side-walls were taken into account. Figures are adapted from ref. 444. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 46  An example of a photonic circuit consisting of three metallic NPs and one dielectric NP. (a) An illustration of the NP cluster geometry and the AFM image of the cluster (three Au NPs and one Al2O3 NP) assembled with AFM manipulation. (b) Different circuit models used to predict the scattering spectra corresponding to different incident light directions and polarization. (c) Measured and (d) simulated scattering spectra as a function of incident light polarization. Only for selected polarizations, the spectra can be described qualitatively with a simple circuit model. Figures are adapted with permission from ref. 446. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 47  2D plasmonic metasurfaces and 3D plasmonic nanostructures for plasmon-enhanced second-harmonic generation (SHG). (a) SEM image of a plasmonic metasurface composed of G-shaped gold unit cells (side length ∼1 μm). The yellow lines are added around the edges of the structures in order to improve the visibility. (b) Metasurface composed of L-shaped gold nanostructures with a 250 nm arm length and a 100 nm arm width. (c) SEM images of a chiral metasurface structure composed of right-handed twisted gold crosses. The inset shows a close-up image. (d) Top-down (left) and tilted (right) SEM images of individual gold nanocups oriented at 30° and 0° to the substrate normal. The gold nanocups were fabricated by the deposition of a 35 nm thick gold layer using an electron-beam evaporator at different deposition angles onto silica NPs (120 nm in diameter). Figures are adapted with permission from (a) ref. 450, (b) ref. 451, (c) ref. 452, and (d) ref. 449. Copyright (2009, 2011, 2012) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2009 Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 48  Spatially uniform SHG emission from the silver metasurface patterned with a double resonant V-shaped nanogroove array. (a and b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the focused ion-beam (FIB)-milled nanogroove surface, which exhibits double plasmonic resonances at λ1 = 532 nm (SHG wavelength) and λ2 = 1064 nm (incident pulsed laser wavelength). (c) Optical reflectance spectra at normal incidence show the strong dependence of reflectance on the incident light polarization. The blue curve is measured using horizontally (H) polarized white light (the electric field is perpendicular to the nanogroove). In comparison, the vertically (V) polarized white light (electric field parallel to nanogroove) has reflectance close to unity (red curve). The insets show the optical microscopy (OM) reflection images. (d) The SHG emission at 532 nm is also strongly H-polarized with a large polarization ratio. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 49  SHG emissions from a series of double resonant silver metasurfaces. (a and b) SEM images of nanogroove arrays with different nanogroove depths. (c) Corresponding OM reflection images of nanogroove structures acquired using H-polarized, normal incident white light. The reflection colors of the OM images depend on the spectral positions of plasmonic resonances. By varying only the nanogroove depth (100–175 nm), the λ1 resonance can be tuned across the full visible spectrum, including blue (440 nm, structure I), green (532 nm, structure V), and red (624 nm, structure X). (d) Corresponding SHG emission images obtained by raster scanning a focused laser (pulsed) at 1064 nm. (e) SHG spectra of the nanogroove structures shown in (a). The SHG signal is maximized when the excitation laser wavelength (1064 nm) and the SHG emission wavelength (532 nm) match with the double resonant plasmonic modes supported by the nanogroove array. The inset shows the variation of the SHG peak intensity at 532 nm measured for nanogroove arrays with different depths. According to this plot, a 1.5 nm variation of the nanogroove depth from the optimized depth can lead to about 10% decrease in the SHG intensity. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 50  Examples of SERS substrates. (a) SEM image of a silver nanowire monolayer deposited on a silicon wafer. (b) Nanostructured silicon surface consisting of a square lattice of inverted square pyramidal pits with a 2 μm pitch, and pit depths ranging from 0.7 μm to 1.0 μm. (c) Array of gold islands with an average diameter of 100 nm and an average thickness of 80 nm. (d) SEM images of an array of silver nanoclusters. The scale bar in the inset is 30 nm. Figures are adapted with permission from (a) ref. 483, (b) ref. 484, (c) ref. 485, and (d) ref. 486. Copyright (2003, 2012) American Chemical Society. Copyright 2006 Optical Society of America. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 51  Single monolayer of close-packed AgNPs as a SERS metasurface. (a) SEM image of a close-packed AgNP monolayer film on quartz. (b) Transmission and reflection photographs of a large-area (1 × 1 cm2) AgNP monolayer film on quartz, illustrating the effects of collective plasmonic resonance. (c) Schematic of the SERS detection geometry. The analyte layer composed of crystal violet (CV) molecules embedded in spin-on-glass (SOG). The cross-sectional SEM image shows that the thicknesses of the CV/SOG layer and AgNP film are about 5 nm and 6 nm, respectively. (d) Raman spectra (vertically offset for clarity) obtained from a CV/SOG layer on top of an AgNP film, a bare AgNP film, and a bare CV layer. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 52  Raman enhancement factor of the SERS substrate composed of close-packed AgNPs. (a) SERS mapping near the edge of an AgNP monolayer film. The whole area is covered by a CV/SOG layer with an estimated molecule areal density of 5000 μm2. (b) Two Raman spectra (vertically offset for clarity) were obtained from a 5000 molecules per μm2 CV/SOG layer on top of an Ag NP film and a 500000 molecules per μm2 CV/SOG layer on quartz, respectively. (c) A raster-scanning image shows that the standard deviation of Raman intensity is only 4.3%. (d) The normalized CV intensity at 1177 cm−1 as a function of CV molecules. The areal densities of CV molecules were varied from 5 to 5000 molecules per μm2. These data were collected from two different Raman instruments. The error bars represent the standard deviations of SERS intensities at different sample locations. The error bars are larger at ultralow density levels due to the statistical nature of ensemble measurements. This figure is adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
