Anchoring of halogen-cleaved organic ligands on perovskite surfaces   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02698H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02698H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 5340-5349Anchoring of halogen-cleaved organic ligands on perovskite surfaces†

        
          
            Juntao 
            Hu‡
af, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Chen‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Deying 
            Luo
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Linjie 
            Dai
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shunde 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shiyu 
            Yang
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Zewei 
            Fu
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Dengke 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qihuang 
            Gong
          
        
      bgh, 
      
        
          
            Samuel D. 
            Stranks
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Zhu
          
        
      *bgh and 

        
          
            Zheng-Hong 
            Lu
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Physics, Center for Optoelectronics Engineering Research, Yunnan University, 650091 Kunming, China. E-mail: zhenghong.lu@utoronto.ca
bState Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Frontiers Science Center for Nano-optoelectronics & Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China. E-mail: iamzhurui@pku.edu.cn
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, M5G 3E4 Ontario, Canada. E-mail: deying.luo@utoronto.ca
dCavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0AS, UK
fCenter of Development and Research, Yunnan Tin Group (Holding) Co. Ltd, 650106 Kunming, P. R. China
gPeking University Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, Nantong, 226010 Jiangsu, China
hCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006 Shanxi, China
Received 
      21st August 2022
    , Accepted 31st October 2022First published on 1st November 2022AbstractPerovskite surface passivation is key to eliminating junction charge-carrier losses and is considered a critical step in fabricating solar cells with efficiencies close to the theoretical limit. Various halogenated organic ligands are found to produce efficient and stable solar cells when the perovskite surfaces are thermally activated. Photoemission spectroscopy shows that most of the ligands start to evaporate during heating. When annealed at high temperatures, halogens are cleaved off the ligands, leaving the organic cations anchored to the perovskite and causing charge transfer n-doping. The band-alignment measurement reveals that the formation of n-doped perovskites caused by strongly anchored ligands leads to the formation of ideal heterojunctions with energy offsets benefiting electron extraction and hole blocking, contributing to over 22% improvement in device performance without burn-in degradation.

Broader context
Stabilizing perovskite surfaces with favorable electronic levels, which can form a barrier-free interface when in contact with the adjacent charge-carrier extraction layer, play a key role in realizing efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Perovskite surface functionalization by passivating electronic defects has been broadly adopted using large bulky cations. When the perovskite surfaces are treated using large bulky cations, perovskite solar cells with n–i–p and p–i–n configurations exhibit record-breaking device performance. Though these large bulky cations (such as PEA+) are thought to form 2D/quasi-2D perovskites on the perovskite absorbers, it is unclear how these complicated surface chemical reactions happen using in situ characterization techniques. In situ surface-sensitive photoemission spectroscopy can concurrently probe both chemical and electronic structures of perovskite surfaces and interfaces over different temperatures, and thus can provide insight into the perovskite surfaces and heterojunctions. Herein, we studied the chemistry and electronic structure of PEA bulky organic ligands on CsFAPbI3 perovskite surfaces. Upon high-temperature annealing, the halogens of physisorbed organics can be removed, and halogen-cleaved-off organic ligands are anchored to the perovskites causing n-type doping. The PEA+ anchored perovskite surfaces have proven beneficial for forming favorable band alignment and stabilizing perovskite surfaces, thereby resulting in improved burn-in device degradation.

Introduction
Halide perovskites with outstanding optoelectronic properties are attractive for photovoltaic applications,1,2 and recent years have witnessed skyrocketing efficiencies in single and multijunction configurations.3,4 For perovskite solar cells (PSCs), heterojunctions consisting of a perovskite absorber and adjacent charge-carrier transport layers are the keys to efficient extraction and minimal nonradiative recombination under continuous operation.5,6 Currently, the pressing need for boosting device performances toward the performance limit is optimizing the perovskite heterojunctions by judiciously choosing charge-carrier transport materials and functionalizing perovskite surfaces. The latter is enabled by passivating perovskite surfaces using either large organic salts or two-dimensional (2D)/quasi-2D perovskites.7–9 Numerous studies have shown that whether a 2D or quasi-2D perovskite topmost layer can improve device performances depends on the surface nature of the tailored perovskites.10–12 For example, early studies revealed that constructing quasi-2D perovskite passivation agents with excellent charge-carrier transport and favorable energy bands is critical for yielding efficient and stable PSCs.3,13–15 While large organic salts can positively improve the device efficiencies,16,17 they may cause operational instabilities as they are attached to the perovskite surface by a weak physisorption force. This stability issue can be mitigated somewhat by using less polar passivation agents with a moderate dipole force,10 resulting in substantial advancements in device performances.
Despite notable advances, there is an urgent need to construct ideal passivated heterojunctions to unlock the full potential of PSCs. An additional surface passivation layer must concurrently passivate surface defects and form heterojunctions with band offsets benefiting extraction of majority carriers while blocking minority carriers.18–20 More recently, quasi-2D perovskites with optimized layers, in which 3-fluoro-phenethylammonium (3F-PEA) bulky cations confine the lead octahedra matrix, have enabled concurrent improvements in device efficiencies and device stabilities of p–i–n PSCs via reducing electron transport barriers.11 By applying oleylammonium iodide to form tailored dimensionality 2D perovskites, p–i–n PSCs have passed damp-heat recycle tests.21 Coating a tailored 2D perovskite with asymmetric structures onto perovskites effectively tunes charge-carrier transport near the surface,22 with overall improvements in device performance. These encouraging results suggest that refining perovskite heterojunctions through the use of tailored perovskites is essential for high-performance PSCs. Correlations between various passivated perovskite heterojunctions and device performances are poorly understood. Meanwhile, the basic reaction kinetics of perovskite surfaces associated with the bulky cations and their impact on surface electronic structures and perovskite heterojunctions remains unclear as well. These factors have limited the realization of ideal perovskite heterojunctions with improved selective carrier extraction and reduced nonradiative recombination. Photoemission spectroscopy (PES) is capable of measuring the chemical structure and all key energy levels of perovskite surfaces and interfaces, which will help understand perovskite surfaces and heterojunctions and will, in turn, become an indispensable guide to making high-performance perovskites and PSCs.
Here, we began our investigations on the surface chemistry of the halogenated PEA ligands used to functionalize formamidinium-cesium lead triiodide (Cs0.18FA0.82PbI3) perovskite surfaces during heat treatment. We find that the physisorbed ligand films would evaporate upon annealing and decrease the thickness with increasing temperature. Furthermore, upon annealing at high temperatures, the halogens are found to be cleaved off the ligands. With the removal of halogens, the ionized ligands PEA+ are anchored to the perovskite surfaces and chemisorbed. The strong charge-transfer bonding of the PEA+ to the perovskite surfaces leads to n-type doping and improved band alignment with the electron transport layer, thereby enhancing device efficiencies and burn-in operational stabilities. Although PEA cations are reported to form 2D or quasi-2D perovskites on parent perovskites that considerably improve device performances via surface passivation, we focus on a detailed study of the reaction kinetics over temperatures using in situ photoemission spectroscopy uncovering the surface interaction mechanisms, and we establish the links between surface constituents and heterojunction band alignments and device performances.
Results and discussion
Experimental demonstration of thermally activated anchoring on perovskite surfaces
A series of halogenated PEA organics were used for the reaction kinetic studies, and these organics are henceforth denoted chlorinated-, brominated-, and iodinated-PEA organics. The Cs0.18FA0.82PbI3 perovskite was first pre-coated on the ITO substrates modified with a self-assembled layer {namely, [2-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)ethyl]phosphonic acid (2PACz)}. Then samples were annealed before halogenated PEA organics went down. Next, the resulting perovskite surfaces were covered by halogenated PEA organics. The Cs0.18FA0.82PbI3 perovskite was fabricated using a similar method reported previously.23 X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) was used to study the chemical constituents of perovskite surfaces treated at temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 100 °C in a glovebox. The temperature dependence of the reaction kinetics was probed in a multi-linked system with a photoemission analysis chamber, a vapor-phase deposition chamber, and a glovebox (Fig. S1, ESI†), where all the samples and layer-by-layer deposition via vapor-phase deposition were conducted without exposure to air.

Fig. 1A shows the evolution of the N 1s XPS spectra of the halogenated PEA organics on the perovskite surface after annealing at temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 100 °C. For comparison, we provide the reference N 1s XPS spectra of the pristine perovskite without any treatment, and we find that only a single N 1s core level peak at 400.5 eV is detected in the XPS spectrum (Fig. S2A, ESI†), which is indexed to the FA+ constituent of the Cs0.18FA0.82PbI3 perovskites. For the perovskite coated with halogenated PEA organics, however, a new N 1s peak at ∼402.2 eV is detected, as shown in Fig. 1A. We also note that the N 1s peak intensity of the halogenated PEA organics relative to the perovskite's N 1s intensity was substantially decreased with increasing temperature. The high-resolution N 1s XPS spectra are deconvoluted into the respective PEA and FA components upon annealing over temperatures (Fig. 1B–D and Fig. S2–S4, ESI†). In analogy to the results observed in Fig. 1A, we show a consistent reduction in the PEA signals with temperature. This set of XPS data suggests that sublimation of the halogenated PEA organics occurs during heat treatment. Once annealed at 100 °C, the thickness of organics coated on the parent perovskite surface is estimated to be ∼1 nm by using relative PEA-to-FA ratios (Fig. S5, ESI†). Details about the film thickness estimation by the XPS data are provided in the ESI† Text 1.
 Fig. 1  Evidence of thermal evaporation of halogenated PEA organics on the perovskites. (A) Evolution of the N 1s XPS spectra of the halogenated PEA organic layer on the perovskite surfaces upon annealing at temperatures from 30 °C to 100 °C. The deconvoluted N 1s spectra showing PEA (phenylethylammonium) and FA (formamidinium) contributions are shown in (B–D) for chlorinated-, brominated-, and iodinated-PEA organics, respectively. (E) The N 1s XPS spectra of the 100 °C annealed perovskites after cluster ion beam etching for 60 s, which removes ∼1 nm surface organic layers. The disappearance of the PEA peak indicates that the PEA organics are on the perovskite surfaces only. More details about the N 1s XPS spectra and corresponding curve fitting results are provided in Fig. S2–S4 (ESI†). (F) Schematic illustration of trimming the halogenated PEA organics by annealing. 
To confirm if these 1 nm thick organic ligands are solely present on the surface, we obtained XPS depth profiles of the perovskites using a gas cluster ion beam (GCIB). From the depth profiling of the XPS spectra shown in Fig. 1E, we note that after 60 s of GCIB etching, the N 1s peak attributed to the PEA constituent cannot be detected anymore. The etched thickness by the 60 s GCIB beam is less than 2 nm, consistent with the thickness estimated directly by the above XPS analyses. As a consequence, it is concluded that only ultrathin PEA organic ligands are left on the perovskite surfaces after annealing at 100 °C. The corresponding thickness variation during the heat treatment is displayed in Fig. 1F. Furthermore, the device-performance results demonstrate that when making PSCs based on these treated perovskites, the ultrathin PEA anchoring treatment when annealing at 100 °C positively impacts the power conversion efficiencies under sunlight illumination, as shown in Table S1 (ESI†). Similar positive effects associated with annealing were reported previously.23–25
We further study if the changes in the chemical structures of halogenated PEA organic ligands occur upon thermal annealing. First, we observe that Cl and Br core level signals on 100 °C treated samples disappear (Fig. 2A and B). In Fig. 2C, the I signals detected for the perovskites treated with the iodinated-PEA organic at 100 °C are from the underlayer perovskite. Fig. S6 (ESI†) shows that the I/Pb atomic ratio decreased from 3.37 (30 °C) to 3.07 (100 °C). We noticed that if the control film (i.e., no PEAX treatment) was annealed at 100 °C, there was no loss of surface I and N that can be detected, as seen in Fig. S6d (ESI†). This indeed indicates that the halogen is cleaved off the organic ligands upon annealing at 100 °C. We also preclude a combined effect of the vacuum and the chemical composition of halogenated organic themselves, as confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Fig. S8, ESI†) and XPS analysis of PEA powders annealed at and above 100 °C (Fig. S9, ESI†). The quantitative analysis for the individual powder is provided in Table S3 (ESI†). Second, we proceed to analyze the C 1s signal of the PEA+ shown in Fig. 2D–F. Notably, three well-resolved C 1s peaks located at 284.8 eV, 286.6 eV, and 288.8 eV are detected and are assigned to the C–C and C–N bonds in PEA+ and FA+ of the perovskite, respectively.7,26 Also, we note that the relative FA+ peak intensity is greatly enhanced, which once again reveals substantial reductions of the covered organics. Yet, the integrated C–C to C–N intensity ratio (∼87.5:12.5) was identical for all treated samples regardless of the temperature (Table S2, ESI†). It is thus unlikely to accompany PEA+ group fragmentation when the halogen–carbon bond is cleaved upon thermally activated reaction on perovskite surfaces.
 Fig. 2  Experimental demonstration of halogen cleavage and organic anchoring on perovskite surfaces. (A–C) Evolutions of the halogen (Cl 2p, Br 3d, and I 3d) XPS spectra of the various organics on the perovskites annealed from 30 °C to 100 °C. The Cl and Br signals are absent on 100 °C annealed samples. The persistent I 3d signal on the iodinated-PEA-organics stems from the perovskite. Curve-fitted C 1s spectra of chlorinated- (D), brominated- (E), and (F) iodinated-PEA organics annealed at various temperatures as shown. The C 1s spectra were normalized to the C–C peak intensity. Note that the ratio of C–C (284.8 eV) to C–N (286.6 eV) is a constant for all annealing temperatures (shown in Table S2, ESI†), indicating that the benzene ring and alkylammonium from PEA organics remain intact before and after halogen cleavage. The evolutions of C 1s, Pb 4f, and Cs 3d signals are provided in detail in Fig. S7 (ESI†). (G) Transient absorption (TA) maps and (H) TA spectra of the perovskite treated with chlorinated PEA organics (Pump, 400 nm, 6.4 μJ cm−2). GSB, ground-state bleach. (I) Schematic illustration of thermally-activated halogen-cleaved PEA ligands anchoring on perovskites. 
The halogen cleavage probably renders bulky PEA anchoring on the perovskite surfaces that resemble a 2D or quasi-2D perovskite, as reported in the literature.27,28 To better understand the mechanism of the thermally-activated PEA anchoring on perovskite surfaces, we performed structural analyses and optical characterizations of the treated perovskites. The measured XRD patterns show no additional peaks indexed to the low-dimensional perovskites (Fig. S10 and S11, ESI†). The expected absorption peaks of 2D and quasi-2D perovskites cannot be observed at the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectra (Fig. S12, ESI†). This is mainly due to a small number of the 2D or quasi-2D perovskites on the perovskite surface. Furthermore, we conducted transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy measurements on the perovskites treated with and without halogenated PEA organics (Fig. 2G, H and Fig. S13, ESI†). Fig. 2G and H display TA maps and spectra of the chlorinated-PEA-organic treated perovskite (100 °C) with a thickness of 450 nm under a 400 nm pump with a fluence of 6.4 μJ cm−2 (i.e., a carrier density of 2.85 × 1017 cm−3). In addition to a sharp positive peak positioned at ∼770 nm that corresponds to the ground-state bleach (GSB) signals of Cs0.18FA0.82PbI3 parent perovskites, an additional GSB signal centered at ∼565 nm occurs when treated by halogenated PEA organics. Strikingly, these GSB peak locations observed are independent of halogenated organic ligands. In contrast, the peak intensity has been greatly influenced by the halogens of halogenated organic ligands, which we show in the early-time (0 to 5 ps) TA maps and TA spectra under a high fluence pump (400 nm, 25.5 μJ cm−2) (Fig. S14, ESI†). These observations suggest high-quality quasi-2D perovskite functionalization surfaces enabled by halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring on the perovskites.11,29 We provide a schematic diagram of perovskite films with halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring (Fig. 2I and Fig. S15, ESI†).
Impact of the bulky cation anchoring on the electronic structure
It is well recognized that the electronic structure of a semiconductor can be altered by adatom physisorption and chemisorption.30,31 The halogen-cleaved bulky PEA anchoring on the perovskite surfaces may influence the surface electronic structures such as Fermi levels, thus resulting in the variation of band alignments at the heterojunctions and subsequently influencing device performances. We used the core level XPS I 3d5/2 spectra to measure the Fermi level shift. The data show n-type doping characteristics when treated with halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring (Fig. 3A). Similarly, UPS data show increased binding energy of the valence band maximum (VBM) with respect to the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 3B (left). The secondary electron cut-off (SECO) spectra (Fig. 3B, right) also exhibit a reduction of 0.54–0.6 eV work function in the PEA+ anchoring. This reduction indicates an upward shift of the Fermi level toward the conduction band, as expected by perovskite surface n-doping. Thus, XPS and UPS data confirm an n-doped Fermi level shift after halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. The cause of n-doping is most likely the charge transfer between halogen-cleaved PEA and perovskites. The surface charge transfer doping has been suggested as one of many possible methods to dope perovskites.32Fig. 3C summarizes the photoemission results in simplified energy diagrams. Although the halogen cleavage shows similar steps in all cases, the perovskite films treated with chlorinated-PEA organics present better optoelectronic properties than others (Fig. S16, ESI†). Thus, in the following discussion, we focus on employing chlorinated-PEA-organic treated perovskites for the PSCs and detailed studies on heterojunction energy-level alignment.
 Fig. 3  Effects of halogen-cleaved PEA cations on the electronic structures, Fermi level position, and photovoltaic performance. (A) I 3d5/2 XPS spectra of the perovskites before and after halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. All PEA anchored samples show a consistent core level energy shift (∼0. 2 eV) toward higher binding energies, indicating an upward change in Fermi levels, i.e., n-type doping. (B) UPS spectra of perovskites with and without halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. The valence band maximum (VBM) with respect to the Fermi level (EF) and work function (Φ) are indicated. SECO, secondary electron cut-off. (C) Energy levels of the perovskite surfaces with and without halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. EB, the binding energy of I 3d5/2 core levels. (D) Comparison of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for PSCs with perovskite surfaces activated under the different temperatures. The gray dash is a J–V curve for the reference device without any treatments on the perovskite surfaces. (E) J–V curves of PSCs with Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring (100 °C) were obtained from the reverse scan and forward scan. (F) Stabilized power outputs (SPO) tracking at maximum power point under the full AM 1.5G sunlight illumination. The gray dash is the SPO of the reference PSC device. 
On the relationship between the photovoltaic performances and energy-level alignment
We examined the impact of the Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring on the photovoltaic performances by fabricating p–i–n PSCs using a device configuration of glass/indium tin oxide (ITO)/2PACz/perovskite/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Cu (Fig. S17A, ESI†), where the perovskite absorbers are treated by Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring. The photovoltaic performances are evaluated by measuring current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under simulated air mass 1.5 G (global) illumination. The results are shown in Fig. 3D and Fig. S17(B–E) (ESI†). With Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring at 100 °C, the PSCs deliver the best performance among all surface treatments. The reason for this can be rationed by reduced defects, as demonstrated in Fig. S16 (ESI†). The device also shows fewer hysteresis phenomena over reverse and forward scans (Fig. 3E). The resulting champion device processed with Cl-cleaved PEA delivers a power conversion efficiency of ∼23% (Fig. S18, ESI†), which is among the best-performing p–i–n PSCs with methylammonium-free triiodide perovskites (Table S4, ESI†). It is noteworthy that when the annealing temperature is below 100 °C, the device performances are inferior and even lower than the reference one (dash, Fig. 3D). In analogy to J–V scanned photovoltaic performances, when the PSC is treated with an annealing temperature of less than 100 °C, the PSCs exhibit undesirable burn-in degradation at the early time of sunlight illumination in comparison to both the reference (with a bit of light soaking effect) and 100 °C treatments (Fig. 3F). As we discussed above, annealing at less than 100 °C features thick physisorbed PEAs on the parent perovskites; whist 100 °C treatment results in ultrathin chemisorbed PEA+ anchoring. These collective results suggest that the perovskite heterojunction in a p–i–n PSC containing thick physisorbed halogenated-PEA organics can cause a severe burn-in degradation at the early illumination time. However, this burn-in degradation can be retarded by thermally-activated chemisorbed PEA+ anchoring at 100 °C. This observation is probably due to the variation of band alignments at the perovskite heterojunctions upon various annealing treatments. In addition, stabilizing perovskite surfaces through low-dimensional perovskite addition could improve burn-in degradation. Thus, it is crucial to ascertain whether or not temperature-induced surface constituent differences can vary the barrier for electron carriers at the heterojunctions, correlating the device performance with band alignments at the perovskite/electron transport layer interface.
We study the energy-level alignment across the heterojunction interfaces through layer-by-layer deposition and in situ UPS measurements. Fig. 4A displays the valence band (VB) and SECO spectra of the perovskite (reference)/C60 stacks. Combined with the reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS) measurements in Fig. S19 (ESI†), the measured band alignment is summarized in Fig. 4D. Details about the bandgap determination for organic semiconductors by REELS can be found elsewhere.33 We note from the energy band diagram that a significant 0.19 eV electron barrier ΔECBM is located at the perovskite/C60 heterojunction interface with an interface dipole (Δ) of 0.19 eV. When C60 is deposited on chlorinated-PEA-organic coated perovskites (with the annealing of 60 °C), it is noted that a more considerable barrier for electrons and a higher interface dipole are formed at the perovskite/C60 heterojunction interface (Fig. 4B and E), that is, 0.35 eV (ΔECBM) and 0.45 eV (Δ). This indicates that annealing at less than 100 °C produces poor band alignment when in contact with the electron carrier transport layer. From the device performance in Table S1 (ESI†), we find that the changes to device performances agree with electron barrier variations, which affect all the photovoltaic parameters.
 Fig. 4  Energy-level alignment at the perovskite/C60 hetero-interface. In situ UPS spectra C60 on perovskites. (A) Untreated perovskite/C60 (reference). (B) Chlorinated-PEA treated perovskite/C60 (60 °C). (C) Cl-cleaved-PEA treated perovskite/C60 (100 °C). The simplified energy-level diagram at perovskite/C60 interfaces is shown as (D), (E), and (F), respectively. The labels for various energy levels are the valence band maximum (EVBM) of perovskites, the conduction band minimum (ECBM) of perovskites, the vacuum level (EVAC), interfacial dipole (Δ), valence band offsets (ΔEVBM), highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) of C60, and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO). Red ellipsoids highlight the changes in CBM energy offsets in eV. 
By contrast, upon Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring (that is, chemisorbed PEA+) on perovskite surfaces when annealed at 100 °C, energy-level alignment at the perovskite/C60 interface shows an ideal type-II heterojunction with almost “zero” barrier for electron collection and sufficiently high barriers for holes (Fig. 4C and F). The ability of the electron barrier tuning upon Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring at 100 °C has enabled the notable enhancement of all the key parameters, thus enhancing the efficiency of 22% compared to the reference device, as shown in Table S1 (ESI†). This can further reveal why the optimal device performance can be attained when annealed at 100 °C. Additionally, as compared to stabilized power output tracking at maximum power output under AM 1.5 G sunlight illumination (Fig. 3F), it is found that the magnitude of charge-carrier barriers is also critical for eliminating the initial burn-in degradation and practical output powers.
Conclusions
In summary, we thoroughly conducted PES experiments to uncover the secrets of tailored perovskite surfaces and related heterojunctions with a low dimensional perovskite. We found that the halogen would cleave off from the organic salts, leaving the PEA cations anchored to the perovskite after 100 °C heat treatment. Such changes on perovskite film surfaces have resulted in the variation of the band edges and Fermi level, along with the band upshift near the surfaces, all of which considerably engineer the energy-level alignment at the heterojunctions. In a combination of device performance characterization and a full understanding of perovskite heterojunctions, we demonstrate that the formation of ideal selective contacts by tailoring interfacial bands is critical for simultaneously overcoming the fundamental limits of device efficiencies and inhibiting initial “burn-in” under operational conditions. These insights gained from device physics and device engineering will become indispensable guides to the community in their efforts to make efficient and stable PSCs.
Methods
Materials and reagents
The materials used in the sample and device preparation include formamidinium iodide (FAI, Greatcell Solar), [2-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)ethyl]phosphonic acid (2PACz; 98.0%, TCI), and lead diiodide (PbI2; 99.99%, TCI), cesium chloride (CsCl; >99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), bathocuproine (BCP, Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, Nano-C Tech), buckminsterfullerene (C60; sublimated >98%, Lumtec), copper (Cu, >99%), isopropanol (IPA, Acros), ethanol (Acros), chlorobenzene (CB, Acros), dimethylformamide (DMF, Acros), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Acros). The halogenated organics, including phenylethylammonium chloride (PEACl), phenylethylammonium bromide (PEABr), and phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) were purchased from the Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp, China. All reagents were used as received without further purification.
Photoemission spectroscopy
For the perovskite films, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS), and reflection-electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS) measurements were performed on a Thermofisher ESCALAB Xi+ system. The XPS/UPS spectra energy positions were calibrated using a standard Au sample at Au 4f7/2 BE = 84.0 eV and Fermi level of EF = 0 eV. XPS measurements were carried out using a monochromatic Al Kα source (hv = 1486.6 eV) with a pass energy of 20 eV. After loading the sample into the XPS chamber, we first collected the Pb 4f spectrum to avoid metallization. The halide and N 1s core levels were measured at 5 and 8 min respectively after measurements. The XPS measurements which were completed within about 15 min include a broad energy window survey spectrum and high-resolution spectra for targeted core levels. UPS measurements were performed using a He UV lamp (hν = 21.2 eV) with a pass energy of 1 eV. Gas cluster ion beam (GCIB) sputtering was performed using a cluster size of 2000 at 4 keV energy. REELS measurements were acquired using a 1 keV electron beam with a pass energy of 6 eV. All samples were transferred into the vacuum system via a vacuum transfer module avoiding exposure to air. For the perovskites treated with halogenated organics (from 30 °C to 100 °C), post-treatment steps were finished inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox with a cool water and oxygen level of less than one ppm, and surface analyses on the chemical constituents and electronic structures were also acquired in an attached vacuum chamber with photoemission spectroscopy techniques. For the individual PEAX (X = Cl, Br, and I) powders, XPS measurements were performed using a Thermofisher K-Alpha system before and after the powders underwent thermogravimetric analysis.
Transient absorption spectroscopy
The output of a Ti: sapphire amplifier system (Spectra-Physics Solstice Ace) operating at 1 kHz and generating ∼100 fs pulses was split into pump and probe. The 400 nm pump pulses were created by sending the 800 nm fundamental beam of the Solstice Ace through a second harmonic generating (SHG) beta barium borate (BBO) crystal (Eksma Optics). The pump was blocked by a chopper wheel rotating at 500 Hz while a computer-operated mechanical delay stage (Newport XPS-C8) adjusted the delay between the pump and the probe. A visible broadband beam (520–780 nm) was generated in a home-built noncollinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA), and the white light was split into two identical beams (probe and reference) by a 50/50 beamsplitter. The reference beam passing through the sample did not interact with the pump, which allows for correcting any shot-to-shot fluctuations in the probe that would otherwise significantly increase the structured noise in the experiments. Based on this arrangement, small signals with a ΔT/T ∼ 10−5 could be measured. The transmitted probe and reference pulses were collected with an InGaAs dual-line array detector (Hamamatsu G11608-512DA, spectrograph: Andor Shamrock SR-303i-B) driven and read out by a custom-built board (Stresing Entwicklungsbüro).

In situ photoemission spectroscopy measurements across perovskite/C60 interfaces
The C60 overlayer was deposited on the as-prepared perovskite films with a deposition rate of 0.2 Å s−1 by thermal evaporation (with a base pressure ∼10−7 torr). A calibrated quartz crystal microbalance monitored the C60 deposition thickness and deposition rate. After a 2 nm thick C60 overlayer was deposited on the perovskite, the whole samples were transferred to the photoemission spectroscopy chamber attached to the physical vapor deposition system avoiding exposure to the ambient atmosphere. The UPS valence spectra, secondary electron cut-off spectra, and REELS spectra at the interface of perovskites and organics can be tested through in situ photoemission spectroscopy analyses. Based on these critical observations, energy-level alignment across the perovskite/organic interface can be built accordingly.
Device preparation
ITO transparent electrodes were sequentially cleaned in soap water, deionized H2O, acetone, and isopropanol by ultrasonication for 20 min each. The ITO transparent electrodes were then dried with the N2 and treated with UV-ozone for 15 min. The self-assembling monolayer (2PACz, 0.3 g mL−1 in ethanol) was deposited on the ITO substrate by a spin-coating procedure of 4000 rpm (30 s) and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (608.4 mg), FAI (206.4 mg), and CsCl (36 mg) in 1 mL DMF/DMSO (4:1, v/v) mixed solvent. The perovskite absorber was fabricated via a two-step spin-coating procedure with 1000 rpm for 10 s and 5000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. 150 μL CB was dropped on the center of the spinning substrates during the final 10 s of the second spin-coating process. The samples were then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. For reference devices, the PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in CB) electron transport layer was prepared with the speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s and 1000 rpm for 30 s, respectively. BCP (1 mg mL−1 in ethanol) was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 30 s. The Cu (100 nm) electrode was made by thermal evaporation to complete device fabrication. For the thermally-activated perovskites with halogenated organics, the PEAX (X = Cl, Br, and I) solution (1.5 mg mL−1 in IPA) was dynamically spin-coated onto the perovskite substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s (with a ramping rate of 2000 rpm s−1) before making the PCBM layer. Then the samples were heated at varying temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 100 °C for 5 min under an inert atmosphere. Subsequently, the following electron transporting layers and electrodes were obtained with the same regular approaches used in the reference device fabrication process. For the champion device, the nickel oxide nanoparticle dispersion was deposited onto the ITO substrate (with a spin rate of 3000 rpm for 30 s and a ramping rate of 2000 rpm s−1) before coating the self-assembling monolayer, while other layers were fabricated with the same protocols as mentioned above.
Device performance test
The device performances were acquired using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter under simulated AM 1.5G solar irradiation (XES-40S1, SAN-EI). The light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 was calibrated using a standard monocrystalline Si solar cell with a KG-5 filter. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were scanned under a forward scan from −0.02 V to 1.21 V and a reverse scan from 1.21 V to −0.02 V with no decay time. The stabilized power output was tracked at the maximum power point under 1-sun full sunlight illumination without any UV filter.
Other characterizations
The XRD patterns for perovskite films coated on ITO substrates were acquired using the Rigaku Ultima IV XRD system with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). For the XRD measurements, the scanning was fixed at 3° min−1. The TAG tests for PEAX (X = Cl, Br, and I) powders were carried out using the Netzsch 449-F5 system. The Ar purge gas passes over the sample at 240 mL min−1, and the heating rate is 5 °C min−1 during the TGA measurement. The UV-vis absorption spectra (350–850 nm) were recorded using a spectrophotometer (UH4150, Hitachi, Japan) with the background-subtracted before testing. During the spectral acquisitions, the perovskite films were exposed to the air for less than 5 min. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was carried out using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS1000 photoluminescence spectrometer (Edinburg, UK). All TRPL-related tests were acquired by a pulsed laser with the excitation wavelength of 450 nm after 120 second illumination.
Author contributions
D. L., R. Z., and Z.-H. L. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. J. H., D. L., and D. W. contributed to XPS, UPS, and REELS results. N. C. contributed to the energy level alignment at the perovskite–organic interfaces. P. C. fabricated the PSCs and all samples for characterization. P. C. and S. L. characterized the photovoltaic performances and device stabilities. L. D. contributed to the TA results under the supervision of S. D. S. Z. F. and S. Y. conducted the XRD measurements. J. H. conducted the TGA analysis. D. L., R. Z., S. D. S, Q. G., and Z.-H. L. directed and supervised the project. J. H. and P. C. wrote the first draft of the paper. D. L. and Z.-H. L. revised the paper. All authors analyzed the data and reviewed and commented on the paper.
Conflicts of interest
S. D. S. is a co-founder of Swift Solar, Inc.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Z. Wang from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto (Canada), for the helpful suggestions on 2D perovskites, X. Li from the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology (USA), for valuable discussion on surface chemical reactions, and C. Qin from the School of Physics at Henan Normal University (China) for his help with the transient absorption experiments and helpful discussion. This work is supported by the International Joint Research Center for Optoelectronic and Energy Materials and Key Laboratory of Yunnan Provincial Higher Education Institutions for Optoelectronics Device Engineering, Beijing Natural Science Foundation (JQ21005), the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFB3800100 and 2021YFB3800101), National Natural Science Foundation of China (12164052), the open research fund of Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory (2022SLABFK07), and the R&D Fruit Fund (20210001).
References
H. Min, D. Y. Lee, J. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Paik, Y. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2021, 598, 444–450 CrossRef .
N. Li, X. Niu, L. Li, H. Wang, Z. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, C. Zhu, H. Zai, Y. Bai, S. Ma, H. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Guo, G. Liu, R. Fan, H. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Lun, X. Wang, J. Hong, H. Xie, D. S. Jakob, X. G. Xu, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Science, 2021, 373, 561–567 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Zhang, X. Guo, C. Lu, J. Wei and J. Fang, Science, 2022, 375, 434–437 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Gratzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, S. Zhang, C. J. Hages, D. Rothhardt, S. Albrecht, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, T. Unold and D. Neher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 847–854 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, X. Li, A. Dumont, H. Yu and Z. H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2006004 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. McGott, C. P. Muzzillo, C. L. Perkins, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu, J. N. Duenow, E. Colegrove, C. A. Wolden and M. O. Reese, Joule, 2021, 5, 1057–1073 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, R. Liang, M. Ge, G. Sun, Y. Zhang and G. Xing, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, e2105635 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lin, J. Xu, M. Wei, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, Z. Liu, J. Wu, K. Xiao, B. Chen, S. M. Park, G. Chen, H. R. Atapattu, K. R. Graham, J. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nature, 2022, 603, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Teale, B. Chen, Y. Hou, L. Grater, T. Zhu, K. Bertens, S. M. Park, H. R. Atapattu, Y. Gao, M. Wei, A. K. Johnston, Q. Zhou, K. Xu, D. Yu, C. Han, T. Cui, E. H. Jung, C. Zhou, W. Zhou, A. H. Proppe, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, T. Filleter, K. R. Graham, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Brinkmann, T. Becker, F. Zimmermann, C. Kreusel, T. Gahlmann, M. Theisen, T. Haeger, S. Olthof, C. Tuckmantel, M. Gunster, T. Maschwitz, F. Gobelsmann, C. Koch, D. Hertel, P. Caprioglio, F. Pena-Camargo, L. Perdigon-Toro, A. Al-Ashouri, L. Merten, A. Hinderhofer, L. Gomell, S. Zhang, F. Schreiber, S. Albrecht, K. Meerholz, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht and T. Riedl, Nature, 2022, 604, 280–286 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Kim, H. Sato, Y. Ohkura, A. Ishii and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2102856 CrossRef .
C. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Du, Q. Chen, Z. Song, G. Li, X. Wang, J. Lin, W. Sun, M. Huang, Y. Huang, P. Gao and Z. Lan, Small Methods, 2021, 5, e2101000 CrossRef .
M. Degani, Q. An, M. Albaladejo-Siguan, Y. J. Hofstetter, C. Cho, F. Paulus, G. Grancini and Y. Vaynzof, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabj7930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, A. Johnston, S. Teale, A. Mahata, R. Quintero-Bermudez, E. H. Jung, L. Grater, T. Cui, T. Filleter, C. Y. Kim, S. O. Kelley, F. De Angelis and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herterich, C. Baretzky, M. Unmüssig, C. Maheu, N. Glissmann, J. Gutekunst, G. Loukeris, T. Mayer, M. Kohlstädt, J. P. Hofmann and U. Würfel, Sol. RRL, 2022, 6, 2200195 CrossRef .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 5, 44–60 CrossRef .
R. Chen, S. Liu, X. Xu, F. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Tian, Z. Yang, X. Guanz, Z. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Han, Y. Qi and W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2567–2580 RSC .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Z. He, B. Zhou, D. Qu, Y. Wang, H. Hu, Q. Hu and Y. Tu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 444, 136622 CrossRef .
R. Azmi, E. Ugur, A. Seitkhan, F. Aljamaan, A. S. Subbiah, J. Liu, G. T. Harrison, M. I. Nugraha, M. K. Eswaran, M. Babics, Y. Chen, F. Xu, T. G. Allen, A. U. Rehman, C. L. Wang, T. D. Anthopoulos, U. Schwingenschlogl, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin and S. De Wolf, Science, 2022, 376, 73–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Y. Park, C. Yao, H. Lu, S. P. Dunfield, C. Xiao, S. Ulicna, X. Zhao, L. Du Hill, X. Chen, X. Wang, L. E. Mundt, K. H. Stone, L. T. Schelhas, G. Teeter, S. Parkin, E. L. Ratcliff, Y. L. Loo, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan, B. W. Larson and K. Zhu, Science, 2022, 375, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gharibzadeh, P. Fassl, I. M. Hossain, P. Rohrbeck, M. Frericks, M. Schmidt, T. Duong, M. R. Khan, T. Abzieher, B. A. Nejand, F. Schackmar, O. Almora, T. Feeney, R. Singh, D. Fuchs, U. Lemmer, J. P. Hofmann, S. A. L. Weber and U. W. Paetzold, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5875–5893 RSC .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, T. Wang and Y. Zhao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2065–2075 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J. E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, R. Sabatini, G. Walters, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, Y. Li, J. Z. Fan, H. Tan, J. Pan, M. Yuan, O. M. Bakr, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3701–3709 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. Deng, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
X. Liu, T. Webb, L. Dai, K. Ji, J. A. Smith, R. C. Kilbride, M. Yavari, J. Bi, A. Ren, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, G. Shao, S. J. Sweeney, S. Hinder, H. Li, D. G. Lidzey, S. D. Stranks, N. C. Greenham, S. R. P. Silva and W. Zhang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, 5, 670–682 CrossRef .
R. J. Hamers, R. M. Tromp and J. E. Demuth, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 1972–1975 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Göpel, R. S. Bauer and G. Hansson, Surf. Sci., 1980, 99, 138–156 CrossRef .
J. Euvrard, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 531–549 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, D. Wang, J. Hu, L. Guan and Z.-H. Lu, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2021, 259, 2100459 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02698h‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Stabilizing perovskite surfaces with favorable electronic levels, which can form a barrier-free interface when in contact with the adjacent charge-carrier extraction layer, play a key role in realizing efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Perovskite surface functionalization by passivating electronic defects has been broadly adopted using large bulky cations. When the perovskite surfaces are treated using large bulky cations, perovskite solar cells with n–i–p and p–i–n configurations exhibit record-breaking device performance. Though these large bulky cations (such as PEA+) are thought to form 2D/quasi-2D perovskites on the perovskite absorbers, it is unclear how these complicated surface chemical reactions happen using in situ characterization techniques. In situ surface-sensitive photoemission spectroscopy can concurrently probe both chemical and electronic structures of perovskite surfaces and interfaces over different temperatures, and thus can provide insight into the perovskite surfaces and heterojunctions. Herein, we studied the chemistry and electronic structure of PEA bulky organic ligands on CsFAPbI3 perovskite surfaces. Upon high-temperature annealing, the halogens of physisorbed organics can be removed, and halogen-cleaved-off organic ligands are anchored to the perovskites causing n-type doping. The PEA+ anchored perovskite surfaces have proven beneficial for forming favorable band alignment and stabilizing perovskite surfaces, thereby resulting in improved burn-in device degradation.


 	Fig. 1  Evidence of thermal evaporation of halogenated PEA organics on the perovskites. (A) Evolution of the N 1s XPS spectra of the halogenated PEA organic layer on the perovskite surfaces upon annealing at temperatures from 30 °C to 100 °C. The deconvoluted N 1s spectra showing PEA (phenylethylammonium) and FA (formamidinium) contributions are shown in (B–D) for chlorinated-, brominated-, and iodinated-PEA organics, respectively. (E) The N 1s XPS spectra of the 100 °C annealed perovskites after cluster ion beam etching for 60 s, which removes ∼1 nm surface organic layers. The disappearance of the PEA peak indicates that the PEA organics are on the perovskite surfaces only. More details about the N 1s XPS spectra and corresponding curve fitting results are provided in Fig. S2–S4 (ESI†). (F) Schematic illustration of trimming the halogenated PEA organics by annealing.	 

 	Fig. 2  Experimental demonstration of halogen cleavage and organic anchoring on perovskite surfaces. (A–C) Evolutions of the halogen (Cl 2p, Br 3d, and I 3d) XPS spectra of the various organics on the perovskites annealed from 30 °C to 100 °C. The Cl and Br signals are absent on 100 °C annealed samples. The persistent I 3d signal on the iodinated-PEA-organics stems from the perovskite. Curve-fitted C 1s spectra of chlorinated- (D), brominated- (E), and (F) iodinated-PEA organics annealed at various temperatures as shown. The C 1s spectra were normalized to the C–C peak intensity. Note that the ratio of C–C (284.8 eV) to C–N (286.6 eV) is a constant for all annealing temperatures (shown in Table S2, ESI†), indicating that the benzene ring and alkylammonium from PEA organics remain intact before and after halogen cleavage. The evolutions of C 1s, Pb 4f, and Cs 3d signals are provided in detail in Fig. S7 (ESI†). (G) Transient absorption (TA) maps and (H) TA spectra of the perovskite treated with chlorinated PEA organics (Pump, 400 nm, 6.4 μJ cm−2). GSB, ground-state bleach. (I) Schematic illustration of thermally-activated halogen-cleaved PEA ligands anchoring on perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 3  Effects of halogen-cleaved PEA cations on the electronic structures, Fermi level position, and photovoltaic performance. (A) I 3d5/2 XPS spectra of the perovskites before and after halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. All PEA anchored samples show a consistent core level energy shift (∼0. 2 eV) toward higher binding energies, indicating an upward change in Fermi levels, i.e., n-type doping. (B) UPS spectra of perovskites with and without halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. The valence band maximum (VBM) with respect to the Fermi level (EF) and work function (Φ) are indicated. SECO, secondary electron cut-off. (C) Energy levels of the perovskite surfaces with and without halogen-cleaved PEA anchoring. EB, the binding energy of I 3d5/2 core levels. (D) Comparison of the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics for PSCs with perovskite surfaces activated under the different temperatures. The gray dash is a J–V curve for the reference device without any treatments on the perovskite surfaces. (E) J–V curves of PSCs with Cl-cleaved PEA anchoring (100 °C) were obtained from the reverse scan and forward scan. (F) Stabilized power outputs (SPO) tracking at maximum power point under the full AM 1.5G sunlight illumination. The gray dash is the SPO of the reference PSC device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy-level alignment at the perovskite/C60 hetero-interface. In situ UPS spectra C60 on perovskites. (A) Untreated perovskite/C60 (reference). (B) Chlorinated-PEA treated perovskite/C60 (60 °C). (C) Cl-cleaved-PEA treated perovskite/C60 (100 °C). The simplified energy-level diagram at perovskite/C60 interfaces is shown as (D), (E), and (F), respectively. The labels for various energy levels are the valence band maximum (EVBM) of perovskites, the conduction band minimum (ECBM) of perovskites, the vacuum level (EVAC), interfacial dipole (Δ), valence band offsets (ΔEVBM), highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) of C60, and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO). Red ellipsoids highlight the changes in CBM energy offsets in eV.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02698h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
