Beyond artificial photosynthesis: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9FD90022E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9FD90022E
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 422-438Beyond artificial photosynthesis: general discussion

        
          
            Ryu 
            Abe
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mark 
            Bajada
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthias 
            Beller
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew B. 
            Bocarsly
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Julea N. 
            Butt
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Flavia 
            Cassiola
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Domcke
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            James R. 
            Durrant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stelios 
            Gavrielides
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Leif 
            Hammarström
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marta C. 
            Hatzell
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Burkhard 
            König
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Akihiko 
            Kudo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Moritz F. 
            Kuehnel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ava 
            Lage
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chong-Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marcelino 
            Maneiro
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shelley D. 
            Minteer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Aubrey R. 
            Paris
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nicolas 
            Plumeré
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joost N. H. 
            Reek
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Erwin 
            Reisner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Souvik 
            Roy
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christoph 
            Schnedermann
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ravi 
            Shankar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sergii I. 
            Shylin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wilson A. 
            Smith
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Han Sen 
            Soo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Wagner
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dominik 
            Wielend
          
        
      
First published on 24th June 2019

Christoph Schnedermann opened a discussion of the paper by Burkhard König: In a broader context, it would be desirable to move towards a more holistic approach by simultaneously optimising the reaction yield and reducing the required photon input. Could you comment on the quantum yields you observe in this and related reactions and how you could potentially optimise them?
Related to the first question, I was wondering if you have considered transitioning from a homogeneous photoredox catalytic system towards a heterogeneous platform and what potential bottlenecks you can envision regarding stability, reaction yield and efficiency?

Burkhard König replied: Photons are used as a reagent in photocatalytic organic synthesis; the quantum yield is therefore of importance. We have not determined the quantum yield of the reported reaction, but for many other organic transformations. Typically for reactions involving radical chain mechanisms good quantum yields, often much larger than 1, are observed. Photocatalytic reactions that require excitation for each catalytic cycle typically show rather small quantum yields, often 0.01 or less. Many photons are wasted and it is certainly a future challenge to design photocatalytic systems that utilize photons more efficiently.
Heterogeneous photocatalysts are more practical than homogeneous photocatalysts, e.g. in terms of recycling, separation from the reaction mixture and often stability. So far the number of heterogeneous photocatalysts that have been used in organic synthesis is much smaller than homogeneous photocatalysts, but this may change in the future. The current bottleneck is the limited overlap between materials science (developing potential heterogeneous photocatalysts) and organic synthesis.

Erwin Reisner asked: What is the prospect of using solar irradiation instead of LEDs to drive organic photochemistry?

Burkhard König responded: The intensity of solar irradiation changes when it is overcast. A weather-dependent chemical yield would complicate synthesis. Most chemical plants operate 24/7, but there is no solar irradiation at night to drive the reactions. There may be special applications of simple solar synthesis in some sunny countries, but for photocatalytic chemical production LED light sources are the way to go.

Han Sen Soo remarked: I really appreciate the fact that we are finally bringing together the communities of artificial photosynthesis and photoredox catalysis. I am personally interested in utilizing photoredox catalysis as part of the half-reactions in artificial photosynthesis. Regarding the photoreduction catalysis in the paper, I noticed that Cs2CO3 is the optimal catalyst and there seems to be an equilibrium between the phenolate form and the anthrone. Is it not possible to generate and isolate the phenolate form with a strong base and fully characterize the photophysical properties of that photosensitizer? And why do the soluble bases such as the amines perform worse?

Burkhard König replied: The base has two roles in our reaction system: (1) it deprotonates the anthrone to the anthronate, the active photocatalyst, and (2) it neutralizes the HCl, which is a stoichiometric by-product of the reaction. In selecting the best base we had to consider the basicity, the solubility in the reaction mixture and the redox potential of the base. Basic amines are often easy to oxidize and can therefore not be used.
We did not made any attempts to isolate the anthronate anion in pure form.

Han Sen Soo asked: This is a follow-up question. Would the use of a stoichiometric amount of a strong base such as potassium tert-butoxide and the addition of a different base also provide the same yields?

Burkhard König answered: Likely yes, but we have not tried such an approach.

Michael Grätzel commented: I wonder about the turnover numbers that can be reached with the molecular catalysts employed in photo-redox catalysis.

Burkhard König responded: The TON that can be achieved with a molecular photocatalyst depends very much on the catalyst itself, the photocatalytic reaction and the reaction conditions. Numbers vary between 10 and 10000.

Michael Grätzel asked: I wonder how you separate the various products formed during the photo-redox catalytic activation of arylchlorides. Is the sensitizer recuperated from the mixture?

Burkhard König replied: After reaction work-up, flash column chromatography was used to separate remaining or dehalogenated starting material, trapping reagent and sensitizer from the desired products. As most of the employed sensitizers are prone to oxidation in alkaline media and in the presence of air, we could isolate the corresponding anthraquinones in most of the cases. However, GC-MS (EI) analysis of the crude reaction mixtures verified the presence of the anthrone-sensitizers.

Wilson Smith opened a discussion of the paper by Marta C. Hatzell: Really interesting to use RRDE for product detection, that should be an interesting approach moving forward to solve issues with product detection.
My question is about the reaction mechanism you show in your presentation. There, you show that di-nitrogen becomes hydrogenated, where a lot of literature shows that nitrogen needs to adsorb then dissociate, and mono-nitrogen is the active site for hydrogenation. Can you comment on these two pathways, and why you think you have direct hydrogenation of di-nitrogen before nitrogen dissociation?

Marta Hatzell responded: Yes, there are numerous pathways for nitrogen to be fixed, however, most predict that nitrogen reduction occurs through an associative pathway at room temperature and pressure. Currently the proposed reaction pathway in our recent paper1 suggests a dissociation based pathway may be possible with the carbon radical. We note however that this is a working hypothesis, and we are still exploring if it is practically possible.
1 B. M. Comer, Y.-H. Liu, M. B. Dixit, K. B. Hatzell, Y. Ye, E. J. Crumlin, M. C. Hatzell and A. J. Medford, The Role of Adventitious Carbon in Photo-catalytic Nitrogen Fixation by Titania, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(45), 15157–15160.

Ava Lage asked: Did you conduct any further characterisation of the recycled catalyst in order to obtain more detailed information on the proposed structural changes, particularly the adsorbed methoxy- or ‘other oxidised carbon’ species in phase 3?

Marta Hatzell responded: Not at this point in time. We have only indirectly observed the catalyst structure through ex situ measurements such as FTIR. We are looking into other approaches to try to explore this reaction in situ, but have not started these tests yet.

Ravi Shankar said: You mentioned that you’ll be doing some EPR measurements soon. We have done some measurements of our own – what exactly are you hoping to see? Are you looking for a particular paramagnetic signature or will you be doing pulsed measurements to determine lifetimes?

Marta Hatzell replied: We are interested in investigating the role photogenerated CH3 radical species play in the nitrogen photofixation process. We have designed a series of experiments to evaluate how CH3 species are photogenerated from various hydrocarbon feed sources in an argon environment. After this, we plan to explore how the carbon radicals interact with a nitrogen gas. Finally, EPR will also enable us to begin to explore the role of oxygen vacancies on the nitrogen photofixation.

Ravi Shankar asked: Going forward, what are the next steps and the key challenges that you envision for this project?

Marta Hatzell responded: The most immediate challenge is in confirming experimentally the theorized catalytic pathway. In addition, we need to begin to explore if there are additional active sites working in concert with carbon radicals to promote nitrogen photofixation. Long-term there is also a need to design catalysts with a high density of these identified actives sites to promote higher rates of ammonia production.

Shelley Minteer remarked: During your presentation, you brought up concerns about contamination/importance of controls/etc. This is also a huge issue in the electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction area, as shown from many recent reviews. How are you verifying that the ammonia detected is produced from nitrogen gas?

Marta Hatzell responded: Currently we utilize multiple methods to confirm our results. We use spectrometric approaches, ion chromatography and rotating ring disk electrode experiments. Ideally confirmation through multiple methods provides a degree of certainty that our measurements are correct. We are also looking into exploring the use of isotope labeled gases.

Andreas Wagner remarked: Regarding your RRDE experiments to quantify ammonia, shown in Fig. 2 of the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00191j): have you done any concentration dependent experiments to perform a linear calibration and be certain that this peak is from NH4+ oxidation?

Marta Hatzell responded: We have conducted these experiments and are able to discern differences in the peak height and area as a function of the ammonia concentration.

Moritz F. Kuehnel asked: Could you comment on the reliability of your electrochemical ammonia detection. How do you know that the observed current is actually due to ammonia oxidation and not due to oxidation of some other species in solution? Do you think this approach is more reliable than other methods for quantifying NH3, such as ion chromatography?

Marta Hatzell responded: We are fairly certain that the peak is ammonia, however, we are investigating this further through a series of tests. We think that the precision and detection limits for ammonia may be more ideal than chromatography or UV/Vis, but are also working to confirm this. We do not envision that this technique will displace other state of the art techniques. Rather we believe that it can complement other techniques. Ultimately we are always looking for multiple techniques that can confirm our findings, and rotating ring disk experiments can aid with this goal.

Flavia Cassiola remarked: The paper is an inspiring revisit to a system reported quite some ago for photocatalytic N2 fixation. As you pursue simplicity and what you well called frugal engineering, how is the stability of your system coming along? Is your system robust enough (stability and durability) for this concept (simplicity)? What are the developments envisioned for improving stability?

Marta Hatzell answered: Our system is stable, but we have not conducted lifetime tests. In addition, we are currently running in batch mode operation. If we start to investigate longer continuous flow operations we may begin to see catalyst instability and a broad range of products (decrease in selectivity). We know that ammonia can be oxidized on the photocatalyst, and therefore designing the system to prevent back reactions is critical for future system design.

Leif Hammarström opened a discussion of the paper by Joost N. H. Reek: Does your “box” acceptor ever dissociate from the dye after charge separation, or does it rather work as a stationary acceptor group?
Did you record IV-curves? If so, did you see higher open-circuit voltage indicating less recombination (and possibly better fill factors)?

Joost Reek responded: As the current system indeed requires MV and ring-type (“box”) compounds as redox mediator, we cannot exclude that the box works as a stationary acceptor only (based on experiments done so far). We are working on systems that can work solely with ring-type mediators, which may lead to more insight into this question.
The IV curve of the system that includes the ring is reported in the ESI of the paper. We didn’t include the IV curve of the system that only contains MV as quality of the device (and the IV curve) didn’t allow us to draw any conclusions. These type of experiments will be performed with the next generation systems in which photocurrents are much higher, and as a result the IV curve contains more sound information.

Michael Grätzel commented: The sequence of electron transfer reaction induced by light in p-type dye sensitized solar cells you postulated is that the electron is first transferred to the viologene moieties associated with the box and subsequently to freely diffusing methylviologen in solution. Based on redox potentials the second step would encounter a free energy barrier. Could you please comment ?

Joost Reek answered: We have measured the redox properties of the ring and MV, and using the Nernst equilibrium, these potentials and the concentration of the components you can calculate that electron transfer is feasible under the applied conditions. This is described in the ESI of the paper. Still, it would be better to have a system that doesn’t need a second redox couple (such as MV in the current system), and we are currently working on that.

Ryu Abe remarked: I was impressed by your study in which a recognition part was introduced to catch and release the box-type redox mediator to control the direction of electron transfer in a p-type dye-sensitized photolectrochemical cell. However, the present system still requires the conventional methyl viologen as the second redox mediator along with the box-one. I understood this unfavorable use of methyl viologen is derived from the fact that the dye molecules were readily desorbed from the surface of NiO when the concentration of box-type shuttle redox mediator was increased. Thus, to achieve your final goal, you must fix the dye molecules rigidly. Do you have any idea for fixing such dye molecules on the surface of p-type NiO?

Joost Reek responded: There are several options to improve the binding of the dye to the NiO surface. One can change the anchoring group from carboxylic acid to a hydroxyamide or a phosphite, and it has been reported that these anchoring groups lead to stronger binding. Another option would be to increase the number of anchoring groups. We will consider these modifications to the dye. Also, initial studies using a neutral version of the ring show that the presence of excess of this ring doesn’t lead to leaching. So the first experiments will be focused on this ring.

Matthias Beller commented: You have shown that supramolecular surrounding improved one of your systems by factor of 100. In principle this improvement is due to secondary function or stability. With regards to improving the rate of reaction: are there a lot of works on improving stability, e.g. by putting additional shielding around such systems?. Do you know if it is a stability or activity effect that acts?

Joost Reek replied: For the system I showed today the effect is clearly an activity effect. The water oxidation reaction with this catalyst is second order in ruthenium, and as such pre-organization of these catalysts result in rate acceleration. More generally, we have studied many different catalysts in cages, and we have also seen effects on stability. For example, in a recent ChemComm paper1 we describe a hydrogenase model in a cage, which cannot disproportionate because of the encapsulation, leading to higher stabilities. I think that catalyst encapsulation therefore is a more general strategy that may be beneficial for many different reactions, and further exploration is worthwhile.
1 S. S. Nurttila, R. Zaffaroni, S. Mathew and J. N. H. Reek, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3081–3084.

Nicolas Plumeré asked: Can you use electrochemical methods to better understand the function of the viologen cage? Is it possible to detect the redox signals of the surface confined viologens? Is the viologen cage really departing the surface upon reduction or is it instead facilitating charge transfer to the methyl viologen in solution without dissociation from the photosensitizers?

Joost Reek answered: Electrochemistry is a powerful tool to get more information on the system. Unfortunately, electrochemistry using the NiO semiconductor material is impossible in the window of interest because of the properties of the semiconductor. When immobilised on gold, you should be able to see the redox signals of the viologen box, in which case you could confirm that the viologen box leaves the ring upon reduction. In related work by Willner (ref. 1) a similar principle on a rotaxane was demonstrated in which viologen box changes station on the rotaxane upon electrochemical reduction.
It is difficult to prove experimentally that the viologen box dissociates upon reduction, rather than that charge transfer occurs to the free viologen without leaving the station (see other comment). We are working on a new system that doesn’t need the additional viologen, which should be easier to understand.
1 E. Katz, O. Lioubashevsky and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(47), 15520–15532.

Michael Grätzel asked: I wonder about the sequential electron transfer postulated for the sensitization process. According to your mechanism the electron is first transferred from the p-type sensitizer to the viologen on the box and from there to the methylviologen which is freely diffused in solution. I would expect that this second transfer has a substantial energy barrier as the redox potential of the viologene on the box is more positive than that of the methylviologen. Hence the eletron could get stuck on the box.

Joost Reek replied: We have measured the redox properties of the ring and MV, and using the Nernst equilibrium, these potentials and the concentration of the components you can calculate that electron transfer is feasible under the applied conditions. This is described in the ESI of the paper. Still, it would be better to have a system that doesn’t need a second redox couple (such as MV in the current system), and we are currently working on that.

Sergii Shylin opened a discussion of the paper by Stelios Gavrielides: Your paper is a nice example of work driven by the concept of carbon neutrality in the chemical industry. However, the main drawback of industrial emissions as a source of CO2 for synthesis is steam, which accompanies CO2 wastes. Combustion of natural gas produces two H2O per one CO2 molecule. This gas mixture can be roughly separated by distillation, but further drying of CO2 may be challenging on an industrial scale. How sensitive is your reaction (coupling of CO2 and epoxides) to water traces?

Stelios Gavrielides answered: The reaction is not significantly sensitive to water traces. The Ru-TiO2 HBN photocatalyst is also tolerant to H2O traces. The addition of water in this reaction has been reported in the literature, with organocatalytic systems, where it was used as a co-catalyst to activate the CO2/epoxide coupling by enhancing the homogeneous catalyst’s (phosphonium halides, ammonium, etc.) solubility.

Matthias Beller commented: There are a number of applications at the moment, even on an industrial scale, that use waste stream from factories, e.g. polycarbonates. I think that taking water out of the waste stream is no problem, the problem is the stability of the catalysts. Is it really the light, or Lewis function of the TiO2, that does the reaction?

Stelios Gavrielides responded: I agree, taking the water out of the system is not difficult, but also not a necessity because the reaction is not particularly sensitive to small amounts of water. To eliminate doubts related to the origin of the reaction, we conducted control experiments (Fig. 8 in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/c8fd00181b)), under dark conditions, in the presence of photocatalyst, keeping temperature and pressure the same. The photocatalyst was not activated in this case, and we could observe no cyclic carbonate conversion. However, more research is needed in order to gain a better understanding of the reaction pathways.

Matthias Beller commented: Have you ever tried to make polycarbonates?

Stelios Gavrielides replied: We haven’t tried to generate polycarbonates yet. Based on the FTIR results alone, we were worried that polycarbonates might be a side product of this reaction, however, after recent NMR spectroscopy of the product, it shows our product is purely cyclic carbonates. However, since polycarbonates are very valuable chemicals we might in the future try to generate polycarbonates as well.

Michael Grätzel commented: Maybe TiO2 is not involved in the photocatalytic process and acts just as a support for the RuO2 catalyst. RuO2 is black so it does absorb light but due to its metallic character the photo-excited carriers live only for a short time i.e. at most a few picoseconds in this material. Hence the chances are slim that they would induce a chemical reaction.

Stelios Gavrielides answered: The control experiments indicated that the loading of RuO2 onto TiO2 worked as the photocatalytic site for the photogeneration of PC although the working mechanism is unclear at this stage and under investigation. Additionally the control experiment using the as-prepared TiO2 HBN shows a small conversion of CCs which suggests that TiO2 alone demonstrated better performance than the no-photocatalyst control experiment. Furthermore, the quantum confinement effect of our photocatalyst transforms the band gap from continuous to discrete, which should in principle delay the recombination rate therefore allowing the photo-excited charges enough time to be used in a chemical reaction, at least to some extent. Relevant information can be found in the listed references.1–3
1 W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. Rao, H.-L. Feng, X.-D. Guo, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 6–11.
2 I. Musa, F. Massuyeau, L. Cario, J. L. Duvail, S. Jobic, P. Deniard and E. Faulques, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 243107.
3 M. B. Nardelli, K. Rapcewicz and J. Bernholc, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 3135.

Ravi Shankar remarked: You mentioned that when you changed the morphology of your material, you observed a change in the band gap. Could you please elaborate a bit more on this? Which morphology change did you observe?

Stelios Gavrielides responded: We are referring to the hyper-branched morphology that was achieved, with the TiO2 HBNs, which creates a 3D nanostructured nanorod with nano-branches growing on all sides. These nano-branches have a thickness of 5–20 nm. The bandgap of anatase phase TiO2 in bulk is 3.2 eV. The band gap was found to be widened significantly with this morphology and was calculated to be 3.6 eV. This is attributed to the quantum confinement effect, which is essentially the transition of the continuous energy bands of bulk material to discrete atomic-like energy levels, which has as an effect the band-gap widening and consequently a hypsochromic shift. In more detail, the valence and conduction bands of the semiconductor are no longer continuous and the excited charges are not able to move freely. In other words, the geometrical constraints affect the electron energy. This is observed when the size of a particle is small enough to be in the same magnitude as the de Broglie wavelength of the electron wave function. The quantum confinement effect can change the optical and electronic properties of solids.

Dominik Wielend asked: I have two questions regarding the method and analysis of your FTIR data shown:
Did you record them in a transmission cell configuration or in an ATR configuration?
And regarding the quantification/selectivity values you reported: did you only consider the transmittance values of the band at 1800 cm−1 or a combination/ratio of the 1100 and 1800 cm−1 bands?

Stelios Gavrielides responded: The reaction solution was measured using an ATR configuration. As mentioned in the paper, the quantification is an estimation since FTIR is not a quantification technique. The values considered were only the values of the 1800 cm−1 that correspond to the functional group of the cyclic carbonate. However, ongoing characterisation of the reaction solution using NMR shows that the measurements were fairly accurate; we are currently working on getting more quantifiable information regarding the conversion and yield as well as possible by-products.

Matthias Beller opened the general discussion of the papers by Burkhard König, Marta Hatzell, Joost Reek and Stelios Gavrielides: Considering Dr König’s talk: his presentation showed that photocatalysis offers nice possibilities for organic synthesis, which is one of the hottest fields at the moment. These are two very active fields. What can the different fields/communities learn from each other? What can we gain by bringing them together?

Joost Reek replied: That is a good question. I think that the field of photocatalysis for synthesis can learn from the artificial photosynthesis field in the area of device design, materials, and strategies to achieve high efficiencies. In turn, I think that the artificial photosynthesis field is very much focused on water oxidation and proton/CO2 reduction, whereas there may be many possibilities for energy storage out there that have not been considered (maybe only for smaller scales). So I think that it would be good to keep on bringing these fields together.

Burkhard König replied: I believe both fields can learn and benefit a lot from each other, but there is a gap to bridge. Many materials originally developed for solar fuel applications (hydrogen generation, carbon dioxide utilization etc.) may be of high value for organic synthesis. However, the functional group compatibility and the stability of photocatalytic materials in organic reaction mixtures (containing radicals, electrophiles, nucleophiles) may be challenges.

Wolfgang Domcke remarked: In my view, there is an important difference between light-driven photochemical transformations, for example synthesis of fine chemicals, and the oxidation of water and the reduction of carbon dioxide. The latter two reactions are among the most difficult chemical reactions, since water and carbon dioxide are exceptionally stable and therefore are exceptionally difficult to activate. It is timely to get away from sacrificial reagents and address the real challenges, that is, the oxidation of exactly water and the reduction of exactly carbon dioxide with visible light and without the consumption of other chemicals.

Burkhard König responded: I agree that sacrificial agents should be avoided in any reaction. For photochemical transformations in synthesis it is important to note that there are, in addition to photooxidation and photoreduction, which require a sacrificial oxidant or reductant, many redox-neutral transformations, e.g. ATRA reactions, (cyclo)addition or cross-coupling reactions. Such redox-neutral reactions in synthesis do not require sacrificial reagents.

Michael Grätzel commented: Heterogeneous photo-redox catalysis has the advantage over the homogeneous approach in that the products can be readily separated from the catalyst. For example we have published recently together with our colleague Professor Xile Hu and his coworkers a paper in Nature Catalysis where we showed that the CH amination of arenes is photo-electrocatalyzed by a simple mesoscopic Fe2O3 electrode.1
1 L. Zhang, L. Liardet, J. Luo, D. Ren, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 366–373.

Stelios Gavrielides replied: We agree that the heterogeneous photocatalytic approach has significant advantages over the homogeneous counterparts. This was the rationale of using the FTO-grafted photocatalyst for easy separation. Congratulations on a very important and informative paper.

Erwin Reisner addressed Burkhard König: You have mentioned the more complex reaction space in organic photochemistry compared to the simple transformations in artificial photosynthesis. I would like to add another point of view: Organic photochemistry is commonly employing radical chemistry initiated by single-electron transfer events to execute exothermic reactions. In contrast, artificial photosynthesis deals with multi-proton/electron processes, which are also highly endothermic. The latter should therefore be recognised as both thermodynamically and kinetically complex.

Burkhard König responded: I agree that currently the majority of photocatalytic organic synthesis involves radical reactions and radical or radical ion intermediates. And in most reported reactions the light energy input is used to overcome kinetic barriers of overall exothermic reactions. However, there is no reason not to develop organic reactions involving more than one electron and photon, including endothermic transformations. We do this in our research projects.

Souvik Roy addressed Burkhard König: What’s your thought about using the molecular sensitizers as building blocks to build porous materials – then the photocatalysis will occur in cages/confined spaces which will offer scope for tuning the environment.

Burkhard König responded: This is an interesting suggestion combining the selectivity of photocatalytic activation (according to the redox potentials) with confined reaction space as a second element of control. However, the close proximity of the chromophores may alter their photophysical properties and the photochemical stability of some organic dyes may not be good enough for such a material approach to photocatalysis.

Julea Butt addressed Stelios Gavrielides and Joost Reek: An aspect of biological photosynthesis that can provide inspiration for strategies in artificial photosynthesis is the precise spatial arrangement of redox centres having different properties. This facilitates charge separation, and the coupling of single photon events to catalytic chemistry typically requiring multiple electrons. It seems the molecules you describe lend themselves to integration within 3D assemblies that could mimic these aspects of biological photosystems. I welcome your thoughts on the feasibility and utility of such an approach.

Stelios Gavrielides responded: Yes, indeed the spatial arrangement of redox centers would facilitate the charge separation. Further investigation in this regard on the material we have is being undertaken.

Joost Reek replied: I think this is an excellent remark. One of the reasons that the Natural system works so well is that all the molecular components required for photosynthesis are precisely organised in space. Supramolecular chemistry also allows such precise organization of molecules just by programming the building blocks with molecular information that leads to the self assembly. Today’s paper is a simple demonstration of that, but you can imagine that more complex systems are also accessible via supramolecular assembly strategies. It will take some time and effort, however, to get where we want. I would like to stimulate other scientists to also think about these type of strategies.

Mark Bajada addressed Burkhard König: I agree that using the whole visible (solar) spectrum for the purposes of organic synthesis doesn’t make much sense, and from a chemical selectivity perspective, it’s better to use LEDs of a specific wavelength. But if we use PVs to generate electricity, which we then use to power an LED of a particular wavelength in order to drive a chemical reaction, why not circumvent the use of LEDs altogether and just look into organic electrochemical synthesis; a field which is also growing rapidly at the moment? Is this research being carried out in your lab?

Burkhard König replied: Electrocatalysis and photocatalysis both use electron transfer for the activation of molecules; therefore similar types of organic transformations can be performed. However, there is one striking difference between the two approaches, at least if we compare electrocatalysis with homogeneous photocatalysis. In electrocatalysis we need solid electrodes and the electron has to cross the solid to liquid phase boundary; in homogeneous photocatalysis the molecular photocatalyst acts as the electron donor or acceptor and no phase boundary has to be crossed. The selection of electrode material, its surface structure and modification is of key importance for stability and performance in electrocatalytic synthesis.
Like many labs around the globe we also look into combinations of photocatalysis with electrocatalysis.

Leif Hammarström remarked: Another difference between photoredox catalysis and electrochemical catalysis is that the latter can often lead to multi-electron redox reactions, as the initial radicals are often easier to oxidize/reduce than the starting material. In photoredox catalysis, this can be controlled as it usually involves single-electron redox initiators.

Burkhard König responded: This is correct. However, electrocatalysis in return has the advantage to offer a wide range of potentials for the electron transfer. Both methods have advantages and limitations.

Matthias Beller addressed Marta Hatzell: With regards to the efficiency, 4.1% should be commercially viable. Ammonia is abundant and so this is very interesting for large scale/general applications. What is the timescale for this to be a proper technology? What does the market space look like at low level?

Marta Hatzell responded: We currently do not know what efficiency would aid in promoting commercial viability, as cost would also be a significant issue. We anticipate that low solar-to-ammonia efficiencies may be acceptable due to the rate at which nutrients are utilized. We also intend to look into estimating capital and operating costs to better assess the viability of solar driven fertilizer production. Currently there is little market for dilute fertilizers as the cost to ship dilute fertilizers prohibits their use. However, if produced at the site of use, this could potential enable its use.

Han Sen Soo returned to the discussion of the paper by Joost N. H. Reek: The supramolecular cyclophanes in the paper are very attractive and impressive. In this paper, the application is for p-type DSSCs. However, given that perovskite solar cells are already performing so well with far less research, do you foresee much future in DSSCs? Or are there other applications for the supramolecular systems that you are creating?

Joost Reek responded: It is very difficult to predict what will be applied in the future, and currently both DSSC and perovskite solar cells have advantages and disadvantages. It is true that the efficiencies of perovskite solar cells have increased enormously in past years, but there are no commercial applications yet for several reasons (including stability and lead). On the other hand DSSCs are currently commercially available. Most importantly, as a scientist I would like to create new knowledge and I would like to provide new concepts and new tools, and it is not my primary aim to look at the application. As such, I believe we should not feel hampered or limited in our science by the application.

Han Sen Soo asked: This is a follow-up question. The performance of perovskite solar cells have already exceeded the best DSSCs, and I can imagine that they will have similar indoor applications with low lighting. Would the two technologies be competitive?

Joost Reek responded: Again, this is very difficult to predict.

Michael Grätzel remarked: This comment addresses the general question of research on dye sensitized solar cells (DSC) and perovskite solar cells (PSC). DSCs are by now a mature technology and cells are sold on the market by a number of companies, such as Exeger, Fujikura, Ricoh and H.Glass. The two main applications of DSCs are in ambient light harvesting to power portable electronic devices such as E-readers, and sensors for the Internet of Things (IoT) market. Here their energy conversion efficiency is substantially higher than that of the best competing technology. The other application is in solar electricity producing translucent glass panels. PSCs emerged from DCSs and are still at a research state. They show very high solar to electric power conversion efficiencies which have reached 23.7%, however more research and long term outdoor field tests are required to address existing notorious stability problems. In addition current formulations of PSCs contain lead and hence their use would be restricted to well protected solar fields.

Leif Hammarström said: This comment is in response to the earlier question on why to continue working on DSSCs when perovskite cells have undergone such great development in recent years. In science, not everyone should go in the same direction. It may sound obvious, but often granting agencies and even colleagues advise or request you to work on what already works best and where lots of scientists already work. This is dangerous for science, and reminds me of the old joke of the drunken man looking for his car keys underneath the lamp post, instead of where he dropped them (in the dark, behind some shrubbery) because it is easier to search where there is already light. With the same argument, people should not have started looking into perovskite cells because silicon (and DSCCs) worked so much better. In particular you young scientists should not fall into this trap, but follow new ideas and research directions.

Matthias Beller replied: This is good advice, go and work on areas that are unknown.

Chong-Yong Lee addressed Marta Hatzell: Regarding your perspective view that 0.1% solar conversion efficiency to ammonia is sufficient for practical application, I am just wondering what do you think about other alternative ways of obtaining this low-level ammonia? For example, by the reduction of nitrous oxide which is present in the atmosphere of some cities such as Beijing and Bangkok? It may achieve advantages of ammonia production as well as treating environmental pollutants.

Marta Hatzell answered: This is definitely another avenue. However, one issue with taking NOx out of the atmosphere is the energy required to separate NOx from other atmospheric constituents. Generally, areas which have a high concentration of NOx also have a high concentration of harmful particulate matter (aerosols). This could contaminate the dilute fertilizers. Ideally, obtaining pure and dilute fertilizers which require minimal separation processes is our current goal.

Aubrey Paris addressed Marta Hatzell: You noted that there seems to be an interest in intentionally producing dilute concentrations of ammonia in solution. Where is this interest coming from? Is it related to the fact that the quantities of ammonia currently used in agriculture are excessively high? If so, do you think that there would be a barrier to entry for dilute ammonia in the agriculture space, since this would result in process and possibly infrastructure changes on farms?

Marta Hatzell responded: Nutrient utilization by a plant is most efficient if fertilizers are supplied when a plant has access to water and sunlight. Therefore, dilute fertilizers solve one issue, as water and nutrients can be supplied at the same time. The challenge is that dilute fertilizers are associated with the infrastructure. A farm would need to have an extensive irrigation system. A second challenge is that shipping dilute fertilizers would most likely be energy intensive and expensive. Therefore dilute fertilizers would most likely only make sense if they were manufactured on site (on farm).

Matthias Beller returned to discussion of the paper by Stelios Gavrielides: In principle it would be more energy efficient to keep the oxygen in the system (reduction costs most of the energy). No change of oxidation state would occur, and the system would be more energy and oxygen rich, which could have intrinsic advantages. Do you have any comments on this?

Stelios Gavrielides answered: I agree energy-wise it would be beneficial to leave oxygen in the system. Since we haven’t done any reaction mechanism studies yet, we cannot be sure on how the presence of oxygen could affect the reaction. In the future, we plan to investigate this matter further.

Erwin Reisner returned to discussion of the paper by Marta Hatzell: You have mentioned a desired solar-to-ammonia conversion efficiency of 0.1%. This number appears rather low compared to other efficiency goals in artificial photosynthesis (such as commonly quoted 10% solar-to-H2 efficiency). Could you please elaborate on this aspect further and explain how this value (0.1%) was determined?

Marta Hatzell answered: This was estimated based on the current nutrient requirements supplied to farms. Currently nitrogen is supplied at a rate of approximately 50–100 kgN ha−1 yr−1. With this known nutrient flux, the solar-to-ammonia target was estimated using assumptions regarding solar intensity and capture area.

Andreas Wagner commented: The production of low-concentration ammonia in water via solar energy would be fantastic and I am very supportive of this research. I was wondering whether other elements besides nitrogen such as potassium or phosphorus might become the limiting components of plant growth if ammonia is supplied via solar chemistry?

Marta Hatzell responded: In developed countries access to phosphorous and potassium are generally easy to acquire. Therefore from a chemical manufacturing perspective nitrogen fixation is the largest bottleneck for fertilizer production. However, if this technology would be envisioned to be a stand-alone fertilizer production system at a farm site, one would need to have the means to ship the additional nutrients (P and K) necessary for plant growth. This is a good point that would need to be addressed on site.

Han Sen Soo remarked: This may be a simplistic question. There are a number of reports about the photocatalytic reduction of N2 to ammonia recently. However, there has not been much work on photocatalytic or electrocatalytic N2 oxidation similar to the Ostwald process. The Ostwald process is exothermic, but also consumes a lot of energy and needs ammonia. Are you also looking at photocatalytic N2 oxidation reactions?

Marta Hatzell responded: We are looking at these different reactions. There is a large interest in this area as well, however, there are also significant challenges associated with exploring nitrogen oxidation. Many issues regarding contamination exist. We envision seeing similar challenges with nitrogen oxidation, and control experiments will be critical in this area.

Andrew Bocarsly addressed Stelios Gavrielides: Fossil fuels are highly reduced materials and CO2 is highly oxidized. From a strategic synthetic point of view, aren’t we better off making oxidized products from CO2 and reduced compounds from fossil fuels? Along this line of reasoning, the conversion of CO2 to cyclic carbonates is a thermodynamically spontaneous reaction, in contrast to fuel formation which has a positive ΔG. Is there a preferred product strategy in this regard?

Stelios Gavrielides responded: The photoreaction of propylene oxide converted into propylene carbonate via CO2 fixation is proposed herein to demonstrate the possible heterogeneous photocatalysis, which is underexplored for this green organic synthesis. We agree that this reaction has a negative ΔG. However, catalysts are widely employed in the industry to improve the yield.

Wilson Smith opened discussion of the concluding remarks by James Durrant: As discussed in the introduction of your talk, there are many approaches to artificial photosynthesis, among them particle-based reactors, photoelectrodes, and PV (or more accurately renewable electricity-based) electrolysis. While it is somewhat common for most people to say they don’t want to pick winners, and it is true there is underlying science that translates between different approaches, at what point do we actually need to pick a winner? The timescale for technological large scale solutions is very short, and we need to start making some choices about which approaches are working and should have more attention paid to their upscaling, while other approaches can still benefit from fundamental/basic science.

James Durrant answered: This is an important question for which there is no clear answer. On the one hand, we are addressing an urgent problem, and should be addressing multiple approaches in parallel rather than in series. However you are right that we should be starting to focus our efforts on the most promising front runners. I think to chose these, we need a close engagement between scientists and engineers from both academia and industry, so we can understand both what it appears likely we will be able to achieve scientifically, and what devices and technologies look most promising for scale up and commercial application. In the shorter term, I think that PV plus electrochemistry is the most obvious approach, and indeed is the benchmark we should compare other artificial photosynthetic approaches against. I think we also need to consider carefully what reactions we wish to target. In the long term it is clear we should target water splitting and CO2 reduction, but in the shorter term, other reactions, including for example selective organic oxidations, may be more commercially attractive.

Erwin Reisner said: I would like to emphasise the importance of bringing industry collaborations on board for academic research and to facilitate tech transfer. Industry partners do not only provide valuable resources, but also offer important questions and much needed expertise and input in the development of real-world processes. I also believe that many energy companies are genuinely very interested in our work, but have only limited contacts to the latest developments in academia. The often perceived paradigm that industry has limited interest in artificial photosynthesis as it’s too far from application is not true. I have had very positive interactions with industry and we have just completed a 7-year application oriented basic research programme on solar syngas production half-funded by an industrial partner. The key is pro-active engagement with potential industry partners and reaching out to the right person within the company (and the challenge here is to identify and meet the ‘right’ person). I would be interested to hear from academic delegates about experience working with industry and the view from industry delegates about working with academics.

Akihiko Kudo replied: In Japan, many companies are interested in artificial photosynthesis. Some companies are carrying out the research by themselves and some are joining a national project.1 It is crucial to demonstrate a solar water splitting system, not sacrificial H2 evolution, using a photocatalyst under sunlight with a suitable scale, even if the efficiency (STH) is not satisfying. I am sure that the demonstration will attract much more attention from not only industry people but also politicians.
1 T. Setoyama, T. Takewaki, K. Domen and T. Tatsumi, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 509–527.

Marcelino Maneiro responded: I completely agree with the importance of promoting collaboration between industry and academia. I think that this type of collaboration is crucial to furthering the transfer of technology to society, in fact I have been trying to do it for many years although with mixed results. My initial experience years ago was not very positive, but contacts in recent years have been much more satisfactory. To be honest, recent state aids to foster this type of collaboration helps without question. Networking events where we can meet people from industry are also extremely useful. Definitively, it is important to connect with the “right” person.

Wilson Smith responded: We have also had very positive experiences working with industry, and have several active and fruitful collaborations with Shell (among others) in the Netherlands. Shell has been a terrific partner by helping us understand issues related to upscaling, while also explicitly funding ‘pre-competitive’ research that is still far from applications. It is important to have some idea about where we want to take the science we are doing from a practical perspective, so we can learn how to understand and optimize materials and reactions under industrially relevant conditions, which can drastically speed up the timeline or technological development.

Flavia Cassiola asked: When you say leadership and direction, what else do you think we can collaborate more on?
In general, the Energy Industry has become very active in finding solutions towards Net Carbon Footprint. Shell has demonstrated leadership and our commitment to it. Our R&D programs are engaged with academia and we are providing guidance for several key initiatives. We are amazed by the enthusiastic and talented scientists we are collaborating with in our current programs. More and more attention has been paid to techno-economic challenges that each idea must confront and for the engineering aspects. Hopefully, we can continue to collaborate and improve our ways of working.

Flavia Cassiola remarked: Solar fuels include the power-to-X (X being liquids, gas or chemicals). It refers to the synthesis of fuels and chemicals from CO2 and water with input of renewable electricity. It is very attractive because it uses the existing infrastructure. For fuels, it has high energy density, good stability and it is an excellent option to decarbonize the transport sector (aviation and non-road).
Photosynthetic systems are included in the concept but our efforts in this area revealed critical gaps in the properties of existing materials and the understanding of synchronized processes occurring in integrated photosystems (light harvesting, atmospheric CO2 capture and CO2 conversion via (photo)catalysis). We understand the need of considering all options to develop a zero emission mobility and chemical industry. Shell has established key collaborations with academia aiming to work together with researchers to develop solar fuels.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
