Two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite materials: preparation, enhanced stability, and applications in photodetection  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE01181A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE01181A
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2087-2113Two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite materials: preparation, enhanced stability, and applications in photodetection

        
          
            Xiangxin 
            Tian
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yongzhuan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Rongkun 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Wei
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jingquan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Linyi University, Linyi, 276000, Shandong, China. E-mail: tianxiangxin@lyu.edu.cn; yitian_120@163.com; jliu@qdu.edu.cn
bSchool of Physics, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
cBeijing Graphene Institute, China
Received 
      3rd December 2019
    , Accepted 23rd February 2020First published on 24th February 2020AbstractThree-dimensional (3D) inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites have attracted considerable attention during the past decade because of their superior optoelectronic properties and broad application prospects, especially in energy-related fields. However, the applications of 3D perovskites, for example, the well-studied CH3NH3PbI3, are severely restrained by their environmental instability, photoinstability, and crystal processing difficulties. In contrast to their 3D counterparts, Ruddlesden–Popper phases, which are layered two-dimensional (2D) perovskites, have shown promising stability and excellent performance in photodetection and solar cell applications, which can be achieved through appropriate selection of organic spacer cations and artificial tuning of the number of perovskite-like layers. Because of their decreased dimensions, novel properties also appear in Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, such as large exciton binding energy, sensitive photodetection, high photoluminescence quantum yield, and a wide bandgap. In light of this, 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites have garnered much interest in recent years and various methods have been developed for their synthesis, property evaluation, and device fabrication. In this review, recent progress in the synthesis and enhanced ambient stability of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites is summarized. The applications of these materials in advanced photodetectors are emphasized and challenges limiting their ongoing development are also discussed.Xiangxin TianDr Xiangxin Tian is currently a lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Linyi University. He received his B.S. and Ph.D. in materials science from Shandong University in 2013 and 2018, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Xutang Tao. His research interests mainly include the synthesis, growth and structure–property relationships of novel nonlinear optical crystal materials and two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite single crystals.Yongzhuan ZhangDr Yongzhuan Zhang is currently a lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Linyi University. He graduated from the Department of Physics in Pisa University. His research interests include laser single crystals and fibers, mainly oxides and fluorides doped with rare-earth ions, grown by the Czochralski or micro-pulling-down technique. His other interests about laser fibers include fluorides used for infrared output. Recently, his research interest spans 2-D materials, such as transition metal disulfides, because of their special performances.Rongkun ZhengRongkun Zheng obtained his B.S. in Physics from Shandong University in China in 1999 and his PhD in Physics from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2004. He joined the University of Sydney in late 2004, and currently is an Associate Professor at the School of Physics. His research interest spans from Condensed Matter and Materials Physics to Microscopy and Microanalysis, with focus on the growth-structure–property relationships in functional materials and devices using sophisticated microscopy and microanalysis, particularly atom probe tomography (APT) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). He has published ∼190 papers and has received ∼7500 citations. He has received a number of awards, including a prestigious fellowship from the Australian Research Council, and has been regularly invited to national and international conferences in his field.Di WeiDi Wei received his Ph.D. from Abo Akademi University in Finland. After a postdoctoral fellowship at Cambridge University in the UK, he became a senior research scientist at Nokia Technologies Cambridge. He was one of the initiators of the research in the field of nanocarbon and graphene technologies in Nokia. He participated strongly in the early phase of defining and initiating the European Union Graphene Flagship programme during 2011–2013. He became the executive director of Beijing Graphene Institute in 2017 and keeps the fellowship at Wolfson College Cambridge University and adjunct professorship at Abo Akademi University. His research interests cover applications of nanotechnology in sensors and energy devices.Jingquan LiuProf. Jingquan Liu received his bachelor's degree from Shandong University. His master's and PhD were obtained from the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 1999 and 2004, where his PhD was undertaken under the guidance of Prof. Justin Gooding. From 2004 to 2006 he worked as a CSIRO-UTS post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Cortie. In 2007 he returned to UNSW with Prof. Tom Davis as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow until taking up a professorship at Qingdao University in 2010. He has co-authored over 200 peer-reviewed papers with more than 8000 citations and 5 book chapters. The H-index for his publications is 33. His research interests mainly focus on RAFT polymerization, graphene-related nanomaterials and versatile novel bio- and nanohybrids for varied applications.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have drawn unprecedented research interest since the first report of the use of methylammonium (CH3NH3+, MA+) lead halides (methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3)) in photovoltaic cells by Kojima et al.1 in 2009. After ten years of rapid development, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic–inorganic hybrid metal halide perovskite solar cells has increased from the initial 3.8% to an astonishing 25.2%, making them the most attractive candidates for next-generation photovoltaic technologies.2–6 In addition, hybrid perovskites also exhibit outstanding application potential in other optoelectronic fields, including highly efficient photodetectors,7–11 light-emitting diodes,12–16 and field-effect transistors,17–20 because of their remarkable features such as bandgap tunability,21–23 low trap density,24,25 high carrier mobility,26–29 long carrier diffusion lengths,30–34 and high external quantum efficiencies (EQE) and coefficients.35,36 Numerous theoretical studies have also been conducted and provided many inspiring strategies for the design of novel photoelectronic devices based on various perovskites.37–43 With all these merits, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have become a research hot spot in materials science, chemistry, and other related scientific fields in the past decade.
Despite their advantages, there are still some fatal drawbacks hampering the practical deployment of perovskite materials. The two most serious problems limiting perovskites are their poor stability towards environmental moisture and the toxicity of the water-soluble source of lead. The latter problem can potentially be solved by replacing the toxic lead with more environmentally friendly elements like tin.44–46 However, the improvement of moisture resistance usually requires much more complex modification techniques. For example, the most common perovskite MAPbI3 is intrinsically vulnerable to various environmental conditions, like moisture, light, and heat.47 To solve this problem, multiple strategies have been proposed and systematically investigated. For instance, the most immediate solution to limit the humidity is to encapsulate the whole device,48–50 which is effective but leads to complex device structure and increased fabrication cost. In addition, strategies like modifying the perovskite surface with hydrophobic tertiary or quaternary alkylammonium cations as efficient water-resisting layers,51 modifying perovskites with ligands or mixed cations,4,47,52 or using an aliphatic fluorinated amphiphilic additive to enhance the stability and performance of perovskite solar cells at the same time53 have been investigated. Modification of the structure of perovskite solar cells is also a feasible approach to improve device stability.54,55 However, all of these modification and encapsulation strategies increase structural complexity and/or degrade performance.
Recently, two-dimensional (2D) perovskite-like materials, including Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phases, Dion–Jacobson phases,56–59 and double perovskite phases,60–64 have attracted tremendous attention because of their unique crystallographic structural characteristics and promise in energy-related applications. Among quasi-2D perovskites, the RP ones have shown enhanced long-term stability and achieved an acceptable PCE (>13%).65 In 2014, the 2D RP perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (PEA = C6H5(CH2)2NH3+) was used as an absorber in a solar cell that achieved an open-circuit voltage of 1.18 V and a PCE of 4.73%. Since then, tremendous research effort has been expended and the PCE of a (C6H5CH2NH3)2(FA)8Pb9I28-based device has already reached 17.40%.66,67 RP perovskites exhibit strong light absorption in the visible region, accompanied by strong photoluminescence (PL) at room temperature, making them promising light absorbers for photovoltaic applications.68 In addition, the intergrowth of large organic spacer layers and the perovskite-like layers endow RP materials with other unique advantages, like high ambient, structural, and thermal stability as well as attractive structure–property tunability.
Apart from solar cells, RP phases have also drawn considerable attention from photodetection and light-emission researchers. While RP phases exhibit some excellent characteristics, they are not ideal materials. Although the relatively large organic spacers in RP phases help to protect them from moisture, they also lead to strong quantum and dielectric confinement, which widens the optical band gap and decreases the carrier mobility compared with those of three-dimensional (3D) perovskites.69–71 According to theoretical calculations, the exciton-binding energies of RP perovskites increase as the number of layers decreases, indicating that ultrathin 2D perovskites may be more suitable materials for light emission and photodetection than solar absorbers.70,71 Herein, the current main focus of the study of RP phases is to find an ideal trade-off between their ambient stability and charge-carrier mobilities, yielding humidity-resistant materials for highly efficient photoelectronic devices.
In this review, we focus on recent progress in the development of RP phases, especially in the crystallographic structure, synthesis, single-crystal growth, and enhanced ambient stability. The applications of RP perovskites in highly efficient photodetectors are also discussed.
2. Crystal structure of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites
The term perovskite was originally used to refer to the mineral calcium titanate but its meaning has since broadened to represent a class of materials with a similar crystal structure to that of calcium titanate. Now, a perovskite is a material with the general formula of ABX3, in which A is a monovalent amine cation, such as MA+ or CH(NH2)2+ (FA+); B is a bivalent metal cation such as Pb2+, Sn2+, or Mn2+; and X is a monovalent halogen anion like I−, Cl−, or Br−. Perfect perovskite structure has strict crystallographic limitations, in which B and X form regular octahedral BX6 anionic groups and all the groups are connected together by sharing the common vertex atoms with the A cation being located within each four BX6 octahedra, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. However, in actual compounds, the B cations are sometimes distorted from the center of the octahedra because of the second-order Jahn–Teller effect. Additionally, tilting or rotation of the BX6 octahedra also gives rise to the formation of distorted perovskite structures.72–74 To better understand the structures of perovskites and describe their evolution, the following empirical formula has been proposed:75,76 (1)where t is the tolerance factor and rA, rB, and rX represent the radii of A, B, and X, respectively. A t value of 0.9–1 is compatible with ideal cubic perovskite structure, as shown in Fig. 1a. When a small A or large B cation is used and t is in the range of 0.7–0.9, an orthorhombic, rhombohedral, or tetragonal structure is usually formed. For the most intensely investigated organic lead halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, the ionic radii of Pb2+, I−, and CH3NH3+ are 0.132, 0.206, and 0.18 nm, respectively.77 According to eqn (1), the t of CH3NH3PbI3 is calculated to be 0.81, corresponding to a distorted non-cubic structure, which is consistent with the experimentally observed tetragonal structure of a well-developed singe crystal.78 In contrast, when a large A cation is used, t becomes larger than 1, the perovskite structure becomes unstable, and layered perovskites, for example, RP, Dion–Jacobson, and Aurivillius phases, will be obtained. The relationship between t and the crystal structure is summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 1  (a) Unit cell of a general cubic perovskite and the coordination around the lead ions (octahedron) and the organic cations (cuboctahedron). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic crystal structures of all-inorganic members of Ruddlesden–Popper type An+1BnO3n+1 (n = 1, 2 and 3). n represents the number of stacked octahedral layers separated by a rock-salt AO layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, MDPI. (c) Crystal structures of the 2D lead iodide perovskites (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1 to ∞). The n-value denotes the thickness of the inorganic layer in each compound. The numerical values refer to the distance between the terminal iodide ions of each layer and are determined directly from the refined crystal structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Tolerance factors of perovskite structures75




Tolerance factor
Structure
Comment




<0.7






0.7–0.9
Tetragonal/orthorhombic/rhombohedral
A too small or B too large


0.9–1.0
Cubic
Ideal perovskite structure


>1.0
Various layered structures
A cation too large




Perovskites, for example, the representative CH3NH3PbI3, have been investigated extensively because of their excellent performance in solar cells. However, their use is limited by their poor long-term stability in air. Recent research achievements have suggested that 2D RP-type perovskites usually exhibit high environmental stability. RP perovskites were first characterized by Ruddlesden and Popper in 1957 and are K2NiF4-type all-inorganic layered perovskites with an empirical formula that can be expressed as An+1BnO3n+1 or (AO)(AnBnO3n) (where n ≥ 1 and represents the number of octahedral layers in the perovskite-like stack).79Fig. 1b shows that all-inorganic RP perovskites exhibit distinct structural features with the intergrowth of perovskite-like layers (AnBnO3n) and rock-salt layers (AO).
As well as the great development of 3D perovskites, organic–inorganic hybrid RP phases have also received much attention. The empirical formula of organic–inorganic hybrid RP phases can be written as An−1A2′BnX3n+1, where A is a monovalent organic spacer; A′ is a monovalent cation like CH3NH3+, CH(NH2)2+, or Cs+; B is an octahedral coordinated covalent cation like Pb2+ or Sn2+; and X is a monovalent halogen anion like Cl−, Br−, or I−. In Fig. 1c, a series of compounds, (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (BA = CH3(CH2)3NH3+), is used as an example to illustrate the crystallographic structural features of organic–inorganic hybrid RP phases. Fig. 1c shows that the organic–inorganic hybrid RP phases retain the structural features of the all-inorganic RP phases except that the long-chain organic spacer BA replaces the rock-salt layer of the all-inorganic phases. In Fig. 1c, 3D MAPbI3 can be regarded as the parent prototype of RP phases and for each 2D member, it can be viewed that the MA+ cations are partially (n = 2, 3, 4,…) or fully (n = 1) substituted by the terminal organic BA+ cations. As the number of stacked octahedral layers n increases, the 2D character of the RP phase decreases and when n = ∞, which means that there are no BA long-chain organic spacers, the parent prototype 3D perovskite MAPbI3 will be obtained.
Compared with the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite, unique structural features and properties emerge upon the introduction of organic spacers into RP phases. Layered perovskites are generally viewed as the periodic splitting of the 3D structure along a crystallographic plane, forming natural quantum well structures. When exposed to humidity, the 3D perovskite MAPbI3 only remained stable for several days, whereas no evident changes were observed in RP phases under the same conditions.67 The outstanding humidity resistance of RP phases can be ascribed to the organic spacers, which can prevent water molecules from penetrating into the crystallographic structure. In perovskites, the Pb–I octahedral layers can act as solar-cell absorbers. Thus, the coexistence of Pb–I layers and hydrophobic organic spacer layers in RP phases makes this family promising candidates for use in solar cells. Apart from the important advantage of favorable hydrophobicity, RP phases usually exhibit better structural and thermal stabilities than 3D perovskites, which are also attributed to their unique crystallographic structures. The introduction of organic spacers also converts the enclosed construction of 3D perovskites to an open superlattice structure, which enables the crystal structure and material properties of RP perovskites to be readily tuned. By adjusting the precursor stoichiometry in the material synthesis, continuous tuning of the dimensionality can be achieved. Thus, the layered RP perovskite structure may offer greater tunability at the molecular level for material optimization. One typical example of the property modulation of RP perovskites can be found in their band-gap tuning. For example, in the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) series, the band gap decreases from 2.43 to 1.91 eV as n increases, and the band gap of MAPbI3 (n = ∞) is only 1.48 eV (Table 2).78,81
Table 2 Band gaps of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites78,81




Compound
Band gap Eg (eV)
Compound
Band gap Eg (eV)




(BA)2PbI4
2.43
(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10
2.03


(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7
2.17
(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
1.91


MAPbI3
1.48








Compared with 3D perovskites, the introduction of organic spacers into the crystal structure of RP perovskites does not yield only positive changes. As illustrated above, as the dimensionality decreases, the band gap widens, resulting in a deterioration in absorption performance in the visible region. The increase in the band gap can be attributed to the quantum and dielectric confinement effect, the latter of which not only widens the band gap but also confines electron–hole pairs and decreases the carrier mobility in layered RP phases.69,82 These two changes are undesirable for solar cell applications, which principally require strong light absorption overlapping with the solar spectrum and efficient separation of electron–hole pairs to produce a photocurrent.
3. Preparation methodology and enhanced stability
3.1 Preparation methodology
Various methods have been successfully adopted to synthesize RP perovskites. For applications of RP perovskites, such as highly efficient photodetectors, the micromorphology, phase purity, and thickness of the synthesized materials directly affect the final performance of the fabricated device. Therefore, in this section, recent progress in the synthesis of RP perovskites is reviewed. The preparation of RP perovskites by four common approaches—solvent-based, colloidal-based, liquid- and gas-phase epitaxy, and exfoliation methods—are discussed. Additionally, progress of the single-crystal growth of RP perovskites is also presented in detail.

3.1.1 Solution-based synthesis. 
Solution-based methods represent a facile strategy to prepare 2D RP perovskites and are also fundamental for other subsequent controlled preparation methods, like mechanical exfoliation and thermal evaporation. Solution-based synthesis is currently the most widely used approach to prepare 2D RP perovskites.68,81,83–88 To synthesize these materials, generally, covalent cation sources are first reacted with a halogen acid to produce a metal halide and halogenated organic spacers are also prepared by reaction with the halogen acid. Then, the halogenated metal cations and organic spacers are mixed together in an appropriate ratio to produce the target material. To illustrate this process, the synthesis of the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) family is considered as an example.68,81 First, lead oxide (PbO) powder was dissolved in a mixture of aqueous HI solution and aqueous H3PO2 by heating to boiling under constant magnetic stirring for several minutes, resulting in the formation of a transparent bright yellow solution. An appropriate amount of CH3NH3I was then added into the hot reaction solution and stirred until the added solid was completely dissolved. Meanwhile, the CH3(CH2)3NH3I solution was prepared by slowly adding n-CH3(CH2)3NH2 dropwise into the stirred aqueous HI solution in an ice-water bath. After cooling to room temperature, the CH3(CH2)3NH3I solution was poured into the hot solution containing dissolved PbO.
The reaction mixture was heated and stirred until no precipitate was observed. Then, the mixed solution was left to cool to room temperature, during which, deep-red or glossy black rectangular-shaped thin plates started to crystallize. By controlling the ratio of n-CH3(CH2)3NH2 to HI, the members with different n values in the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 series can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 2a. The precipitation was deemed to be complete after ∼2 h. The crystals were isolated by suction filtration and then thoroughly dried under reduced pressure.68 As described above, the organic spacer layers and perovskite-like layers are bound together by van der Waals interactions to afford a structure that affects nearly every property of the materials. In the synthesis of the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) family, the NH3 groups in CH3(CH2)3NH3I coordinate to the I− ions in the PbI42− network by forming hydrogen bonds to construct the 2D crystallographic structure.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM images (top) and photographs of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite crystals (bottom) (scale bars = 200 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Tyndall effect of (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets in toluene. (c) SEM, (d) AFM, and (e) TEM images of single-layer (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets. Insets: (c) lateral size distribution of the as-synthesized (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets and (e) SAED pattern of a typical (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheet. (b)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. 
Integrating a 2D RP perovskite prepared by a solution-based method into an optoelectronic device usually requires a subsequent spin-coating process. An appropriate amount of the RP perovskite powder is dissolved in a selected solvent, for example, anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF), under constant stirring to form a homogeneous solution. Thin films of the perovskite can then be deposited on a suitable substrate, like a silicon (Si) wafer, by spin coating the precursor solution under specific conditions. This approach is an extraordinary advantage of RP perovskites over MAPbI3, because the poor crystallinity of MAPbI3 leads to low surface coverage and large, non-uniform crystals, which are unfavorable for thin-film formation.
Although the solution-based synthesis of RP perovskites is quite straightforward and convenient, it usually results in inhomogeneous samples and undesired morphology, especially in the preparation of ultrathin samples. In other words, precise control of the composition, phase purity, and morphology of RP perovskites is difficult using solution-based synthesis. To solve this problem, Chen et al.90 systematically studied the synthesis of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 from a chlorobenzene/DMF/acetonitrile (ACN) ternary solvent system. The effects of three critical factors including the solvent volume ratio, crystallization temperature, and solvent polarity on the growth dynamics of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 were studied in detail. It was found that the precursor concentration and solvent polarity strongly influenced the morphology, including shape, lateral dimensions, and thickness, of the obtained perovskite samples. Fig. 3 illustrates that when the precursor concentration was low (corresponding to high DMF and ACN concentrations), the (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite showed branched growth, suggesting a diffusion-controlled growth mechanism, and the obtained samples possessed star-like shapes. As the precursor concentration increased, the growth mode transformed into habit growth and regular cubic rather than the star-like samples. Sample thickness was directly related to both the crystallization temperature and solvent polarity. The polar groups of the solvent tended to adsorb on specific polar crystal planes and therefore hampered the self-assembly of the planes along the normal directions. Higher crystallization temperature also favored the formation of ultrathin films of the perovskite because the growth of the low-energy surfaces along the c-axis was greatly hindered at higher temperature. Within the scope of their study, the nucleation density increased monotonically with the precursor concentration, as shown in Fig. 3f and l.
 Fig. 3  Effects of the solvent volume ratio and crystallization temperature on perovskite morphology. SEM images illustrating the different morphologies of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown using DMF ratios of (a) 33.3%, (b) 25%, (c) 14.3%, (d) 11.1%, and (e) 9.1%. (f) The size and nucleation density of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite with respect to the DMF ratio. SEM images illustrating the different morphologies of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown at ACN ratios of (g) 50%, (h) 40%, (i) 30%, (j) 18%, and (k) 11.25%. (l) Size and nucleation density of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite with respect to the ACN ratio. SEM images of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown at (m) 298 K, (n) 313 K, (o) 333 K, (p) 348 K, and (q) 363 K. Insets show corresponding AFM height profiles. (r) Temperature dependence of the thickness and size of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite. (a)–(r) Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. 


3.1.2 Colloidal-based method. 
Generally, a RP perovskite precursor solution is prepared and then spin coated on a substrate like mesoporous TiO2 or an Si wafer before solvent evaporation. The resulting samples usually crystallize into different lateral dimensions and thicknesses, which greatly limits further applications of RP perovskite films. In 2017, Yang and co-workers found that the colloidal-based method provided an alternative way to synthesize ultrathin 2D RP perovskites in a more controllable and facile manner than the solution-based approach.89 The procedures used in the colloidal-based method are quite similar to those used in the solvent-based one. However, the pre-synthesized perovskite precursor solution is dropped into toluene under vigorous stirring in the colloidal-based method instead of being dropped onto a substrate. A typical Tyndall effect was clearly observed after 10 min of stirring the toluene-based mixture, indicating the colloidal nature of the product, as shown in Fig. 2b. Using the colloidal-based method, single- and few-layer (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets with lateral dimensions of 531 ± 62 nm and thickness of 2.0 ± 0.1 nm were successfully obtained (Fig. 2c–e). By using different perovskite precursors, this method can also be extended to the synthesis of other single- or few-layer 2D RP phases with different compositions, like (PEA)2PbBrI3, (PEA)2PbBr4, and (PEA)2PbCl4. By replacing toluene with other polar solvents, such as chlorobenzene, chloroform, or dichloromethane, the lateral dimensions of the samples can be finely tuned.


3.1.3 Liquid- and vapor-phase epitaxy method. 
Single-crystalline flakes with few layers and low defect density can be obtained by careful selection of the solvent and precise control of the precursor composition and evaporation conditions in the solution-based method or exfoliation from well-developed bulk single crystals. Although such high-quality flakes can provide opportunities for intrinsic property evaluation, the additional transfer process needed to fabricate semiconductor devices limits the compatibility of the flakes with substrates. This problem is avoided in the case of the epitaxy method because mature solutions have already been developed in the semiconductor industry. Thus, the epitaxy method can provide potential solutions to integrate 2D RP phases into optoelectronic devices.91–94 Considering these advantages, the epitaxy method was quickly implemented in the growth of 3D perovskites and then extended to the preparation of 2D RP perovskites.95–106 As early as 1997, a dual vapor deposition source of lead iodide and organic ammonium iodide was used to prepare (RNH3)2PbI4 films, although the resulting films were defect-rich and disordered.107 Recently, single-crystalline (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flakes with smooth surfaces and high optical quality were successfully prepared by vapor-phase deposition through careful optimization of the deposition conditions.97 By employing mica as the substrate and taking advantage of the weak van der Waals interactions between the substrate and 2D RP phases, single-crystalline flakes with regular orientation along both epitaxial directions were obtained (Fig. 4a). These flakes possessed lateral dimensions of 5–10 μm and thicknesses of less than 80 nm (Fig. 4b). Moreover, their root-mean-square roughness was as low as 0.55 nm in the highlighted region in Fig. 4c, revealing their excellent surface smoothness. Using this van der Waals epitaxy method, flakes of (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 with well-controlled dimensions and different thickness were successfully obtained on both mica and Si substrates.101 As shown in Fig. 4d and e, over 90% of the flakes were oriented parallel indicating epitaxy has been obtained. In addition, step structures were observed, which means that the growth of (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 followed the 2D layer-by-layer mechanism. Vapor-phase epitaxy also plays an important role in the fabrication of heterostructures. In 2017, a general low-temperature synthetic strategy was developed to synthesize (n-C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(n-C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructures.99 This strategy consists of two independent procedures, as shown in Fig. 4f. First, flakes of (n-C4H9NH3)2PbI4 were grown using the traditional solution-based method, as discussed above in Section 3.1.1. A gas–solid-phase intercalation process was then used to convert part of the as-grown (n-C4H9NH3)2PbI4 to (n-C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 and form a heterostructure. In this procedure, the conversion of (n-C4H9NH3)2PbI4 was realized by placing the as-grown flakes in MAI or MACl vapor using high-purity Ar as a carrier gas. During this procedure, synergistic rearrangements of the halide and n-butylamine ions are needed for the intercalation of the small MA cations into the center of PbI6 octahedra. Depending on whether or not a mask was used, both lateral and vertical heterostructures, respectively, were successfully obtained. Fig. 4g shows a photograph of the lateral (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure. The distinct color contrast indicates the formation of the heterostructure.
 Fig. 4  Vapor epitaxy method for the synthesis of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. (a) Epitaxial (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flakes formed on mica by co-evaporation. (b) Height profile of a (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flake. (c) Height line scan of a (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flake, exhibiting excellent surface smoothness. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (d and e) (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flakes grown on muscovite mica and Si (001), respectively, through the van der Waals epitaxy method. The edges of most rectangular flakes were parallel, indicating that epitaxy was obtained. The insets are enlarged images of the epitaxial flakes, in which step structures were observed, indicating a 2D layer-by-layer growth mechanism. Scale bars represent 20 μm. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustrations of the crystal structural evolution from (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 to (C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 and the corresponding gas–solid phase intercalation process for the preparation of lateral and vertical (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructures. (g) Photograph of a lateral (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure. The distinct color contrast indicates the formation of the heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from the vapor-phase epitaxy, the liquid-based epitaxy method has also been employed in the synthesis of RP perovskites. In 2019, Li and colleagues developed a solution-based method for the facile synthesis of centimeter-sized (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 heterostructures.105,106 As shown in Fig. 5a, they carefully adjusted the reaction sequence of the precursors as follows: a butylamine iodide (BAI) solution was first injected into a bright yellow PbI2 solution at 80 °C, followed by addition of MAI powder rather than in the opposite sequence. Taking advantage of the increasing solubility of the RP perovskite series with n, during the cooling process, flakes of the n = 1 RP perovskite (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 started to precipitate from the solution first because of its low solubility. After the temperature was lowered to 75 °C, subsequent slight drops in temperature led to the crystallization of (C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 onto the as-grown n = 1 perovskite flakes through the intercalation of MA cations into the center of PbI64− octahedra of the n = 1 perovskite while BAI molecules were released into the solution to maintain the 2D layered structure. Through fine adjustment of the reaction sequence and cooling rate, centimeter-sized heterostructures with high quality and purity were obtained. In Fig. 5a and c, the exterior of the flakes consisting of n = 2 (C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 is red, while the interior consisting of the n = 1 (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 is yellow. This distinct color contrast clearly reveals the formation of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure.
 Fig. 5  Liquid-phase epitaxy method for the synthesis of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. (a) Schematic illustration of the solution-based synthetic process and the crystal structure of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure. (b) Photograph of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure produced using a growth time of 240 min. (c) Photograph of the exfoliated plates. The distinct color contrast of the plate indicates the formation of a heterostructure. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Photograph of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure grown by the solution epitaxy method. The scale bar represents 0.5 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH. 
At present, although the controllable, scalable, and stable preparation of large-sized 2D RP perovskite films and heterostructures still remains challenging, there is every reason to expect that the epitaxy method will yield further intriguing results in the future.


3.1.4 Exfoliation method. 
It is well known that when the dimensions of a material decrease to a certain degree, unique characteristics different from those of the bulk material emerge. For this reason, ultrathin sheets that are just one unit cell thick are required. The 2D structural characteristics of RP phases with strong van der Waals interactions make the preparation of thin films quite straightforward and the formation of their bulk samples difficult, especially for those with lower n values. Because of this structural feature, the exfoliation method has been widely used to fabricate ultrathin films of 2D perovskites since their initial development and numerous achievements have been made.108–114 According to the nature of the process, exfoliation methods can be divided into mechanical exfoliation and chemical exfoliation, the former of which has been widely used to prepare ultrathin sheets. In 2018, Li et al.113 creatively employed the mechanical exfoliation method to fabricate (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n > 2) microplates with pure single n perovskites (Fig. 6a) and successfully integrated the exfoliated single n RP microplates with 2D hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) flakes to construct a two-probe photodetector, which could advance the design of functional optoelectronic devices. Using a micromechanical exfoliation method, Niu and co-workers obtained mono-and few-layer (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4 flakes.108 Their measurement results demonstrated a clear difference in the exciton properties between “bulk” (>15 layers) and very thin (<8 layers) regions (Fig. 6b–d) caused by the structural rearrangement of organic molecules around the inorganic sheets.
 Fig. 6  The exfoliation method for the synthesis of 2D RP phases. (a) Optical and AFM images of exfoliated n = 3 2D perovskite microplates with different thicknesses. Scale bars from top to bottom represent 2, 4, and 10 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing, Ltd. Images at 100× magnification using (b) bright and (c) dark fields of an exfoliated hexagonal (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4 flake. (d) AFM image of the same area. (b)–(d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals. A powder of methylammonium halide (MAX) and PbX2 was ground with a pestle and mortar. Perovskite formation was monitored by the color change of the powder. The perovskite powder was dispersed in toluene with oleylamine and tip-sonicated for 30 min, after which the dispersion was purified to obtain highly fluorescent perovskite nanocrystals. The resulting crystals were polydisperse in size and shape, but showed extremely high crystallinity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH. 
In addition to mechanical exfoliation, ligand-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation has also been used to lower the dimensions of bulk MAPbX3 (X = I−, Br−, Cl−, or mixed halide ions) prepared by the solid-state method from a specific thickness down to a single perovskite layer.112 As shown in Fig. 6e, CH3NH3PbBr3 was synthesized by grinding CH3NH3Br and PbBr2 together. The perovskite powder was then dispersed in toluene together with oleylamine (OlA) and subjected to tip sonication. By careful optimization of the sonication conditions, perovskite plates with extremely high crystallinity were obtained. In this case, toluene and OlA were used as solvents. The experimental results indicated that the OlA ligand assisted in the exfoliation, protected the obtained nanocrystals from agglomeration, and made them dispersible in organic solvents.


3.1.5 Single-crystal growth. 
Although various synthesis methods have already been developed to prepare 2D RP phases, there are few reports of the growth of bulk single-crystal materials. However, bulk single crystals of high quality are critical for both fundamental studies and efficient devices (especially photodetectors) because the performance of polycrystalline samples is usually limited by the boundary-induced low chemical durability,119 poor uniformity, high defect density,25 and short carrier diffusion length.33 Furthermore, the lack of well-developed bulk single crystals also hampers the full characterization of the anisotropic properties of RP perovskites and thus hinders further insights into their property–structure relationships. The highly anisotropic properties of 2D RP perovskites caused by their natural quantum well structures are of great interest. The study of single-crystal growth also favors the deeper understanding of the growth mechanism of RP perovskites and feeds back to the design of novel preparation methods. Therefore, recent progress of the bulk single-crystal growth of RP perovskites is summarized in this section.
When the solubility of the target crystals in the corresponding acid halide solvents is moderate and changes considerably with the temperature in a suitable range, the temperature-lowering method can be used as an efficient and simple way to grow crystals. In this approach, a decrease of the temperature induces supersaturation of the growth solution, causing the target material to crystallize spontaneously or attach to an existing seed crystal, which is also called the top-seeded solution growth (TSSG) method or bottom-seeded solution growth (BSSG) method according to the position where the seed crystals are fixed. The temperature-lowering method has been widely used for the growth of 3D perovskite crystals21,22,78,123–126 and has also been extended to the growth of 2D RP perovskite crystals. As seen in Fig. 7, some well-developed bulk single crystals of RP perovskites have been obtained through this method. Generally, the as-grown single crystals exhibit a plate growth habit because of the layered crystallographic structure of RP perovskites. The macromorphology of the crystals coincides well with the theoretical one (Fig. 7a and b) because of the few restrictions on the crystals grown by this method. Overall, the temperature-lowering method provides a simple, convenient, and efficient path for the growth of RP perovskite crystals and the obtained crystals are usually of high quality. However, crystal growth using this method is always time-consuming (several days to months) and the exploration and optimization procedures to determine an appropriate solvent system are usually difficult.
 Fig. 7  Single crystals of RP phases grown by the temperature-cooling method. (a) Block crystals of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 and (b) the typical growth morphology of the crystals. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (c)–(f) Photographs of centimeter-sized RP single crystals with n = 1–4 in the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 series. (c)–(f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (g)–(j) Photographs of plate- and block-shaped single crystals of BA2MA2Pb3I10 ((g) and (h)) and BA2MA3Pb4I13 ((i) and (j)) obtained by the TSSG method. (k) A BA2PbI4 single crystal grown by the TSSG method. (g)–(k) Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, RSC Publishing. (l) Photograph of a (PA)2(G)Pb2I7 bulk single crystal with dimensions of 5.5 × 4.2 × 0.9 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH. 
Apart from lowering temperature, there are some other ways to make a growth solution supersaturated; for example, solvent evaporation or the introduction of an antisolvent. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, slow evaporation of a constant-temperature solution was used to grow the RP perovskites (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–3).120 The schematic illustration in Fig. 8a displays the step-by-step process of crystal growth. Using this process, more efficient control of the rapid nucleation and decreased multicrystalline stacking of 2D perovskite flakes were successfully realized compared with the case for the temperature-cooling method. As shown in Fig. 8b, well-shaped millimeter-scale single crystals with high phase purity were obtained by using the solvent evaporation method. Fig. 8c presents a schematic illustration of the modified antisolvent evaporation-assisted crystallization used to grow RP perovskite (PEA)2PbBr4 crystals.121 By controlling the diffusion rate of the antisolvent (DMF and chlorobenzene in this case) vapor, transparent millimeter-sized 2D RP perovskite (PEA)2PbBr4 single crystals of high quality and phase purity were successfully grown (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Growth process of homologous 2D RP single crystals by slow evaporation using a constant-temperature solution growth strategy. (b) As-grown crystals of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–3). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the growth process of 2D (PEA)2PbBr4 perovskite single crystals. (d) Photograph of a transparent 2 mm (PEA)2PbBr4 single crystal. (c), (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
As illustrated previously, 2D RP perovskites are expected to display highly anisotropic properties because of their natural quantum well structures and therefore bulk single crystals are imperative for the full characterization of the intrinsic properties of these materials, especially their anisotropic carrier transport properties. Although several growth methods have already been proposed, as discussed above, and millimeter-sized single crystals have been successfully obtained, their dimensions were all not sufficiently large to allow the full comprehension of their anisotropic carrier transport properties.127–129 Recently, bulk high-quality single crystals of (PEA)2PbI4 with dimensions as large as 36 mm were grown through a surface tension-controlled crystallization method.122 As shown in Fig. 9a, the classical nucleation theory indicates that only when the solution is sufficiently supersaturated can the energy fluctuation compensate for the nucleation energy barrier and nuclei with radii larger than the critical value, r0, stably form and grow into large crystals. However, further study revealed that the critical nucleation barrier at the solution surface is lower than that in the solution. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 9b, the nucleation probability at the surface layer is expected to be higher than that in the solution. Initially, the small crystallites are not large enough to overcome the synthetic effect of the surface tension (Fs) and buoyant force (Fb) (Fig. 9c). As a result, small crystallites can be held on the solution surface until they grow large enough to overcome Fb. Based on this analysis, a surface tension-controlled crystallization method was carefully designed, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 9d. Photographs of the (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals at each temperature-cooling stage are shown in Fig. 9e and f. Finally, high-quality bulk single crystals as large as 36 mm were obtained, which greatly favors the further study of the anisotropic properties of RP perovskites.
 Fig. 9  Crystallization of (PEA)2PbI4 2D RP perovskite single crystals. (a) Gibbs free energy change ΔGtotal as a function of particle radius. ΔGtotal consists of a surface term ΔGs and a bulk term ΔGb. (b) Graph illustrating the lower nucleation barrier for the solution surface compared with that in the solution volume. (c) Schematic of a single crystal staying afloat on a solution surface. (d) Schematic of the surface tension-controlled crystallization process. (e) Photographs of (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals grown at different temperatures. (f) Corresponding photographs of (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals obtained at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Advanced optoelectronic devices usually require large-area single-crystal films. However, an exfoliation process is necessary for single crystals grown by the temperature-cooling, solvent evaporation, and surface tension-controlled crystallization methods, which inevitably induces structural damage because of the weak van der Waals interactions in RP perovskites. Therefore, it is desirable to obtain free-standing 2D RP perovskite single crystals without an exfoliation process to facilitate the development of integrated advanced optoelectronic devices. With this goal in mind, a rapid synthetic route to free-standing 2D perovskite single crystals was designed and membranes of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4 and ∞) were successfully obtained at a water–air interface.130 By taking advantage of the differences between the ammonium heads and alkyl groups as shown in Fig. 10a–d, the alkylammonium cations C4H9NH4+ aligned in a “head-down” manner at a water–air interface, acting as a soft template to guide the nucleation and subsequent growth of RP perovskite crystals. Theoretical analysis revealed that this system had a lower nucleation energy and higher growth rate at the water–air interface compared with those in the out-of-plane directions, which led to film-like growth. Snapshots of the lateral growth of the 2D (n = 1), quasi-2D (n = 2), and 3D (n = ∞) members of the (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 series are shown in Fig. 10e, f, and g, respectively. Inch-size free-standing quasi-2D RP perovskite single crystal membranes with an aspect ratio as large as 104 were grown by this method, helping to bridge the gap between single-crystal devices and emerging quasi-2D perovskite materials.
 Fig. 10  Crystallization of quasi-2D (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite single-crystal membranes. (a) Schematic illustration of the alignment of the butylammonium cation surfactant at the water–air interface to template nucleation. (b) Experimental setup during nucleation. (c) Molecular interaction between precursor molecules (red) and water molecules (yellow). Lower interaction energy is expected for the surface-layer molecules than those in the bulk solution because of surface tension. (d) Experimental setup during crystal growth. Snapshots of the fast lateral growth of (e) 2D (n = 1), (f) quasi-2D (n = 2), and (g) 3D (n = ∞) single-crystal membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Enhanced stability
Although 3D perovskites like MAPbI3 exhibit fascinating properties and are important in various devices such as highly efficient photodetectors, solar cells, and light-emitting diodes, their poor stability in the ambient environment greatly hampers their practical application. A major reason that 2D RP phases have drawn intense research consideration is their superior long-term stability over that of 3D perovskites. In this section, recent progress in the stability enhancement of 2D RP perovskite materials is reviewed.
Generally, smaller molecules are more sensitive to ambient moisture than larger ones and the material structure tends to disintegrate after long-term exposure to moisture. In 3D perovskites, the monovalent cations are all small molecules with single carbon atoms, like MA+ and FA+, because 3D perovskite structures are thermodynamically unstable when larger molecules are located within the PbI2 framework. However, there are no such problems in RP phases because their open architecture allows the intercalation of long-chain alkylamine or large aromatic amines that act as organic spacers. The organic spacers can behave as insulating layers to protect the PbI2 framework from the invasion of humidity. For example, films of MAPbI3 and (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) RP perovskites were prepared by spin coating and then their ambient stability under the same conditions was studied.68Fig. 11a shows that the film of (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 remained unchanged after 2 months of exposure to 40% humidity with no additional PbI2 diffraction peaks observed in its X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. In addition, no evident degradation was witnessed for the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 4) films, as illustrated in Fig. 11b. In contrast, the film of MAPbI3 gradually decomposed to yellow PbI2 after a short time in the humid atmosphere because of the gradual loss of MA+ (Fig. 11b). The moisture resistance of 2D perovskites may be attributed to the hydrophobicity of the long BA cation chain and the highly oriented and dense nature of the perovskite films, which prevent direct contact of adventitious water with the perovskite.68 Based on this point of view, Zheng et al.66 systematically studied the stability of four quasi-2D perovskites (C6H5CH2NH3)2(FA)8Pb9I28 ((BE)2(FA)8Pb9I28), ((CH3)2NH2)2(FA)8Pb9I28 ((DI)2(FA)8Pb9I28), ((CH2)3(NH3)2) (FA)8Pb9I28 ((PR) (FA)8Pb9I28), and ((CH2)4(NH3)2) (FA)8Pb9I28 ((BU) (FA)8Pb9I28) under humid conditions. The humidity stability of the 3D perovskite FAPbI3 and four quasi-2D perovskites under the same conditions is shown in Fig. 11c. The 3D FAPbI3 perovskite exhibited evident morphology changes, displaying considerable decomposition after exposure to humid conditions for 120 h, whereas the other four quasi-2D perovskites remained almost unchanged under the same conditions. The hydrophobicities of the four quasi-2D perovskites were different. According to Fig. 11c–e, the humidity stability of the four perovskite thin films displayed the following order: (PR) (FA)8Pb9I28 < (BU) (FA)8Pb9I28 < (DI)2(FA)8Pb9I28 < (BE)2(FA)8Pb9I28. These results correlate with the cation valence state and number of carbon atoms in the organic spacers: the lower the valence state and greater the number of carbon atoms of the organic spacers, the higher the humidity resistance of the films. In addition, a solar cell based on (BE)2(FA)8Pb9I28 showed a high PCE of 17.4%. Importantly, this device based on (BE)2(FA)8Pb9I28 maintained 80% of its initial PCE after exposure to 80% relative humidity (RH) for 500 h.
 Fig. 11  (a), (b) Stability of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4, and ∞) series. (a) XRD patterns of a fresh and aged (for 2 months) (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 film. (b) Photographs of five different perovskite films before and after exposure to humidity. (a), (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Photographs of FAPbI3 and four quasi-2D perovskite films before and after exposure to 80% relative humidity (RH). (d) XRD patterns of four unsealed quasi-2D perovskite thin films after exposure to 80% RH. (e) Normalized efficiency variation curves of four 2D perovskite and FAPbI3 perovskite single crystals exposed to 80% RH. (c)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Wiley VCH. (f), (g) Energetics of perovskite formation and stability. (f) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞). (g) Density functional theory simulation of the formation energy of perovskites with different n values in different atmospheres. (f), (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The introduction of organic spacers into 3D perovskite structures not only provides hydrophobic groups, but also alters the fairly rigid 3D framework composed of corner-sharing octahedra to an open architecture.131 As described above, the t of a perfect perovskite structure lies within the range of 0.9–1.0 and distortion arises when t deviates from this range, which increases the instability of the structure. Density functional theory (DFT) was used to simulate the stability of dimensionally tuned perovskites, as presented in Fig. 11f. The calculations indicated that the formation energy of 3D perovskites is quite low, which makes it easy for them to decompose to their precursors, especially in a humid environment. This accounts for the low stability of these materials under ambient conditions.47 The situation is quite different for 2D RP phases because the introduction of large organic molecules that are not incorporated into the 3D lattice provides appreciable van der Waals interactions. These interactions greatly ease the structural stress of 3D perovskites and therefore suppress their degradation. Both desorption energies and decomposition lifetimes decrease considerably as n increases (Fig. 11g), consistent with the sensitivity of perovskites to moisture. In addition, previous studies have shown that replacing MA+ with FA+ further increased the stability of 2D RP phases as well as markedly improving solar cell performance.124,132 Therefore, more robust solar cells with outstanding stability can be expected by careful composition engineering.
4. Applications of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in highly efficient photodetectors
Apart from their outstanding stability in the ambient environment, 2D hybrid RP perovskites also possess fascinating properties including a high absorption coefficient, appropriate and tunable band gap, high carrier mobility, and long charge-diffusion length. These features make 2D hybrid RP perovskites promising candidates for use as highly efficient photodetectors. In this section, recent advances of RP perovskite-based photodetectors are discussed.
In 2016, Tan and colleagues systematically studied the photodetection performance of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite.133 Interdigitated electrodes of graphene with a distance between each pair of graphene electrodes of about 100 nm were designed to increase the absorption cross section of the perovskite (Fig. 12a). Current–voltage (I–V) curves of the device showed distinct differences in the dark and under discrete illumination intensities of a 470 nm defocused laser (Fig. 12b).The dark current of the device was extremely low (10−10 A), whereas the corresponding photocurrent under illumination gradually increased with the incident power. The time-dependent photocurrent response of the device at 470 nm was also investigated (Fig. 12c). An on/off current ratio of nearly 103 was obtained under a small bias (0.5 V) and weak incident power (10 μW), leading to an ultrahigh photoresponsivity of up to 2100 A W−1. It should be noted that in this study, graphene was introduced during device fabrication and the efficient encapsulation of the perovskite by the graphene electrodes greatly enhanced both the photoresponsivity and robustness of the device.
 Fig. 12  Photodetectors based on Ruddlesden–Popper phases. (a) SEM images of a photodetector based on 2D (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. Scale bar, 1 μm. (b) Current–voltage (ISD–VSD) curves of the device in the dark and under different illumination intensities of a 470 nm defocused laser. (c) Time-dependent photocurrent response of the device exposed to a 470 nm defocused laser with a spot size of 1 mm2 operated at a bias voltage of 0.5 V and power of 10 μW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Ferroelectricity has been used to enhance the photoelectric performance of 2D RP perovskites. Previous studies have shown that the built-in electric field provided by the large spontaneous polarization of ferroelectric materials greatly lowers the dark current, which improves the signal-to-noise ratio and thus photodetection performance.134,135 In 2017, Li et al.115 reported a high-performance photodetector based on an unusual ferroelectric RP phase (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10.
Perovskite single crystals with high optical quality, as shown in Fig. 13a, were grown by the temperature-cooling method and then a highly oriented wafer was exfoliated from the crystal and used to fabricate a photodetector. Notable photocurrent was observed when the incident wavelength was below 550 nm, which decreased sharply when the incident wavelength was longer than 550 nm (Fig. 13b). The photodetector showed an extremely low dark current (∼2 × 10−12 A at 5 V). The on/off ratio of the device was at least 2.5 × 103 and an optimized photodetectivity of 3.6 × 1010 Jones was obtained. The response speed of the device was also measured. Fig. 13c shows that the estimated rise (τr) and decay (τf) times were τr = 150 and τf = 570 μs, which are faster or comparable to those of reported photodetectors based on 3D hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites.138–141
 Fig. 13  Photodetectors based on ferroelectric Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites. (a) Photograph of bulk single crystals of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 grown by the temperature-cooling method. (b) Variation of photocurrent with incident wavelength under a fixed power of about 2.13 mW cm−2. (c) Enlarged view of the rise and fall of photocurrent responses during on-off light switching. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a photodetector based on the 2D ferroelectric RP perovskite EA4Pb3Cl10 in the dark and under 266 nm illumination at different incident powers. (e) Time-dependent photocurrent response of the device exposed to ambient conditions. (f) The rise and decay of the photocurrent response of the device at zero-bias. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Polarization dependence of the angle-resolved photocurrent under polarized incident light of a photodetector based on the 2D ferroelectric RP perovskite (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2Br7. Along the horizontal axis, the electric field induced by the polarized light is parallel to the crystallographic a-axis (in-plane direction). (h) Long-term repeated switching cycles illustrating the photoresponse of the device. (i) Rise and decay of the photocurrent response of the device. (g)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The spontaneous polarization Ps and large anisotropy of the crystallographic structures of ferroelectric 2D RP perovskites have also inspired scientists to design new self-powered and polarization-sensitive photodetectors.136,137,142 Taking advantage of the ability of the built-in electric field to enhance the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, a self-powered photoresponse was realized using a newly developed 2D ferroelectric perovskite, (EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10 (EA: ethylammonium), which exhibited a Ps of 3.7 μC cm−2.142 Strikingly, a zero-bias photocurrent of 4.1 μA cm−2 was obtained for the self-powered photodetector, as well as an ultralarge “on/off” ratio of ∼106. The responsivity and detectivity of the device were determined to be 1.35 mA W−1 and 1.16 × 109 Jones, respectively. Recently, the same research group successfully grew a new ferroelectric 2D perovskite, EA4Pb3Cl10, which exhibited a larger Ps of ∼4.5 μC cm−2 and a wider bandgap of 3.39 eV.136 Benefiting from the large Ps and bandgap, a self-powered visible-blind ultraviolet photodetector was designed and fabricated. As shown in Fig. 13d, under 266 nm illumination with a fixed incident power of 7.09 mW mm−2, a zero-bias photocurrent as high as 18.6 μA cm−2 was obtained. This value is larger than those of most conventional inorganic ferroelectrics and also the previously mentioned 2D RP perovskite (EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10. Fig. 13e and f display the time-dependent photocurrent response and τr and τf of the device, respectively. After 2 h of on/off cycles, only slight degradation was observed. The τr and τf of the device were 0.8 and 0.22 s, respectively. Detailed performance parameters of the photodetector are listed in Table 3.
Table 3 Performances of some photodetectors based on Ruddlesden–Popper perovskitesa




Materials
Dark current (A)
On/off ratio
Responsivity (A W−1)
Detectivity (Jones)
Response speed
Test conditions
Ref.





a BA: butylamine; MA: methylamine; EA: ethylammonium; OA: octadecylamine; FA: formamidine; (iBA): iso-butylamine; PEA: phenylethylamine; PA: n-pentylamine; G: guanidinium.





(BA)2PbBr4
∼10−10
103
∼2100
—
—

λ: 470 nm; Vbias: 0.5 V; Pinc: 10 μW

133



(BA)2PbI4
1 × 10−12 to 1 × 10−11
1 × 102 (Vbias: 10 V)
3.0 × 10−3
—

τ
r: 28.4 ms

V
bias: 30 V Pinc: 3.0 mW cm−2

159




τ
f: 27.5 ms


(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7




7.31 × 10−3
—

τ
r: 8.4 ms



τ
f: 7.5 ms


(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10


1 × 103 (Vbias: 10 V)
12.78 × 10−3
—

τ
r: 10.0 ms



τ
f: 7.5 ms


(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnBr3n+1
2.8 × 10−12
2.3 × 103 (4.63 mW cm−2)
190 × 10−3 (500 nm, 0.33 mW cm−2)
—

τ
r: 0.21 s

V
bias: 1 V

160




τ
f: 0.24 s


(532 nm, 0.42 mW cm−2)


(BA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10
10−12
2.5 × 103


3.6 × 1010

τ
r: 150 μs

λ: 420 nm; Vbias: 5 V Pinc: 2.13 mW cm−2

115




τ
f: 7.5 μs


(BA)2MAPb2Br7
Unpolarized
∼1.2 × 103







λ: 405 nm

137



Polarized (c-axis)




∼1.1 × 109
τr: ∼20 μs


τf: ∼28 μs


EA4Pb3Cl10


∼104
26.2 × 10−6
3.06 × 109

τ
r: ∼0.8 s

λ: 266 nm; Vbias: 0 V; Pinc: 2.48 mW mm−2

136




τ
f: ∼0.22 s


(EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10
∼4 × 10−15
∼106
1.35 × 10−3
1.16 × 109

τ
r: ∼96 μs

λ: 405 nm; Vbias: 0 V; Pinc: 0.1 W cm−2

142




τ
f: ∼123 μs


(OA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1




32



τ
r: 0.25 ms

λ: 442 nm Vbias: 9 V Pinc: 3.2 mW mm−2

146




τ
f: 1.45 ms


(iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (hot casting treated)
1.3 × 10−11 to 3.1 × 10−9
4.0 × 102
117.09 × 10−3



τ
r: 16 ms

λ: 532 nm Vbias: 1.5 V Pinc: 0.6 W cm−2

145




τ
f: 15 ms


(iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
4.1 × 102
71.11 × 10−3



τ
r: 20 ms



τ
f: 17 ms


(iBA)2((MA0.4FA0.6)0.9Cs0.1)3Pb4I13
1.27 × 10−12
720
400 × 10−3
1.68 × 1012

τ
r: ∼43 ms

λ: 532 nm; Vbias: 1.5 V; Pinc: 0.22 W cm−2

150




τ
f: ∼22 ms


(iBA)2PbI4
2 × 10−10


0.56
1.23 × 1010

τ
r: ∼233 ms

λ: 560 nm; Vbias: −5 V

161




τ
f: ∼166 ms


(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
<10−12


(1.53 ± 0.19) × 104 (10 Hz)
(4.68 ± 0.41) × 1015 (10 Hz)

τ
r: 27.6 μs

V
bias: 5 V Pinc: 229 mW cm−2

143



(1.51 ± 0.21) × 104 (30 Hz)
(7.45 ± 0.66) × 1015 (30 Hz)

τ
f: 24.5 μs


(PA)2(MA)Pb2I7
1.1 × 10−10
>103
3.87 × 10−3 (Pinc = 8 mW cm−2)
2.92 × 1010 (Pinc = 8 mW cm−2)

τ
r: 1.52 μs

λ: 600 nm Vbias: 9.5 V Pinc: 35 mW cm−2

162




τ
f: 1.67 μs


(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
Monolayer
10−13
> 105 (346 μW, 3 V)
11.3 × 10−3 (36 nW)
4.7 × 1010
Focused laser, λ: 532 nm

116



Bilayer
—
24.2 × 10−3 (36 nW)




Bulk
—
71.9 × 10−3 (36 nW)
1.1 × 1012


—
7.4 × 104
1.2 × 1015
Defocused laser, λ: 532 nm


(PEA)2MA3Pb4I13
1.7 × 10−4 mA cm−2
2 × 104 (white light, 62 mW cm−2)
0.46
6 × 1011

τ
r: 5.8 ms

λ: 600 nm Pinc: 39 μW cm−2

163




τ
f: 4.6 ms


(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2
—
102 (0 V, 5.46 nW)
0.121 (0 V, 451 nm, 36 pW)
8.09 × 109 (660 nm, 0.5 V)

τ
r: 34 ms

λ: 451 nm

151



1100 (3 V)

τ
f: 38 ms (0 V)


(BA)2PbI4
5.72 × 10−13
24







V
bias: 1 V

164



(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7
2.25 × 10−13
399
2.96
2.7 × 1013
<4 ms


(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10
1.45 × 10−14
2862








(PEA)2PbI4 (001)-plane
3.06 × 10−12


139.6
1.89 × 1015

τ
r: 21 μs

V
bias: 5 V Pinc: 3.3 × 10−5 mW cm−2

122




τ
f: 37 μs


(BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7
∼10−12
∼103
0.69 (540 nm)



τ
r: 150 ms

λ: 540 nm Vbias: 3 V Pinc: 45 mW cm−2

105



0.65 (610 nm)

τ
f: 170 ms


(BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7


103
∼10−7



τ
r: 124 ms

λ: 980 nm; Vbias: 1 V; Pinc: 200 mW cm−2

106




τ
f: 110 ms


(PA)2(G)Pb2I7
∼2.4 × 10−11
2500
47
6.3 × 1012
3.1 ns

V
bias: 10 V Pinc: 1.2 mW cm−2

118





Combining the ferroelectric spontaneous polarization and strong structural anisotropy of 2D RP perovskites, a polarization-sensitive photodetector working in the short-wavelength region was also prepared based on the 2D RP perovskite (BA)2(MA)Pb2Br7, which exhibited a Ps of 3.6 μC cm−2 and bandgap of ∼2.55 eV.137 Under 405 nm illumination incident from the b-axis (in-plane direction), as shown in Fig. 13g, the maximum photocurrent (Imax) was reached when the polarization direction of the incident light was parallel to the crystallographic c-axis (in-plane direction), whereas the minimum photocurrent (Imin) was observed along the a-axis (out-of-plane direction). The calculated polarization-dependent dichroism ratio (Imax/Imin) was ∼2.0. These results are in good agreement with the previously reported theoretical analysis of RP materials, which suggests that the large anisotropy of layered perovskites means that they exhibit better performance as polarized light detectors than solar absorbers.70,71 After long-term repeated “on/off” switching (∼104 cycles), no obvious fatigue was observed, indicating that the photodetector displayed excellent anti-fatigue behavior (Fig. 13h). The photodetector also exhibited a highly sensitive detectivity of up to ∼109 Jones and a fast response speed with measured τr and τf values of ∼20 and ∼28 μs, respectively (Fig. 13i). This promising performance makes (BA)2(MA)Pb2Br7 a potential candidate material for use in short-wavelength polarization-sensitive detection.
In 2018, Leng and co-workers found that laser-induced surface relaxation can be used to modulate the energy landscape in molecularly thin RP phases in a highly reversible manner and (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)4Pb4I13 showed superior photodetection performance.116 Bulk single crystals of the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) family were grown by a temperature-programmed crystallization method. Monolayer, bilayer, and bulk flakes of the n = 4 member were exfoliated from the crystal to fabricate photodetectors. The monolayer and bilayer flakes were treated by laser annealing to form a relaxed state whereas the bulk remained derelaxed. The flakes were electrically contacted by bottom gold contacts and then the device was capped with hBN as a protection layer (Fig. 14a). The I–V curves of the device (Fig. 14b) revealed that it displayed an ultralow dark current of 10−13 A and the photocurrent reached 610 nA at a laser excitation power of 346 μW at a source–drain voltage of 3 V, corresponding to an increase of five orders of magnitude. Fig. 14c shows that the photocurrent of the device based on bulk flakes was substantially higher than that of the monolayer one (Fig. 14b), which confirmed that the photocurrent was limited by the density of photosensitive states and excitons were able to tunnel across the layers to dissociate at electrodes, contributing to high responsivity and detectivity. The calculated photodetectivities for the monolayer and bulk flake-based detectors were 4.7 × 1010 and 1.1 × 1012 Jones, respectively. Under focused laser illumination at 532 nm, the calculated photoresponsivities at an excitation power of 36 nW for the monolayer, bilayer, and bulk perovskites were 11.3, 24.2, and 71.9 mA W−1, respectively. A responsivity of 7.4 × 104 A W−1 and ultrahigh photodetectivity of 1.2 × 1015 Jones were obtained using the detector based on bulk flakes with a thickness of around 20 nm under the same laser illumination (Fig. 14d). This promising performance makes these 2D materials attractive for practical applications.
 Fig. 14  Photodetectors based on Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phases. (a) Schematic of the structure of a photodetector device based on a monolayer (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)3Pb4I13 flake. (b) I–V characteristics of a monolayer perovskite device tested in the relaxed state in the dark and under different illumination intensities. (c) I–V curves of the bulk device in the dark and under different illumination intensities. (d) Comparison of the detectivity D* and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of photodetectors made from monolayer, bilayer, and bulk perovskite flakes. (a)–(d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Illustration of a photodetector based on single-crystalline 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb3I13 nanowire arrays. (f) Schematic of carrier dynamics in the photodetector of the single-crystalline (101)-oriented 2D perovskite. (g) Temporal response of 1D arrays of the layered perovskite. (h), (i) Responsivities and detectivities, respectively, of n = 2–5 nanowires in the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 series under modulation frequencies of 10 and 30 Hz. (e)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Apart from the strain engineering of RP perovskites to modulate their optoelectronic performance, the fringe effect can also be used to improve the performance of 2D perovskite-based devices. In 2018, 2D-perovskite nanowire arrays of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 2–5) with pure crystallographic orientations were designed and fabricated for use in photodetection.143Fig. 14e shows the photodetector structure based on the nanowire arrays. According to electron diffraction results, the nanowires exhibit pure crystallographic orientations because each wire was perpendicular to the perovskite layer and correspondingly, the spatially confined height and width were parallel to the perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. 14f. This device design integrates insulating organic barriers in the carrier-transport pathway to suppress the dark current with a highly photoconductive channel, provided by the exposed crystalline edges, for exciton dissociation, free-carrier conduction, and charge injection.144 This structure created high resistance in the interior of the crystals and high conductivity at the edges of the crystals. Using this structure, superior photodetection performance was achieved, especially for the n = 4 material (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13, which exhibited the best overall performance among the perovskites with n = 2–5. Because of the ability of the serial insulating organic barriers in the carrier-transport channel to suppress the dark current, photodetectors fabricated with perovskites with n = 2–4 exhibited quite low dark currents of the order of 10−12 A. The response speed of the photodetectors was also impressive. As shown in Fig. 14g, the response times of the photodetector fabricated with the n = 4 perovskite were τr = 27.6 μs and τf = 24.5 μs under an irradiance of 229 mW cm−2. The photoresponsivities and detectivities of the photodetectors were also evaluated. The n = 4 perovskite nanowires presented high average responsivities of (1.53 ± 0.19) × 104 and (1.51 ± 0.21) × 104 A W−1 at modulation frequencies of 10 and 30 Hz, respectively, corresponding to detectivities of (4.68 ± 0.41) × 1015 and (7.45 ± 0.66) × 1015 Jones, respectively (Fig. 10h and i).
Apart from modulating the photodetector performance by modifying the surface state of the materials, introducing a built-in electric field to suppress the dark current, or using fringe effects, some other ways have also been developed to regulate their performance. Recently. Dong et al.145 reported the synthesis of quasi-2D RP perovskite (iBA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 by replacing the frequently used linear n-butylamine (BA) with short-branched iso-butylamine (iBA), which is an isomer of BA, as shown in Fig. 15a. Using iBA, enhanced photodetection performance was achieved. Two different approaches, room-temperature casting and hot casting, were used in the material synthesis. The hot-casting method was found to be preferable for the material synthesis, yielding enhanced photodetection performance including a responsivity as high as 117.09 mA W−1, on/off ratio of 4.0 × 102, and responses of τr = 16 ms and τf = 15 ms for the n = 4 perovskite in the (iBA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 series (Fig. 15b–e). In addition to the modification of the organic spacer, attempts have been made to replace the so-called “perovskiter” site, which is located within the PbI3 perovskite framework and usually occupied by MA+.146–150 Recently, Dong and colleagues incorporated mixed cations like FA+ and Cs+ into (iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and designed a new series of photodetectors.150 After detailed measurements and analysis, (iBA)2((MA0.4FA0.6)0.9Cs0.1)3Pb4I13 (FA0.6Cs0.1) was found to show the best photodetection performance of the doped materials. Flexible photodetectors based on FA0.6Cs0.1 were fabricated and exhibited attractive performance, including high detectivity up to 1.68 × 1012 Jones, acceptable responsivity of 400 mA W−1, and fast responses of τr = 43 ms and τf = 22 ms. Detailed performance parameters of the photodetector are listed in Table 3.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of layered perovskite materials with the chemical formula (iBA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4). Insets are the chemical structures of iBA and nBA. All hydrogen atoms are omitted. (b)–(e) Photoresponse properties of the room-temperature and hot-cast-fabricated samples with the chemical formula (iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. (b) I–V curves with and without light illumination. (c) Photocurrent and responsivity against light intensity. (d) Current vs. time under modulated incident light. (e) High-resolution current vs. time curve. In (c)–(e), the bias voltage was 1.5 V and the incident light wavelength was 532 nm. In (d) and (e), the light intensity was 0.6 W cm−22. (a)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Illustration of the tailored design of (PA)2(G)Pb2I7. Because of the tolerance-factor restriction, it fails to directly insert a large G cation into the perovskite cavity confined by the corner-sharing PbI6 octahedra. However, for (PA)2(G)Pb2I7, organic G cations can be located inside the distorted perovskite framework as a “perovskiter” to form a 2D bilayer perovskite motif. (g) Iph and Idark measured under different incident light power intensities. (h) Photoresponsivity R and detectivity D* of (PA)2(G)Pb2I7 as a function of incident light power. (f)–(h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH. 
Apart from the traditional organic MA+ and FA+ and inorganic Cs+, there are also some other monovalent organic groups that can act as the perovskiter. As depicted in Fig. 15f, the relatively large guanidinium (G) group was first introduced into (PA)2(G)Pb2I7 (PA = n-pentylaminium) as the perovskiter.118 Single-crystal array photodetectors based on the obtained materials were fabricated that achieved high photodetectivities (6.3 × 1012 Jones) and responsivities (∼47 A W−1), as well as low dark current (∼2.4 × 10−11 A) (Fig. 15g and h). The outstanding performance of the (PA)2(G)Pb2I7-based photodetectors paves the way to explore novel 2D hybrid perovskite candidates to improve the performance of optoelectronic devices.
Heterostructures are of great importance in advanced electronics because of their ability to exhibit physical properties inaccessible to single-material systems. Thus, heterostructures can tremendously extend the functionalities of electronic devices.152 In particular, 3D perovskite-based heterostructures have been widely studied and numerous achievements have been realized.36,153–157 Compared with their 3D counterparts, the 2D structural characteristics and van der Waals interactions between the organic spacer layer and perovskite-like layers of RP phases make these materials perfect candidates for high-performance photodetectors with low noise because of their lack of dangling bonds.81,158 Therefore, integrating RP perovskites into heterostructures has attracted intense attention, although this field is still in its infancy. Recently, (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 and (PEA)2SnI4/MoS2 heterostructures were prepared for use in photodetectors.105,151 As shown in Fig. 16a, a centimeter-sized (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 heterostructure, in which the n = 2 perovskite layer grew outside that with n = 1, was successfully grown by optimizing the precursor concentration and maintaining time. Based on the heterostructure, a two-probe vertical electronic device was designed. Fig. 16b shows that the fabricated device consisted of two back-to-back heterostructures, which greatly suppressed the dark current and thus improved the sensitivity of the device to achieve superior photodetection performance. An extremely low dark current of ∼10−12 A (Fig. 16c), corresponding to a dark current density of 10−6 A cm−2, was obtained and the measured responses were τr = 150 ms and τf = 170 ms (Fig. 16d). The relatively low response speeds should be attributed to the large thickness of the plate and low operating electric field. A device based on a heterostructure with a thinner n = 2 perovskite layer was also fabricated. This device exhibited a narrow dual-band spectral response with central peaks located at 540 and 610 nm, as shown in Fig. 16e.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process of centimeter-sized (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructures. (b) Schematic illustration of the narrow dual-band photodetector configuration of the (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructure. (c) Output characteristics (I–V curves) of the heterostructured device in the dark and under different monochromatic light illumination conditions. (d) Temporal photoresponse of the (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructured photodetector irradiated by 540 nm light with a power density of 45 mW cm−2 under a bias voltage of 3 V. (e) Normalized responsivity of narrow dual-band (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructure photodetectors fabricated with maintaining times of 30 and 240 min (corresponding to (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 layer thicknesses of 300 nm and 1.1 μm, respectively) under a bias voltage of 3 V. (a)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration, optical microscopy image, and SEM image of the as-fabricated graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device. The scale bar represents 20 μm. (g) Ids–Vds curves of the graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device under 451 nm light at different intensities. (h) Power-dependent responsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the as-prepared graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device at zero bias. (i) Transient photocurrent response at zero bias. The incident light power was 5.46 nW. (f)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Integrating RP perovskites with other 2D layered materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides and graphene, has also been explored. As shown in Fig. 16f, using few-layer graphene flakes as the electrodes, photodetectors with the structure graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene were designed and fabricated in which MoS2 and (PEA)2SnI4 acted as n-type and p-type semiconductors, respectively. I–V curves of the device in the dark and under 451 nm illumination (Fig. 16g) exhibited a rectification ratio as high as 500, more than two orders of magnitude larger than that of 3D perovskite/transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures.165–167 Additionally, a responsivity of 1100 A/W at a bias of 3 V (Fig. 16h) and fast response speeds of τr = 34 ms and τf = 38 ms (Fig. 16i) were obtained for the device, making graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene heterostructures competitive candidates for novel optoelectronics in photodetection, solar cells, and light emission.
Performance parameters, including dark current, on/off ratio, response speed, responsivities, and detectivities, of some RP phase-based photodetectors under different test conditions are compared in Table 3. Although lots of research achievements have already been realized, the study of 2D RP perovskite-based photodetectors is still in its infancy and further in-depth explorations, especially of devices based on ultrathin and highly oriented single crystals or heterostructures, are still required.
5. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, recent progress of the photodetection applications of 2D RP perovskite materials was summarized. Compared with 3D perovskites like MAPbI3, 2D RP phases exhibit unique properties such as higher ambient stability intrinsic quantum well structure, strong quantum and dielectric confinement effects, and extremely large exciton binding energy. The crystallographic structure of RP perovskites can be regarded as the periodic splitting of 3D perovskites by long-chain organic alkylamine or arylamine spacers. Herein, the structures of 2D RP phases and 3D perovskites were compared to gain further insights into their structure–property relationships. Specifically, the introduction of the relatively large alkylamine or arylamine organic spacers into the crystal structure alters t and prevents the formation of ideal perovskite structure. Instead, a layered structure of perovskite-like layers and organic spacer layers is formed. The open layered architecture endows RP phases with high tunability while retaining the advantages of 3D perovskites. The favorable characteristics of RP phases suggest their promise for application in optoelectronics like efficient photodetectors. In this review, different preparation methods of RP phases, including solution-based spin-coating, colloidal-based, liquid- and vapor-phase epitaxy, and exfoliation methods, were discussed. The enhanced stability of RP phases compared with that of 3D perovskites was also reviewed. The relatively large organic spacers not only provide hydrophobic protection of moisture-vulnerable small cations like MA+, but also introduce a substantial amount of van der Waals interactions into the structure, which eliminates dangling bonds and lessens the structural stress of the perovskite layers, thus improving the ambient stability of RP phases. Considering their outstanding properties, RP phases have attracted wide attention from optoelectronics researchers. Recent advances of photodetectors containing RP phases were also discussed in detail. Because of the ability of the insulating organic spacer layers to suppress the dark current, RP phases exhibit outstanding photodetection performance with detectivity reaching as high as 1015 Jones,122,143 making these materials promising candidates for the development of novel photodetectors.
Unfortunately, the introduction of organic groups into the 3D perovskite structure does not yield only positive effects. There are still obstacles that need to be overcome for the wide application of RP phases, although promising research achievements have been obtained. First, it remains important to develop new members and enlarge the family of RP phases, even though a considerable number of materials have already been identified. Because of their unique open crystal structure, property modulation of RP phases can be easily implemented through proper modification of the organic spacer groups (A site), bivalent metal cations (B site), or halogens (X site). Besides, the traditional pervoskiter motif located inside the perovskite framework, usually MA+, can also be replaced by the FA+ or G+, which further increases the diversity of RP phases.
Second, the overall device performance greatly relies on the quality of the materials, However, precise control of the composition and phase purity of the synthesized RP materials, especially the large-scale production of high-quality ultrathin flakes, is still difficult. Therefore, additional research effort is needed to study the thermodynamics of the nucleation and growth mechanism of RP phases. Their synthesis methods also need to be developed, modified, or further optimized.
Third, heterostructures of RP phases with other 2D or 3D materials, especially with graphene, disulfide compounds, or 3D perovskites, are urgently needed to extend the functionality of RP phases in optoelectronics. The mechanisms underlying the charge carrier transport and electronic coupling at the interface in such heterostructures should also be elucidated. In addition, there are only a few reports on the growth of bulk single crystals of RP phases at present.117,118,120–122,130 Bulk single crystals are necessary because of their irreplaceable role in the study of the anisotropic properties of RP materials and can also provide further insight into the structural origins of their electronic properties. Therefore, it is important to continue to investigate the growth of bulk single crystals of RP phases. Through detailed study and careful selection of the crystallographic orientations, devices with better performance could be rationally designed.
In summary, 2D RP phases have unique open structures and exhibit fascinating optoelectronic properties, which are favorable for their application in devices like highly efficient photodetectors. Although promising achievements have already been obtained, the mechanism of their charge carrier transport dynamics is still unclear and their controlled synthesis is still challenging. In view of the promising application potential of RP phases in optoelectronics, further in-depth study of these materials in the near future is anticipated.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully appreciate the financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Grant No. ZR2019BEM029).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, F. Gu, H. Rao, S. Ye, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802671 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, F. Meng, M. B. Rowley, B. J. Thompson, M. J. Shearer, D. Ma, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, Y. Deng, B. Chen, H. Wei, X. Xiao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803428 CrossRef PubMed .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20191106.pdf,  2019.
L. Shen, Y. Fang, D. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Lu and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10794–10800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, H. Y. Hsu, J. C. Lee, A. J. Bard and E. T. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 994–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lan, R. Dong, Z. Zhou, L. Shu, D. Li, S. Yip and J. C. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702759 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wangyang, C. Gong, G. Rao, K. Hu, X. Wang, C. Yan, L. Dai, C. Wu and J. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701302 CrossRef .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, H. Fang, X. Jin, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4831–4841 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Wong, M. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. Dou, A. Fu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519–5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Leyden, L. Meng, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono, L. Qiu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, C. Qin, C. Adachi and Y. Qi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3193–3198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. S. Han, K. Hong, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704002 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, S. P. Senanayak, J. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Shi, Z. Li, C. Zhang, B. Yang, L. Jiang, D. Di, A. V. Ievlev, O. S. Ovchinnikova, T. Ding, H. Deng, L. Tang, Y. Guo, J. Wang, K. Xiao, D. Venkateshvaran, L. Jiang, D. Zhu and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902618 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Lin, P. Pattanasattayavong and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702838 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dang, C. Zhong, G. Zhang, D. Ju, L. Wang, S. Xia, H. Xia and X. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6968–6974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ju, Y. Dang, Z. Zhu, H. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, X. Li, L. Wang, X. Hu, A. K. Y. Jen and X. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1556–1565 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ju, X. Zheng, J. Yin, Z. Qiu, B. Türedi, X. Liu, Y. Dang, B. Cao, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr and X. Tao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 228–234 CrossRef .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. Wang, C. Li, S. Liu and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071–3078 RSC .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. Alcocer, A. R. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, R. Lindblad, E. M. Johansson, I. J. McPherson, H. Rensmo, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7147–7155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X.-H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, R. Fu, J. Chen, W. Yang, J. Ren, X. Guo, Z. Ni, X. Pi, C. Z. Li, H. Li and H. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1802349 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-S. Liao, Q.-Q. Zhao, Y.-Q. Zhao, Z.-L. Yu, H. Zhou, P.-B. He, J.-L. Yang and M.-Q. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 135, 109060 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ali, G.-J. Hou, Z.-G. Zhu, Q.-B. Yan, Q.-R. Zheng and G. Su, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 718–728 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, J. S. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, A. J. Neukirch, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, M. Lai, S. R. Ellis, D. Dietze, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang, S. Tretiak and R. A. Mathies, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2525 CrossRef PubMed .

          W.-J. Yin, H.-J. Gu and X.-G. Gong, in Handbook of Materials Modeling,  2019, ch. 74-1, pp. 1–16,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-50257-1_74-1 .
D. J. Yang, Y. H. Du, Y. Q. Zhao, Z. L. Yu and M. Q. Cai, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2019, 256, 1800540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Zhao, Q. R. Ma, B. Liu, Z. L. Yu and M. Q. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 14718–14724 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
W. F. Yang, F. Igbari, Y. H. Lou, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1902584,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201902584 .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Weerasinghe, Y. Dkhissi, A. D. Scully, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y.-B. Cheng, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15016 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Gu, G. Liu, N. Zhu, W. Luo, D. Han, X. Guo, B. Qu, S. Wang, Z. Bian, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902974 CrossRef .
D. Bi, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Oveisi, J. Luo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2910–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Hu, L. Huang, G. Yue, J. Liu, X. Lu, Z. Hu, M. Shang, L. Han and Y. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7047–7050 RSC .
J. Cao, J. Yin, S. Yuan, Y. Zhao, J. Li and N. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9443–9447 RSC .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, M. Chen and S. F. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3670–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, T. Niu, J. Qiu, L. Chao, B. Li, Y. Yang, Q. Li, C. Lin, X. Gao, C. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1900090 CrossRef .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Xie, G. Kieslich, D. M. Evans, M. A. Carpenter, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 328–332 RSC .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Zhang, D. M. Evans, G. Kieslich, S. Tominaka, M. A. Carpenter, J. Zhang, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Li, T. Wu, L. Sun, R.-X. Yang, L. Jiang, P.-F. Cheng, Q.-Q. Hao, T.-J. Wang, R.-F. Lu and W.-Q. Deng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 35175–35180 RSC .
Z. Deng, F. Wei, F. Brivio, Y. Wu, S. Sun, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5015–5020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, F. Wei, S. Sun, G. Kieslich, A. K. Cheetham and P. D. Bristowe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12025–12029 RSC .
C. Liang, D. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Peng, G. Shao and G. Xing, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, G. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan and S. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800051 CrossRef .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhao, Q. R. Ma, B. Liu, Z. L. Yu, J. Yang and M. Q. Cai, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8677–8688 RSC .
Y.-F. Ding, Q.-Q. Zhao, Z.-L. Yu, Y.-Q. Zhao, B. Liu, P.-B. He, H. Zhou, K. Li, S.-F. Yin and M.-Q. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7433–7441 RSC .
N. A. Benedek and C. J. Fennie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13339–13349 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Halasyamani, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3586–3592 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Benedek, A. T. Mulder and C. J. Fennie, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 195, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25673–25683 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. McKinnon, D. C. Reeves and M. H. Akabas, J. Gen. Physiol., 2011, 138, 453–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Lu, G. Liu, H. Xia and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 665–670 RSC .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1957, 10, 538–539 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee and H. N. Lee, Materials, 2017, 10, 368 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Jiang, T. He, S. Li, H. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807696 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, W. Tian, J. Leng, Y. Zhao and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3950–3954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. M. Hosseini, R. Gunder, A. Petsiuk, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, S. Shoaee, P. Meredith, S. Schorr, T. Unold, P. L. Burn, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901090 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, A. Solanki, K. Parida, D. Giovanni, M. Li, T. L. C. Jansen, M. S. Pshenichnikov and T. C. Sum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13523–13532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vashishtha, M. Ng, S. B. Shivarudraiah and J. E. Halpert, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 83–89 CrossRef .
I. Spanopoulos, I. Hadar, W. Ke, Q. Tu, M. Chen, H. Tsai, Y. He, G. Shekhawat, V. P. Dravid, M. R. Wasielewski, A. D. Mohite, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5518–5534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, W. Niu, A. L. Wang, Z. Fan, B. Chen, C. Tan, Q. Lu and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4252–4255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Gan, F. Zhuge, H. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng and T. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yan, D. Gargas and P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, G. Xin, J. Lian and J. Shi, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 4741–4749 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Hsu, Z. Yang and J. Shi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600248 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Guo, Y. Hu, E. Wertz, X. Wang, H. Gao, T.-M. Lu and J. Shi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700373 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Y. Guo, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Sun, J. Feng, T.-M. Lu, E. Wertz and J. Shi, J. Mater. Res., 2017, 32, 3992–4024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Li, Q. Tan, L. Li, J. Zhang, J. Zang, P. Tan, J. Zhang and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6211–6219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Deschler, X. Sun, T. M. Lu, E. A. Wertz, J. M. Hu and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3355–3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Sun, Y. Xiang, Y. Hu, J. Jiang, J. Feng, Y. Y. Sun, X. Wang, G. C. Wang, T. M. Lu, H. Gao, E. A. Wertz and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6676–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Yang, Y. Xiang, Z. Chen, Y. Dong, H. Zhou, Z. Cai, G.-C. Wang and J. Shi, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 076002 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Guo, E. Wertz and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 11803514 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, X. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Gao, F. Zheng, L. Jin, M. Chen, Z. Ma, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, K. Beach, H. Terrones, Y. Shi, D. Gall, T. M. Lu, E. Wertz, J. Feng and J. Shi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4145 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Li, S. Lan, C. Fang, H. Shen, Q. Xiong and D. Li, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5473–5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Mi, X. Gao, J. Li, J. Li, S. Lan, C. Fang, H. Shen, X. Wen, R. Chen, X. Liu, T. He and D. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900398 CrossRef .
M. Era, T. Hattori, T. Taira and T. Tsutsui, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 8–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu, A. Eiden, G. Vijaya Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 171111 CrossRef .
O. Yaffe, A. Chernikov, Z. M. Norman, Y. Zhong, A. Velauthapillai, A. van der Zande, J. S. Owen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045414 CrossRef .
X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089–2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, X. Wu, T. Zhu, X. Zhu and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9992–9998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Hintermayr, A. F. Richter, F. Ehrat, M. Doblinger, W. Vanderlinden, J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, L. Polavarapu, J. Feldmann and A. S. Urban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9478–9485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, G. Lin, X. Xiong, W. Zhou, H. Luo and D. Li, 2D Matter., 2018, 5, 021001 CrossRef .
W. J. Wei, X. X. Jiang, L. Y. Dong, W. W. Liu, X. B. Han, Y. Qin, K. Li, W. Li, Z. S. Lin, X. H. Bu and P. X. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9134–9139 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Sun, P. Wang, W. Hu, S. Wang, C. Ji, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 12150–12154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leng, I. Abdelwahab, I. Verzhbitskiy, M. Telychko, L. Chu, W. Fu, X. Chi, N. Guo, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, Q. H. Xu, J. Lu, M. Chhowalla, G. Eda and K. P. Loh, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 908–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, J. Wei, X. Liu, X. Wang, K. Xu, M. Lei, W. Hu and X. Tao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2237–2243 RSC .
Z. Xu, Y. Li, X. Liu, C. Ji, H. Chen, L. Li, S. Han, M. Hong, J. Luo and Z. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900308 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
C. M. Raghavan, T. P. Chen, S. S. Li, W. L. Chen, C. Y. Lo, Y. M. Liao, G. Haider, C. C. Lin, C. C. Chen, R. Sankar, Y. M. Chang, F. C. Chou and C. W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3221–3228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, L. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. W. Yeh, N. Yao, B. P. Rand and T. L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12247–12256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, H. Wu, G. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
Y. Dang, D. Ju, L. Wang and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4476–4484 RSC .
Y. Dang, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, D. Ju, S. Xia, H. Xia and X. Tao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 3447–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700471 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lédée, G. Trippé-Allard, H. Diab, P. Audebert, D. Garrot, J.-S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 2598–2602 RSC .
D. Ma, Y. Fu, L. Dang, J. Zhai, I. A. Guzei and S. Jin, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2117–2129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, J. Yin, K. T. Ho, O. Ouellette, M. De Bastiani, B. Murali, O. El Tall, C. Shen, X. Miao, J. Pan, E. Alarousu, J. H. He, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, E. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Wu, D. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4919–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612–16615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, P. Wang, J. Wang, W. Hu, X. Zhou, N. Guo, H. Huang, S. Sun, H. Shen, T. Lin, M. Tang, L. Liao, A. Jiang, J. Sun, X. Meng, X. Chen, W. Lu and J. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6575–6581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Fridkin, Photoferroelectrics, 1979, 85–115 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Li, W. Weng, C. Ji, X. Liu, Z. Sun, W. Lin, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Xu, Z. Wu, S. Han, K. Tao, M. Hong, J. Luo and Z. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Fullon, M. Acerce, C. E. Petoukhoff, J. Yang, C. Chen, S. Du, S. K. Lai, S. P. Lau, D. Voiry, D. O'Carroll, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite, S. Zhang, H. Zhou and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603995 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kwon, E. Hwang, C. H. Ra, W. J. Yoo, J. H. Ahn, J. H. Park and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, Y. Gu, Q. Shan, Y. Zou, J. Song, L. Xu, Y. Dong, J. Li and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5232–5236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, S. Wang, P. Long, L. Li, Y. Peng, Z. Xu, S. Han, Z. Sun, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14504–14508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, C. Gong, H. Gao, W. Wen, Y. Gong, X. Jiang, B. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Fu, L. Jiang and X. Zhang, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, K. Wang and S. Priya, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau3241 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Dong, C. Lan, X. Xu, X. Liang, X. Hu, D. Li, Z. Zhou, L. Shu, S. Yip, C. Li, S. W. Tsang and J. C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19019–19026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Shen, X. Liu, Y. Zhu and H. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2565–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ke, X. Gan, W. Zhao, L. Guo and H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 788, 954–960 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, G. Liu, X. Xu, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15143–15150 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Gao, P. Liu, M. Li, J. Yao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7748–7752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, C. Lan, F. Li, S. Yip and J. C. Ho, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 1342–1352 RSC .
C. Fang, H. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Shen, S. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8419–8427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. Lotsch, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 85–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Zhang, Z. Long-Hui, X. W. Tong, Y. Gao, C. Xie, Y. H. Tsang, L. B. Luo and Y. C. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1185–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Hu, Z.-K. Wang, L. Meng, K.-L. Wang, Y. Zhang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6391–6397 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Chu and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25660–25666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Gan, Y. He, H. Li and T. Zhai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 14893–14897 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. Li, J. Ma, S. Wang, W. Li and D. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900988 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, P. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Sun, X. Huang, L. Li, C. Ji, W. Zhang, B. Teng, W. Hu, M. Hong and J. Luo, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800060 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, S. Hu, J. Zhu, J. Huang and Z. Liang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802764 CrossRef PubMed .
X. He, Y. Wang, K. Li, X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Yang, Q. Liao, T. Zhai, J. Yao and H. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15905–15912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, A. Carvalho, H. Liu, S. X. Lim, A. H. Castro Neto and C. H. Sow, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 11945–11949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bai, J. Qi, F. Li, Y. Fang, W. Han, H. Wu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701275 CrossRef .
C. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Hu, M. H. Chiu, Z. Liu, A. Bera, F. Li, H. Wang, L. J. Li and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3683–3689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Xiangxin Tian	Dr Xiangxin Tian is currently a lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Linyi University. He received his B.S. and Ph.D. in materials science from Shandong University in 2013 and 2018, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Xutang Tao. His research interests mainly include the synthesis, growth and structure–property relationships of novel nonlinear optical crystal materials and two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite single crystals.
Yongzhuan Zhang	Dr Yongzhuan Zhang is currently a lecturer in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Linyi University. He graduated from the Department of Physics in Pisa University. His research interests include laser single crystals and fibers, mainly oxides and fluorides doped with rare-earth ions, grown by the Czochralski or micro-pulling-down technique. His other interests about laser fibers include fluorides used for infrared output. Recently, his research interest spans 2-D materials, such as transition metal disulfides, because of their special performances.
Rongkun Zheng	Rongkun Zheng obtained his B.S. in Physics from Shandong University in China in 1999 and his PhD in Physics from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2004. He joined the University of Sydney in late 2004, and currently is an Associate Professor at the School of Physics. His research interest spans from Condensed Matter and Materials Physics to Microscopy and Microanalysis, with focus on the growth-structure–property relationships in functional materials and devices using sophisticated microscopy and microanalysis, particularly atom probe tomography (APT) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). He has published ∼190 papers and has received ∼7500 citations. He has received a number of awards, including a prestigious fellowship from the Australian Research Council, and has been regularly invited to national and international conferences in his field.
Di Wei	Di Wei received his Ph.D. from Abo Akademi University in Finland. After a postdoctoral fellowship at Cambridge University in the UK, he became a senior research scientist at Nokia Technologies Cambridge. He was one of the initiators of the research in the field of nanocarbon and graphene technologies in Nokia. He participated strongly in the early phase of defining and initiating the European Union Graphene Flagship programme during 2011–2013. He became the executive director of Beijing Graphene Institute in 2017 and keeps the fellowship at Wolfson College Cambridge University and adjunct professorship at Abo Akademi University. His research interests cover applications of nanotechnology in sensors and energy devices.
Jingquan Liu	Prof. Jingquan Liu received his bachelor's degree from Shandong University. His master's and PhD were obtained from the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in 1999 and 2004, where his PhD was undertaken under the guidance of Prof. Justin Gooding. From 2004 to 2006 he worked as a CSIRO-UTS post-doctoral fellow with Prof. Michael Cortie. In 2007 he returned to UNSW with Prof. Tom Davis as a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellow until taking up a professorship at Qingdao University in 2010. He has co-authored over 200 peer-reviewed papers with more than 8000 citations and 5 book chapters. The H-index for his publications is 33. His research interests mainly focus on RAFT polymerization, graphene-related nanomaterials and versatile novel bio- and nanohybrids for varied applications.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Unit cell of a general cubic perovskite and the coordination around the lead ions (octahedron) and the organic cations (cuboctahedron). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic crystal structures of all-inorganic members of Ruddlesden–Popper type An+1BnO3n+1 (n = 1, 2 and 3). n represents the number of stacked octahedral layers separated by a rock-salt AO layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2017, MDPI. (c) Crystal structures of the 2D lead iodide perovskites (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1 to ∞). The n-value denotes the thickness of the inorganic layer in each compound. The numerical values refer to the distance between the terminal iodide ions of each layer and are determined directly from the refined crystal structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

<0.7	
	

0.7–0.9	Tetragonal/orthorhombic/rhombohedral	A too small or B too large
0.9–1.0	Cubic	Ideal perovskite structure
>1.0	Various layered structures	A cation too large

(BA)2PbI4	2.43	(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10	2.03
(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	2.17	(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	1.91
MAPbI3	1.48	
	


 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM images (top) and photographs of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite crystals (bottom) (scale bars = 200 μm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Tyndall effect of (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets in toluene. (c) SEM, (d) AFM, and (e) TEM images of single-layer (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets. Insets: (c) lateral size distribution of the as-synthesized (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheets and (e) SAED pattern of a typical (PEA)2PbI4 nanosheet. (b)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Effects of the solvent volume ratio and crystallization temperature on perovskite morphology. SEM images illustrating the different morphologies of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown using DMF ratios of (a) 33.3%, (b) 25%, (c) 14.3%, (d) 11.1%, and (e) 9.1%. (f) The size and nucleation density of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite with respect to the DMF ratio. SEM images illustrating the different morphologies of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown at ACN ratios of (g) 50%, (h) 40%, (i) 30%, (j) 18%, and (k) 11.25%. (l) Size and nucleation density of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite with respect to the ACN ratio. SEM images of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite grown at (m) 298 K, (n) 313 K, (o) 333 K, (p) 348 K, and (q) 363 K. Insets show corresponding AFM height profiles. (r) Temperature dependence of the thickness and size of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 perovskite. (a)–(r) Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Vapor epitaxy method for the synthesis of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. (a) Epitaxial (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flakes formed on mica by co-evaporation. (b) Height profile of a (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flake. (c) Height line scan of a (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flake, exhibiting excellent surface smoothness. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (d and e) (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 flakes grown on muscovite mica and Si (001), respectively, through the van der Waals epitaxy method. The edges of most rectangular flakes were parallel, indicating that epitaxy was obtained. The insets are enlarged images of the epitaxial flakes, in which step structures were observed, indicating a 2D layer-by-layer growth mechanism. Scale bars represent 20 μm. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustrations of the crystal structural evolution from (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 to (C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 and the corresponding gas–solid phase intercalation process for the preparation of lateral and vertical (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructures. (g) Photograph of a lateral (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure. The distinct color contrast indicates the formation of the heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Liquid-phase epitaxy method for the synthesis of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. (a) Schematic illustration of the solution-based synthetic process and the crystal structure of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure. (b) Photograph of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure produced using a growth time of 240 min. (c) Photograph of the exfoliated plates. The distinct color contrast of the plate indicates the formation of a heterostructure. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Photograph of the (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/(C4H9NH3)2MAPb2I7 heterostructure grown by the solution epitaxy method. The scale bar represents 0.5 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  The exfoliation method for the synthesis of 2D RP phases. (a) Optical and AFM images of exfoliated n = 3 2D perovskite microplates with different thicknesses. Scale bars from top to bottom represent 2, 4, and 10 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing, Ltd. Images at 100× magnification using (b) bright and (c) dark fields of an exfoliated hexagonal (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4 flake. (d) AFM image of the same area. (b)–(d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals. A powder of methylammonium halide (MAX) and PbX2 was ground with a pestle and mortar. Perovskite formation was monitored by the color change of the powder. The perovskite powder was dispersed in toluene with oleylamine and tip-sonicated for 30 min, after which the dispersion was purified to obtain highly fluorescent perovskite nanocrystals. The resulting crystals were polydisperse in size and shape, but showed extremely high crystallinity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Single crystals of RP phases grown by the temperature-cooling method. (a) Block crystals of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 and (b) the typical growth morphology of the crystals. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (c)–(f) Photographs of centimeter-sized RP single crystals with n = 1–4 in the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 series. (c)–(f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (g)–(j) Photographs of plate- and block-shaped single crystals of BA2MA2Pb3I10 ((g) and (h)) and BA2MA3Pb4I13 ((i) and (j)) obtained by the TSSG method. (k) A BA2PbI4 single crystal grown by the TSSG method. (g)–(k) Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2018, RSC Publishing. (l) Photograph of a (PA)2(G)Pb2I7 bulk single crystal with dimensions of 5.5 × 4.2 × 0.9 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Growth process of homologous 2D RP single crystals by slow evaporation using a constant-temperature solution growth strategy. (b) As-grown crystals of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–3). (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the growth process of 2D (PEA)2PbBr4 perovskite single crystals. (d) Photograph of a transparent 2 mm (PEA)2PbBr4 single crystal. (c), (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Crystallization of (PEA)2PbI4 2D RP perovskite single crystals. (a) Gibbs free energy change ΔGtotal as a function of particle radius. ΔGtotal consists of a surface term ΔGs and a bulk term ΔGb. (b) Graph illustrating the lower nucleation barrier for the solution surface compared with that in the solution volume. (c) Schematic of a single crystal staying afloat on a solution surface. (d) Schematic of the surface tension-controlled crystallization process. (e) Photographs of (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals grown at different temperatures. (f) Corresponding photographs of (PEA)2PbI4 single crystals obtained at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Crystallization of quasi-2D (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite single-crystal membranes. (a) Schematic illustration of the alignment of the butylammonium cation surfactant at the water–air interface to template nucleation. (b) Experimental setup during nucleation. (c) Molecular interaction between precursor molecules (red) and water molecules (yellow). Lower interaction energy is expected for the surface-layer molecules than those in the bulk solution because of surface tension. (d) Experimental setup during crystal growth. Snapshots of the fast lateral growth of (e) 2D (n = 1), (f) quasi-2D (n = 2), and (g) 3D (n = ∞) single-crystal membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a), (b) Stability of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4, and ∞) series. (a) XRD patterns of a fresh and aged (for 2 months) (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 film. (b) Photographs of five different perovskite films before and after exposure to humidity. (a), (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Photographs of FAPbI3 and four quasi-2D perovskite films before and after exposure to 80% relative humidity (RH). (d) XRD patterns of four unsealed quasi-2D perovskite thin films after exposure to 80% RH. (e) Normalized efficiency variation curves of four 2D perovskite and FAPbI3 perovskite single crystals exposed to 80% RH. (c)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018, Wiley VCH. (f), (g) Energetics of perovskite formation and stability. (f) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞). (g) Density functional theory simulation of the formation energy of perovskites with different n values in different atmospheres. (f), (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photodetectors based on Ruddlesden–Popper phases. (a) SEM images of a photodetector based on 2D (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. Scale bar, 1 μm. (b) Current–voltage (ISD–VSD) curves of the device in the dark and under different illumination intensities of a 470 nm defocused laser. (c) Time-dependent photocurrent response of the device exposed to a 470 nm defocused laser with a spot size of 1 mm2 operated at a bias voltage of 0.5 V and power of 10 μW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photodetectors based on ferroelectric Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites. (a) Photograph of bulk single crystals of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3Br10 grown by the temperature-cooling method. (b) Variation of photocurrent with incident wavelength under a fixed power of about 2.13 mW cm−2. (c) Enlarged view of the rise and fall of photocurrent responses during on-off light switching. (a)–(c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (d) Current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of a photodetector based on the 2D ferroelectric RP perovskite EA4Pb3Cl10 in the dark and under 266 nm illumination at different incident powers. (e) Time-dependent photocurrent response of the device exposed to ambient conditions. (f) The rise and decay of the photocurrent response of the device at zero-bias. (d)–(f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (g) Polarization dependence of the angle-resolved photocurrent under polarized incident light of a photodetector based on the 2D ferroelectric RP perovskite (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2Br7. Along the horizontal axis, the electric field induced by the polarized light is parallel to the crystallographic a-axis (in-plane direction). (h) Long-term repeated switching cycles illustrating the photoresponse of the device. (i) Rise and decay of the photocurrent response of the device. (g)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 


(BA)2PbBr4	∼10−10	103	∼2100	—	—	
λ: 470 nm; Vbias: 0.5 V; Pinc: 10 μW	
133

(BA)2PbI4	1 × 10−12 to 1 × 10−11	1 × 102 (Vbias: 10 V)	3.0 × 10−3	—	
τ
r: 28.4 ms	
V
bias: 30 V Pinc: 3.0 mW cm−2	
159


τ
f: 27.5 ms
(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	
	
	7.31 × 10−3	—	
τ
r: 8.4 ms

τ
f: 7.5 ms
(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10	
	1 × 103 (Vbias: 10 V)	12.78 × 10−3	—	
τ
r: 10.0 ms

τ
f: 7.5 ms
(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnBr3n+1	2.8 × 10−12	2.3 × 103 (4.63 mW cm−2)	190 × 10−3 (500 nm, 0.33 mW cm−2)	—	
τ
r: 0.21 s	
V
bias: 1 V	
160


τ
f: 0.24 s
(532 nm, 0.42 mW cm−2)
(BA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10	10−12	2.5 × 103	
	3.6 × 1010	
τ
r: 150 μs	
λ: 420 nm; Vbias: 5 V Pinc: 2.13 mW cm−2	
115


τ
f: 7.5 μs
(BA)2MAPb2Br7	Unpolarized	∼1.2 × 103	
	
	
	
λ: 405 nm	
137

Polarized (c-axis)	
	
	∼1.1 × 109	τr: ∼20 μs
τf: ∼28 μs
EA4Pb3Cl10	
	∼104	26.2 × 10−6	3.06 × 109	
τ
r: ∼0.8 s	
λ: 266 nm; Vbias: 0 V; Pinc: 2.48 mW mm−2	
136


τ
f: ∼0.22 s
(EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10	∼4 × 10−15	∼106	1.35 × 10−3	1.16 × 109	
τ
r: ∼96 μs	
λ: 405 nm; Vbias: 0 V; Pinc: 0.1 W cm−2	
142


τ
f: ∼123 μs
(OA)2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1	
	
	32	
	
τ
r: 0.25 ms	
λ: 442 nm Vbias: 9 V Pinc: 3.2 mW mm−2	
146


τ
f: 1.45 ms
(iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (hot casting treated)	1.3 × 10−11 to 3.1 × 10−9	4.0 × 102	117.09 × 10−3	
	
τ
r: 16 ms	
λ: 532 nm Vbias: 1.5 V Pinc: 0.6 W cm−2	
145


τ
f: 15 ms
(iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	4.1 × 102	71.11 × 10−3	
	
τ
r: 20 ms

τ
f: 17 ms
(iBA)2((MA0.4FA0.6)0.9Cs0.1)3Pb4I13	1.27 × 10−12	720	400 × 10−3	1.68 × 1012	
τ
r: ∼43 ms	
λ: 532 nm; Vbias: 1.5 V; Pinc: 0.22 W cm−2	
150


τ
f: ∼22 ms
(iBA)2PbI4	2 × 10−10	
	0.56	1.23 × 1010	
τ
r: ∼233 ms	
λ: 560 nm; Vbias: −5 V	
161


τ
f: ∼166 ms
(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	<10−12	
	(1.53 ± 0.19) × 104 (10 Hz)	(4.68 ± 0.41) × 1015 (10 Hz)	
τ
r: 27.6 μs	
V
bias: 5 V Pinc: 229 mW cm−2	
143

(1.51 ± 0.21) × 104 (30 Hz)	(7.45 ± 0.66) × 1015 (30 Hz)	
τ
f: 24.5 μs
(PA)2(MA)Pb2I7	1.1 × 10−10	>103	3.87 × 10−3 (Pinc = 8 mW cm−2)	2.92 × 1010 (Pinc = 8 mW cm−2)	
τ
r: 1.52 μs	
λ: 600 nm Vbias: 9.5 V Pinc: 35 mW cm−2	
162


τ
f: 1.67 μs
(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	Monolayer	10−13	> 105 (346 μW, 3 V)	11.3 × 10−3 (36 nW)	4.7 × 1010	Focused laser, λ: 532 nm	
116

Bilayer	—	24.2 × 10−3 (36 nW)	

Bulk	—	71.9 × 10−3 (36 nW)	1.1 × 1012
—	7.4 × 104	1.2 × 1015	Defocused laser, λ: 532 nm
(PEA)2MA3Pb4I13	1.7 × 10−4 mA cm−2	2 × 104 (white light, 62 mW cm−2)	0.46	6 × 1011	
τ
r: 5.8 ms	
λ: 600 nm Pinc: 39 μW cm−2	
163


τ
f: 4.6 ms
(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2	—	102 (0 V, 5.46 nW)	0.121 (0 V, 451 nm, 36 pW)	8.09 × 109 (660 nm, 0.5 V)	
τ
r: 34 ms	
λ: 451 nm	
151

1100 (3 V)	
τ
f: 38 ms (0 V)
(BA)2PbI4	5.72 × 10−13	24	
	
	
	
V
bias: 1 V	
164

(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	2.25 × 10−13	399	2.96	2.7 × 1013	<4 ms
(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10	1.45 × 10−14	2862	
	
	

(PEA)2PbI4 (001)-plane	3.06 × 10−12	
	139.6	1.89 × 1015	
τ
r: 21 μs	
V
bias: 5 V Pinc: 3.3 × 10−5 mW cm−2	
122


τ
f: 37 μs
(BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	∼10−12	∼103	0.69 (540 nm)	
	
τ
r: 150 ms	
λ: 540 nm Vbias: 3 V Pinc: 45 mW cm−2	
105

0.65 (610 nm)	
τ
f: 170 ms
(BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	
	103	∼10−7	
	
τ
r: 124 ms	
λ: 980 nm; Vbias: 1 V; Pinc: 200 mW cm−2	
106


τ
f: 110 ms
(PA)2(G)Pb2I7	∼2.4 × 10−11	2500	47	6.3 × 1012	3.1 ns	
V
bias: 10 V Pinc: 1.2 mW cm−2	
118


 	Fig. 14  Photodetectors based on Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phases. (a) Schematic of the structure of a photodetector device based on a monolayer (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)3Pb4I13 flake. (b) I–V characteristics of a monolayer perovskite device tested in the relaxed state in the dark and under different illumination intensities. (c) I–V curves of the bulk device in the dark and under different illumination intensities. (d) Comparison of the detectivity D* and internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of photodetectors made from monolayer, bilayer, and bulk perovskite flakes. (a)–(d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Illustration of a photodetector based on single-crystalline 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb3I13 nanowire arrays. (f) Schematic of carrier dynamics in the photodetector of the single-crystalline (101)-oriented 2D perovskite. (g) Temporal response of 1D arrays of the layered perovskite. (h), (i) Responsivities and detectivities, respectively, of n = 2–5 nanowires in the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 series under modulation frequencies of 10 and 30 Hz. (e)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of layered perovskite materials with the chemical formula (iBA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4). Insets are the chemical structures of iBA and nBA. All hydrogen atoms are omitted. (b)–(e) Photoresponse properties of the room-temperature and hot-cast-fabricated samples with the chemical formula (iBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. (b) I–V curves with and without light illumination. (c) Photocurrent and responsivity against light intensity. (d) Current vs. time under modulated incident light. (e) High-resolution current vs. time curve. In (c)–(e), the bias voltage was 1.5 V and the incident light wavelength was 532 nm. In (d) and (e), the light intensity was 0.6 W cm−22. (a)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) Illustration of the tailored design of (PA)2(G)Pb2I7. Because of the tolerance-factor restriction, it fails to directly insert a large G cation into the perovskite cavity confined by the corner-sharing PbI6 octahedra. However, for (PA)2(G)Pb2I7, organic G cations can be located inside the distorted perovskite framework as a “perovskiter” to form a 2D bilayer perovskite motif. (g) Iph and Idark measured under different incident light power intensities. (h) Photoresponsivity R and detectivity D* of (PA)2(G)Pb2I7 as a function of incident light power. (f)–(h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process of centimeter-sized (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructures. (b) Schematic illustration of the narrow dual-band photodetector configuration of the (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructure. (c) Output characteristics (I–V curves) of the heterostructured device in the dark and under different monochromatic light illumination conditions. (d) Temporal photoresponse of the (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructured photodetector irradiated by 540 nm light with a power density of 45 mW cm−2 under a bias voltage of 3 V. (e) Normalized responsivity of narrow dual-band (BA)2PbI4/(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 heterostructure photodetectors fabricated with maintaining times of 30 and 240 min (corresponding to (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 layer thicknesses of 300 nm and 1.1 μm, respectively) under a bias voltage of 3 V. (a)–(e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration, optical microscopy image, and SEM image of the as-fabricated graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device. The scale bar represents 20 μm. (g) Ids–Vds curves of the graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device under 451 nm light at different intensities. (h) Power-dependent responsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the as-prepared graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene device at zero bias. (i) Transient photocurrent response at zero bias. The incident light power was 5.46 nW. (f)–(i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
