Multifunctional hydantoins: recent advances in optoelectronics and medicinal drugs from Academia to the chemical industry  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC04090A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04090A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16341-16377Multifunctional hydantoins: recent advances in optoelectronics and medicinal drugs from Academia to the chemical industry

        
          
            Pratiksha P. 
            Gawas
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Buthanapalli 
            Ramakrishna
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            N. 
            Veeraiah
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Venkatramaiah 
            Nutalapati
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology (SRMIST), Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu 603203, India. E-mail: nvenkat83@gmail.com; venkatrv1@srmist.edu.in
bDivision of Chemistry, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Chennai campus, Tamil Nadu 600127, India
cDepartment of Physics, Acharya Nagarjuna University, Nagarjuna Nagar, Andhra Pradesh, 522 510, India
Received 
      30th August 2021
    , Accepted 12th October 2021First published on 19th October 2021AbstractImidazilidine-2,4-dione, also well known as hydantoin (TH), is a prominent five-membered heterocyclic compound with four versatile points of functionalities in its framework. Since the discovery of TH, various synthetic strategies have been developed through functionalization and the corresponding derivatives have been found to have versatile applications in various fields of science. Furthermore, its sulphur analogue thiohydantoin (2TH) is a fascinating and potential compound of the hydantoin family with five possible diverse reactive points, which has been explored extensively owing to its simple synthesis, resulting in desirable reactivity patterns and attractive properties via appropriate peripheral functionalization. This review provides a detailed survey on the structural modifications at various positions of 2TH and the promising applications of the resultant derivatives reported in the literature are thoroughly discussed. Functionalization of 2TH shows high potential for biological, medical and pharmaceutical activity. The commercialization of hydantoin-based drugs, their technology in the market and the capital of income generated are explored. TH derivatives display a plethora of properties and a wide range of applications such as sensors, chemical sensory materials towards the detection of toxic anions, metal ions, and biosensing/imaging as labelling markers in living cells and tissues. Furthermore, this review assesses the basic understanding of the photophysical properties of hydantoins given that this field is ripe for new ideas, which can enable their use in optoelectronics and prototypes to translate laboratory products into commercial products.
Pratiksha P. Gawas
Pratiksha Prakash Gawas received her BSc in Chemistry (2015) and MSc (2017) in Organic Chemistry from Goa University, India. Currently, she is a PhD student in the Functional Materials Lab of SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Chennai. Her research interests include optoelectronics, fluorescent materials, photophysics, chemosensors, fluorescent bio-imaging and organometallic chemistry.
Buthanapalli Ramakrishna
Dr Buthanapalli Ramakrishna earned his MSc degree in 2009 from Pondicherry University, where he continued his doctoral research with Prof. Bala. Manimaran as a UGC-Research Fellow and received his PhD Degree in 2016. In Aug 2016, he joined the research group of Prof. Dillip K. Chand as an Institute Postdoctoral Fellow (2016–2018) at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. Later, he moved to the University of Miami, Florida to work with Prof. Angel E. Kaifer as a SERB Indo-US Postdoctoral Fellow. In Dec 2019, he became a faculty member in the Division of Chemistry at Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai Campus. His research interests include transition metal-based coordination and supramolecular chemistry, molecular self-assembly of discrete supramolecules, metallo-pillarenes, molecular recognition and CO-releasing molecules.
N. Veeraiah
Prof. Veeraiah Nalluri obtained his PhD in Solid-State Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 1984. Currently, he is working as a UGC-BSR Faculty Fellow in the Department of Physics at Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur. He received several honours, including Andhra Pradesh (AP) Govt. Best Teacher Award 2015, A.P. Scientist Award 2010, and Fellow of AP Academy of Sciences 2013. He has handled several research projects funded by DST, DRDO, DAE, CSIR, and UGC and organized several National and International conferences on recent trends in materials science. His major research interests include photoluminescence, non-linear optics, piezoelectric materials, positron annihilation, and bioactive studies of glasses and glass ceramic materials. He has published more than 350 research articles (H-index 52 and citation 8500) in various international reputed peer reviewed journals. Currently, he is serving as an Associate Editor for Optical Materials.
Venkatramaiah Nutalapati
Dr Venkatramaiah Nutalapati received his MSc in Analytical Chemistry from Acharya Nagarjuna University, Andhra Pradesh. He obtained his PhD (2011) from Pondicherry University, India. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, India (2011–2012) and FCT Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Aveiro, Portugal (2012–2016). Following his Research Associate work at IISc, he joined as a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, SRM Institute of Science and Technology (SRMIST) in 2017. He is an author of more than 75 research articles with an H-index of 22. His major research interests include supramolecular chemistry, photophysics of organic chromophores and (chemo) sensors and optoelectronics.
1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, hydantoin (TH) or imidazilidine-2,4-dione has received tremendous attention alongside fascinating developments in synthetic organic, medicinal and pharmaceutical chemistry. Typically, TH 1 (Fig. 1) is a five-membered heterocyclic compound comprised of two nitrogen centres and two carbonyl groups in its framework, thus providing four versatile points of functionality, i.e., one each at positions 1 and 3 and C5 positions.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structure of hydantoin (TH). 
Baeyer first isolated TH in 1861 as one of the products in the reduction reaction of the natural product allantoin 2 (Scheme 1).1,2 However, the first classical and constructive synthetic route for TH was reported by Urech et al. in 1873, where 5-methylhydantoin was prepared via the condensation of alanine sulphate in the presence of potassium cyanate and hydrochloric acid.3
 Scheme 1  Reduction of allantoin to TH and urea. 
TH exhibits similar structural features with barbiturate molecules given that they possess chemically similar nitrogen atoms, and both have two points of functionality at the C5 position. Also, diethyl-barbituric acid 3 is well known for its high soporific effect. Up to 1922, the only TH known with a soporific effect was 5-ethyl-5-phenylhydantoin (nirvanol) 4 (Fig. 2), whereas the corresponding diethyl TH analogue showed no such effect. Considering that the R,R′-C-CO-NH-CO-NH– group is common in both 3 and 4 at the C5 position, they are expected to show identical physiological properties. Hence, nirvanol 4 was explored as a sleep-inducing drug in 1917. Triggered by this breakthrough, it appeared that these intriguing and potential properties can also be found with other TH derivatives.4 Therefore, enormous efforts have been made in this direction to explore diverse synthetic strategies for TH and its derivatives. Also, numerous reviews on methodologies for the preparation of TH and its derivatives including by Read,4 Bucherer-Bergs,5 Biltz,6 Ware,7 and Meusel8 have been reported to date. Scheme 2 shows the retrosynthetic routes for the synthesis of different TH given by these authors. However, the challenging reaction conditions, unsustainable substrates, prolonged reaction times, reagent solubility complications, poor yields, and environmental concerns strongly limit the potential of the conventional synthetic methodologies.
 Fig. 2  Structures of TH and diethylbarbituric acid. 
 Scheme 2  Retrosynthetic route for the synthesis of TH. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. 
Recently, sustainable synthetic strategies or green synthetic methodologies have been applied as a convenient and eco-friendly alternative, which partially tend to solve some of the limitations of the conventional synthetic methods. Green synthetic methodologies such as synthesis under microwave irradiation, reaction under solvent-free conditions and reactions using deep eutectic solvents, multicomponent reactions (MCR), bio-activated synthesis, mechanochemistry, etc. have been developed rapidly in the last few decades. These strategies offer highly selective, rapid and efficient transformations with a high degree of conversion of reactants to the desired products (Scheme 3).
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of some C- and N-substituted TH and 2TH using green techniques. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
Multicomponent reactions (MCRs) are a one-pot synthetic method, wherein almost all the atoms of three or more reactants are combined to selectively obtain only one product. This technique is highly advantageous compared to the conventional synthetic procedures, specifically considering its simple purification procedure, short reaction time and atom economy. Therefore, it has evolved as a highly efficient and potential technique in synthetic organic chemistry given that complex organic molecules can be synthesized from simple and easily available reactants in a very fast and efficient way without the isolation of any intermediate. Also, one-pot synthesis avoids the isolation of intermediates formed, achieving step economy, and thus reducing the consumption of solvents.
Gao and co-workers reported the one-pot multicomponent synthesis of tetra-substituted TH through the sustainable integration of the double domino process using commercially available methyl ketones or terminal aryl alkenes, urea and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. This process involves two coupled domino reactions, i.e., iodine-promoted synthesis of unsymmetrical 1,4-enediones (domino I) followed by their sequential transformation into tetra-substituted TH (domino II).11 A synthetic route for the novel molecule [2,1-b]naphtho[1,2-e][1,3]thiazin-10-one was reported by Ghanbari et al. through a facile and solvent-free one-pot MCR method, which was found to be eco-friendly, mild, simple with no chromatographic purification of products and gave high yields.12 Shen et al. reported the synthesis of spiro[indoline-3,7′-pyrrolo[1,2-c]imidazole] derivatives via a green and highly efficient one-pot MCR method catalyzed by sodium bicarbonate in water.13 Mandal et al. developed a facile one-pot three-component synthetic route for the preparation of biologically active drug-like spiro 2TH/TH scaffolds fused with phthalidyl from readily available reactants in a very short time by exploiting the collaborative acidic nature and oxidizing properties of silica sulphuric acid, which was used as a solid support. The excellent yields, recyclability of the silica sulphuric acid, wide reactant scope, very high atom economy and two solvent-free steps out of three steps of this process make it very attractive, highly efficient and practicable.14 Recently, Kotha and co-workers described a green, metal-free, one-pot MCR route using an inexpensive and easily available deep eutectic solvent for the synthesis of different functionalized TH derivatives, which were found to be useful in the agriculture and pharmaceutical industries.15
Numerous procedures have been reported for the synthesis of highly decorated TH by employing different green synthesis techniques such as microwave-activated Read,16 Bucherer-Bergs,17 and Biltz18,19 reactions, including MCR methods such as cascade Ugi/cyclization strategies (Scheme 3).20–22 The microwave-assisted intramolecular carbanilide cyclization using barium hydroxide as a catalyst23 or ureidothenoic acid derivatives under acidic condition24 is reported in solution, the solid phase such as resin containing different amino acids25 and liquid phase by employing macromolecular soluble supports such as poly(ethylene)glycols (PEG),26–28 as shown in Scheme 3. The main advantage of this reaction is that the supported ureidothenoic acid derivatives result in base-induced cleavage followed by cyclisation with the additional aid in simple and fast purification of the product, wherein the unreacted reactants remain attached to the ureidothenoic acid derivative support, whereas TH is released in the solution.24
Green methodologies for the synthesis of TH through the Bucherer–Bergs reaction depend on the use of liquid–liquid (water/ethyl acetate) biphasic continuous flow technologies.29,30 Organic synthesis based on continuous flow methods helps in multistep transformation by allowing efficient mixing of all the reactants and providing thermal control, and thus maintaining the maximal yields of the products with high selectivity.31 Vukelić and co-workers reported a modified version of the Bucherer–Bergs reaction, directly leading to hydantoins C and E from simple and easily available amines.32 The reaction proceeds via photochemically induced multi-step gas–liquid continuous flow in an atmosphere of the abundant, cheap and renewable oxidant O2 (oxygen from the air) and CO2 as the source of carbonyl to trap the in situ-generated unstable intermediate, i.e., α-amino nitrile31–34 (Scheme 3).
Recently, the preparation of TH scaffolds via light-induced transformation for the synthesis of 3,5,5-trisubstituted hydantoin B resulting from the photolytic ring contraction of barbituric acid derivatives has been reported (Scheme 3).35 Solvent-free synthetic methods have also been described to access hydantoin scaffolds H and L starting from methyl N-cyano-N-aryl/alkylaminoacetate derivatives upon neat heating in the presence of dibutyl phosphate to achieve the hydrolysation and cyclisation of the reactant in a single step, thus affording the desired product.36 Similarly, hydantoin L was prepared via microwave-assisted solvent-free medium in a Biltz-like reaction process starting from aryglyoxal in the presence of excess polyphosphoric esters involving a simple purification technique.37 Safari et al. used a recyclable magnetic and heterogeneous Fe3O4 nanoparticle catalyst, given that it is environmentally and economically benign, to prepare hydantoins A and C through the Bucherer–Bergs reaction by neat heating at 70 °C38 (Scheme 3). In contrast, Fahmy and co-workers synthesized the trisubstituted hydantoin of type B by manually grinding benzyl, HCl and phenyl urea under neat solvent-free conditions in a porcelain mortar and pestle at room temperature.39
An alternative source of energy in molecular synthesis based on ultrasound with sonochemical processes has also been studied for accessing hydantoins A–C and E.40 Ultrasonication or direct sonication has been successfully carried out to achieve Biltz41 or Bucherer–Bergs-type reactions on K-10 montmorillonite as a heterogeneous recyclable acidic catalyst.42,43 The microwave-assisted reactions based on sonochemical processes afford a significant enhancement in the reaction rate and mass transport and heat transfer compared to the conventional thermal activation techniques involving lengthy heating and stirring.
Among the various unconventional energy inputs for the sustainable development of more eco-friendly or greener synthetic methods, mechanochemistry44–47 provides unique opportunities to exploit TH-based complex organic frameworks, enzymes, inhibitors,48 active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs)9,49,50 and advanced silicon-based nanomaterials for potential pharmaceutical, agricultural, medicinal, industrial and biomedical applications. Colacino and co-workers reported eco-friendly, no-base, solvent-free procedures without the use of toxic reagents for the synthesis of TH-based commercial drugs or APIs (phenytoin, ethotoin, nitrofurantoin and dantrolene) and hybrid nanomaterials based on mechanochemistry. The synthetic method involves the formation of a ureido derivative via the condensation of silyl isocyanide with diphenylglycine methyl ester hydrochloride, and then cyclization using cesium carbonate. In addition, they also synthesized the anticonvulsant drug ethotoin following a similar procedure using isocyanates as pseudo catalysts generated in situ through Lossen rearrangement (Scheme 3).10,51 Compared to the conventional thermal procedure, the synthesis of TH based on the mechanochemical process is highly advantageous given that it involves simple and easy purification, short reaction time, improved product yields, no generation of waste, reduction in formation of by-products and avoids toxic and harmful reagents and reaction conditions. Thus, reagent and waste economy are achieved, enabling, an eco-friendly, cheap, greener sustainable substitute to synthesize different APIs with low cost and less environmental impact.10
Recently, Konnert et al. reported a review on the recent advances in the synthetic strategies for TH from 2004 to 2016 (classification is given in Fig. 3).52
 Fig. 3  Classification of TH. 
This review focuses on the recent advances in molecular design of TH, highlighting the changes produced by replacing the oxygen of TH with an S-atom. Among the known derivatives of TH, 2-thiohydantoin (2TH) 5 is of great importance owing to its easy synthesis and quantitative yields compared to its oxygen counterpart (Fig. 4A). The structural changes are predominantly due to the greater polarisation of the 2TH thiocarbonyl group (larger contribution of canonical form 5b, as shown in Fig. 4B) compared to the carbonyl group of TH. This is attributed to the difficulties faced by the larger S-atom to form a π-bond with carbon, thus outweighing the high electronegativity effect of oxygen. TH and 2TH-based systems and their potent applications in the field of chemical sensors, optoelectronics and other fields of research are reviewed.
 Fig. 4  (A) Chemical structure of 2TH and (B) canonical forms of the thiocarbonyl functionality of 2TH. 
Over the past few decades, 2TH and its derivatives have attracted increasing attention from researchers owing to their broad spectrum of versatile applications in the pharmaceutical, medicinal, biological, sensor and industrial fields, leading to numerous publications including patents in pharmaceutical, methodological, biological and medicinal chemistry. Thus, it is not astonishing that numerous synthetic methods have been developed to date to synthesize 2TH and its derivatives. The most widely used methods involve the coupling of α-amino acids with acetic anhydride, and then ammonium thiocyanate53–55 and condensation of isothiocyanate with the α-amino acid derivatives.56–59 Additional techniques for the preparation of 2TH involve the reaction between α-halo acids and thiourea,60 α-amino acid and thiourea,61 benzil and thiourea,18,19,62 di-imidazole thiocarbonate and amino amide,63,64 thiocyanate and oxazolinone,65 and others.66 Moreover, most of these reactions have been further modified to obtain better results using the microwave irradiation technique19 and fluorous-phase or solid phase57,67–69 supported reaction conditions.
2TH is a sulphur analogue of the non-aromatic five-membered heterocyclic TH with a thiocarbonyl and carbonyl group at the C2 and C4 position, respectively, including two nitrogen atoms at the C1 and C3 position. Therefore, 2TH has five possible diverse reactive points in its skeleton. The properties and reactivity of 2TH can easily be tuned by appending various functionalities onto the periphery of its ring. Thus, desirable molecular and material properties can be imparted to 2TH by appropriate substitution and derivatisation. Based on the type and nature of the substitution on 2TH, the resulting derivatives show particular biological and pharmaceutical activity with a wide range of applications.70 Owing to the presence of a nucleophilic carbon atom at the C5 position of the 2TH ring, different types of functionalization can be performed.
2. Functionalization of 2-thiohydantoin at the 1 and 3 positions
US Patent No. 2551134 disclosed that 2TH can be structurally modified by functionalizing it with –NH– groups at positions 1 and 3 to obtain a wide range of compounds (Fig. 5), which can be used to improve colour photography. These 2TH derivatives form azomethine dyes with aromatic amines, primary amines and other developing agents during the colour development of silver halide latent images.71
 Fig. 5  Functionalization of 2TH with –NH– groups at positions 1 and 3. 
Abubshait et al. reported highly substituted derivatives of 2TH, which have been screened for their biological activities. Especially, 17 is of great importance, which was prepared by refluxing ortho-vanillin and thiosemicarbazide in methanol followed by cyclisation with ethyl chloroacetate and fused sodium acetate under alcoholic conditions. It showed antimicrobial and anticancer activity. To improve these activities, it was further functionalized at different positions of the 2TH framework to obtain four novel compounds 18–21, as described in Scheme 4. The modified 19 and 21 exhibited enhanced anticancer activities.72
 Scheme 4  Synthetic route for compounds 17–21. 
Mahapatra et al. carried out molecular docking studies of murrayanine-based 2TH and TH analogues. Murrayanine 22 is a naturally occurring alkaloid, which has been used as an anticonvulsant drug in the treatment of epileptic seizures, bipolar personality disorder and neuropathic pain. To enhance its anticonvulsant activity, murrayanine 22 was treated with TH and 2TH to obtain the corresponding new hybrids 23 and 24, respectively (Fig. 6). Based on screening for anticonvulsant activity and molecular docking, the 2TH-containing hybrid 24 was found to exhibit enhanced anticonvulsant activity compared to the parent murrayanine.73
 Fig. 6  Structure of murrayanine and its functionalized derivatives. 
3. Functionalization of 2-thiohydantoin at the 3 and 5 positions
Ramachandran et al. developed four substituted derivatives of 2TH of type 25 (Fig. 7). These compounds were screened for anticonvulsant activity, wherein the commercial anticonvulsant drug clonazepam was used as a standard. It was reported that the presence of a benzylidene moiety, long carbon chain and aromatic moiety at the nitrogen of 2TH improved the anticonvulsant activity of the resultant compound.74
 Fig. 7  Structure of compound 25. 
Shipman et al. synthesized amide-functionalized 2TH (26) under microwave conditions through a four-component reaction. Compound 26 (Fig. 8a) was found to be a fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor with IC50 = 23.4 ± 1.1 μM.75 Gasch and co-workers described a procedure for the synthesis of a conformationally restricted D-gluco pseudo nucleotide containing 2TH attached to C3 of a sugar moiety coupled with different types of amines (27). Furthermore, 27 (Fig. 8b, where R represents different types of amines) showed potential inhibition activity against the enzymes glycosidase and glycogen phosphorylase.76
 Fig. 8  Structure of amide functionalised 2TH 26 and general structure of 27. 
Similarly, Park and co-workers reported the synthesis of benzylidene-containing 2TH derivatives (28, 29 and 30), acting as inhibitors of the enzymes NADPH oxidase 1 and 4 (NOX-1 and NOX-4), which are known to generate reactive oxygen species. The inhibition constant Ki (μM) for 28, 29 and 30 (Fig. 9a) against NOX-1 was 1.95 ± 0.07, 1.02 ± 0.07 and 0.35 ± 0.04 and that against NOX-4 was 0.88 ± 0.01, 2.33 ± 0.05 and 0.84 ± 0.06, respectively.77 The inhibitory mechanisms of some reported NOX inhibitors is presented in Fig. 9b.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structures of 28–30 and (b) inhibitory mechanisms of some reported NOX inhibitors. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
Sundaram et al. described a novel approach for the easy and highly efficient three-component reaction of 3,5-disubstituted 2TH using commercially available amino acid esters, amines and 1-(methyldithiocarbonyl)imidazole derivatives as thiocarbonyl transferring reagents in a one-pot process. All the synthesized compounds (Fig. 10) were found to be optically active, as observed from their optical rotation.79
 Fig. 10  Library of 3,5-disubstituted 2TH. 
4. Functionalization of 2-thiohydantoin at C5 and other positions
Functionalization at position 5 of 2TH shows vital importance from a pharmacological point of view. Roszak and Weaver summarised that phenytoin 49 is used as an anti-epileptic and anticonvulsant drug due to the teratogenic and mutagenic effects exhibited by its amide face between C2 and N3. Upon rotation of this face, it was observed that 49 showed reduce toxicity for mutagenic potential. In contrast, the thio analogue of phenytoin, i.e., 50 (Fig. 11), displayed the same ranges of properties as 49 in addition to some different toxicity such as antithyroid activity, which was found to be much less compared to that shown by 49. This confirms that the amide face between C2 and N3 facilitates the discrimination of effectiveness from toxicity.80
 Fig. 11  Chemical structures of 49 and 50. 
Ahmedova and co-workers reported the effect of a sulphur atom and substitution of the carbonyl group with a thio-keto group on the physicochemical and structural properties of 51 and 52 (Fig. 12). The cyclopentane ring present in 51 and cyclohexane ring in 52 adopt an envelope and chair confirmation, respectively. Although the same number of proton acceptor and donor groups is present in 51 and 52, the presence of water of crystallisation in 52 results in a different pattern of H-binding. The intermolecular H-bonds formed in 51 are of the type N–H⋯O and N–H⋯S, whereas in 52, N–H⋯S, O–H⋯O and O–H⋯N types of intermolecular hydrogen bonds are formed, as shown in their crystal structures (Fig. 12).81
 Fig. 12  Chemical and crystal structures of 51 and 52 showing their intermolecular H-bonding patterns. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009. 
Muccioli et al. reported the synthesis and evaluation of the pharmacological properties of C5-substituted TH and 2TH compounds and evaluated their affinity towards CB1 cannabinoid receptors in humans. Among the compounds screened for their inhibitory action, compounds 53–56 (Fig. 13) exhibited good inhibition activity towards the CB1 cannabinoid receptor. The Ki values for 53 and 54 were 1820 nM and 1738 nM, respectively. The compound with a short unsaturated alkyl chain was found to be more favourable as a receptor inhibitor. Replacing oxygen with sulphur on the C2 position of the TH skeleton led to the formation of 2TH 55 and 56, which showed Ki values of 724 nM and 589 nM, respectively. The Ki values for TH derivatives 53 and 54 were 2–3 times higher than that of 55 and 56. Hence, the replacement of the oxygen present in the C2 position of the TH ring with sulphur resulted in enhanced affinity for the CB1 cannabinoid receptor.82
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures of C5-substituted TH and 2TH compounds. 

C
5-Substituted 2TH linked with benzylidene derivatives exhibit potential as inhibitors of tyrosinase and anti-browning agents in agricultural and food products. They can also be used as active candidates in cosmetics for skin lighting and in medicines for the treatment of hyperpigmentation-related diseases. Fig. 14 presents a list of the 2TH analogues (57–59) that were found to be the most promising candidates and are currently used as anticonvulsant drugs. By replacing the carbonyl group with a thiocarbonyl group, the resulting compounds display reduced anticonvulsant activity and an increased tyrosinase inhibition effect, including better bioavailability, due to their improved lipophilic character. Compounds 57–59 exhibited greater tyrosinase inhibition activity (∼18 to 24-fold) in comparison with kojic acid and resveratrol, respectively. The presence of β-phenyl-α,β-unsaturated carbonyl, loss of H-bonding ability of the thiocarbonyl group, acidic nature of the thioimido group and lipophilicity of the amino group were found to be crucial factors affecting the high potential tyrosinase inhibition activity shown by these compounds.83
 Fig. 14  Chemical structure of C5-substituted 2TH. 
The one-pot highly chemoselective S-alkylation and N-acylation of 2TH derivatives in the presence of trialkyl orthoformate, ZnCl2 and acetic anhydride was reported by Kumar and co-workers (Scheme 5). This method can be used for the functionalization of natural products given that it chemo-selectively alkylates the thio group, while all other nucleophilic groups are acetylated. It was observed that the active methylene group of 2TH did not undergo any reaction with orthoformate, while its dione analogues reacted with orthoformate through their active methylene group.84
 Scheme 5  
S-Alkylation and N-acylation of 2TH. 
Patel and co-workers carried out the styrylation of 2TH via functionalization at the 1, 3 and 5 positions, leading to the formation of 62 (Fig. 15). Styrylation on 2TH with different types of aromatic aldehydes resulted in enhanced antibacterial activity. The antibacterial activity increased when an electron-donating methoxy group was present on the aromatic ring and coordinated to the active methylene group of 2TH. However, the synthesized compounds did not show any enhancement in antiviral activity compared with the parent 2TH due to the blocking of the amide moieties, which are responsible for binding to the active sites of viral enzymes through H-bonding and other physical interactions.85
 Fig. 15  Structure of the compound obtained after styrylation of 2TH. 
4.1 Metal complexes of 2-thiohydantoin
2TH can form metal complexes with some lanthanides (La3+, Ce3+, and Nd3+), actinides (Th4+ and UO22+) and transition metals such as Tc, Co, Ni, Cu, Ag, Pt, Pd, and Hg given that most of the transition metals with a low charge density behave as soft acids, and thus they interact effectively with soft bases, i.e., the sulphur of 2TH.
Kandil and co-workers reported the synthesis of 2TH-based metal complexes. Different metal ions such as Co2+, Ni2+ and Cu2+ formed complexes of 2TH derivatives (Fig. 16). The FT-IR spectra showed that the position of the peak due to thioamide ν(CS) and the symmetric and asymmetric ν(NCS) peaks remained unchanged, while there was a shift in the ν(CO) peak of 2TH, ν(COO) of the carboxylate moiety and ν(NN). This proved that the metal ion was coordinated through the oxygen atom of 2TH and not the sulphur atom.86,87
 Fig. 16  Proposed structure of 2TH-containing metal complexes. 
Dash et al. designed and synthesised 2TH-based ML2-type metal complexes (Fig. 17) and characterised them via different spectroscopic techniques. The complexes exhibited high spin coordination in an octahedral environment. The thioamide bands of the ligand in the FT-IR spectrum remained intact in the ML2 complexes, which ruled out other possible coordinations between the thioamide nitrogen or sulphur atom and metal ion.88
 Fig. 17  Structures of complexes of type ML2. 
Among the various metal-2TH coordination compounds, copper complexes are highly effective against several neurodegenerative diseases including malignant tumours such as mammary gland and brain tumours. Owing to its endogenic nature, copper is almost nontoxic to normal cells and acutely toxic to cancerous cells compared to nonessential elements such as platinum.89 Majouga et al. developed sulphur-functionalized 2TH-based copper complexes with tetradentate N-containing ligands of type 67 (Fig. 18). The electrochemical studies showed that the copper ions present in the dinuclear complexes are reduced simultaneously at the same potential followed by the transfer of two electrons. This revealed that the copper ions are not bound to each other in these complexes. Further, the catalytic activities of the dinuclear complexes were evaluated towards oxidation reactions such as alkene epoxidation.90 These complexes were utilized for the epoxidation of a library of alkenes (cyclic and acyclic) in the presence of hydrogen peroxide or iodosylbenzene as an oxidant, where hydrogen peroxide as an oxygen source was found to be more efficient.91
 Fig. 18  Structure of tetradentate N-containing 2TH-Cu complexes 67 and 68. 
The same group developed another set of 2TH-based dinuclear copper complexes 68 (Fig. 18), which were further used for catalysing nitrous oxide via the electrochemical reduction and oxidation of triphenyl phosphine.92 Oxidative dehydrogenation of 2TH at the exocyclic double bond at the C5 position lead to the formation of complex 68 (Scheme 6).93
 Scheme 6  Proposed mechanism for the formation of complex 68. 
Tishchenko and co-workers developed 2TH-based Cu2+ complexes of type M2L2 with benzylidene containing 3-substituted-2TH (Fig. 19). These complexes exhibited anticancer activity through their interaction and binding with DNA and bovine serum albumin (BSA, which has a similar structure to that of human serum albumin). Among the three complexes, 70 (IC50 value closest to the cisplatin) was found to be the most promising cancer cell line inhibitor. The binding efficiency of 70 towards DNA was investigated via the fluorescence method using ethidium bromide (EB) as the fluorescent probe. The fluorescence intensity of EB increased upon intercalation with DNA. When the second ethidium bromide molecule is added to the ethidium bromide–DNA complex, its fluorescence is quenched as DNA intercalates into it. The extent of fluorescence quenching between EB and DNA was used to determine the extent of binding between DNA and the second molecule of ethidium bromide. Similarly, when complex 70 was added to a solution of the ethidium bromide–DNA complex, quenching of its fluorescence was observed (Fig. 20).89
 Fig. 19  Structure of 2TH-based Cu2+ complexes. 
 Fig. 20  Fluorescence emission spectra of (A) ethidium-bromide–DNA (10 mM) and (B) BSA (1 μM) in the presence of an increasing concentration of complex 70 in dimethyl sulphoxide solvent. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. 
On increasing the concentration of complex 70, fluorescence quenching of ethidium bromide–DNA complex was observed (as shown in Fig. 20). Fluorescence quenching of the ethidium bromide–DNA complex by 70 was in good agreement with linearly obtained Stern–Volmer plot, which provided evidence that complex 70 binds with DNA. Similarly, the binding of 70 with BSA was determined given that BSA is a fluorescent molecule. The fluorescence intensity decreased with the addition of complex 70. The binding constant, Kb, between complex 70 and BSA is (1.9 ± 0.2) × 106 M−1. The superior behaviour of 70 towards cancerous cells is due to its small size, binding stability, planar structure and geometry. Various biological experiments revealed that DNA is the main intracellular target of drugs with anticancer activity, where the interaction between DNA and small molecules such as 70 can damage cancerous cells, thus blocking their division, followed by their death.89
Mahfouz et al. reported a 2TH-based technetium (99Tc5) complex (Fig. 21) as a potential agent in clinical studies. The chemistry of technetium in different oxidation states is of great importance in terms of its applications in nuclear medicine. The absorption spectrum of 72 in water showed an intense charge transfer band at 450 nm. The corresponding FT-IR spectrum displayed bands at 990 cm−1 for ν(TcO), 1170 cm−1 for ν(CS), 3300 cm−1 for ν(OH) and at 3190 cm−1 for ν(NH), which was found to be different from that of free 2TH (bands at 1160 cm−1 for ν(CS), 1730 cm−1 for ν(CO) and at 3190 cm−1 for ν(NH)). This provides evidence for the mode of attachment of technetium through the nitrogen and sulphur of 2TH.94
 Fig. 21  Structure of 2TH-Tc complex 72. 
Casas et al. reported the synthesis, molecular and crystal structure of thallium (Tl)-based 2TH complex 73 (Fig. 22). The single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies of 73 indicated that the thallium ion was coordinated with two methyl groups via carbons, an O-atom of DMSO, and further chelated with the 2TH derivative through its one of the nitrogen atom and sulphur atom. Besides, it also showed weak interaction between thallium and oxygen of the neighbouring 2TH derivative.95
 Fig. 22  Chemical and crystal structure of complex 73. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 1999. 
Arca and co-workers reported the synthesis of ligand methyl-2TH 74 (Fig. 23A) and its caesium (Cs) complex. The X-ray crystal structure of (Cs-methyl-2TH-OH)∞ is shown in Fig. 23B. Each Cs ion shows 8-fold coordination with three OH− groups and four methyl-2TH moieties as a ligand, where one methyl-2TH group is coordinated via its nitrogen and sulphur atoms, the second methyl-2TH unit is connected through its sulphur, and the remaining two methyl-2TH moieties are bonded through an oxygen atom. Each methyl-2TH moiety offers three donor atoms, namely, a sulphur atom that bridges two Cs ions almost aligned with a Cs⋯Cs distance of 5.122 Å; an oxygen atom that bridges two Cs ions separated by a distance of 4.832 Å; and a nitrogen atom. Three OH− groups triply bridge three Cs ions. Even though methyl-2TH is very weakly coordinating, its use as a modifying agent or spacer in the crystal structure provides a new outlook in the crystal or chemical engineering of alkali metal ions.96
 Fig. 23  (A) Chemical structures of ligand methyl-2TH and (B) crystal structure of the complex (Cs-methyl-2TH-OH)∞. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 1998. 
Arrizabalaga et al. described platinum and palladium complexes of 2TH as a bidentate ligand. These two complexes were prepared by reacting one mole each of [PtCl4]2− and [PdCl4]2− with two moles of 2TH (Fig. 24). The reaction was very fast with palladium with no intermediate formed, but very slow and stepwise in the case of platinum, thus allowing the isolation of the intermediate having a protonated nitrogen atom.97
 Fig. 24  Structures of Pt and Pd complexes of 2TH. 
Singh and co-workers described the synthesis and characterisation of 2TH-coordinated Ni(II), Co(II)98 and Ti(IV), Sn(IV)99 complexes. Marinova et al. reported the synthesis of fluorene-spiro-2TH-based Pt(II) complex 77 (Fig. 25) of type PtL2 and investigated its activity against a human tumour cell line. The PtL2 complex of 77 exhibited anticancer activity against human tumours in vitro.100
 Fig. 25  Structure of (a) ligand fluorene-spiro-2TH and (b) cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligands. 
They also described new Pt(II) complexes of cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligands 52 and 78 (Fig. 25). There are numerous ways of coordination between the cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligand and metal ions (Fig. 26) due to the presence of two thioamide groups in the ligand. According to the results obtained, two Pt(II) complexes with ligands 52 and 78 were found to have a square planar geometry with two ligand moieties coordinating the metal atom in a bidentate way (N3∧O4). Fig. 27 represents the ground state equilibrium geometries of ligands 52 ad 78 and their corresponding Pt(II) complexes.101
 Fig. 26  Potential (a) monodentate, (b) bridging and (c) bidentate or chelating modes of coordination between cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligand and metal ion. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Slovenian Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 27  Ground state equilibrium geometries of ligands 52 and 78 and their corresponding complexes. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Slovenian Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
5. 2-Thiohydantoin-related marketed drugs
5.1. Enzalutamide
This is an androgen receptor antagonist, which was first discovered in 2006 and has been approved for the treatment of breast cancer in women102 and prostate cancer.103–109 It was commercialised under the name “Xtandi” by Astellas Pharma Incorporation and Medivation Incorporation after approval by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2012.110 Astellas Pharma Incorporation had reported its annual net sales of $381 million generated from the sale of Xtandi in 2014. In India, it is marketed under the brand name “Azel” by Dr Reddy Laboratories. Enzalutamide 79 (Fig. 28) is the first second-generation nonsteroidal antiandrogen. It was first synthesized by Sawyers and co-workers but a limitation of their proposed synthetic route was its low yield in the last step.111 Later, an efficient and improved synthetic route for 79 was developed by Jianqi and co-workers.112 The pharmacokinetics of this drug were reported by Gibbons and co-workers.113 It is also used in feminising hormone therapy in transgender women (160 mg per day).114 Worldwide, it is also sold under the brand name ENZUTA, Glenza, Enzamide, Encrpc, BDENZA and Obnyx. Recently in May 2020, the Zydus Cadila drug firm launched a generic enzalutamide drug for the treatment of prostate cancer under the brand name “Obnyx” with a cost of nearly 70% less than the currently available enzalutamide drugs.
 Fig. 28  Chemical structure of enzalutamide. 
5.2 Apalutamide
This is also a nonsteroidal antiandrogen, which was first discovered by Janssen and was approved for the treatment of prostate cancer in 2018, February.115,116 It is the first drug to be approved for the treatment of non-metastatic resistant prostate cancer, and now it can also be used against metastatic resistant prostate cancer.117–119 Prostate cancer is expected to affect 11.6% men during their lifetime. Indeed, currently, more than three million men in the US are living with prostate cancer. In 2017, 161360 men were newly diagnosed with prostate cancer and 26730 men died from the same. Apalutamide 80 (Scheme 7), also called ARN-509, was commercialised under the brand name “Erleada” by Janssen Biotech in 2018.120 It also acts as an antiandrogenic agent by directly binding to the ligand-binding domain of androgen receptors.115,121 It is pharmacologically and structurally similar to enzalutamide but it shows more advantages such as increased antiandrogen activity.109 In US Patent No. 20100190991A1, the first retrosynthetic route for apalutamide was documented (Scheme 7).122 The cost for 120 Erleada oral tablets (60 mg each) is around $13407.
 Scheme 7  Retrosynthetic route for apalutamide. 
6. 2-Thiohydantoin as a clinical candidate
The reason why 2TH has attracted tremendous interest from researchers is due to its use as a potential agent and intermediate in the medicinal and pharmaceutical industry. 2TH and its derivatives show a variety of biological and pharmacological activities, as shown in in Fig. 29.105,106,123–141
 Fig. 29  Biological and pharmacological activities exhibited by 2TH and its derivatives. 
In addition to the aforementioned biological activities, 2TH is also found to be used as and antimutagenic,142 antiparasitic,106 and topoisomerase-I inhibitor.143 Besides their biological and pharmacological activities, 2TH derivatives also have a variety of applications in other areas such as the development of C-terminal protein sequencing as a reference standard,144 identification of N-terminal groups in peptides,145 antioxidants,146 anticorrosion activity against steel,147 reagent for the development of dyes148,149 and polymerisation catalysis and complexation of metal cations.87
2TH has both amide and thioamide functionalities, which provide an equal number of proton acceptors (A) and proton donors (D) in the D–A–D–A sequence. Due to this unique structural characteristic, it is expected to form various complex H-bonding networks in its crystal stricture.150 Owing to the presence of H-bonding acceptor and donor groups in the 2TH ring, N–H⋯O intermolecular H-bonding can be formed. Additionally, 2TH can also coordinate with metals through its sulphur or nitrogen atom. Thus, the 2TH nucleus can be functionalized to act as a recogniser and chemical sensory materials towards the detection of toxic anions,151 metal cations152,153 and other anthropogenic compounds.
7. Photophysical applications of 2-thiohydantoin and hydantoin
Although researchers have reported several articles related to various biological, medicinal and pharmaceutical applications of TH, 2TH and their derivatives130,154 a collective review on their photophysical aspects and corresponding applications is not available in the literature to date. Therefore, we aim to focus on elucidating their primary photophysical properties and applications in this review.
7.1 Fluorescent labelling reagent
The emergence of advanced biomolecular imaging has driven researchers to develop effective and sophisticated fluorescent labels that can be used in imaging techniques. As a part of fluorescence labelling, fluorescence turn-ON systems harnessing fluorogenic chromophores have received great attention. The fluorescent chromophore is initially non-fluorescent and becomes highly fluorescent after binding to its specific target (Fig. 30), minimising any background fluorescence and allowing high imaging contrast.155,156
 Fig. 30  Fluorescence OFF–ON mechanism of fluorescent chromophores during imaging. 
In 1975, Sinsheimer et al. reported the synthesis of 1-(9-acridinyl)-4-benzyl-2-thiohydantoin 81. Compound 81 was found to be promising as a novel fluorescent reagent for protein labelling with uses in other microanalytical techniques. It was synthesized by reacting 9-isothiocyanatoacridine with proline in the presence of dioxane in pH 9 buffered solution. Subsequently, 82 was obtained through the formation of an intermediate by condensing 9-isothiocyanatoacridine and phenylalanine in the presence of glycine under basic conditions. Further, cyclization in the acidic condition led to the desired 82, as shown in Scheme 8. The activation and fluorescence wavelengths, i.e. 400 nm and 490, nm for 81 and 260 nm and 460 nm for 82 were reported, respectively.157
 Scheme 8  Synthetic route of 81 and 82. 
Researchers have developed fluorogenic labels with the idea of developing Yellow Fluorescence-Activating and Absorption-Shifting Tags (FAST or Y-FAST). As its name suggests, Y-FAST involves two specific spectroscopic modifications used for the activation of fluorogens as follows: (i) fluorescence quantum yield of the fluorogen increases due to the restriction of its motion and (ii) ionization of auxochromic groups of fluorogen leads to a red shift in its absorption.158 The free fluorogen or fluorogen that is bound non-specifically does not assist in giving a fluorescent signal, and also the red shift in absorption results in an enhancement in fluorogen activation, leading to high contrast images. Based on this concept, Jullien and co-workers reported the synthesis and characterisation of the red fluorogenic chromophore of type 83 and 84 (Fig. 31), which were found to have great potential for biosensing and bioimaging.158
 Fig. 31  Structures of red fluorogenic push–pull chromophores. 
Compounds 83 and 84 are push–pull compounds having extended π-electron conjugation. In the aqueous state, the protonated and deprotonated forms of 83 absorb mainly violet and blue light, respectively. The protonated form of 83 shows very weak fluorescence at 580 nm and its deprotonated form shows orange-red emission at 635 nm in the solution state. Fluorogen 84 in aqueous solution absorbs blue light at 461 nm and exhibits a weak red emission at 667 nm (Fig. 32a and b), respectively. Both fluorogens positively responded to two spectral modifications with an increase in the fluorescence quantum yields due to their restricted motion, i.e., with the addition of 40% glycerol. It was also observed that the deprotonation of 83 led to a red shift in its absorption by 35 nm. Even though 84 lacks any ionisable auxochromic group, it exhibits a negative solvatochromism effect. Furthermore, 83 and 84 were observed to be potential candidates as intracellular fluorogenic markers (Fig. 32c). Certainly, compared to the commercially available endoplasmic reticulum or mitochondrial trackers involving a long incubation time and washing steps, staining of the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria with 83 and 84 is rapid and straightforward.158
 Fig. 32  Absorption (black line) and emission (red line) spectra in the presence (solid line) or absence (dotted line) of 40% glycerol: (A) fluorogen 83 at pH 10 and (B) fluorogen 84 at pH 7.4. (C) Confocal micrographs of HeLa cells incubated with 1 μM of 83 (left side) and 84 (right side). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. 
Recently, the green fluorescent proteins (GFP) have emerged as an essential marker or labelling tool for the imaging of tissues, living cells or an entire organism. The 4-hydroxy-benzylidene-imidazolidinone nucleus (4-HOBDI) is a fluorophore of GFP. Its planar structure with deprotonable 4-OH group plays an important role in altering the fluorescence properties of GFP derivatives through intramolecular excited-state proton transfer.159,160 Mucsi and group reported the one-pot synthesis and characterisation of the novel 2TH-based GFP chromophore 85 (Fig. 31) using 4-HOBDI as a reference. The synthesised chromophore 85 showed enhanced fluorescence and a 3-fold higher quantum yield than 4-HOBDI.160
7.2 Fluorescent sensors for anthropogenic ions
Molecular recognition has developed from the scientific knowledge designed to understand biological systems through diverse research areas. Different types of neutral and ionic species have a variety of uses in catalysis, medical diagnostics, physiology, biology and environmental chemistry.161,162 However, despite the necessity of many ions (e.g., Ca2+, Na+, K+, Cu+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Cl−, HCO3−, HPO42−, and SO42−) for the existence of biological life, some of these species (e.g., Hg2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, F−, CN−, and Br−) are very toxic, detrimental and lead to serious health, physiological and environmental problems.163 Therefore, it is necessary to develop highly effective and efficient methods for quantifying or recognising and sensing these species or ions.
Fluorescent chemosensors have attracted growing attention owing to their high sensitivity, selectivity and advantages of easy operation, portability, and simplicity along spatial and temporal resolutions. Fluorescent chemosensors can be used as a tool for recognising and sensing toxic ions, other anthropogenic analytes in the environment and also to sense and measure guest species or other biological species present in living systems.164 The detection of an analyte by a fluorescent chemosensor usually occurs via one or more photophysical mechanisms such as photo-induced electron transfer (PET), inter/intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), chelation-induced enhanced fluorescence (CIEF), energy transfer (ET), aggregation-induced emission (AIE) and aggregation caused quenching (ACQ) and the list of mechanistic techniques is still expanding.163 Some of the most important mechanisms are discussed below.
(a) Inter/intramolecular charge transfer (ICT): ICT-based fluorescent chemosensors are distinguished by the presence of an electron-donating group in conjugation with an electron acceptor group in a single molecule, thus resulting in a push–pull π-electron system in their excited state. When a cation interacts with the electron-rich part of the fluorophore, the electron donation ability of the fluorophore decreases, thus shifting its absorption towards a lower wavelength (blue shift). Upon the interaction of a cation with the electron-deficient group, the electron-withdrawing character of that group increases, thus stabilising the fluorophore system and showing a red shift in the absorption spectrum (Fig. 33).165,166
 Fig. 33  Schematic representation of the mechanisms exhibited by (A) ICT, (B) ET, (C) PET and (D) ACQ and AIE. 
(b) Energy transfer (ET): ET is another detection strategy, which can be further classified as electronic energy transfer (EET) and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) based on the orientation and distance between energy acceptor and energy donor present in multi-chromophoric compounds. The energy of the excited state donor is used to excite the acceptor group via energy transfer. If the distance between the acceptor and donor is below 10 Å, it leads to the ET mechanism, which is called Dexter type ET, and if the distance is between 10–100 Å, then it's considered as Förster-type ET (Fig. 33a).164,167
(c) Photo-induced electron transfer (PET): in the case of PET-based fluorescent sensors, both the donor and acceptor are linked by a non-conjugated bridge. After excitation, the fluorophore moiety either accepts or donates an electron to the ground state acceptor present in the same molecule. Usually, fluorescence quenching is observed due to the PET mechanism, which can be recovered by deactivating the PET mechanism through the introduction of a guest analyte (Fig. 33b).164,167
(d) Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) or aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ): usually, in the ACQ mechanism, the fluorescence of the organic fluorophore gets quenched in its aggregate form, and on the contrary, some organic materials are non-fluorescent in solution and become highly emissive on aggregation, affording AIE or AIEE, i.e., aggregation-induced enhanced emission (Fig. 33c).168,169

7.2.1 2TH as a fluorescent sensor for cations. 
2TH and TH act as cation receptors to detect different multivalent cations due to the presence of sulphur and nitrogen atoms in the 2TH ring and oxygen and nitrogen coordination in the TH ring. 2TH can coordinate with metals through its sulphur or nitrogen atoms.
Accordingly, C5-substituted 2TH derivatives 86–89 (Fig. 34) were synthesized and treated with different cations and studied via UV-vis spectroscopy. The compounds underwent a chemical reaction with Cu2+, Au1+, Au3+ and Zn2+, forming their respective complexes and showing a dramatic colour change, and are found to be good chromogenic agents.170 Similarly, Ariza and co-workers described four C5-substituted derivatives 90–93 (Fig. 34) towards the spectrophotometric detection of palladium (Pd2+). Among them, 93 was found to be highly selective and sensitive towards Pd2+ ions and showed minimal interaction with other interfering metal ions. The complex formed by these 2TH derivatives is of the ML2 type.171
 Fig. 34  Structures of (a) condensation products of 2TH and (b) C5-substituted derivatives of 2TH for the detection of Pd2+. 
Moustafa et al. reported a 2TH-based azo unit-containing ligand for the spectrophotometric detection of lanthanide ions such as La3+, Ce3+, and Nd3+ and actinides such as Th4+ and UO22+. The complexes formed were of type 1:1 and 1:2 (M:L), which were characterised by different spectroscopic techniques. The hydroxy protons of free ligand 94 appeared at δ 11.22 ppm in its 1H-NMR spectrum, which were found to disappear upon complexation. The ν(OH) band appearing at 3200–3350 cm−1 in the FT-IR spectrum of ligand 94 disappeared upon the formation of a complex and the ν(NN) band showed a red shift by 10–17 cm−1 on complexation. Thus, this supports the fact that complex formation between ligand 94 and metal ions occurs via covalent and coordinate covalent bond with a hydroxyl oxygen and nitrogen of azo unit of the ligand, respectively (Fig. 35).172
 Fig. 35  Structure of ligand 94 and the proposed structures of the complexes formed by ligand 94 with lanthanides and actinides ions. 
Sugii et al. described the colour reaction of 3-methyl-2TH (95) in basic medium as an analytical agent for the detection of Mn2+ ions. Upon auto-oxidation in the presence of dissolved oxygen species, 95 gave adduct 97 through intermediate 96, which on further rapid auto-oxidation, resulted in the formation of 97 (Fig. 36A). The absorption spectra of 95, 96 and 97 at different pH ranges are shown in Fig. 36B. The absorption spectrum of adduct 97 showed two maxima at 330 and 500 nm at 9.2 pH. At pH 6, the absorption maxima of 97 shifted to a lower wavelength at 453 nm. The blue shift was found to be independent of pH. Further, the effect of metal ions on the reactivity of 97 towards them was studied. The absorption maximum of 97 showed a red shift from 500 to 514 nm in the presence of Mn2+ ions, and upon the addition of EDTA, the absorption maximum of 97 showed a blue shift to its original value, i.e., 500 nm. This supports the formation of a complex between Mn2+ and the adduct.173
 Fig. 36  (A) Preparation of 3-methyl-2TH adduct and (B) UV absorption spectra of 95 (), 96 () and 97 (—). (1) 95 (5 × 10−5 M) at pH 6, (2) 95 (3 × 10−3 M) at pH 9.2, (3) 96 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 6, (4) 96 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 9.2, (5) 97 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 9.2 and (6) 97 (5 × 10−5 M) at pH 6. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Pharmaceutical Society of Japan, Copyright 1974. 
Yang and co-workers reported the synthesis of 2TH-based conjugated fluorescent polymer 98 with enhanced fluorescence quenching for the recognition and sensing of Ag+ ions. Polymer 98 was synthesized via Sonogashira–Hagihara condensation. This polymer interacted only with Ag+ ions with a fluorescence turn off mechanism in the presence of other metal ions, as shown in Fig. 37b. Titration studies of polymer 98 with Ag+ in a DMSO/H2O mixture showed that there was a decrease in the fluorescence intensity of 98 with broadening of the band at around 350 nm with an increase in the concentration of Ag+ ions (Fig. 37a). Upon the addition of ten equivalents of Ag+ ions, 91% fluorescence quenching was observed without a change in its peak position. This proves that the fluorescence quenching of polymer 98 by Ag+ ions occurs mainly by the energy transfer (ET) process, i.e., Dexter-type ET (Fig. 37c). The Stern–Volmer quenching constant (Ksv) obtained was 4.66 × 104 M−1 and the limit of detection (LOD) was 1.84 × 10−4 M for Ag+ ions.174
 Fig. 37  (a) Decrease in fluorescence intensity of polymer 98 with an increase in Ag+ ion concentration in DMSO/H2O mixture, (b) fluorescence colour variation of polymer 98 upon the addition different metal ions under long UV light and (c) mechanisms of the interaction between polymer 98 and Ag+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from the WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2014. 
Fluorescent polymer 100, which is structurally similar to 98 with an additional methylene group, was reported by Yang et al. for the detection of copper ions.175 Polymer 100 was synthesized through Sonogashira–Hagihara condensation. The interference studies of different metal ions with polymer 100 showed very weak interaction with Ag+ without altering its emission intensity and complete quenching with the addition of Cu+ ions, as shown in Fig. 38a. Fig. 38b shows an increase in the fluorescence intensity of 100 by 2–10% upon the addition of 5 equivalents of Mn2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, K+ and Cd2+, whereas its fluorescence intensity was reduced by 4–12% upon the addition of Na+, Mg2+, Ni2+, Ca2+, Pb2+ and Hg2+. Besides, Ag+ ions quenched its fluorescence by 64%, while Cu+ ions quenched its original fluorescence by 96%. Based on this observation, it is clear that Cu+ and Cu2+ ions show the opposite effect on the fluorescence of polymer 100. Given that the fluorescence of polymer 100 gets quenched only in the presence of Cu+ ions and not Cu2+, oxidation of Cu+-100 complex can be done to recover the fluorescence of the complex. To achieve this, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was added to the Cu+-100 complex, which led to the oxidation of Cu+ to Cu2+, thus recovering the fluorescence of the complex (Fig. 38). This also shows that by recovering the fluorescence of the Cu+-100 complex, the detection of H2O2 is also possible. Furthermore, H2O2 is released during the oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid, and thus polymer 100 can also be extended for the detection of glucose. Similar to H2O2, the fluorescence of the Cu+-100 complex could also be recovered using glucose.175
 Fig. 38  (a) Fluorescence colour variation of polymer 100 upon the addition of different metal ions under long UV light, (b) emission spectra of 100 in DMSO/H2O mixture upon the addition of different metal ions (5 equivalents) and (c) fluorescence ON–OFF mechanism of polymer 100 in the presence of copper ions. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. 
Hartley and co-workers reported the dual excitation, ratiometric, low-affinity NitroAzidoFuraRed 101 as a Ca2+ sensor (Fig. 39a).176 The fluorescence properties of the Fura Red nucleus-containing 101 originate from the PET process given that the fluorophore moiety is directly conjugated with 1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)-ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA). The lone pairs present on nitrogen turn out of plane during calcium binding (Fig. 39b). By introducing an electron-withdrawing group on ring A, the binding affinity can be reduced, which in turn, will increase the conjugation with the amino group. Thus, this disfavours the out of plane rotation required for Ca2+ binding and lowers the binding affinity, while increasing the binding dissociation constant Kd. The presence of an azido tag on 2TH in the distal position to the BAPTA unit reduces the interference with calcium binding. This provides a universal attachment site by biorthogonal chemistry for incorporating biomolecules of target groups using strain-promoted or copper-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (SPAAC or CuCAAC, respectively). Hence, NitroAzidoFuraRed 101 is a ratiometric, low-affinity Ca2+ sensor having a Kd value of 90 μM, which is excitable with visible light, shows a large Stokes shift and found to have potential for the attachment of biomolecules or target groups. The absorption studies revealed that the Ca2+-bonded NitroAzidoFuraRed 101 showed a blue shift from the original band of the free NitroAzidoFuraRed 101, which was similar to the absorption bands of Fura Red bound to Ca2+ (Fig. 39c).176
 Fig. 39  (a) Chemical structure of NitroAzidoFuraRed 101, (b) mechanism of calcium binding to NitroAzidoFuraRed and (c) absorption (solid line) and emission (dashed line) spectra of free NitroAzidoFuraRed (red) and Ca2+-bonded NitroAzidoFuraRed. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. 


7.2.2 2TH as a fluorescent sensor for anions. 
Anion recognition and sensing have gained considerable popularity owing to the fundamental involvement of anions in various biological and chemical processes.177–181 Although important, research on anion-selective sensors has not explored much compared to sensors for cations. According to the literature, compounds with N–H⋯X− and O–H⋯X− play a crucial role in selectively recognising and sensing anions.
2TH acts as an anion receptor to detect anions given that it can form N–H⋯X− intermolecular H-bonding because of the presence of an H-binding donor and acceptor in its ring. Due to the presence of two proton donor –NH groups and proton acceptor –CO group, 2TH can undergo inter- and intramolecular proton transfer, including excited-state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT). This involves intramolecular fast proton transfer from –NH to the oxygen atom of –CO in the excited state of the fluorophore.165
Even though F− ions have been found to be very beneficial for humans in terms of osteoporosis treatment and dental health,182–184 they have also been found to show some human pathologies.185 The novel and highly selective 2TH-based naked-eye chromogenic chemosensor 102 for fluoride (F−) ions was reported in the literature.186 Chemosensor 102 (Fig. 40) has different types of proton donors such as –OH and –NH, which was synthesized by condensing butyl isothiocyanate with methyl-2-amino-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl) acetate hydrochloride under basic conditions. The colorimetric behaviour of 102 for F− ions was also studied in both solution and the solid state. To study the ability of 102 to detect F− in solution, UV absorption titration of 102 against tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) was performed in acetonitrile, which showed a strong absorption band at around 275 nm for 102. Upon the addition of F− ions up to 3.0 equivalent to an acetonitrile solution containing 102, a dramatic colour change from colourless to yellow was observed with a new prominent absorption band at 447 nm. On further increasing the concentration of F− ions up to 6 equivalents, the colour of 102 in acetonitrile changed to purple. Concurrently, there was a gradual decrease in the absorption band at 447 nm with the formation of a new intense band at 552 nm including a shoulder band at 600 nm. This proved that the 102-F− interaction is a two-step process involving H-bonding. To confirm this 102-F− interaction, 1HNMR titration of 102 with TBAF was carried out, which showed that on increasing the TBAF concentration, broadening and disappearance of the phenolic OH proton occurred (with 1 equivalent of TBAF), and the NH proton continuously shifted downfield and disappeared completely with 16 equivalents of TBAF. To study the selectivity of 103, it was treated with different types of anions (F−, Cl−, Br−, NO3−, and HSO4−) as their TBA salts. The results obtained revealed that 103 reacts selectively with F− ions by host–guest interaction (Fig. 40).186
 Fig. 40  (a) Structure of chemosensor 102 and (b) colour changes in a solution of 102 in acetonitrile upon the addition of different TBA salts of the mentioned anions. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from The Royal Society Of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. 
The colorimetric sensor probe 103, which is similar to 102, for F− ions was also reported by Yong et al. Probe 103 (Fig. 41c) was found to interact selectively with only F− ions over other anions (Fig. 41a). Fig. 41b shows the changes in the UV-vis absorption spectrum of probe 103 upon interaction with the different concentrations of F− ions in acetonitrile. It involves deprotonation of the phenolic OH protons and H-bonding interaction between F− and the NH proton, leading to the formation of a 1:2, adduct which was confirmed by 1HNMR titration.151
 Fig. 41  (a) Naked-eye colour change in acetonitrile solution of probe 103 upon the addition of different anions, (b) changes in UV absorption spectra of probe 103 in acetonitrile upon the addition of F− (103 = 100 μM, F−: 103 = 0–60 equivalent) and (c) complex formation between 103 and F− ions. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from The Royal Society Of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. 
Fluorescent chemosensor 98 for recognition and sensing of F− ions was also reported by Yang and co-workers.174 Polymer 98 (Fig. 42a) was found to interact only with F− ions with the fluorescence turn off mechanism in presence of other anions, as shown in Fig. 42c. Titration studies of polymer 98 with F− in DMSO showed that there is a decrease in the fluorescence intensity of 98 with broadening of the band at around 350 nm with an increase in the concentration of F− ions (Fig. 42b). Upon the addition of ten equivalents of F− ions, the polymer exhibited 94% fluorescence quenching. The high selectivity and specificity of polymer 98 for F− ions was due to the high charge density and small size of the ion, which allowed it to have strong H-bonding with the 2TH group, as evidenced by the 1H NMR study. The Stern–Volmer quenching constant (Ksv) obtained was 7.54 × 104 M−1 and the limit of detection (LOD) was 1.13 × 10−4 M for F− ions.174
 Fig. 42  (a) Structure of polymer 98, (b) decrease in the fluorescence intensity of polymer 99 with an increase in the concentration of F− ions in DMSO and (c) variation in the fluorescence colour of polymer 99 upon the addition of different anions under long UV light. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2014. 
Liu and co-workers reported 2TH-based naked-eye sensor probes 104 and 105 for the detection of F− ions. Fig. 43 presents the structures of probes 104 and 105. These probes were found to interact only with F−, which was accompanied by a change in the original colourless solution of the probes in dimethylformamide (DMF) to yellow. 1HNMR titration of probes 104 and 105 with TBAF showed that the interaction between the probes and F− is due to H-bonding between F− and the 2TH moiety. According to the binding constant studies, it was observed that probe 104 is more sensitive towards F− than 105. Besides, it was also observed that probe 104 can act as a chemosensor for the detection of F− on test paper.187
 Fig. 43  Chemical structure of naked-eye sensor probes for solutions containing TBA salts of different anions. 


7.2.3 Hydantoin as a fluorescent sensor for ions. 
There are very few studies on the applications of TH as a fluorescent sensor for cations and anions. Ohtani and co-workers described three TH-based ligands (Fig. 44) for the detection of chloride ions. The mechanism of detection involves analysing the quantity of Cl− ions eliminated upon the coordination of these ligands to tetrachloroaurate ions (Fig. 44). The formation constants of the gold complexes were evaluated, which were found to follow the order of 108 > 107 > 106. All three ligands on complexation with gold were found to be very efficient for the detection of chloride ion concentration.188
 Fig. 44  Structures of TH derivatives and their mechanism for the detection of Cl− ions. 


7.2.4 Fluorescent biosensors. 
TH or 2TH has not been explored much in terms of their application as a fluorescent biosensor for the recognition and sensing of biological structures/biomolecules such as DNA, proteins, glucose, and enzymes. Sasmal et al. reported a highly sensitive and selective turn-off sensor for the nucleobase guanine based on graphene oxide (GO) decorated with TH derivatives 109, 110 and 111 (Fig. 45). These probes were synthesized via a very facile and eco-friendly method involving sonication, followed by exfoliation and assembly. Among the hybrid probes of TH derivatives, 111-GO was insoluble in most organic solvents, which upon warming, showed a scarlet colouration from colourless solution, indicating the formation of indole, whereas 109-GO remained unaffected upon UV irradiation. However derivative 110-GO formed yellow crystals in ethyl acetate, which upon exposure to UV irradiation, turned black. Probe 110-GO was tested for the detection of different nucleobases of DNA, where the probe sensor was found to be selective towards only guanine. Fig. 45 shows the results of the photophysical studies performed during the detection of guanine by probe 110-GO. The yellow colour of a solution containing 110-GO in ethyl acetate turned colourless upon the addition of guanine to it. The addition of guanine to a solution of 110 in ethyl acetate and also to a solution of GO in ethyl acetate did not give similar results, as shown in Fig. 45. This may be due to the disruption of the sheet-like framework of 110-GO upon the addition of guanine. Thus, the hybrid probe 110-GO acts as a highly sensitive, selective and naked-eye sensor for guanine with an LOD of 75 ppb.189
 Fig. 45  (a) Structure of TH derivatives used for fabricating sensing probes with graphene oxide. (b) Absorption and (b) emission spectra of (i) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate, (ii) guanine and (iii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate. (c) Colour of (i) guanine in ethyl acetate, (ii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate and (iii) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate under daylight. (d) Colour of (i) guanine in ethyl acetate, (ii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate and (iii) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate under UV light. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2017. 

7.3 Fluorescent metal complexes
Copper complexes have received great interest from researchers and the factors responsible for their widespread use are the availability of the diamagnetic form d10 Cu1+, suitable half-life isotopes (Cu-64, half-life of 12.7 h)190 and one unpaired electron, leading to a high ligand exchange rate.191 The synthesis and characterisation of Cu+ halide complexes with 2TH have been reported by Aslanidis and co-workers to study the coordination behaviour of 2TH towards Cu+ bromide and chloride. 2TH acts as a monodentate ligand coordinating to copper through its soft centre exocyclic sulphur atom, thus affording a planar trigonal and distorted tetragonal geometry for complexes 112 and 113, respectively (Fig. 46A). The results also showed that these complexes exhibited intense luminescence at room temperature in both the solid and solution states. Their emission originated from ligand-to-metal charge transfer or inter-ligand charge transfer transition. Complex 112 gave orange-red crystals, while complex 113 gave violet-coloured crystals by slow evaporation of acetonitrile solvent. The excitation and emission maxima for 112 were located at 343 nm and 411 nm, whereas that for complex 113 was 362 nm and 410 nm, respectively. The Oak Ridge Thermal Ellipsoid Plot (ORTEP) of complexes 112 and 113 obtained from single-crystal XRD is shown in Fig. 46B and C, respectively. These complexes were found to be good intermediates for the synthesis of other important derivatives.153 Beloglazkina et al. synthesized 2TH-based diatopic organic ligand 114 containing a terpyridine moiety to prepare homo-polynuclear metal complexes, which can be further used to obtain complexes with different metal ions (Fig. 47).192
 Fig. 46  (A) Structures of complexes 112 and 113 and ORTEP representation of the structure of complexes (B) 112 and (C) 113. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2012. 
 Fig. 47  Chemical structure of complex 114 showing its interaction with cobalt. 
7.4 Miscellaneous applications
The molecular design of most optoelectronic materials, photo-switches, nonlinear optical (NLO) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) involve organic materials having a D–π–A system in their skeleton (D = donor group, π = conjugated unit and A = acceptor group). This type of alignment allows the application of the material in DSSCs given that it favours ICT, which can be converted into photocurrent.193–195 However, although both TH and 2TH contain a D–π–A system in their skeleton, surprisingly there are not many studies on the use of TH and 2TH derivatives in this type of device.

7.4.1 Miscellaneous applications of 2-thiohydantoin. 
With rapidly developing technologies, numerous materials have been found to possess remarkable nonlinear optical (NLO) properties, encouraging the design and synthesis of various practical device applications such as reversible optical data storage, photonic and photo-electronic devices.196–198
Smokal et al. reported the synthesis of 2TH-based polymers with benzylidene moieties.199 The compounds containing a benzylidene moiety were found to be promising materials for NLO-based devices due to their photophysical properties.200 This group synthesized homo and copolymers based on 2TH monomers, as shown in Fig. 48, and their polymerization capability was monitored using the dilatometric method. The third-order NLO properties of the synthesized 2TH-based polymers were studied in the solution state using the degenerate four-wave mixing (DFWM) method at 532 nm. The nonlinear transmission measurement studies showed that the synthesized polymers possessed one-photon absorption. The NLO effect for the copolymer was found to be greater than the corresponding homopolymer and the polymer with methacrylic benzylidene was found to be the most promising for reversible optical data storage devices. This behaviour is attributed to their photo-isomerization processes.199
 Fig. 48  Structures of 2TH-based monomers. 
US Patent No. 20060071253 documented 2TH derivative 120 as a material that can be used in photoelectric conversion devices. Compound 120 (Fig. 49) was used as a positive hole transporting material in a photoelectric conversion film (PCF) between electrodes. As an important part of the device, the PCF acts as a p-light sensor, which is used as a light-receiving system or solid-imaging device.201
 Fig. 49  Chemical structure of 120. 
Orwat and co-workers reported for the first time the use of 2TH as a novel electron acceptor or anchoring group of a photosensitizer for DSSCs with the D–π–A configuration, wherein triphenylamine was used as the donor due to its non-planarity and high electron-donating ability and 2TH as the acceptor and π aromatic spacer (Fig. 50). All six derivatives showed a strong band between 398–438 nm due to ICT from the triphenylamine to aromatic spacer and 2TH. Besides, they also showed one more band between 250–293 nm due to the π–π* transitions between the aromatic units of the sensitizers. On changing the aromatic spacer from 1,4-phenylene to 1,9-anthracenylene, both bands were redshifted due to the extended conjugation. The molecules with the same π aromatic spacer showed almost identical absorption bands (Fig. 51). Dyes 121a and 121b showed the most intense absorption in the visible region, whereas 123a and 123b exhibited the weakest absorption (Fig. 51). According to the results, it was concluded that a large π-aromatic spacer decreases the ICT efficiency. Compound 121 with geometrically the most planar 1,4-phenylene showed the highest performance as a sensitizer, allowing the application of this small molecule for the future development and fabrication of renewable energy devices. Thus, dye 121b was found to be the most efficient with an internal power conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 2.59%, which was reduced to 2% for 123b with an increase in the size of the aromatic spacer (Fig. 51).193
 Fig. 50  (a) Structures of the 2TH derivatives used in DSSCs and (b) schematic representation of the corresponding DSSC. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from MDPI, Copyright 2020. 
 Fig. 51  Absorption spectra of 121a-123b (a) in dichloromethane and (b) in ethanol and (c) IPCE chart of 121a-123b. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from MDPI, Copyright 2020. 


7.4.2 Miscellaneous applications of hydantoin. 
The development of functional materials that can be controlled by powerful, non-invasive stimuli, i.e., light, is attracting increasing attention from researchers. Photochemical pressure is employed at the molecular level via light-sensitive chemical structures, i.e., photo or molecular switches, which consist of two isomers that can be reversibly interconverted by irradiating them at different wavelengths. These switches can be classed into two types based on the photochemical technique that permits the switch between two isomers. Type I consists of compounds that can isomerise around the double bond as in E/Z photo-switches and type II consists of compounds that can undergo photo-isomerisation between the open and closed forms.202,203
Sampedro and co-workers reported a new family of TH derivatives as molecular photo-switches (Fig. 52). The synthetic procedure of 124–134 gave exclusively the E isomer. Irradiation of 124–134 at different wavelengths was performed until the photo stationary state (PTSS) was reached, which was continued further for 4 h until the compound exhibited E–Z–E–Z–E isomerisation. However, no decomposition of the compounds was observed, thus confirming their high photostability. The kinetics of the photo-isomerisation of 130 as a representative example was studied to determine the concentration of isomer at different irradiation intervals (Fig. 53A). Further, it was derived that even a small variation in the irradiation wavelength can cause significant changes in the PTSS. In the case of 130, changing the irradiation wavelength from 300 to 375 nm resulted in a change in the predominant isomer in PTSS from the E to Z isomer (Fig. 53B). Compound 130 is a representative example of a photoswitch, which shows its emission maximum at 429 nm with a quantum yield of 16% ± 1%, thus confirming its efficiency for use as a molecular photoswitch.203
 Fig. 52  Series of TH-based molecular photo-switches. 
 Fig. 53  Different concentration of Z isomer during irradiation of E isomer of 130 (A) at different time interval and (B) using monochromatic light. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
Similarly, Todorov et al. described the photochromic and molecular switching behaviour of new TH-based Schiff bases (Fig. 54). Solvatochromic studies of the synthesised Schiff bases showed that 135–137 displayed negligible solvatochromic shifting and 138 exhibited a strong red shift in methanol due to intermolecular H-bonding. Conversely, 139 exhibited negative solvatochromism owing to the greater stabilisation of its molecule in the ground state than in the excited state. The photo-isomerisation experiments showed the E–Z–E–Z–E switching ability of the switchable –CHN– group. Compound 136 exhibited keto–enol tautomerism (imine ⇄ enamine equilibrium) by ESIPT (Scheme 9). Based on these results, 135, 136, 137 and 139 fall under P-type photochromic switches, while 138 is a T-type switch.204 Georgiev et al. reported the synthesis of identical Schiff bases containing the TH nucleus, which can be used as molecular photo-switches based on ESIPT and the E–Z photo-switching ability of the synthesized Schiff bases (Fig. 55).205
 Fig. 54  Structures of TH-based Schiff bases. 
 Scheme 9  Photochemical conversion upon exposure to UV irradiation. (A) E–Z–E–Z isomerization and (B) imine ⇄ enamine tautomerism shown by 136 through ESIPT. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
 Fig. 55  Structures of Schiff bases containing the TH nucleus. 
There is significant interest in the design and development of organic materials based on the D–π–A configuration, which can be used as a sensitizer or anchoring group in DSSCs. To date, the IPCE given by most of these organic sensitizers is 12%. Guo et al. reported dyes 144 and 145 based on triphenylamine as the donor and TH as the acceptor as anchoring groups in DSSCs (Fig. 56). The time-dependent adsorption and desorption studies revealed the high photostability and strong binding strength of the TH-based dyes. Further, the study showed that the TH-based dyes 144 and 145 led to an enhancement in photocurrent and electron injection efficiency, giving a greater photovoltage performance. All the results obtained showed the superiority of the TH-based dyes 144 and 145 compared to the conventional cyanoacrylic acid-based dye as an acceptor and anchoring group in DSSCs. On changing the anchoring group from cyanoacrylic acid to TH, the photovoltaic efficiency increased from 4.9% for cyanoacrylic acid to 7.58% for dye 144 and 7.66% for dye 145 with two methoxy groups.206 Similarly, Deogratias and co-workers investigated the optoelectronic properties of triphenyl amine-containing TH-based dye sensitizers for DSSCs using density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT). The studied dye sensitizers 145–151 are shown in Fig. 56. According to the DFT and TD-DFT studies, dyes 145, 146 and 149 were found to be superior in their performances as acceptor and anchoring groups for DSSCs compared to other TH-based dyes and conventional cyanoacrylic acid-based dyes.194
 Fig. 56  Chemical structures of triphenylamine-containing TH-based dyes. 
Kathiravan and co-workers described the synthesis and applicability of zinc titanate (ZnTiO3) nanomaterial and porphyrin-TH (P-TH) system (Fig. 57) or ZnT/P-TH system as a photoactive photoanode for DSSCs. Porphyrins are known to have greater light-harvesting properties in the near IR and visible region, and it is possible to tune their redox and electronic properties through peripheral functionalization and also through metallation. Besides, ZnTiO3 nanomaterials are known to have high photocatalytic efficiency due to their enhanced electron–hole separation, where electrons can easily transfer from the titanium conduction band to the Zn conduction band. The sensitization of P-TH by the ZnTiO3 nanomaterial enhances the rate of electron injection from P-TH to ZnTiO3, thus making this ZnT/P-TH system an ideal and promising candidate as a sensitizer or photoactive photoanode in DSSCs. The fluorescence quenching technique was used to access the electron injection ability of P-TH to different nanomaterials (Fig. 58). The very low fluorescence quenching by ZnO2 compared to other nanomaterials is due to the partial aggregation of P-TH on its surface and not due to electron injection from P-TH. Also, because of its low conduction band edge, ZnO2 is energetically out of reach of the excited states of most of dyes. TiO2 and ZnTiO3 showed very good quenching, confirming the electron injection from P-TH to these materials. However, the fluorescence quenching by ZnTiO3 was greater than that of the other two nanomaterials, which is due to its good electron–hole separation, thus making it a very efficient and promising candidate as a sensitizer or photoanode in DSSCs.207
 Fig. 57  Structure of porphyrin-TH dye. 
 Fig. 58  Absorption (a) and emission (b) spectra of P-TH in the presence of different nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
The absorption spectrum of 153 shows the Soret band for the S0 → S2 transition at 424 nm and Q bands at 558 and 597 nm for the S0 → S1 transition (Fig. 59A). In contrast, its emission spectrum shows two maxima at 603 nm and 654 nm (Fig. 59B). The electron injection rate and quantum yield of electron injection obtained were 7.19 × 1010 s−1 and 99%, respectively. However, its electron recombination rate was found to be much less than that of the conventional carboxyl-based Zn–porphyrin. This type of higher electron injection rate and low electron recombination rate is very useful for obtaining long-lived electric currents in photovoltaic devices. Therefore, the Zn–P-TH-sensitized TiO2 electrode material exhibited the best photovoltaic performance with a total conversion efficiency of 1.01%. For comparison, a Zn–P-COOH-sensitised electrode was developed under the same conditions, which showed an overall conversion efficiency of 0.84%.208
 Fig. 59  (A) Absorption (red) and emission (blue) spectra of Zn–P-TH 153 in THF. (B) Normalised absorption spectra of Zn–P-TH and Zn–P-TH/TiO2 film. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. 
7.4.2.1 Applications of hydantoin as a green reagent or catalyst. 
The implementation of green chemistry in the pharmaceutical and chemical industries is increasingly owing to the fact that the world is facing tremendous environmental challenges in the 21st century. The US Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) has recommended using green chemistry as a sustainable innovative technique, which uses inexpensive raw materials, reduces unwanted and toxic waste, avoids the use of toxic reagents, and hence minimizes the adverse impacts on the environment. Therefore, green chemistry is emerging as a solution to overcome the expense of different scientific areas. The direct and easiest way to implement green chemistry in synthetic chemistry and pharmaceuticals is to use non-hazardous, eco-friendly, recyclable and efficient catalysts and solvents for the synthesis and manufacturing of APIs, drug molecules and other value-added chemicals. A green alternative for the consumption of a large amount of salts and toxic reagents is to use a catalyst. Thus, researchers are focusing on finding catalysts that will enable synthetic procedures to be less polluting, eliminate the use of hazardous reagents, operate with better atom economy, achieve maximum selectivity with purer products and will be reusable.
Various groups of chemicals known as N-halo reagents of urea, amides, amines, sulphonamides, imidazolidines, saccharines, imides, and sulphonamides are extensively employed in organic synthesis. Some special characteristics of N-halo compounds such as their highly reactive N–X bond and different splitting mode makes them potential precursors for use in organic synthesis.209 1,3-Dibromo-5,5-dimethylhydantoin (DBDMH) and 1,3-dichloro-5,5-dimethylhydantoin (DCDMH) have received great attention as N-halo reagents owing to their economic benefits. DBDMH is inexpensive, easily available, stable in air and moisture and has been used as a homogeneous catalyst in various organic reactions owing to its high catalytic activity, such as the synthesis of 2-arylimidazolines and 2-arylthiazolines under solvent-free conditions (Scheme 10).210 Hojati et al. reported the synthesis of some biologically active heterocycles such as benzimidazoles, benzoxazoles and oxazolo-[4,5-b]pyridines using DBDMH in solvent-free medium.211 The rapid deprotection of 1,1-diacetates to their parent aldehyde using DBDMH in the presence of wet silica as a solid support with no solvent was reported by Maleki and co-workers (Scheme 11).212 Yasamin et al. also described an eco-friendly and industrially acceptable MCR-based method for the synthesis of bioactive oxindole heterocycles using the non-poisonous, cheap and green homogenous DBDMH catalyst in aqueous medium.213
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of 2-arylimidazolines and 2-arylthiazolines using DBDMH under solvent-free conditions. 
 Scheme 11  General route for the deprotection of 1,1-diacetals to the parent aldehyde. 
The one-pot synthesis of α-haloacetals of ketone from secondary alcohol using DBDMH in ethylene glycol was reported by Han and co-workers. The reaction followed oxidation, bromination, and then acetalization all in one pot without the use of any other catalyst.214 The state-of-the-art research further showed that DBDMH is also a highly selective, mild and environmentally friendly oxidant in the oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes,215,216 ketones,217 esters216 and lactones218 and in suitable reaction media to substitute high-valent metal oxides and salts. It has also been used as a brominating agent,219 sanitiser for swimming pools and water purification,220 aromatization of tri-substituted pyrazolines221 and silylation and pyranylation of benzylic and primary or secondary aliphatic alcohols.222
Similarly, DCDMH is also used as a green and novel homogeneous catalyst for the synthesis of dihydropyrimidinones in the Biginelli reaction. The original Biginelli reaction proceeds in very strong acidic conditions, resulting in very poor product yields.223 DCDMH is a low-cost, eco-friendly and stable five-membered heterocycle, which has been used as a chlorine source in chlorination reactions,224 oxidant of secondary alcohols to ketones217 and oximes to their corresponding carbonyl compound,225,226 for the methoxymethylation of alcohols227 and for water decontamination.228 Hojati et al. reported a modified Biginelli reaction (Scheme 12) for the synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones using DCDMH as a homogeneous catalyst.223 Ghomi and co-workers developed a new synthetic route for the preparation of the environmental friendly nano hybrid catalyst H3PMo12O40/Hyd-SBA-15 based on TH to achieve domino MCR for the synthesis of biologically active molecules, i.e., 3-amino-2′-oxospiro[benzo[c]pyrano[3,2-a]phenazine-1,3′-indoline]-2-carbonitrile/carboxylate derivatives (Fig. 60). The catalyst synthesized was found to be reusable and recyclable, heterogeneous, afford high product yields, environmentally benign and avoid the use of hazardous solvents when used in the reaction compared to other similar catalysts.229
 Scheme 12  Modified Biginelli reaction using DCDMH. 
 Fig. 60  Synthesis of H3PMo12O40/Hyd-SBA-15 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Ltd, Copyright 2019. 
Furthermore, the synthesis of D-amino acids from 5-substituted TH in the presence of the microbial enzyme Agrobacterium radiobacter was reported by Deepa et al.230 and George et al.231 The stereospecific bacterial conversion of DL-5-(2-methylthioethyl)hydantoin to L-amino acid, i.e., L-methionine was also reported by Ishikawa and co-workers. These reaction mechanisms proceeded via three steps as follows: (i) enzymatic or spontaneous racemization of 5-(2-methylthioethyl)hydantoin, (ii) hydrolysis-assisted ring-opening of TH to form N-carbamyl-amino acids and the enzyme called hydantoinase and (iii) stereospecific hydrolysis of N-carbamyl-L-amino acids to L-methionine selectively.232
Due to the different functional groups present on this platform molecule, it is substantiated to be an excellent starting material for the synthesis of drug analogues, complex heterocyclic moieties and photo-responsive molecules. Among the various unconventional energy inputs for the sustainable development of more eco-friendly synthetic routes, green chemistry-based synthetic methods provide unique opportunities to exploit TH- and 2TH-based complex organic frameworks, enzymes inhibitors, and active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) for potential pharmaceutical, agricultural, medicinal, industrial and biomedical applications.

8. Conclusion
Since their discovery, TH and 2TH have consistently been studied to determine the source of their unique properties, while new synthetic methodologies are continuously being developed to generate novel molecules appended with TH and 2TH moieties. The 2TH core has been proven to be of utmost importance, affording wide biological properties to a wide range of compounds when tuned with it. Thanks to the different functional groups present on this platform molecule, 2TH has proven to be an excellent starting material for the preparation of analogues of drugs, complex heterocyclic scaffolds and photo-responsive molecules. This had caused a group of synthetic, pharmaceutical and medicinal chemists to explore new synthetic routes to access these valuable molecules and look for more sustainable and efficient alternatives to the existing procedures. Specific attention is dedicated to synthetic methods for the extensive use of TH and 2TH, highlighting their advantages over classical procedures and opening new perspectives in the sustainable preparation of useful scaffolds for the medicinal and pharmaceutical industry and photophysical applications. Compared to the conventional synthetic procedures, the synthesis of TH and 2TH derivatives based on green chemistry principles is highly advantageous given that it involves simple and easy purification, short reaction time, improved product yields, no generation of waste, reduction in the formation of by-products and also avoids toxic and harmful reagents and reaction conditions. Thus, it affords reagent and waste economy, enabling an eco-friendly, cheap, greener sustainable substitute to synthesize different APIs with low and less environmental impact.
The use of this C-3 synthon in novel synthetic routes is appealing, given that it allows the incorporation of other organic moieties into the final targets. Characterised by their unique absorbance and fluorescence spectra, communication between TH or 2TH and other organic moieties has inspired the production of a copious library of molecules. The flexibility in the modification of the 2TH core allows the design of multifunctional fluorescence probes for sensing toxic cations, anions, intracellular redox processes, diverse biomolecules, etc. Controlling its fluorescence properties finds application in the generation of molecular switches, while its light-harvesting ability make it a model candidate for application in DSSCs and synthetic photochemical cells.
The research involving TH or 2TH units thus far has produced numerous fascinating results and their rich photochemical, biological, electrochemical and photophysical properties will undoubtedly continue to stimulate research in many fields. Nevertheless, enormous additional efforts are required to fully explore the possibilities of 2TH related to its photophysical applications. We hope that this review on TH and 2TH will serve as a catalyst to stimulate further studies on these molecules. We believe that many unknown compounds can be discovered and studied with the help of this review and that some of these compounds will find their way towards practical applications. Thus far, the research carried on TH and 2TH units indicates that a large number of compounds will be only limited by our imagination in the future.
Abbreviations

BAPTA1,2-Bis(o-aminophenoxy)-ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid
2TH2-Thiohydantoin
4-HOBDI4-Hydroxy-benzylidene-imidazolidinone
AAcceptor
ACQAggregation-caused quenching
AIEAggregation-induced emission
AIEEAggregation-induced enhanced emission
ÅAngstrom
KbBinding constant
KdBinding dissociation constant
BSABovine serum albumin
CB1Cannabinoid receptor type 1
CIEFChelation-induced enhanced fluorescence
CuCAACCopper-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition
DFWMDegenerate four-wave mixing
DFTDensity functional theory
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DMSODimethyl sulphoxide
DMFDimethylformamide
DDonor
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
EETElectronic energy transfer
ETEnergy transfer
EBEthidium bromide
ESIPTExcited state intramolecular proton transfer
FRETFluorescence resonance energy transfer
FT-IRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
GOGraphene oxide
GFPGreen fluorescent proteins
IC50Half maximal inhibitory concentration
THHydantoin
H2O2Hydrogen peroxide

K
i
Inhibition constant
ICTIntramolecular charge transfer
IPCEInternal power conversion efficiency
LODLimit of detection
μMMicromolar
mgMilligram
MmMillimol
MMolar
nMNanomolar
nmNanometre
NADPHNicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NLONonlinear optical
ORTEPOak Ridge Thermal Ellipsoid Plot
ppbParts per billion
PCFPhotoelectric conversion film
PETPhoto-induced electron transfer
PTSSPhotostationary state
P-THPorphyrin-hydantoin
[PdCl4]2−Potassium tetrachloropalladate(II)
[PtCl4]2−Potassium tetrachloroplatinate(II)

1H-NMRProton nuclear magnetic resonance

K
sv
Stern–Volmer quenching constant
SPAACStrain-promoted azide–alkyne cycloaddition
TBAFTetrabutylammonium fluoride
THFTetrahydrofuran
TD-DFTTime-dependent density functional theory
TiO2Titanium dioxide
H2OWater
XRDX-ray diffraction
Y-FASTYellow fluorescence-activating and absorption-shifting tags
ZnCl2Zinc(II) chloride
ZnO2Zinc peroxide
ZnTiO3Zinc titanate.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Dr NVR greatly acknowledges the Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government of India for funding through a start-up research grant (SRG/2019/001023) and SRMIST seed grant. The authors also thank DST-FIST (No. SR/FST/CST-266/2015(c)) for the improvement of the S&T infrastructures to the Department of Chemistry, SRMIST. PG thank SRMIST for the PhD fellowship.
References
A. Baeyer, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1861, 117, 178–180 CrossRef .
A. Baeyer, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1861, 119, 126–128 CrossRef .
F. Urech, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1873, 165, 99–103 CrossRef .
W. T. Read, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1922, 44, 1746–1755 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Bucherer and V. A. Lieb, J. Prakt. Chem., 1934, 141, 5–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. Biltz, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1908, 41, 1379–1393 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ware, Chem. Rev., 1950, 46, 403–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Meusel and M. Gütschow, Org. Prep. Proced. Int., 2004, 36, 391–443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Konnert, B. Reneaud, R. M. De Figueiredo and J. Campagne, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 10132–10142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Colacino, A. Porcheddu, C. Charnay and F. Delogu, React. Chem. Eng., 2019, 4, 1179–1188 RSC .
M. Gao, Y. Yang, Y. D. Wu, C. Deng, W. M. Shu, D. X. Zhang, L. P. Cao, N. F. She and A. X. Wu, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 4026–4029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ghanbari, M. Jamali and G. Batta, J. Sulfur Chem., 2014, 35, 394–398 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shen, Y. Zhou, F. Che, J. Yu, Y. Lin and Q. Song, J. Chem. Res., 2015, 39, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mandal and A. Pramanik, Tetrahedron, 2020, 76, 130817 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kotha, N. K. Gupta and V. R. Aswar, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3188–3197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, Z. Jiang, H. Feng, L. Liu and J. Wang, Asian J. Chem., 2014, 26, 1171–1173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Prevet, M. Flipo, P. Roussel, B. Deprez and N. Willand, Tetrahedron Lett., 2016, 57, 2888–2894 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Muccioli, J. H. Poupaert, J. Wouters, B. Norberg, W. Poppitz, G. K. E. Scriba and D. M. Lambert, Tetrahedron, 2003, 59, 1301–1307 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Muccioli, J. Wouters, J. H. Poupaert, B. Norberg, W. Poppitz, G. K. E. Scriba and D. M. Lambert, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 3599–3602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Medda, G. Martinez-Ariza and C. Hulme, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 5295–5298 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Xu, Y. Ding, J. P. Meng, D. Y. Tang, Y. Li, J. Lei, C. Xu and Z. Z. Chen, Synlett, 2018, 2199–2202 CrossRef CAS .

          C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,  2004, 43, 6250–6284 Search PubMed .
Y. D. Gong and M. J. Kurth, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 3379–3382 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Brouillette, V. Lisowski, J. Guillon, S. Massip and J. Martinez, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 7538–7544 CrossRef CAS .
E. Colacino, F. Lamaty, J. Martinez and I. Parrot, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 5317–5320 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee and C. M. Sun, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 437–440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. K. Spear, J. G. Huddleston and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 64–82 RSC .
E. Colacino, J. Martinez, F. Lamaty, L. S. Patrikeeva, L. L. Khemchyan, V. P. Ananikov and I. P. Beletskaya, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2893–2920 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Monteiro, B. Pieber, A. G. Corrêa and C. O. Kappe, Synlett, 2016, 83–87 CAS .
N. Weeranoppanant, React. Chem. Eng., 2019, 4, 235–243 RSC .
J. Britton and C. L. Raston, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1250–1271 RSC .
S. Vukelić, B. Koksch, P. H. Seeberger and K. Gilmore, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 13451–13454 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Noël and R. Luque, Accounts on Sustainable Flow Chemistry,  2020 Search PubMed .
H. Seo, L. V. Nguyen and T. F. Jamison, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2019, 361, 247–264 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Bartoń, J. Bojarski and A. Żurowska, Arch. Pharm., 1986, 319, 457–461 CrossRef .
V. Kumar, H. Rana, R. Sankolli and M. P. Kaushik, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 6148–6151 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paul, M. Gupta, R. Gupta and A. Loupy, Synthesis, 2002, 75–78 CAS .
J. Safari and L. Javadian, C. R. Chim., 2013, 16, 1165–1171 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. M. Fahmy, S. A. Rizk, M. M. Hemdan, A. A. El-Sayed and A. I. Hassaballah, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 2018, 55, 2545–2555 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lupacchini, A. Mascitti, G. Giachi, L. Tonucci, N. d’Alessandro, J. Martinez and E. Colacino, Tetrahedron, 2017, 73, 609–653 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Arani and J. Safari, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Safari and L. Javadian, J. Chem. Sci., 2013, 125, 981–987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Li, T. Li, H. Li and J. Liu, Ultrason. Sonochem., 1996, 3, 141–143 CrossRef .

          V. Margetic and D. Štrukil, Mechanochemical organic synthesis,  2016 Search PubMed .

          A. Stolle and B. Ranu, Ball milling towards green synthesis: applications, projects, challenges, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. Andersen and J. Mack, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1435–1443 RSC .
S. L. James, C. J. Adams, C. Bolm, D. Braga, P. Collier, T. Frišcic, F. Grepioni, K. D. M. Harris, G. Hyett, W. Jones, A. Krebs, J. Mack, L. Maini, A. G. Orpen, I. P. Parkin, W. C. Shearouse, J. W. Steed and D. C. Waddell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 413–447 RSC .
L. Konnert, L. Gonnet, I. Halasz, J. S. Suppo, R. M. De Figueiredo, J. M. Campagne, F. Lamaty, J. Martinez and E. Colacino, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 9802–9809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Colacino, A. Porcheddu, I. Halasz, C. Charnay, F. Delogu, R. Guerra and J. Fullenwarth, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2973–2977 RSC .
L. Konnert, M. Dimassi, L. Gonnet, F. Lamaty, J. Martinez and E. Colacino, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 36978–36986 RSC .
A. Porcheddu, F. Delogu, L. De Luca and E. Colacino, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12044–12051 CAS .
L. Konnert, J. Martinez, E. Colacino and M. Enscm, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 13757–13809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Wyzlic, W. Tjarks, A. H. Soloway, D. J. Perkins, M. Burgos and K. P. O’Reilly, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 4541–4547 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Johnson and B. Treat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1913, 35, 1605–1606 CrossRef .
W. M. S. Johnson and B. Treat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1913, 35, 1130–1136 CrossRef .
A. Takahashi, H. Matsuoka, Y. Ozawa and Y. Uda, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1998, 46, 5037–5042 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Qu, J.-P. Li and C.-M. Ma, Synth. Commun., 2005, 35, 1203–1208 CrossRef .
W. Ben Yeh, M. J. Lin, M. J. Lee and C. M. Sun, Mol. Diversity, 2003, 7, 185–198 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. L. Erve, V. Amarnath, R. C. Sills, D. L. Morgan and W. M. Valentine, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 1998, 11, 1128–1136 Search PubMed .
A. M. Mahmoud, A. E. Abdel-Rahman, G. M. El-Naggar and H. A. H. El-Sherief, Indian J. Chem., Sect. B: Org. Chem. Incl. Med. Chem., 1984, 23, 379 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Wang, Z. Daniel and S. O. Sheikh, Molecules, 2006, 11, 739–750 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. Muccioli, D. Martin, G. K. E. Scriba, W. Poppitz, J. H. Poupaert, J. Wouters and D. M. Lambert, J. Med. Chem., 2005, 48, 2509–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nefzi, M. A. Giulianotti and R. A. Houghten, Tetrahedron Lett., 2000, 41, 2283–2287 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Xu, D. Krishnamurthy, R. Varsolona, L. Nummy, S. Shen, R. P. Frutos, D. Byrne, J. C. Chung, V. Farina and C. H. Senanayake, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 273–276 CrossRef CAS .

          E. B. Chain, The chemical structure of the penicillins,  1946 Search PubMed .
M. A. Metwally and E. Abdel-Latif, J. Sulfur Chem., 2012, 33, 229–257 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. C. Kim, S. Woong, S. Youl Ahn, J. Sung Koh, J. Ho Lee and S. Ro, Tetrahedron Lett., 1997, 38, 4603–4606 CrossRef .
K.-H. Park and M. J. Kurth, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 9297–9300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Matthews and R. A. Rivero, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 6090–6092 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Delgado, L. E. Seijas, A. J. Mora, R. Almeida and T. González, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2015, 607, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Bradshaw, Process of color developing with 2-thiohydantoin derivatives, US Pat., 2551134,  1951 Search PubMed .
S. Abubshait, Indian J. Chem., Sect. B: Org. Chem. Incl. Med. Chem., 2017, 56, 641–648 Search PubMed .
D. K. Mahapatra, D. Das, R. S. Shivhare and S. S. Borkar, MOJ Bioorg. Org. Chem., 2018, 2, 46–50 Search PubMed .
N. S. B. Ramachandran, C. N. Nalini, C. R. Girija and N. S. Begum, Malays. J. Sci., 2007, 26, 81–89 Search PubMed .
E. Gallienne, G. G. Muccioli, D. M. Lambert and M. Shipman, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 6495–6497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gasch, P. Merino-Montiel, Ó. López, J. G. Fernández-Bolaños and J. Fuentes, Tetrahedron, 2010, 66, 9964–9973 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Bae, S. Choi, J. J. Park, J. H. Joo, M. Cui, H. Cho, W. J. Lee and S. H. Lee, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2016, 24, 4144–4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Augsburger, A. Filippova, D. Rasti, T. Seredenina, M. Lam, G. Maghzal, Z. Mahiout, P. Jansen-Dürr, U. G. Knaus, J. Doroshow, R. Stocker, K. H. Krause and V. Jaquet, Redox Biol., 2019, 26, 101272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. M. Sundaram, C. Venkatesh, H. Ila and H. Junjappa, Synlett, 2007, 251–254 CAS .
A. W. Roszak and D. F. Weaver, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1998, 54, 1168–1170 CrossRef .
A. Ahmedova, G. Pavlović, M. Marinov, N. Stoyanov, D. Šišak and M. Mitewa, J. Mol. Struct., 2009, 938, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Muccioli, D. Martin, G. K. E. Scriba, W. Poppitz, J. H. Poupaert, J. Wouters and D. M. Lambert, J. Med. Chem., 2005, 48, 2509–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Kim, H. J. Lee, Y. J. Choi, Y. J. Park, Y. Woo, S. J. Kim, M. H. Park, H. W. Lee, P. Chun, H. Y. Chung and H. R. Moon, MedChemComm, 2014, 5, 1410–1417 RSC .
R. Kumar and P. M. S. Chauhan, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 5475–5479 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Patel, K. R. Desai and K. H. Chikhalia, Indian J. Chem., Sect. B: Org. Chem. Incl. Med. Chem., 2006, 45, 1716–1721 Search PubMed .
S. S. Kandil, G. B. El-hefnawy, E. A. Bakr and A. Z. A. El-ezz, Transition Met. Chem., 2003, 28, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kandil, G. B. El-Hefnawy and E. A. Baker, Thermochim. Acta, 2004, 414, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nanda, D. C. Dash, F. M. Meher and P. C. Mohanty, Indian J. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg., Phys., Theor. Anal., 1987, 26, 698–701 Search PubMed .
K. Tishchenko, E. Beloglazkina, M. Proskurnin, V. Malinnikov, D. Guk, M. Muratova, O. Krasnovskaya, A. Udina, D. Skvortsov, R. R. Shafikov, Y. Ivanenkov, V. Aladinskiy, I. Sorokin, O. Gromov, A. Majouga and N. Zyk, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2017, 175, 190–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Majouga, E. K. Beloglazkina, O. V. Shilova, A. A. Moiseeva and N. V. Zyk, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2009, 58, 1392–1399 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Beloglazkina, A. G. Majouga, R. B. Romashkina and N. V. Zyk, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 2957–2959 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Majouga, E. K. Beloglazkina, A. A. Moiseeva, O. V. Shilova, E. A. Manzheliy, M. A. Lebedeva, E. S. Davies, A. N. Khlobystov and N. V. Zyk, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 6290–6293 RSC .
A. G. Majouga, E. K. Beloglazkina, A. V. Yudina, A. V. Mironov and N. V. Zyk, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 114–117 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Mahfouz, E. Shahawy and A. A. Hassan, Transition Met. Chem., 1994, 19, 385–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Casas, A. Castiñeiras, N. Playá, A. Sánchez, J. Sordo, J. M. Varela and E. M. Vázquez-López, Polyhedron, 1999, 18, 3653–3659 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arca, F. Demartin, F. A. Devillanova, A. Garau, F. Isaia, V. Lippolis, G. Verani, V. Ospedale, C. Strutturale, V. G. Venezian, I. Milano and R. V. April, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 4164–4165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Arrizabalaga, P. Castan and J. Laurent, Transition Met. Chem., 1980, 5, 324–327 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. S. Pashupati, P. Singh and U. P. Shukla, Aust. J. Chem., 1976, 29, 79–84 CrossRef .
P. P. Singh and U. P. Shukla, Aust. J. Chem., 1974, 27, 1827–1832 CrossRef CAS .
P. Marinova, M. Marinov, M. Kazakova, Y. Feodorova, P. Penchev, V. Sarafian and N. Stoyanov, Biotechnol. Biotechnol. Equip., 2014, 28, 316–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Marinova, M. Marinov, V. Delchev and N. Stoyanov, Acta Chim. Slov., 2015, 62, 225–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Cochrane, S. Bernales, B. M. Jacobsen, D. M. Cittelly, E. N. Howe, N. C. D’Amato, N. S. Spoelstra, S. M. Edgerton, A. Jean, J. Guerrero, F. Gómez, S. Medicherla, I. E. Alfaro, E. McCullagh, P. Jedlicka, K. C. Torkko, A. D. Thor, A. D. Elias, A. A. Protter and J. K. Richer, Breast Cancer Res., 2014, 16, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Formula, M. Weight, T. Category, C. Name, F. Names, G. Names and B. Names, Enzalutamide.

          A. Azvolinsky, Cancer Netw.
M. Bassetto, S. Ferla, F. Pertusati, S. Kandil, A. D. Westwell, A. Brancale and C. McGuigan, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2016, 118, 230–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Buchynskyy, J. R. Gillespie, Z. M. Herbst, R. M. Ranade, F. S. Buckner and M. H. Gelb, ACS Med. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 886–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Lou, Y. Zhu, N. Nadiminty, C. T. Schwartz, C. P. Evans and A. C. Gao, Clin. Cancer Res., 2014, 20, 3198–3210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. C. Chan, L. J. Brand, T. H. Hwang, K. A. T. Silverstein and S. M. Dehm, Cancer Res., 2013, 73, 483–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Joseph, N. Lu, J. Qian, J. Sensintaffar, G. Shao, D. Brigham, M. Moon, E. C. Maneval, I. Chen, B. Darimont and J. H. Hager, Cancer Discovery, 2013, 3, 1020–1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Ramadan, W. K. Kabbara and H. S. A. B. Al Masri, Onco. Targets. Ther., 2015, 8, 871–876 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. L. Sawyers, M. E. Jung, C. D. Chen, S. Ouk, D. Welsbie, C. Tran, J. Wongvipat and D. Yoo, Diarylhydantoin compounds, US Pat., 7709517,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. N. Zhou, B. Li, L. Ruan, Y. Wang, G. Duan and J. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 426–430 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gibbons, T. Ouatas, W. Krauwinkel, Y. Ohtsu, J. S. van der Walt, V. Beddo, M. de Vries and J. Mordenti, Clin. Pharmacokinet., 2015, 54, 1043–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. L. Fishman, M. Paliou, L. Poretsky and W. C. Hembree, Endocrine care of transgender adults, Springer International Publishing,  2019 Search PubMed .
Z. T. Al-Salama, Drugs, 2018, 78, 699–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Janssen-Cilag, Australian Public Assessment Report for Apalutamide, 2019.
M. R. Smith, E. S. Antonarakis, C. J. Ryan, W. R. Berry, N. D. Shore, G. Liu, J. J. Alumkal, C. S. Higano, E. Chow Maneval, R. Bandekar, C. J. de Boer, M. K. Yu and D. E. Rathkopf, Eur. Urol., 2016, 70, 963–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Chi, N. Agarwal, A. Bjartell, B. H. Chung, A. J. P. D. S. Gomes, R. Given, A. J. Soto, A. S. Merseburger, M. Ozguroglu, H. Uemura, D. Ye, K. Deprince, V. Naini, J. Li, S. Cheng, M. K. Yu, K. Zhang, J. S. Larsen, S. Mccarthy and S. Chowdhury, N. Engl. J. Med., 2019, 381, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Clegg, J. Wongvipat, J. D. Joseph, C. Tran, S. Ouk, A. Dilhas, Y. Chen, K. Grillot, E. D. Bischoff, L. Cai, A. Aparicio, S. Dorow, V. Arora, G. Shao, J. Qian, H. Zhao, G. Yang, C. Cao, J. Sensintaffar, T. Wasielewska, M. R. Herbert, C. Bonnefous, B. Darimont, H. I. Scher, P. Smith-Jones, M. Klang, N. D. Smith, E. De Stanchina, N. Wu, O. Ouerfelli, P. J. Rix, R. A. Heyman, M. E. Jung, C. L. Sawyers and J. H. Hager, Cancer Res., 2012, 72, 1494–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Unidos, FDA/CDER, Erleada (apalutamide): Highlights of Prescribing Information, http://www.fda.gov/medwatch.
R. K. Ranjan and A. Chandra, Int. J. Basic Clin. Pharmacol., 2018, 7, 1853 CrossRef .

          O. Ouerfelli, A. Dilhas, G. Yang and H. Zhao, Synthesis
of thiohydantoins, US Pat., 20100190991A1,  2010 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, Z. Guo, H. Song, Y. Liu, L. Wang and Q. Wang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 8253–8261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tejchman, B. Orwat, I. Korona-Głowniak, A. Barbasz, I. Kownacki, G. Latacz, J. Handzlik, E. Żesławska and A. Malm, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 39367–39380 RSC .
D. Erşen, M. Ülger, S. Mangelinckx, M. Gemili, E. Şahin and Y. Nural, Med. Chem. Res., 2017, 26, 2152–2160 CrossRef .
N. P. Badiger, N. S. Shetty, R. S. Lamani and I. A. M. Khazi, Heterocycl. Commun., 2009, 15, 433–442 CAS .
A. I. Khodair and E. S. E. Ibrahim, Nucleosides Nucleotides, 1996, 15, 1927–1943 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. El-Barbary, A. I. Khodair, E. B. Pedersen and C. Nielsen, J. Med. Chem., 1994, 37, 73–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. E. A. El Fattah, A. H. Soliman and H. H. A. Allah, 14th Int. Electron. Conf. Synth. Org. Chem., 2010, 14, b024-1.
S. Vengurlekar, R. Sharma and P. Trivedi, Lett. Drug Des. Discovery, 2012, 9, 549–555 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Kachhadia, M. R. Patel and H. S. Joshi, J. Serb. Chem. Soc., 2005, 70, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Elhady, R. El-Sayed and H. S. Al-nathali, Chem. Cent. J., 2018, 12, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. El-moneim, E. H. Elsayed and M. El-ashry, World J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 2017, 6, 20–37 CAS .
M. M. A. Elmazar, A. M. Al-Obaid, H. I. El-Subbagh and A. I. Khodair, Anticancer Drugs, 1996, 7, 873–880 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zuo, X. Xu, Z. Xie, R. Ge, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Bian, X. Xu, Z. Xie, R. Ge, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and J. Bian, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2017, 125, 1002–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yildiz and O. Bozdag-Dundar, Med. Chem. Res., 2010, 19, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J. Wang, H. Dong, J. Lei, M. Wang and J. Fang, Molecules, 2011, 16, 2833–2845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, H. Dong, Z. Xu, J. Wang and M. Wang, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 19526–19539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suzen and E. Buyukbingol, Farmaco, 1998, 53, 525–527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kieć-Kononowicz, J. Karolak-Wojciechowska, B. Michalak, E. Pekala, B. Schumacher and C. E. Müller, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2004, 39, 205–218 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ono, S. Hayashi, K. Matsumura, H. Kimura, Y. Okamoto, M. Ihara, R. Takahashi, H. Mori and H. Saji, ACS Chem. Neurosci., 2011, 2, 269–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Takahashi, H. Matsuoka, K. Yamada and Y. Uda, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2005, 43, 521–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Majumdar, C. Bathula, S. M. Basu, S. K. Das, R. Agarwal, S. Hati, A. Singh, S. Sen and B. B. Das, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2015, 102, 540–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mo, J. Li and S. Liang, Anal. Biochem., 1997, 249, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ramachandran, A. Epp and W. B. McConnell, Anal. Chem., 1955, 27, 1734–1737 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kiec-Kononowicz, J. Karolak-Wojciechowska and J. Robak, Arch. Pharm., 1997, 330, 85–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Yüce and G. Kardaş, Corros. Sci., 2012, 58, 86–94 CrossRef .

          K. S. Ooi, T. Fukui, T. Kobayashi, M. Ueno, K. Kagami and K. M. Nishino, US Pat., 5482814,  1994 Search PubMed .

          M. C. Nelson, J. V. Helber and M. J. Brick, US Pat., 5695917,  1995 Search PubMed .
K.-K. Kunimoto, K. Taniguchi, H. Okumura, M. Honda, M. Suda, S. Fujinami, A. Kuwae, K. Hanai and S. Maeda, X-Ray Struct. Anal. Online, 2009, 25, 93–94 CrossRef .
X. Yong, M. Su, W. Wan, W. You, X. Lu, J. Qu and R. Liu, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 1591–1594 RSC .
J. S. Casas, E. E. Castellano, A. Macías, N. Playá, A. Sánchez, J. Sordo, J. M. Varela and J. Zukerman-Schpector, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1995, 238, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
P. Aslanidis, S. Kyritsis, M. Lalia-kantouri, B. Wicher and M. Gdaniec, Polyhedron, 2012, 48, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Cho, S. H. Kim and D. Shin, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 164, 517–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jullien and A. Gautier, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2015, 3, 42007 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Bruchez, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2015, 27, 18–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Sinsheimer, V. Jagodić, L. Polak, D. D. Hong and J. H. Burckhalter, J. Pharm. Sci., 1975, 64, 925–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chenge Li, M.-A. Plamont, I. Aujard, T. Le Saux and A. G. Jullien, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 9253–9261 RSC .
J. J. Vaquero, S. Gutiérrez, D. Martínez-López, M. Morón, D. Sucunza, D. Sampedro, A. Domingo and A. Salgado, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 18758–18763 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jancsó, E. Kovács, L. Cseri, B. J. Rózsa, G. Galbács, I. G. Csizmadia and Z. Mucsi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 218, 161–170 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Lavigne and E. V. Anslyn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3118–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. de Silva, B. McCaughan, B. O. F. McKinney and M. Querol, Dalton Trans., 2003, 1902–1913 RSC .
T. Gunnlaugsson, E. U. Akkaya, J. Yoon and T. D. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7097–7472 RSC .
J. Wu, W. Liu, J. Ge, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3483–3495 RSC .
M. H. Lee, J. S. Kim and J. L. Sessler, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4185–4191 RSC .
J. Dhar, N. Venkatramaiah, A. Anitha and S. Patil, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3457–3466 RSC .
X. Sun, Y. Wang and Y. Lei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8019–8061 RSC .
J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11718–11940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Venkatramaiah, D. M. G. C. Rocha, P. Srikanth, F. A. Almeida Paz and J. P. C. Tomé, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1056–1067 RSC .
R. G. González, M. M. Ariza, J. G. Pino and F. Villanova, Talanta, 1978, 25, 331–337 CrossRef .
M. T. Montaña Gonzalez and J. L. Gómez Ariza, Top. Catal., 1980, 25, 360–367 Search PubMed .
M. M. Moustafa, Synth. React. Inorg. Met.-Org. Chem., 1997, 27, 1417–1436 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sugii, Y. Ohara and K. Kitahara, Chem. Pharm. Bull., 1974, 22, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, X. Yong, X. Yang, Y. Yan, X. Lu, J. Qu and R. Liu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2014, 215, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zeng, X. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Yan, X. Lu, J. Qu and R. Liu, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 61, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Caldwell, A. G. Cairns, M. Olson, S. Chalmers, M. Sandison, W. Mullen, J. G. Mccarron and R. C. Hartley, Tetrahedron, 2015, 71, 9571–9578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Martínez-Máñez and F. Sancenón, Fluorogenic and chromogenic chemosensors and reagents for anions,  2003, vol. 103 Search PubMed .
K. Bowman-James, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 671–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Suksai and T. Tuntulani, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 255, 163–198 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Gale, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 465–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Gale, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 82–86 RSC .
P. C. Daniel and S. Bernstein, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 1967, 27, 197–210 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. L. Kirk and K. L. Kirk, Biochemistry of the Elemental Halogens and Inorganic Halides,  1991, vol. 3, pp. 19–68 Search PubMed .
M. Petzold, Caries Res., 2001, 35, 45–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cametti and K. Rissanen, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2809–2829 RSC .
X. Yong, M. Su, W. Wang, Y. Yan, J. Qu and R. Liu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2013, 11, 2254–2257 RSC .
L. Ruiyuan, Y. Xue, Y. Xiaodong., Y. Yichen, L. Xinwei and Q. Jinqing, Chin. J. Org. Chem., 2014, 34, 561–565 CrossRef .
Y. Ohtani, T. Saito, K. Sugawara, A. Shiozawa and A. Yamaguchi, Hyomen Gijutsu, 2005, 56, 479–480 CAS .
S. Sasmal and D. Haldar, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 5832–5837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lux, A. G. White, M. Chan, C. J. Anderson and A. Almutairi, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 277–288 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dunbar, R. J. Sowden, K. D. Trotter, M. K. Taylor, D. Smith, A. R. Kennedy, J. Reglinski and C. M. Spickett, Biometals, 2015, 28, 903–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Manzhelii, E. K. Beloglazkina, A. G. Majouga and N. V. Zyk, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2013, 62, 2631–2633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bartkowiak, B. Orwat, M. Zalas, P. Ledwon, I. Kownacki and W. Tejchman, Materials, 2020, 13, 2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Deogratias, N. Seriani, T. Pogrebnaya and A. Pogrebnoi, J. Mol. Graphics Modell., 2020, 94, 107480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Yuan, X. Tian, J. Yuan and J. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 5090–5104 RSC .
C. Chandrakala, A. S. S. Reddy, J. Jedryka, V. R. Kumar, G. N. Raju, N. Venkatramaiah, V. R. Kumar, G. Lakshminarayana and N. Veeraiah, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2020, 126, 1–11 CrossRef .
M. Bala Murali Krishna, N. Venkatramaiah, R. Venkatesan and D. Narayana Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3059–3068 RSC .
A. S. Rao, M. H. Dar, N. Venkatramaiah, R. Venkatesan and A. Sharan, J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. Mater., 2016, 25, 1–15 CrossRef .
B. Smokal, V. Krupka, O. Kolendo, A. Derkowska, B. Czaplicki and R. Sahraoui, Chem. Chem. Technol., 2007, 1, 131–135 CrossRef .
G. Kóczán, G. Csík, A. Csámpai, E. Balog, S. Bosze, P. Sohár and F. Hudecz, Tetrahedron, 2001, 57, 4589–4598 CrossRef .

          K. Nii, US Pat., 20060071253A1,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. W. H. Hoorens, M. Medved’, A. D. Laurent, M. Di Donato, S. Fanetti, L. Slappendel, M. Hilbers, B. L. Feringa, W. Jan Buma and W. Szymanski, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Martínez-López, M. L. Yu, C. García-Iriepa, P. J. Campos, L. M. Frutos, J. A. Golen, S. Rasapalli and D. Sampedro, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 3929–3939 CrossRef PubMed .
P. T. Todorov, P. N. Peneva, S. I. Georgieva, R. I. Rusew, B. L. Shivachev and A. H. Georgiev, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 2740–2751 RSC .
A. Georgiev, P. Todorov and D. Dimov, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 386, 112143 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Guo, Z. Q. Li, X. P. Liu, L. Zhou, F. T. Kong, W. C. Chen and S. Y. Dai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5733–5740 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Nii, US Pat., 20060071253A1,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. K. Kumar, P. Ram, E. M. Mothi and M. Ramesh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 5117–5127 RSC .
E. Kolvari, A. Ghorbani-Choghamarani, P. Salehi, F. Shirini and M. A. Zolfigol, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2007, 4, 126–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Hojati, I. Mohammadpoor-Baltork, B. Maleki, M. Gholizadeh, F. Shafiezadeh and M. Haghdoust, Can. J. Chem., 2010, 88, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Hojati, B. Maleki and Z. Beykzadeh, Monatsh. Chem., 2011, 142, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
B. Maleki, D. Azarifar, R. Ghorbani-Vaghei, H. Veisi, S. F. Hojati, M. Gholizadeh, H. Salehabadi and M. K. Moghadam, Monatsh. Chem., 2009, 140, 1485–1488 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saadati, F. S. Hojati, M. Al Naddaf and M. Keshe, J. Chem. Pharm. Res., 2018, 10, 108–112 CAS .
B. Han, Z. Zheng, F. Wu and A. Wang, Synth. Commun., 2017, 47, 2387–2394 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhuri, H. Zaki and M. Levine, Synth. Commun., 2016, 46, 636–644 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Zhu, J. Bao and X. Zou, Synth. Commun., 2014, 44, 1155–1164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khazaei, A. Abbasi, F. Kianiborazjani and M. Saednia, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2014, 25, 361–364 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, A. Xia, C. Meng, Z. Xu and D. Xu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2546–2549 RSC .
B. Radaram and M. Levine, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 4905–4908 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bridges, H. Kawai, T. Y. Chen, E. Nichols, J. Williams, S. McClure and J. Wetherbee, WO 2005/033004 A1, 2005.
D. Azarifar, M. A. Zolfigol and B. Maleki, Synthesis, 2004, 1744–1746 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shirini, M. A. Zolfigol and M. Paktinat, Synthesis, 2006, 4252–4256 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Hojati, M. Gholizadeh, M. Haghdoust and F. Shafiezadeh, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3238–3240 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Zhang and D. Zou, Synth. Commun., 2006, 36, 255–258 CrossRef .
A. A. Khazaei and A. Manesh, Synthesis, 2005, 1929–1931 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khazaei and A. Manesh, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2005, 52, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saednia, A. Amini Manesha, A. Khazaeib, M. Gohari and M. Chegeni, Iran. Chem. Commun., 2017, 5, 308–314 Search PubMed .
A. A. Semenova and A. A. Korolov, Gig. Sanit., 1982, 11–13 CAS .
J. Safaei-Ghomi and A. Bakhtiari, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 33, 1–14 Search PubMed .
S. Deepa, B. Sivasankar, K. Jayaraman, K. Prabhakaran, S. George, P. Palani, K. S. Ramesh, C. V. Srinivasan, N. R. Kandasamy and A. K. Sadhukhan, Process Biochem., 1993, 28, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. George and A. K. Sadhukhan, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1996, 12, 657–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishikawa, K. Watabe, Y. Mukohara, S. Kobayashi and H. Nakamura, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 1993, 57, 982–986 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Pratiksha P. Gawas
	Pratiksha Prakash Gawas received her BSc in Chemistry (2015) and MSc (2017) in Organic Chemistry from Goa University, India. Currently, she is a PhD student in the Functional Materials Lab of SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Chennai. Her research interests include optoelectronics, fluorescent materials, photophysics, chemosensors, fluorescent bio-imaging and organometallic chemistry.

Buthanapalli Ramakrishna
	Dr Buthanapalli Ramakrishna earned his MSc degree in 2009 from Pondicherry University, where he continued his doctoral research with Prof. Bala. Manimaran as a UGC-Research Fellow and received his PhD Degree in 2016. In Aug 2016, he joined the research group of Prof. Dillip K. Chand as an Institute Postdoctoral Fellow (2016–2018) at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. Later, he moved to the University of Miami, Florida to work with Prof. Angel E. Kaifer as a SERB Indo-US Postdoctoral Fellow. In Dec 2019, he became a faculty member in the Division of Chemistry at Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai Campus. His research interests include transition metal-based coordination and supramolecular chemistry, molecular self-assembly of discrete supramolecules, metallo-pillarenes, molecular recognition and CO-releasing molecules.

N. Veeraiah
	Prof. Veeraiah Nalluri obtained his PhD in Solid-State Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 1984. Currently, he is working as a UGC-BSR Faculty Fellow in the Department of Physics at Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur. He received several honours, including Andhra Pradesh (AP) Govt. Best Teacher Award 2015, A.P. Scientist Award 2010, and Fellow of AP Academy of Sciences 2013. He has handled several research projects funded by DST, DRDO, DAE, CSIR, and UGC and organized several National and International conferences on recent trends in materials science. His major research interests include photoluminescence, non-linear optics, piezoelectric materials, positron annihilation, and bioactive studies of glasses and glass ceramic materials. He has published more than 350 research articles (H-index 52 and citation 8500) in various international reputed peer reviewed journals. Currently, he is serving as an Associate Editor for Optical Materials.

Venkatramaiah Nutalapati
	Dr Venkatramaiah Nutalapati received his MSc in Analytical Chemistry from Acharya Nagarjuna University, Andhra Pradesh. He obtained his PhD (2011) from Pondicherry University, India. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, India (2011–2012) and FCT Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Aveiro, Portugal (2012–2016). Following his Research Associate work at IISc, he joined as a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, SRM Institute of Science and Technology (SRMIST) in 2017. He is an author of more than 75 research articles with an H-index of 22. His major research interests include supramolecular chemistry, photophysics of organic chromophores and (chemo) sensors and optoelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structure of hydantoin (TH).	 

 	Scheme 1  Reduction of allantoin to TH and urea.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of TH and diethylbarbituric acid.	 

 	Scheme 2  Retrosynthetic route for the synthesis of TH. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of some C- and N-substituted TH and 2TH using green techniques. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Classification of TH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Chemical structure of 2TH and (B) canonical forms of the thiocarbonyl functionality of 2TH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Functionalization of 2TH with –NH– groups at positions 1 and 3.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthetic route for compounds 17–21.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of murrayanine and its functionalized derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of compound 25.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of amide functionalised 2TH 26 and general structure of 27.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structures of 28–30 and (b) inhibitory mechanisms of some reported NOX inhibitors. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  Library of 3,5-disubstituted 2TH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structures of 49 and 50.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical and crystal structures of 51 and 52 showing their intermolecular H-bonding patterns. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures of C5-substituted TH and 2TH compounds.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structure of C5-substituted 2TH.	 

 	Scheme 5  
S-Alkylation and N-acylation of 2TH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of the compound obtained after styrylation of 2TH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed structure of 2TH-containing metal complexes.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structures of complexes of type ML2.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structure of tetradentate N-containing 2TH-Cu complexes 67 and 68.	 

 	Scheme 6  Proposed mechanism for the formation of complex 68.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of 2TH-based Cu2+ complexes.	 

 	Fig. 20  Fluorescence emission spectra of (A) ethidium-bromide–DNA (10 mM) and (B) BSA (1 μM) in the presence of an increasing concentration of complex 70 in dimethyl sulphoxide solvent. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of 2TH-Tc complex 72.	 

 	Fig. 22  Chemical and crystal structure of complex 73. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 1999.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Chemical structures of ligand methyl-2TH and (B) crystal structure of the complex (Cs-methyl-2TH-OH)∞. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 1998.	 

 	Fig. 24  Structures of Pt and Pd complexes of 2TH.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structure of (a) ligand fluorene-spiro-2TH and (b) cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligands.	 

 	Fig. 26  Potential (a) monodentate, (b) bridging and (c) bidentate or chelating modes of coordination between cycloalkanespiro-2TH ligand and metal ion. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Slovenian Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 27  Ground state equilibrium geometries of ligands 52 and 78 and their corresponding complexes. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from the Slovenian Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 28  Chemical structure of enzalutamide.	 

 	Scheme 7  Retrosynthetic route for apalutamide.	 

 	Fig. 29  Biological and pharmacological activities exhibited by 2TH and its derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 30  Fluorescence OFF–ON mechanism of fluorescent chromophores during imaging.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthetic route of 81 and 82.	 

 	Fig. 31  Structures of red fluorogenic push–pull chromophores.	 

 	Fig. 32  Absorption (black line) and emission (red line) spectra in the presence (solid line) or absence (dotted line) of 40% glycerol: (A) fluorogen 83 at pH 10 and (B) fluorogen 84 at pH 7.4. (C) Confocal micrographs of HeLa cells incubated with 1 μM of 83 (left side) and 84 (right side). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic representation of the mechanisms exhibited by (A) ICT, (B) ET, (C) PET and (D) ACQ and AIE.	 

 	Fig. 34  Structures of (a) condensation products of 2TH and (b) C5-substituted derivatives of 2TH for the detection of Pd2+.	 

 	Fig. 35  Structure of ligand 94 and the proposed structures of the complexes formed by ligand 94 with lanthanides and actinides ions.	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) Preparation of 3-methyl-2TH adduct and (B) UV absorption spectra of 95 (), 96 () and 97 (—). (1) 95 (5 × 10−5 M) at pH 6, (2) 95 (3 × 10−3 M) at pH 9.2, (3) 96 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 6, (4) 96 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 9.2, (5) 97 (2 × 10−5 M) at pH 9.2 and (6) 97 (5 × 10−5 M) at pH 6. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Pharmaceutical Society of Japan, Copyright 1974.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Decrease in fluorescence intensity of polymer 98 with an increase in Ag+ ion concentration in DMSO/H2O mixture, (b) fluorescence colour variation of polymer 98 upon the addition different metal ions under long UV light and (c) mechanisms of the interaction between polymer 98 and Ag+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from the WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Fluorescence colour variation of polymer 100 upon the addition of different metal ions under long UV light, (b) emission spectra of 100 in DMSO/H2O mixture upon the addition of different metal ions (5 equivalents) and (c) fluorescence ON–OFF mechanism of polymer 100 in the presence of copper ions. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Chemical structure of NitroAzidoFuraRed 101, (b) mechanism of calcium binding to NitroAzidoFuraRed and (c) absorption (solid line) and emission (dashed line) spectra of free NitroAzidoFuraRed (red) and Ca2+-bonded NitroAzidoFuraRed. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Structure of chemosensor 102 and (b) colour changes in a solution of 102 in acetonitrile upon the addition of different TBA salts of the mentioned anions. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from The Royal Society Of Chemistry, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Naked-eye colour change in acetonitrile solution of probe 103 upon the addition of different anions, (b) changes in UV absorption spectra of probe 103 in acetonitrile upon the addition of F− (103 = 100 μM, F−: 103 = 0–60 equivalent) and (c) complex formation between 103 and F− ions. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from The Royal Society Of Chemistry, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Structure of polymer 98, (b) decrease in the fluorescence intensity of polymer 99 with an increase in the concentration of F− ions in DMSO and (c) variation in the fluorescence colour of polymer 99 upon the addition of different anions under long UV light. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 43  Chemical structure of naked-eye sensor probes for solutions containing TBA salts of different anions.	 

 	Fig. 44  Structures of TH derivatives and their mechanism for the detection of Cl− ions.	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) Structure of TH derivatives used for fabricating sensing probes with graphene oxide. (b) Absorption and (b) emission spectra of (i) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate, (ii) guanine and (iii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate. (c) Colour of (i) guanine in ethyl acetate, (ii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate and (iii) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate under daylight. (d) Colour of (i) guanine in ethyl acetate, (ii) after the addition of guanine to the solution of 110-GO in ethyl acetate and (iii) probe 110-GO in ethyl acetate under UV light. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 46  (A) Structures of complexes 112 and 113 and ORTEP representation of the structure of complexes (B) 112 and (C) 113. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 47  Chemical structure of complex 114 showing its interaction with cobalt.	 

 	Fig. 48  Structures of 2TH-based monomers.	 

 	Fig. 49  Chemical structure of 120.	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Structures of the 2TH derivatives used in DSSCs and (b) schematic representation of the corresponding DSSC. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from MDPI, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 51  Absorption spectra of 121a-123b (a) in dichloromethane and (b) in ethanol and (c) IPCE chart of 121a-123b. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from MDPI, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 52  Series of TH-based molecular photo-switches.	 

 	Fig. 53  Different concentration of Z isomer during irradiation of E isomer of 130 (A) at different time interval and (B) using monochromatic light. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 54  Structures of TH-based Schiff bases.	 

 	Scheme 9  Photochemical conversion upon exposure to UV irradiation. (A) E–Z–E–Z isomerization and (B) imine ⇄ enamine tautomerism shown by 136 through ESIPT. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 55  Structures of Schiff bases containing the TH nucleus.	 

 	Fig. 56  Chemical structures of triphenylamine-containing TH-based dyes.	 

 	Fig. 57  Structure of porphyrin-TH dye.	 

 	Fig. 58  Absorption (a) and emission (b) spectra of P-TH in the presence of different nanomaterials. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 59  (A) Absorption (red) and emission (blue) spectra of Zn–P-TH 153 in THF. (B) Normalised absorption spectra of Zn–P-TH and Zn–P-TH/TiO2 film. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of 2-arylimidazolines and 2-arylthiazolines using DBDMH under solvent-free conditions.	 

 	Scheme 11  General route for the deprotection of 1,1-diacetals to the parent aldehyde.	 

 	Scheme 12  Modified Biginelli reaction using DCDMH.	 

 	Fig. 60  Synthesis of H3PMo12O40/Hyd-SBA-15 catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Ltd, Copyright 2019.	 
BAPTA	1,2-Bis(o-aminophenoxy)-ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid
2TH	2-Thiohydantoin
4-HOBDI	4-Hydroxy-benzylidene-imidazolidinone
A	Acceptor
ACQ	Aggregation-caused quenching
AIE	Aggregation-induced emission
AIEE	Aggregation-induced enhanced emission
Å	Angstrom
Kb	Binding constant
Kd	Binding dissociation constant
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
CB1	Cannabinoid receptor type 1
CIEF	Chelation-induced enhanced fluorescence
CuCAAC	Copper-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition
DFWM	Degenerate four-wave mixing
DFT	Density functional theory
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DMSO	Dimethyl sulphoxide
DMF	Dimethylformamide
D	Donor
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
EET	Electronic energy transfer
ET	Energy transfer
EB	Ethidium bromide
ESIPT	Excited state intramolecular proton transfer
FRET	Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
FT-IR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
GO	Graphene oxide
GFP	Green fluorescent proteins
IC50	Half maximal inhibitory concentration
TH	Hydantoin
H2O2	Hydrogen peroxide

K
i
	Inhibition constant
ICT	Intramolecular charge transfer
IPCE	Internal power conversion efficiency
LOD	Limit of detection
μM	Micromolar
mg	Milligram
Mm	Millimol
M	Molar
nM	Nanomolar
nm	Nanometre
NADPH	Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NLO	Nonlinear optical
ORTEP	Oak Ridge Thermal Ellipsoid Plot
ppb	Parts per billion
PCF	Photoelectric conversion film
PET	Photo-induced electron transfer
PTSS	Photostationary state
P-TH	Porphyrin-hydantoin
[PdCl4]2−	Potassium tetrachloropalladate(II)
[PtCl4]2−	Potassium tetrachloroplatinate(II)

1H-NMR	Proton nuclear magnetic resonance

K
sv
	Stern–Volmer quenching constant
SPAAC	Strain-promoted azide–alkyne cycloaddition
TBAF	Tetrabutylammonium fluoride
THF	Tetrahydrofuran
TD-DFT	Time-dependent density functional theory
TiO2	Titanium dioxide
H2O	Water
XRD	X-ray diffraction
Y-FAST	Yellow fluorescence-activating and absorption-shifting tags
ZnCl2	Zinc(II) chloride
ZnO2	Zinc peroxide
ZnTiO3	Zinc titanate.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
