Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC04187G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04187G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387-440Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications

        
          
            Karim 
            Khan†
*abcd, 
      
        
          
            Ayesha Khan 
            Tareen†
*b, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Aslam†
e, 
      
        
          
            Renheng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Yupeng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Asif 
            Mahmood
          
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Zhengbiao 
            Ouyang
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhongyi 
            Guo
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Electrical Engineering & Intelligentization, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan (DGUT), Dongguan, 523808, Guangdong Province, P. R. China. E-mail: karim_khan_niazi@yahoo.com; guozhongyi@hfut.edu.cn
bCollege of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, and THz Technical Research Center of Shenzhen University, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronics Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: chemistayesha@yahoo.com; zbouyang@szu.edu.cn; hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cShenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, and SZU-NUS Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Science and Technology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China
dInstitute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Collaborative Innovation Centre for Optoelectronic Science & Technology, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology, Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China
eGovernment Degree College Paharpur, Gomel University, Dera Ismail Khan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province, Islamic Republic of Pakistan
fSchool of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Sydney, 2006, Sydney, Australia
Received 
      31st July 2019
    , Accepted 20th November 2019First published on 20th November 2019AbstractThe technological evolution has been progressing for centuries and will possibly increase at a higher rate in the 21st century. Currently, in this age of nanotechnology, the discovery of more economical and sustainable novel materials has considerably increased. The abundance of two-dimensional (2D) materials has endowed them with a broad material platform in technical studies and in the expansion of nano- and atomic-level applications. The innovation of graphene has motivated considerable attention to the study of other novel 2D materials, known as modern day “alchemy”, by which scientists are trying to convert most possible periodic table elements into 2D material structures and forms. 2D material devices with high quality and good optical encoder performance have a multitude of industrial applications. However, their stability and large size restrict their applications, but these problems can be overcome by functionalization and substrate-based formation of 2D materials. Therefore, via this review, first, basic attributes of 2D materials are described, and the mechanisms to further enhance their properties are also summarized. Second, the applications of 2D materials are discussed, along with their advantages and disadvantages. Finally, some effective device-fabrication approaches, such as heterostructure approaches, are applied to further enhance the properties of 2D materials; their novel device applications and opportunities are also presented. This updated review may provide new avenues for 2D material synthesis and development of more efficient devices compared to conventional devices in different fields.
Karim Khan
Dr Karim Khan (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his BSc degree (2005) from Gomal University, his MSc (2009) in Physics from the University of Peshawar, and his MPhil (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan; he also performed research at the National Centre for Physics, Quaid-e-Azim University, Pakistan. He obtained his PhD (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and he also served as a Postdoctoral fellow (2019) at Shenzhen University, China. To date, he has published over 45 scientific publications and 2 patents. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.
Ayesha Khan Tareen
Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7238-6366) is a Post-Doctoral fellow at Shenzhen university. She obtained her PhD (Physical chemistry/Materials) from 2015 to 2018 at the Ningbo Institute Of Material Technology And Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy Of Sciences (CAS), her MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) from 2013 to 2015 at The Islamia University of Bahawalpur and her BSc (Honors) in Chemistry from 2008 to 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are magnetic/superconductivity and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different directions, especially magnetic materials, photocatalysts, fuel cells, and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).
Muhammad Aslam
Muhammad Aslam (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2694-<?pdb_no 511X?>511X<?pdb END?>) received his BSc in Physics and Mathematics (Physical Sciences, 2018) from Government Degree College Paharpur, Gomal University, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K. P. K., Pakistan; currently, he is studying to obtain a Master of Science (MSc) in Physics. His current research focuses on 2D materials and their applications in energy producing/storage devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.
Renheng Wang
Dr Renheng Wang received his PhD degree in Metallurgical Engineering from Central South University (CSU) in 2015. From January 2016 to October 2018, he worked as a postdoctoral follow at Shenzhen University and Nanyang Technological University. He is now a researcher in the College of Physics and Optoelectonic Engineering, Shenzhen University. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials and composites for clean energy storage, such as high-power/high-energy lithium ion batteries.
Yupeng Zhang
Dr Yupeng Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2351-5579) received his PhD from Wuhan University. From 2014 to 2017, he was a postdoctoral research fellow at Monash University. Currently, he is a Research Fellow in the College of Physics and Optoelectonic Engineering, Shenzhen University. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials and composites for energy production, saving, and storage, such as OLEDs and high-power/high-energy lithium ion batteries.
Asif Mahmood
Dr Asif Mahmood (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6438-<?pdb_no 438X?>438X<?pdb END?>) is from Pakistan; he received his MS degree (2011) from National University of Science and Technology, Pakistan, in Materials and Surface Engineering. He obtained his PhD (2016) from Peking University, Beijing, China, in Material Science and Engineering, from the College of Engineering, and he served as a Research Fellow (2018) at Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. Recently, he has been working as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Sydney, Australia, in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.
Zhengbiao Ouyang
Prof. Dr Zhengbiao Ouyang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1466-7813) received his BE in Radio Engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in 1983 and a PhD in Electron Physics from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China in 1988. He then worked at Shenzhen University. He is currently a professor at Shenzhen University, Vice Director of the THz Technical Research Center of Shenzhen University, and Vice Director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology. He is a member of the Council of the Chinese Society for Optical Engineering, a senior member of the Optical Society of America, and a Committeeman of the Opto-Electronic Committee of the Chinese Space Aeronautics Association. He was awarded 2nd prize of Progress in Science and Technology from the Chinese Ministry of Machine and Electronics in 1990, an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship in 1991, and a Guangdong Province-Level Scholar award in 2007. His research interests focus on photonic crystal materials and applications in optical integrated devices.
Han Zhang
Prof. Han Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-1973) received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and his PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently a director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D Materials and Devices and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focus is the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D materials. He was also a Highly Cited Researcher of Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019 and a Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including in Physics Reports (2), PNAS (1), Chem. Soc. Rev. (3), Nat. Commun. (6), and Adv. Mater. (10). The total citations of all his publications are about 29000, and his H index is 79.
1. Introduction
Graphene (2004) is a solitary atom layer derived from graphite, where carbons are bonded with each other in a hexagonal honeycomb lattice; it is a very prominent and well-matured 2D-layered material that has opened a new world of 2D materials owing to its exceptional properties.1–6 Graphene is the first and best-known 2D material;7,8 it has a zero band gap semimetal nature, where electrons are highly mobile and exhibit exceptional conductivity.9,10 Graphene was the first 2D material to represent a major advancement in science and technology due to its novel intrinsic physical properties, such as mechanical, electronic and thermal transport. Enormous numbers of applications, achievements, and fundamental science studies based on graphene have encouraged researchers to develop a plethora of 2D materials. Based on its 2D structure, the potential properties of graphene have inspired researchers to search for new members of the 2D family. Interestingly, the library of 2D-layered materials grows every year; currently, it consists of more than 150 interesting families. Research regarding 2D materials is in a growing phase, and many new materials are introduced and added to their list every year. In general, 2D materials are categorized based on their structures; examples include graphene,16 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) (e.g. MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2),11 layered double hydroxides (LDHs), LAPONITE® clay, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),20 black phosphorous (BP), a family of mono-elemental compounds (Xenes), metal oxides, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),21 metal nitrides/carbides (MXenes),12–15 transition metal halides (TMHs) (e.g., PbI2 and MgBr2),17 transition metal oxides (e.g., MnO2 and MoO3),18 perovskite-type oxides (e.g., K2Ln2Ti3O10 and RbLnTa2O7 (Ln: lanthanide ion)),19 and 2D polymers.22 Since the discovery of graphene, 2D-layered materials have undergone enormous research development.24–26 The emergence of novel 2D materials other than graphene has illustrated their extraordinary potential applications for diverse technologies, in addition to concentrating on new discoveries in elementary science, such as sensors, LEDs, FETs, physics, catalysis, biomedicine, and environmental science.27–29 The undeniable requirements of superior performance and lower power use in electronic systems are the major motivators of the electronics industry's search for device architectures based on novel 2D materials.
2D materials have importance due to their nano- and atomic-level device uses. Free-standing 2D material growth is a very active research topic. Device applications as well as the synthesis of free-standing sheets can be addressed by growing thin sheets of 2D materials on different substrates. Since the exploration of graphene, researchers have discovered a series of 2D layered crystals. Potential 2D materials such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), metal chalcogenides, metal oxides, metal halides, metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes), and organic semiconductors (OSCs) may address the application limitations of 2D materials in different devices. Almost all the atoms on the surface of these materials are exposed after exfoliation (ultrathin form); thus, the surface areas of 2D materials are noticeably increased, which significantly increases their physical and chemical reactivity and influences the 2D wave function through quantum confinement effects. Consequently, these ultrathin 2D structures have unique electronic, photonic, magnetic and catalytic properties that differ from those of their bulk counterparts, endowing them with remarkable advantages in the aforementioned applications; however, this cannot be universally applied in advanced device fabrication.30–34 Generally, materials can be divided into a range of groups, from zero dimensions (0D) to three dimensions (3D); however, here, we are interested in 2D materials, so these materials and their corresponding applications are shown in Fig. 1. Among all these applications, in this review, we will only explore in detail the optoelectronic-device applications of 2D materials.30–34
 Fig. 1  Various nanostructure dimensions: zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) materials, and the corresponding applications of 2D materials. 
Most 2D materials can undergo changes in their physical and chemical properties; however, these changes are not attainable with the most popular pure 2D materials. For example, in graphene doping, it is impossible to substitute half the carbon atoms with extrinsic atoms. To construct diverse 2D materials, stacking with other 2D materials generates novel material structures, along with novel properties. These diverse 2D materials with multiple stacked layers are recognized as heterostructures. To further enhance the atomic thin film properties, a promising group of materials, namely 2D heterostructures, has been synthesized. Heterostructure/hybrid 2D materials are considered to be a novel class of material which are capable of substituting some building blocks in the introduced material family structure and have potential device applications. These heterostructures are very efficient for optoelectronic devices due to their superfast electrical currents, which can be used in nanocircuits, and they are stronger than traditional circuit materials. Suitable band gap (BG) 2D semiconducting materials can be used in electronics, optoelectronics, and sensing applications. Therefore, due to their mixed properties, utilizing heterostructure approaches in 2D materials can broaden the BG range. 2D heterostructure ionic semiconductors (e.g. hybrid perovskites, chalcogenides) have been added to the family of covalent 2D materials (e.g., 2D Xenes). As an ionic material, these heterostructures have special properties that graphene and other 2D materials do not possess. They are potential successors to the popular Si in electronic devices, including solar panels, because Si has limitations. Researchers are devising alternative materials to meet the technology demands of energy to encode Si with efficient materials. Unlike other 2D materials, heterostructure 2D sheets undergo an unusual atomic scale structural relaxation. Advantageously, this subtle structural change in 2D materials led to a noticeable shift in the electronic BG. This shift in the BG does not occur in the bulk (3D) crystals of the counter materials, which is very advantageous to their optoelectronic properties. They generate efficient photoluminescence, and the emitted light can be tuned by changing the sheet thickness and obtaining heteroatom vertical arrangements with desired compositions. The arguments in this review are proposed to provide an overview of the electro-optical properties of the 2D material family and illustrate where electronics investigation is moving ahead in this novel and inspiring direction.
2. Families of two-dimensional materials
2.1. 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs)
The isolation of monolayer MoS2 was first achieved using adhesive tape-assisted mechanical exfoliation in 1966 and by chemical exfoliation 20 years later.35,36 Later, Hall measurements were calculated, which resulted in theories for electron–phonon scattering in TMDCs such as WS2 and MoS2.37,38 In 2010, the research interest in TMDCs was ignited by monolayer MoS2 with a direct BG35 and with the account of the exciting electrical properties of multi-layers (MLs) of MoS2 in 2011. However, the accuracy of the mobility derived from MoS2 transistors is doubtful. In between the most well-known TMDCs are the W- and Mo-based dichalcogenides, i.e., WS2, WSe2, WTe2 MoS2, MoSe2, and MoTe2. For simplicity, TMDCs can be represented by shorthand notation, e.g., MX2, where M is a TM (e.g., Mo, W, Re, or Ta) and X is a chalcogen family element (e.g., O, S, Se, or Te). More than 30 stable TMDCs have been reported using different synthesis methods.39,40 The band structures in 2D-TMDC materials can be tailored either through changing the radioactive decay lifetime of excitons or by stacking the heterolayers in bilayers or multilayers; however, in vertical stacking, the band alignment is limited to bilayer or trilayer. 2D-TMDs at room temperature (RT) have electron carrier mobilities of ∼200 cm2 V−1 s−1 with BGs of 1 to 2 eV in the visible range. In electronic devices, these materials are used in logic gate operations with high on/off ratios and low power. For the first time, Radisavljevc et al. used MoS2 in nano-devices as a transistor41 and in HfO2 insulator logic gates with on–off current ratios of ∼108. The carrier mobility in this process was recorded to be up to 200 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is comparative to Si technology. This group also used ML Si substrate-deposited MoS2 in logic gates for signal amplification.42 A general rule to obtain high carrier mobilities is through high κ-gate dielectrics. High κ-gate dielectrics are obtainable when the Coulomb and electron phonon scattering are minimal. At low temperature, i.e., up to 200 K, the Coulomb scattering is dominant; above this temperature, electron–phonon scattering occurs. Coulomb scattering is the highest in monolayers because the distance is short between the carriers and impurities. Increasing the number of layers increases the dielectric constant; hence, carrier scattering decreases at the interface, and the surface carriers suffer from less Coulomb scattering. Less scattering at the surface can lead to higher electron mobility, up to 10 to 15 layers, e.g., 1000 (34000) cm2 V−1 s−1 for 1 L (6 L) MoS2 at 5 K, measured via Hall mobility measurements. In the case of temperature-dependent electron–phonon scattering, the upper bond mobility limit is described through the large effective mass and out-of-plane polar phonons (i.e. 410 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 1 L MoS2).45,46 However, the highest mobilities obtained to date at RT are 190 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ML (10 nm) MoS247,48 and ∼250 cm2 V−1 s−1 for ML WSe2. On the other hand, atomically flat TMDCs display insignificant surface scattering, in contrast to the extreme surface scattering illustrated by 5 nm rough ultrathin Si.46 Around the same time, group V TMDCs, such as TaS2 and NbSe2, were also explored to evaluate their strongly connected electron phenomena, such as SC and charge density waves.39,49 Typical crystal structures of ML-TMDCs include trigonal prismatic 1H (for multilayer 2H), 1T, and 1T′ (i.e., distorted-1T) phases (Fig. 2(a)–(c)).50,51
 Fig. 2  TMDC crystal and electronic structures. (a) Octahedral coordination (left) frequently generates 1T structures, while triangular prismatic coordination (right) forms 2H or 3R structures. (b) Top view of MLs assembled from triangular prismatic (right) and octahedral (left) coordination. (c) Polytype structure side views of 1T, 2H, and 3R. (d) TMD element constituents of the periodic table. One TM atom (group IV, V, and VI) and two chalcogen atoms (group XVI) form TMD crystals. (e) TMD BG diagrams of octahedron and triangular prism-based structures. The d orbitals of the TMs lie above the p bonding orbitals (named σ) of the chalcogen atoms. The dark arrows along with the Roman numbers show the TMDs corresponding to each TM group FE. In group VI triangular prism TMDs, the BG opens around the FE as a result of ligand field splitting (courtesy Y. Zhang et al.).43 (f) Type-I and (g) type-II band alignments at hetero-bilayer interfaces. The VB maximum and CB minimum energy levels of each ML consist of the interface along the direction of the electron/hole transfer (courtesy M. Bernardi et al.).44 
The electronic structure of a TMDC depends sensitively on the crystal phase and affords a range of electronic characteristics, including metallic, semimetallic, semiconducting, and superconducting (SC), for different TMDCs.52,53 The TMDCs based on group VB and VIB metals tend to be the most heavily studied due to their diversity of stable compounds and electronic behavior.39,54,55 Indeed, stable compounds exist with all stoichiometric ratios in group VB and VIB metals (i.e., V, Nb, Ta, Cr, W and Mo) and chalcogens (i.e., S, Te and Se), except CrS2/Se2/Te2 and VS2.50,51 Group IVB (i.e., Ti, Hf, and Zr) layered sulfides also possess interesting semiconducting performance; however, they suffer from a high tendency toward non-stoichiometric ratios due to the low energy barriers for intercalation of metal atoms.50,56 Group VB and VIIB metal TMDCs, such as 1T TaS2, have been studied for gate tunable charge density waves, and 1T ReS2 has been studied due to the linear anisotropy in its electrical and optical properties.39,50,51,57–59 Group VIII (A, B, C) TM (e.g., pyrite and marcasite) halides and chalcogenides show both layered and non-layered structures with equally diverse electronic structures (e.g., CdI2 structure), including semiconductors such as FeS2.39,50,51 In the 2D area, semiconducting TMDCs, specifically MoS2, WS2, and WSe2, have emerged as electronic device materials due to their comparatively high charge carrier motilities and appreciable BGs, which enable large switching ratios in FETs.39,54,55,60 Furthermore, their successful growth at the wafer scale and ambient stability increase their prospects for practical applications.61 A direct BG at the ML limit provides large oscillator strengths, large spin orbit splitting, and access to the valley degree of freedom at RT. TMDCs also represent an attractive platform for elementary studies of light-matter interactions, optoelectronics, and nanophotonics.62–64 In addition, because bulk TMDCs65 were historically analyzed in the catalysis community for desulfurization reactions, the recently renewed interest in 2D-TMDCs has rejuvenated the study of this material class for catalysis in biological and chemical sensor devices.40,60,66
Layered post-TM chalcogenides (PTMCs), such as GaS, SnS, SnS2, and InSe, are also being explored due to their high motilities, large photo-responses, and in-plane anisotropy.67–70 Some layered TMDCs (e.g., Bi2Se3) have long been studied as thermoelectric materials, and more recent work has focused on their potential as topological insulators (i.e., topological materials conducting at a surface, while the core remains insulating).70 In spite of the increasing attention being paid to 2D-TMDC materials, there are a number of blockages that prevent their development in addition to that of TMDCs with contemporary semiconductor technology.71,72 Specifically, as prearranged through the international technology roadmap for semiconductors (ITRS), the major move in the direction of extremely well-organized electronic devices is toward metal electrode/TMDCs, which have Rc values as low as ∼100 Ω mm.47,73 For most 2D-TMDC-based devices, this is not the case to date due to their damaging interface states.73 Furthermore, due to the types of metal/TMDCs, the contact geometry and chemical bonding play major roles in formatting Rc. The 2D-TMDC free dangling bond surface should not form any chemical bonds with metals to avoid increasing the Rc risk. On the other side, the electron/hole transport competency, mainly hindered by electron/hole entraps and phonon scattering centers, may be affected by impurities in the channels due to the high surface-to-volume ratio of 2D-TMDCs, thus providing a suitable foundation for high mobility devices.74,75 The novel properties and low dimensionality of 2D-TMDCs hinder electron/hole injection due to high Rc and deviate from ideal phonon-limited mobility carrier transport because of scatter centers and deficiencies in practical devices with dimensional confinement.
Although the thickness scaling effect leads to increases in BG by decreasing the number of layers due to quantum confinement, the holding position with MLs and few-layer MoS2 remains approximately constant, which is helpful for strong EF pinning (FLP) or SB for carrier injection; consequently, the SB height augments with decreasing thickness of the layers, and the ML limit of Rc greatly improves.41,76 Alternatively, no other 2D-TMDs display the FLP effect but show fair bipolar electron/hole movement due to their enormous vacancy configuration energies close to the mid-gap.77 In n-type MoS2, computational work was performed to design optimum scattering between the electrons and phonons at RT with 410 cm2 V−1 s−1 charge carrier mobility. The most probable reason for MoS2 p-type and n-type conduction at RT is reported to be impurities trapped at the interface by means of the gate dielectric. 2D materials with single layers are much thinner than the Debye screening lengths; they are prone to demonstrate these effects due to their atomically thin layers. Due to this effect, band engineering highly favors tuning the BGs in these materials to achieve high mobility. As a result, this has great significance not only to intensely inspect the major restrictions of conductance but also to identify approaches to surmount it. These restrictions facilitate precise management of the electronic properties of 2D-TMDs in the direction of high efficiency electronic devices beyond physical limits.
Historically, in the 1960s, Fivaz and Mooser were the first to study the temperature reliance of the Hall mobility in bulk TMDCs; they reported the value as μ = μ0(T/300 K)−γ with γ = 2 to 3, subjugated by electron–phonon scattering at RT (γ = 2.6, 2.5, 2.4, 2.1 for MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and GaSe, respectively).38,78 Similarly, Keyes observed a μ ∼ T1.5 trend for mobility in bulk black phosphorous (BP) in 1953 and justified the same by electron–phonon scattering.79 More recently, Kassbjerg et al. studied electron–phonon scattering in MLs-MoS2 from first principles and calculated a phonon-limited RT mobility of ∼400 cm2 V−1 s−1.45 Most studies on MoS2 transistors report significantly lower values, which indicates that other scattering mechanisms need to be considered. Models based on Thomas–Fermi (TF) screening capture the most essential features of MoS2 transistors (the TF screening length is defined as λTF = √(ε2dt2dtox)/εox ∼ 7 nm, where ε2d and εox are the dielectric constants of the 2D material and oxide dielectric, respectively, and t2d and x are the 2D material thickness and oxide dielectric, respectively).47,80 Competing roles of screening and interlayer resistance were further revealed in uneven current densities (hot spots) within few-layer MoS2 (Fig. 3(b)).80 Recently, Lindhard screening was used to fully describe the screening of free carriers and charged impurities (CI) in scattering, allowing the temperature and carrier density dependence of the carrier mobility to be determined.81 In this manner, the dielectric functions and temperature-dependent polarizabilities have been established to obtain scattering matrix elements and momentum relaxation rates for most group VI TMDCs and BP.82–85
 Fig. 3  2D material charge screening and scattering. (a) 2D layer FET in a dual-gated geometry. (b) Schematic of the current distribution in a 13-layer MoS2 FET showing the position of the maximum current density (hot spot) determined by the competing effects of conductivity and charge screening. (c) Effects of ε mismatch on screening in ML MoS2. The inset shows scattering of the conduction electrons on the FE circle from wave vector ki to kf by a phonon of wave vector q = kf − ki. (d) Top: Calculated values of phonon-limited mobility of ML MoS2 for different combinations of dielectrics. εe = (k1 + k2)/2 is the average dielectric constant shown by MoS2. Bottom: Critical density of charged impurities (CIs) NI at which phonon-limited mobility equates to CI-limited mobility. A high-k dielectric is more effective when MoS2 is already disordered with CIs, resulting in marginal improvements in mobility. (e) Experimental mobility values (circles) compared with mobilities calculated from different scattering mechanisms (lines) for few layer MoS2 FET on SiO2 substrate. (Courtesy N. Ma et al.).81 
In particular, the mobility of an individual scattering mechanism (μi) is calculated within the relaxation time estimation of the Boltzmann transport equation; after that, these terms are added via Matthiessen's rule (tnet−1 = ∑μi−1).45,81,86,87 Due to the ultrathin bodies of 2D materials, a dielectric mismatch with the surrounding media can significantly alter the shape of the Coulomb potential within a 2D semiconductor.81 In Fig. 3(c), qTF/q = ε2d−1, where ε2d, qTF, and q are the dielectric constant, TF screening wave vector, and phonon wave vector, respectively, are plotted against the effective dielectric constant of the environment, εe = (κ1 + κ2)/2, from Fig. 3(a).81 For low-κ environments (i.e., εe < ε2d), the screening is stronger for low scattering angles, whereas for high-κ environments (i.e., εe > ε2d), the opposite is true. Therefore, free carrier screening is weakened by high-κ environments, and CI screening is enhanced by high-κ environments. High-κ materials (e.g., HfO2 and ZrO2) also have low-energy SO phonons that can be excited remotely by electrons in the semiconductor. Although high-κ dielectrics have enhanced mobility in graphene, the results are mixed in the case of TMDCs. A systematic study on different combinations of top-gate and bottom-gate dielectrics (εe = 1 to 25) concluded that most high-κ dielectrics are likely to degrade mobility in MoS2 (Fig. 3(d) and (e)).81 Therefore, the best strategy to maximize mobility is to decrease CI scattering using a suspended geometry or h-BN dielectrics. As expected, the mobility of 2D materials increases with the number of layers for the first few layers due to improved screening of CI and then begins to decrease in thicker samples due to increased interlayer resistance.47 Extending this concept, the mobility can be improved by introducing a spacer such as PMMA between the 2D semiconductor channel and the oxide substrate.88 The dependence of the mobility on the carrier density n2d can also be non-trivial. For example, at low n2d, the mobility increases due to increased screening of CI by free carriers; however, at high n2d, the characteristic energy levels of the carriers move closer to the polar LO phonon that is scattered by the Fröhlich interaction. Thus, the transfer characteristics of MoS2 FETs are typically nonlinear; the drain current Id varies as ∼(Vg)M, where M = 2 for no screening and M = 1 for complete screening, and the mobility in thicker samples saturates at a smaller Vg.89 The ultrathin bodies of 2D materials also endow them with high sensitivity to surface roughness (ΔL).
Surface roughness is also a common problem in conventional group III–V semiconductor heterojunctions, where the mobility degrades as the ‘sixth-power law’ with surface roughness (ΔL−6) due to perturbation of quantized energy levels in the 2D electron gas.87 This effect is even more significant in high-mobility 2D materials, such as graphene, which implies that intrinsic mobility limits are achieved on the atomically flat surface of h-BN. Structural disorder, such as point defects and grain boundaries, can also have more deleterious effects in 2D materials compared to bulk semiconductors due to their large scattering cross-sections. Specifically, point defects typically cause short-range scattering, whereas charged defects and grain boundaries induce long-range fields for Coulomb scattering. For example, few-layer MoS2 sandwiched between h-BN films and contacted by graphene possesses low-temperature mobility exceeding90 104 cm2 V−1 s−1 (limited by CIs) and shows Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations, while its RT mobility (∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1) is limited by optical phonons. The temperature exponent (μ ∼ T−γ) range is between 1.9 and 2.3, which is comparable to the optical phonon-limited μ ∼ T−2.6 for bulk MoS2. Few-layer (i.e. ML) MoS2 devices on SiO2 show comparable RT mobilities of ∼120 cm2 V−1 s−1 (∼60 cm2 V−1 s−1) but significantly decreased low temperature mobilities of ∼400 cm2 V−1 s−1 (∼120 to 300 cm2 V−1 s−1), with γ = 0.67 to 1.7 in un-encapsulated devices and γ = 0.3 to 0.73 in top-gate devices.79,91–93 Because a trend of μ ∼ T−1 is expected from the acoustic deformation potential scattering above the Bloch–Grüneisen temperature, the measured values of γ are justified in first principle mobility models for ML MoS2 by considering Raman-active optical phonons (E12g ∼ 49 meV) and homopolar phonons (A1g ∼ 52 meV) (Fig. 3(e)).81,94 These mobility models also explain the ∼50% decrease in γ (i.e., ∼37% increase in μ) top gate devices.94
Sandwiching schemes based on h-BN were also applied to investigate the intrinsic performance of other 2D semiconductors such as h-BN-sandwiched InSe, yielding low temperature mobilities of ∼104 cm2 V−1 s−1 (and Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations) and RT mobilities of ∼1000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are the highest for any n-type 2D semiconductor. Among p-type materials, few-layer BP has shown the highest mobility values (∼1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature), although the BG of few-layered BP is essentially that of bulk BP (∼0.3 eV), which leads to a modest switching ratio (<500). Finally, variable range hopping has been reported in some low-mobility MoS2 transistors (μ < 10 cm2 V−1 s−1).79,89 The conflicting reports on hopping versus diffusive transport for MoS2 suggest that processing residues and imperfect electrical contacts play important roles in many cases.79,89,93 It is instructive to compare the mobility and BG of the most promising 2D materials with competing technologies, such as thin-film transistors (TFTs), Si-on-insulator (SOI) devices, and 16 ultra-thin body (UTB) devices.54,55 Due to their high mobilities, large switching ratios (>108), and decreased short-channel effects, the progress in MoS2 transistors has been monitored by ITRS since 2012.
In particular, mechanically exfoliated MoS2 devices show comparable mobility to commercial UTB devices based on strained Si, Si–Ge alloys,90 and InGaAs-on-insulator materials.95 However, the performance of large-area MoS2 (saturated mobility (μs) = ∼2.8 × 106 cm s−1) devices is inferior to date; this implies that they are better suited as alternatives to TFTs, which are currently dominated by polycrystalline Si (μs = ∼107 cm s−1), OSCs, graphene (μs = ∼5.5 × 107 cm s−1) and metal oxides, such as InGaZnO.61,90,96–98 Similarly, the reported BP-based electronic performance is also far from the theoretical value, which greatly limits its application. The most probable reason for this problem is inadequate device structure design and incomplete processing. In order to obtain high-performance electronic devices beyond the stability-enhancing approach, many other strategies, such as contact engineering and, most importantly, dielectric engineering, have been employed. Multilayer BP and InSe flakes show higher mobility than UTB technology; however, the issues of large-area growth and environmental stability must be resolved for practical viability while remaining sufficiently high to compete with alternative UTB technologies. Furthermore, although multilayer devices show higher mobility and are more forgiving for non-uniform large area growth, they compromise on short channel effects, which are considered to be among the most significant advantages of 2D electronic devices.
2.2. 2D layered transition metal oxide (LTMO) semiconductors
In 1990s, layered titanates were exfoliated for the first time by Sasaki et al.; this opened a new area in material science and technology known as LTMOs,99–101 involving the precise design of nanostructures via layer by layer assemblage to afford significant improvements in properties such as conductivity, high SSAs, and charge separation.102–105 LTMOs, e.g., layered niobates and titanates, show intercalation reactions such as cation exchange and grafting that are similar to those of layered silicates. The semiconductor properties of LTMOs and their versatility of composition for photocatalysis106,107 originally motivated their study. Currently, many types of LTMOs, such as manganese-,99 ruthenium-,108 and tantalum-oxides,109 have been attained from bulk ruthenium. Due to the easily polarized nature of O2−, TMOs possess non-linear, non-uniform, and large-scale charge distributions within their lattices, which leads to electrostatic screening in the 1 to 100 nm range and produces excellent surface and interfacial properties. As a consequence, on the planar TMO surface, specific states of energy appear; this is different from bulk TMOs and also suggests the possibility of coulombic interactions with neighboring ions.110 Owing to the specific properties of TMOs due to the existence of oxygen and other characteristics, such as tuning of BGs, they have novel uses; the BGs of TMO honeycomb structures fluctuate in a wide range (1.64 to 7.98 eV at the G0W0 level of theory). Therefore, TMOs with large BGs, such as 1THfO2 (7.98 eV) and 1TGeO2 (7.07 eV), may show potential as high-k materials, whereas those with small BGs, such as 2HMoO2 (2.20 eV) and 1TNiO2 (2.15 eV), may be potential photocatalysts.
Interface potentials arise when two TMO materials are in contact, and the EF of the surface planes changes. The TMO surfaces are electronically activated because of hybridization of the ionic orbitals. When the TMO d-orbitals are aligned normal to their planes of spin, orbital ordering or frustration occurs,111 causing unconventional semiconducting properties. In oxygen, the presence of holes in the 2p-orbital results in magnetism.111 Magnetic frustration arises when cations are in the planar phase, resulting in complex anti-ferromagnetic structures and causing the Kondo effect.111 These effects can be minimized by a heterostructure approach by stacking different TMO sheets in a less regular order. In addition to oxygen, the fundamental properties of TMOs are also directed by cations (metals) and their flexibility to change oxidation states. TMO structures can be stabilized easily by simply selecting cations with different vacancies and binding relationships.112 Different metal vacancies provide different electronic properties; thus, materials ranging from metallic to insulating can be obtained for the same TMO with different stoichiometries. These different electronic properties present diversity in BGs, offering the prospect of electric and optical engineering at almost any desired wavelength.113,114 As a function of temperature and pressure (e.g. Mott and Verwey transitions), localized d-electronic states also govern the metal–insulator transformation. TMO redox properties are reversible115 and show excellent thermal and chemical stabilities.116,267 Tunability of TMOs can be achieved by using well-established methods of changing the oxygen electronic states.117 When there is a decrease in energy formation in TMOs, the cation reduction state increases, providing drastically different surface properties than their bulk counterparts. MoO3,118 WO3,119 Ga2O3,120 and V2O5121 exist naturally in anhydrate or hydrate phases as LTMOs (Fig. 4(a)). This indicates that these 2D oxides can be easily exfoliated to nanosheets and are stable in both water and air.
 Fig. 4  2D-TMOs and their selected properties. (a) Layered -MoO3 and V2O5. (b) Images of ultra-thin films of perovskites epitaxially grown on Si substrate measured by high angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM). (c) Optical microscopy of Ti0.87O2 nanosheets for thickness measurement: (I) optical image of 100 nm nanosheets on SiO2/Si (for 450 nm); (II) AFM image of the same location. (d) AFM image of a TaO3 nanosheet. (e) MnO2 nanosheet XRD profile: (1) onset of ageing and after (2) 2.3 h, (3) 4.7 h, (4) 7.0 h, (5) 9.3 h, (6) 11.7 h, and (7) 23.3 h. (f) Different layered perovskites. (Courtesy K.Kalantar-zadeh et al.).112 
Another class of oxides, called perovskites, can also form TMOs with the general formula ABO3. The cubic unit cell of perovskite has an arrangement in which the B sites of the TM ions are in the center and the A sites are located at the corners (Fig. 4(f)). 2D perovskites can be synthesized directly by stacking through layer-by-layer deposition. There are three layered perovskites, i.e., Dion–Jacobson (DJ), Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) and Aurivillius (AU) phases (Fig. 4(f)). [Bi2O2]-[A(n−1)BnO3n+1] is the general formula of AU phase for TMO synthesis. The rock-salt Bi2O2 functions as a separator for the AU phases. For example, SrBi2Ta2O9 and Bi2WO6 have been exfoliated successfully and are stable.112,122 The DJ phase general formula is MA(n−1)BnO(3n+1), and their separators are lanthanide ions or alkali metal. CaLaNb2TiO10, La2Ti2NbO10, and CaLaNb2TiO10 have been exfoliated as DJ phase perovskites.102,112,123 The RP phase is similar to pristine perovskite, in which the separators are metal oxide layers, e.g., Ca2Ta2TiO10 and SrLaTi2TaO10.124,268 The perovskite parent structure in the 2D layered form is highly polar and has applications in ferroelectric and dielectric materials.102 Oxides lying between metals and insulators, e.g., plane cuprates, MnO2, and their composites, are usually taken as quasi-TMOs,125 where electrons can move freely in the weakly coupled oxide layers with SC-nature. For quasi-TMO stabilization and doping, ion layers such as strontium, barium, and lanthanum are used. Otherwise, these quasi-TMOs without doping can behave as Mott insulators. The growth of TMOs on substrates may influence the electronic, structural, and chemical properties of TMOs because of interactions between the TMOs. On one side, the interfacial interactions may cause intriguing phenomena, such as SC126 and quantum Hall effects.127 Conversely, TMO hybridization with 2D materials or substrates may adapt TMOs or compensate for the shortcomings of both parent materials in practical applications.125,128 For example, the interfacial interaction of TMOs with channel materials incorporating high k-dielectrics into microelectronic devices is very difficult but highly desirable because high k-dielectrics can considerably increase transistor gate capacity and efficiently decrease electron scattering through interfacial charged impurities.129
TMOs, due to their large BGs, are promising materials with high k-dielectrics to substitute conventional dielectric gates, e.g., SiO2. There are wide-range reports of planar TMOs utilized as semiconductor and insulating gate materials for creating FETs and memory devices. In FETs, the TMO is shaped into high carrier mobility doped regions near the interfaces for competent transport, like SCs. In traditional electronics, nanometer-thick dielectrics with minimal current leakage, low loss (tanδ) and high permittivity (high ε) are desirable.130 Under the gate electrode, a typical modern transistor is made from SiO2, where the oxide has a gate length of 60 nm or less, and the gate oxide thickness decreases ∼1.5 nm below the critical limit, leading to quantum mechanical tunneling via the oxide layer, with current leakage beyond tolerable limits.131 According to their polarization nature, high-ε dielectrics can be broadly categorized:
(a) Non-polar atomic arrangements in metal oxides. These materials include Al2O3,132 TiO2,133 HfO2, Ta2O5,134 and similar oxide135,136 compounds that possess low tanδ; unfortunately, their permittivity is not as high as required (typically <100).
(b) Generally, very high-ε materials (typically >1000) are ferroelectrics that have residual dipoles; perovskites show a noteworthy range in this class.
Ferroelectric oxides such as Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 and (Ba1−xSrx)TiO3 show wide static dipole moments. To obtain advantageous compositions with lower tanδ and high ε, mixed-phase or composite oxide materials are investigated.137,138 A high ε is valuable for screening disorder because of point charges in the environment or in the material itself; therefore, the electronic mobility increases. To increase the effective dielectric constant, high-ε oxides may be important as substrates or coating materials for other atomically thin materials.139,140 In the same way, a high dielectric constant may show the way toward high electron mobility in the oxide itself; for example, a mobility surpassing that of Si is experienced in 2D MoO3−x because of this effect.141 Near the 2D-TMO surfaces, free charges may be confined in their electronic states, with elevated conductance. The electronic structure that can potentially host a 2D electron gas (2D-EG) relies on a heterostructure interface between two wide-BG metal oxides. Typical examples include LaAlO3/SrTiO3142 and ZnMgO/ZnO143 interfaces. Close to the TMO interface, the origin of 2D-EG is frequently connected to fields generated by O2 vacancies at interfaces that function as dopants. For developing resistive switching components, TMOs also demonstrate great potential for memristors. Numerous 2D-TMOs display modified conductance with applied voltage when sandwiched between two electrodes. These structural characteristics may demonstrate strong hysteresis, which is ascribed to diverse phenomena, including metallic or O2 component migration toward the 2D oxide or electrode that crosses the 2D layer via discharge filaments. Discharge of a filament can take place on either electrode or may be restricted to only one side in TMOs. Joule heating along a discharge filament can also transform the material.144 In TMOs, resistance switching is observed; typically, this switching is anion-based in perovskites, e.g., MnO2125 and ZnO,145 and simple oxides. The ferroelectric properties of TMOs can be particularly advantageous to establish memristors. In metal electrodes, carrier wave-functions can expand into the oxide because of strong ferroelectric polarization, permitting tunneling interactions into diagonally thin TMO insulators. For typical ferroelectric tunnel junctions, ferroresistive switches can be recognized as derived from ultrathin materials such as BaTiO3.146 For these structures, electric field changes are induced in the ferroelectric material by reversing the polarization by the interface transmission; therefore, the resistance of the device changes. The most interesting properties of switching memory performance include large on/off ratio resistance, low operating voltage, high staying power and long retention time. In 2D-hydrated WO3, the best characteristics are observed upon hydration, and the subsequent O2 deficiency improves the anion migration. In TMO semiconductors, free charge carriers are used for spintronic information.147 The EF imbalance spins result in spin polarization; hence, magnetism arises. In 2D-spintronic devices, there is a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ). When the magnetic moments are opposite in direction, the tunnel is blocked. In this case, spin up electrons can simply channel into empty states with very high resistance. The resistance is low when the two magnetizations are parallel. The resistance-stable device depends on the field history and functions as a memory device. Magnetoresistive (MR) device function is based on MTJ. In 1995, the first RT-MR in MTJs was observed in Co/Al2O3/CoFe and Fe/Al2O3/Fe.148,149 The main MTJ applications are in non-volatile magnetic memory and in hard disc magnetic read heads.147 To obtain the strongest MR effects, the most desirable materials are half-metallic ferromagnetic. At the EF, the DOSs of half-metallic materials are finite for spin to 1D and 0D for the other. In spite of theoretical predictions based on calculations, very few TMOs have yielded good tunnel MR (TMR) values to date. 2D half-metal TMOs, including Fe3O4150 and CrO2,150 indicate TMRs of approximately 50%. In comparison, mixed-valence manganites151 and double-perovskites,152 such as La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO) and La2/3Ca1/3MnO3 (LCMO), show TMR values of 100%.153 One more notable approach involves attempting to stimulate spin functionality in non-magnetic oxides during dilute doping of magnetic impurities into non-magnetic metal oxides such as Ti and ZnO.154 Conversely, to date, the most significant issue is to attain homogeneity for host dopants and secondary ferromagnetic phase possibilities. In addition, there are still many unknown defect aspects that must be addressed.154
In a lattice, off-center displacements of atoms are responsible for ferroelectricity. Generally, these displacements occur because of short-range covalent repulsion and long-range dipole–dipole Coulomb interactions.155 Numerous mechanisms are suggested to be involved in 2D ferroelectric TMO conduction,155 including Poole–Frenkel or Fowler–Nordheim tunneling, Schottky injection, the presence of grain boundaries, space charge limited currents, and more prominently, direct tunneling effects. For SrRuO3/2D-PZT/metal-based junctions, phonon-assisted tunneling or direct tunneling has been demonstrated to be a principal phenomenon, and the SNHs are smaller than theoretically proposed.156 The well-known ferroelectric material PZT is the most extensively observed material; it is mostly utilized as an active element in memory. This is because the switchability of instant polarization in ferroelectric 2D-TMOs and ferroelectric materials is executed satisfactorily in magnetic memory. In different 2D-TMOs, advantageous switching can be attained at comparatively low voltages. By utilizing a 2D ferroelectric material as an FET gate memory device, gate polarization can be sensed utilizing source–drain current adjustment. These devices demonstrate very low exhaustion under normal write/read cycles. 2D ferromagnetic insulators are still little known due to their relative scarcity.112 Most ferromagnetic insulators possess low Curie temperatures.157 As an alternative to insulating materials with more than one type of magnetic site, ferrimagnetic insulators shown ordering after antiferromagnetic super-exchange interactions. The major concern in 2D ferromagnetic insulators is utilization of tunnel barriers to entrap electrons selectively according to their spins for spintronic applications. TMO ferromagnetic insulators include very few known materials, e.g., SeCuO3158 and BiMnO3.158

2.2.1. Shortcomings of LTMOs. 
In their 2D forms, weak interlayer interactions mostly result in dangling bonds; this leads to strong surface polarization and induces 2D-TMO surface instability. Prominent lattice relaxation, structural rebuilding and substrate effects are recognized as main mechanisms in balancing these strong surface polarizations in 2D-LTMOs, as already observed in a Pd5O4 overlayer on Pd(111),159 a strained PdO(101) layer on Pd(100),159 a Ag1.83O trilayer on Ag(111),160 a RhO2 trilayer on Rh(111),161 multiple phases of 2D-Mn-oxides on Pd(100),141 and TiO2 on rutile TiO2(011).162 These noteworthy changes cause difficulty when fabricating 2D-LTMOs, in addition to posing a challenge for theoretical structure prediction results.

2.3. 2D layered halide perovskites
Due to the novel electronic characteristics of 2D semiconductors, they are promising successors to Si in future devices; a recent addition to the growing list of 2D semiconductors is the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites called 2D-layered halide perovskites (LHPs). These 2D perovskites have been established as novel solution-based 2D materials with interesting optical properties.163,164 On the other hand, unlike other 2D-semiconductors, in which covalent bonding is present, these 2D-hybrid perovskites undergo ionic bonding, which endows them with unique properties. The LHPs with the general notation ABX3, derived from metal-halide perovskites, have emerged as energy-efficient, profitable materials,165 where A denotes an inorganic or organic monovalent cation and B and X are substituted with a bivalent cation (Ge2+ Sn2+, or Pb2+) and a halogen, respectively. Layered dihalides and trihalides of TMs (e.g., FeCl2 and CrI3) and post-TMs (e.g., PbI2 and BiI3) also show unusual optical and magnetic behavior, such as ferromagnetism, in an insulating state.166,167 In 3D-perovskites, facile solid state ion inter-diffusion is an elementary issue in maintaining a stable heterojunction.168 The LHP family can be further subcategorized as Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites (RPP), which are derived from 3D perovskites and shaped by slicing a 3D structure into 2D blocks, as shown in Fig. 5. Generally, the layered RPP chemical formula is (RNH3)2(A)n−1MX3n+1, in which R is a long alkyl chain/aromatic group; A and M are a small monovalent metal cation (i.e. methylammonium) and divalent metal cation, respectively, X is a halide functional group, and n is an integer. In each layer, a 2D network of [MX6]4− octahedra resides at the corners and mediates the RNH3+ bilayers in these built-in 2D-crystal structures. Both sides of the long chains are capped to balance the charges, and intact unit-layer crystals are stacked together with vdW forces. The presence of RNH3+ (insulating dielectric) in the bilayers can be considered as a class of natural quantum wells (QWs) by means of their degree of quantum confinement. By changing the inorganic layer thickness, the relevant optical properties are customized. Compared to 3D-perovskites, which function as free charge carrier semiconductors, robustly retained 2D-perovskites (n ≤ 5) display strongly bound excitons with BE >100 meV.169 At RT, this produces deep PL with a single sharp color peak and strong exciton photon coupling.170,171 Lead halide RPPs also have enhanced chemical stability compared to 3D-hybrid perovskites and represent alternatives to 3D-hybrid perovskites in optoelectronics.171,172 Particularly, the chemical diversity of 2D-perovskites and their quantum confinement permit powerful PL emissions ranging from the UV to the NIR region173,174 which were not obtainable from previously reported 2D materials. The 2D sheets can be fabricated by solution-based methods or physical exfoliation.164,175 Suitable RPPs with confined dimensions were obtained as building blocks for photonic devices, e.g., LEDs.176–178 However, most of these materials are not compatible with semiconductor processing, which implies that their applications in solid-state devices are limited. To obtain 2D-RP perovskites, mechanical exfoliation is a suitable method because the vdWs in the layered crystal structure are similar to conventional 2D materials.179 Using micromechanical exfoliation, a single layer to several layers of (C6H9C2H4NH3)2PbI4 flakes were obtained, as shown in Fig. 5(a).175 This method is not used in practical material manufacturing due to the lack of thickness and size control.163,180
 Fig. 5  2D perovskite heterostructures. (a) RP perovskite crystal structures with diverse n values. (b) A 3D perovskite configuration equivalent to n = ∞. (c) Illustrations of vertical heterostructures shaped in microplates which have 2D perovskite layers n = 1, 2, and 3. (Courtesy Y. Fu et al.).178 
Dou et al. used a solution-based method to synthesize atomically thin BA2PbBr4 perovskite (BA = C4H9NH3+) on Si/SiO2.164 This method can be extended to the synthesis of ultrathin BA2PbCl4, BA2PbI4, BA2PbCl2Br2, BA2PbBr2I2, and BA2MAPb2Br7 2D sheets simply by using different precursors.164 Under the optimal synthesis conditions, 2D BA2PbBr4 perovskites with sizes from a few nanometers to large lateral dimensions of 40 mm were obtained. In addition, the same group introduced a self-doping method to prepare ultrathin, massive 2D-homologous BA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 perovskites using 2D BA2PbBr4 sheets as a template with MA+ dopants.181 The 2D-perovskite self-doping could yield BA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with diverse n values from 2 to ∞ depending on the self-doping time. By this method, ultrathin BA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 perovskites were obtained through an intercalation mechanism with decreased thickness down to 4.2 nm and lateral dimensions up to 57 mm. Zhang et al.182 successfully obtained 2D-RPP nanosheets of PEA2PbI4 (PEA = C8H9NH3+), BA2PbI4, (C6H13NH3)2PbI4, (C12H25NH3)2PbI4, and (C16H33NH3)2PbI4 on substrates with different thicknesses via a controlled synthesis method. All these nanosheets were grown on substrates; hence, their synthesis technique is complicated, which restricts their further device applications (Table 1).
Table 1 Readily exfoliated magnetic compounds183




Material
Ferromagnetic
Antiferromagnetic




Metals
Co(OH)2, CoO2, ErHCl, ErSel, EuOBr, EuOl, FeBr, Fel2, FeTe, LaCl, NdOBr, PrOBr, ScCl, SmOBr, SmSl, TbBr,ImI2, ImOl, VS2, VSe2, VTe, YCl, YOBr, YbOCl
CoI2, CrSe2, FeO2, FeOCl, FeSe, PrOI, VOBr






Semiconductors
CdOCl, CoBr2, CoCl2, CrOBr, CrOCl, CrSBr, CuCl2, ErSCl, HoSl, LaBr2, NiBr2, NiCl2, NiI2
CrBr2, CrI2, LaBr, Mn(OH)2, MnBr2, MnCl2, MnI2, VBr2, VCl2, VI2, VOBr2, VOCl2




Yang et al. developed a colloidal-based method for 2D-RPP perovskite synthesis. This method is more controllable to grow uniform lateral-size single-layer and few-layer free-standing PEA2PbX4 (X = C, Br, I).184 As a result, in every case, nanocrystal perovskites are formed with a lateral size of 531 ± 62 nm and a thickness of 2.0 ± 0.1 nm. In spite of this controllable growth method, solution methods have received significant attention; however, the crystal quality of the synthesized flakes is still lower than that of materials obtained by mechanical exfoliation methods. CVD is largely applied for the preparation of conventional 2D materials, including the best-known methods for fabricating atomically thin 2D-RPP, e.g., atomically thin and high quality BA2PbI4 grown on mica substrates by CVD with 5 to 10 mm lateral size and rectangular shape.185 The layered 2D-perovskite structure growth is actually complicated and has very low mobility of large organic ligands. Hence, it is difficult for BA2PbI4 molecules to move around on the substrate; thus, they form clusters rather than flakes. Moreover, the organic-ligand C4H9NH2 vapor pressure is higher than the PbI2 vapor pressure due to their melting point difference. To overcome these limitations, the temperature ramp in the downstream is increased using a narrow heating range. Using this approach, BA2PbI4 flakes with well-defined thicknesses can be consistently attained. Furthermore, liquid exfoliation was used to fabricate 2D-RPP using 3D perovskites by introducing long chain molecules into the 3D-perovskite. Hintermayr et al. synthesized OlA2MAn−1PbnX3n+1, where OlA is oleylamine cation [C9H18]C9H17NH3+), and X = Cl, Br, or I.186 Here, the OlA ligand provided support during the exfoliation, preventing the as-synthesized nanoplates from agglomerating or dispersing in organic solvents.
For inorganic halide perovskites, the most widely used technique is the colloidal synthesis method.187–189 Bekenstein et al. produced CsPbBr3 nanoplates from PbBr2 solution at elevated temperatures.188 Furthermore, CsPbI3 and CsPbCl3 nanoplates can be grown via anion exchange, and these nanoplates are coated onto substrate devices by a centrifugal casting method.190 The nanoplatelets have square shapes, indicating that they are derived from native perovskite cubic phase. However, 20 to 300 nm lateral size is not large enough for estimation of ML elementary properties for corresponding device manufacturing. Ultra-thin sheets (3 nm) with lateral sizes from 300 nm to 5 mm of CsPbBr3 were fabricated by Shamsi et al.191 The shortcoming of these materials is that the lateral size thickness can only be controlled in the range of 50 nm to 200 nm. In addition, CVD has been utilized to grow different kinds of inorganic lead perovskites. Zhang et al. used epitaxial CVD to grow CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) nanoplatelets on mica substrates.192 These prepared 2D perovskites are mostly arranged in atomic level morphologies with lack of control of their thickness, which critically limits their applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Numerous controlled synthesis methods for thickness and large lateral size are immediately needed to industrialize these 2D materials in upcoming technologies.

2.3.1. Shortcomings of 2D perovskite materials and their solutions. 
2D perovskite materials have made great achievements in various fields; however, there are still many obstacles for real application of 2D-perovskites. Despite the fact that 2D-perovskites are more stable than 3D-perovskites, they still face durability problems in device fabrication. Further efforts are required to first comprehend their deterioration mechanisms and determine straightforward methods to improve their structure stability. Single crystals along large lateral dimensions are extremely desirable for photodetectors. To date, single crystal-controllable large-scale synthesis of 2D-perovskite has not yet been achieved. Mixed n-2D-RPP based LEDs always demonstrate high performance, such as high EQE and luminescence. The LED performance is also affected by capping the long chains. The effect of long chain capping on LED performance is still not known. Long-term stability of metal-halide perovskite in moist environments is a supreme obstacle to the commercialization of perovskite optical devices; meanwhile, incorporating graphene or other 2D-TMDCs in perovskite films may offer a feasible solution to this obstacle and recover their properties.193

2.4. 2D carbide and nitride semiconductors (MXenes)
Layered 2D-carbide MXenes such as Mo2C23 as well as nitrides or carbonitrides177,194 are also being explored for optoelectronics. They share a general formula Mn+1Xn (n = 1 to 3), where M is an early TM and X = N or C. Carbide synthesis started in 2011 with Ti3C2.194 Generally, these materials consist of a layered structure of M with (n + 1) layers linked by n layers of X in a [MX]nM manner. The ML thickness of the MXene stack is generally less than 1 nm, allowing for a relatively small number of atomic layers. The ML thicknesses and lattice constants of carbide-based MXenes are greater than those of 12 nitride-based MXenes, which is related to the difference in atomic radii between N and C. The obtained stability trends can be seen from their ΔEform negative values as Ti2C < Ti3C2 < Ti4C3 and Ti2N < Ti3N2 < Ti4N3, which also correlates with their cohesive energy (Ecoh) calculations. It is also worth noting that ΔEform of Tin+1Nn is smaller than that of Tin+1Cn; therefore, synthesis of free-standing Tin+1Nn is more challenging, which has been proved by experimental observations. The Tin+1Nn adsorption energy entails a stronger predilection to hold fast to the terminal groups, which provides further active surfaces for nitride-based MXenes. In these MXenes, the overall calculated electrical conductance is higher than that of carbide-based MXenes. Mostly, the MXenes contain numerous surface functional groups, e.g., fluorine, hydroxyl, and O2. MXenes exclusively unite TM carbide/nitride conductivity with their OH/O2/F-terminated hydrophilic surfaces. This endows MXenes with beneficial electronic, magnetic, and optical properties.
Principally, metal ion selection decides the magnetism and electronic conductance of an MXene; they are also considerably affected by electron donating groups. Alternatively, MXene luminescence is largely attributed to size; defect-induced luminescence effects and quantum confinement also contribute. Conversely, before biomedical application of hydrophobic nanoparticles (e.g., upconversion nanoparticles, quantum dots (QDs)), complex surface modification is required. A variety of MXene compositions are found to be non-toxic; hence, they are biocompatible for living organisms.195 This is because C and N are major elements which are essential to maintain biological organism structures. A few early TMs, e.g., Nb, Ta, and Ti, are comparatively non-reactive to biological systems. Experimental studies on mice established that these MXenes can be degraded in mice.195 MXenes have strong absorption in the near-IR region, which is sufficient for both in vivo photothermal therapy (PTT) and photoacoustic imaging (PAI) in the first or second biological window. Additionally, carbide MXenes can be flexibly functionalized with surface modifications using different functional groups, which paves the way to new biomedical applications. These functionalized carbides and nitrides are 2 to 6-fold stronger than bulk MoS2 or graphite.196 Single stack MXene production by simple mechanical exfoliation is not sufficient. To imbalance the electronic charges, defects will be introduced.197,198 The surface terminations also affect the conductivity of carbide and nitride MXenes.198 These surface terminations of MXenes are applied for sensing of numerous gases and other reducing/oxide molecules. The MXene conductivity changes when these attached molecules on the MXene surface are exposed.198,199 The change in electrical conductivity produces electronic signals that are promising in the ultrasensitive sensing of definite biomarkers. MXene semiconductor properties are fundamentally helpful for specific applications, e.g., theoretical studies of biological catalysis also proposed the key factors that influence the optical properties of MXenes. In a typical example, M2C (M = Ti, Zr, Hf) has BGs in the range of 0.92 to 1.75 eV depending on the M composition; these BGs fall in the visible spectrum range.200
The BGs of MXenes can also be engineered to absorb UV radiation by changing their surface terminations, as shown in Table 2. Magne et al.202 presented spectroscopic confirmation that MXenes show optical absorption in the UV-visible range. However, to date, the magnetic properties of MXenes have been less explored. Under termination-free conditions, several MXenes studied by theory were predicted to have magnetic properties (e.g., ferromagnetic and anti-ferromagnetic).203,204 However, due to the complexity of the synthesis of MXenes with termination-free surfaces, these magnetic properties are much less supported by experiments. Recently, Cr2N and Cr2C were proposed to have magnetic spins even with surface terminations; however, the magnetic mechanism is yet not clearly understood.205 Vacancy-importing and ion-doping are two strategies which are predicted to be useful to manage the magnetic properties of MXenes.206 However, magnetic MXenes have not yet been synthesized, and current MXene biomedical applications utilizing magnetic stimuli are dependent on magnetic nanomaterials (e.g. MnO2 and FeO2) and MXene hybrid materials.207 MXene conductivity at RT has also been studied, and some reported carbide MXene conductivities are tabulated in Table 3.201
Table 2 BGs of MXenes predicted from the HSE06 hybrid function with various terminations. Asterisks show topological insulators201




MXene
Termination
BG (eV)




Sc2C
O
1.8




F
1.03




OH
0.45


Ti2C
O
0.24


Zr2C
O
0.88


Hf2C
O
1.0


Cr2C
F
3.49




OH
1.43


Mo2TiC2*
O
0.12




F
0.5




OH
0.05


Mo2ZrC2*
O
0.13


Mo2HfC2*
O
0.24


W2TiC2*
O
0.29


W2ZrC2*
O
0.28


W2HfC2*
O
0.41


Hf2MnC2
O
0.24




F
1.03


Hf2VC2
O
0.06


Cr2TiC2
F
1.35




OH
0.84


Hf3C2
O
0.16




Table 3 MXene conductivity at RT201




MXene
Sample type
RT conductivity (S cm−1)




Ti2C
ML-compressed disc
0.147




Transparent film (spin casting)
5250


Mo2C
Free-standing film
4.35




Free-standing film
0.8


V2C
Free-standing film
384.6


Nb2C
ML-compressed disc
0.00164


Mo2N
Free-standing film
2083


V2N
Free-standing film
4166


TiNbC
ML-compressed disc
0.192


Ti3CN
ML-compressed disc
0.27




Free-standing film
1045


Mo2TiC2
Free-standing film
50


Nb4C3
ML-compressed disc
2.17


Ta4C3
ML-compressed disc
0.476


Mo2Ti2C3
Free-standing film
100




Free-standing film
15


Ti2C
ML-compressed disc
0.147




In the etching synthesis method, the carbide MXene (MAX) phases are terminated; MXene surfaces require several hydrophilic terminal groups to be used as potential catalyst materials. Upon surface termination, the MXene formula becomes Mn+1XnTx, where M is an early TM, X = N or C, and Tx = the surface termination functional group (such as OH, O, or F). Mostly, MXenes are synthesized from selective etching of A (group IIIA–VIA) elements from MAX phases; however, other synthesis methods have also been introduced in which the precursors are being further investigated.208 MXenes show a distinctive mixture of metallic conductance due to the TM carbide or nitride main structure and surface termination-free electrons. Due to their high electronic conductance and versatile chemistry, they have been proven to be promising for a range of applications, including transparent conductors,209,210 energy storage,208 electromagnetic interference shielding,211 pressure and gas sensors,212–215 water purification,216–218 photo and electrocatalysis,219 thermoelectrics,220–222 and plasmonics.222,223 Due to the availability of a large range of TMs and surfaces decorated with functional groups, the properties of MXenes can be engineered through specifying combinations of TMs and X elements and by guiding their surface chemistry. Approximately 30 experimentally obtained MXenes are reported, and many more have been predicted theoretically.224–235 Approximately 100 MAX phases were synthesized by controlling the number of double TM structures, providing continuous and rapidly increasing opportunities for forming MXenes with advantageous properties.236
2D titanium carbide/nitride-based MXenes have been synthesized; however, insufficient methodical studies have established their structure, electronic and elastic properties and therefore discovered their promising applications. The surface chemistry and structural stability of 2D material carbide/nitride-based MXenes are controlled through a few basic structural characteristics, such as equilibrium lattice constants, ML thickness, and atomic composition. The limitations in the experimental synthesis methods of ML MXenes and the scarcity of investigations of their atomic level structures are the main reasons for their limited electronic and optoelectronic device applications. Two experimental studies to date have been carried out to study the structural properties of Ti3C2Tx ML flakes by STEM. The surface kinetics and structure237 in addition to intrinsic point defects237,238 of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets were studied at the atomic level. Density functional theory (DFT) is another method to study the structure stability and surface chemistry of MXenes through measuring the Ecoh and surface adsorption energy. Ecoh, which is the energy required to detach the condensed material into isolated free atoms, is one of the most significant physical quantities in quantifying the thermal stability of a material. However, most previously studied DFT calculations have concentrated on investigating the layer thicknesses and lattice parameters of Ti-based MXenes239,240 and were not able to predict the structure stability and surface properties of the MXenes. There are only two DFT calculation studies241,242 that calculate the MXene Ecoh; however, they did not study distinct MXenes, and the consequence of terminal groups on Ecoh was also not considered. The surface properties of 2D materials are also very important for catalysis applications.243,244
The functionalization effects of MXenes with –O terminated groups result in lower Ecoh than that of –OH and –F-terminated MXenes; thus, it can be concluded that the structural stability of functionalized MXenes decreases in this order: Tin+1CnO2 > Tin+1CnF2 > Tin+1Cn(OH)2 and Tin+1NnO2 > Tin+1NnF2 > Tin+1Nn(OH)2. This finding is consistent with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy findings.245 Generally, Ecoh considerably decreases upon surface functionalization mainly with –F and –O groups, which shows that completely functionalized MXenes are more stable compared to their counterpart pure phases. This also offers theoretical enlightenment of why functionalized MXenes with terminal groups are generally experimentally synthesized.234 In addition, it is observed that the Ecoh values of Tin+1Cn and Tin+1CnT2 are lower compared to those of Tin+1Nn and Tin+1NnT2 with the same ML thickness, which shows that carbide-based MXenes are more stable in comparison to nitride-based MXenes. The experimental observations show good agreement with this conclusion.246,247
The first and most studied Ti3C2Tx MXene possesses the highest conductance (10000 S cm−1) in thin film. The electronic conductance of MXenes is highly dependent on their etching and delamination methods along with their synthesis treatments. Due to the strong response of carbide MXenes to external stimulus, they have potential for use in chemical, light, and pressure sensors. The 2D nature of MXenes enables them to interact with other 2D materials through vdW heterostructures and results in some interesting electronic properties. Based on their plasmonic and optical properties, they have applications in ultrafast lasers, optical communication, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) substrates, metamaterial broadband absorbers, and light-to-heat conversion. Mostly, MXenes are arousing increasing interest in PTT.

2.4.1. Shortcomings and solutions of 2D carbide and nitride semiconductors (MXenes). 
Despite the extensive research on carbide/nitride MXenes, the understanding of these exciting materials is still not fully developed. Many of their primary properties remain unexplored, e.g., their surface termination is still a question. Experimental synthesis of carbide/nitride MXenes with uniform surface termination remains one of the most essential and difficult tasks. MXenes without surface termination are synthesized by CVD in vacuum or by other methods. In addition, native carbide/nitride MXene semiconductors have still not been experimentally reported, despite DFT calculations. DFT has predicted several MXenes that retain full magnetization at RT, which is attractive in 2D spintronics. The optical properties of MXenes are also very interesting. However, the mechanisms of electromagnetic wave interaction with MXenes are not fully comprehended; these have significant importance in EMI shielding, plasmonic and photonics applications. It has been found that theoretical calculations can envisage MXene BGs with high accuracy. In future, theoretical calculations will play a major role in predicting MXene properties. It would be fruitful to take aid from experimental studies of other well-matured 2D materials (e.g. graphene or TMDC) to study the fundamental, optical, electrical, and magnetic properties of carbide/nitride MXenes.

2.5. 2D layered double hydroxide (LDHs)
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are in the class of 2D-clay materials; hence, they are also known as anionic clays. LDHs have the general formula M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2 [Ax/pp−]x+·mH2O, where M2+ and M3+ are metal cations with divalent and trivalent valences, respectively. Divalent (Ca2+, Fe2+, Zn2+, etc.) metals in the metallic layer LDH structure are sometimes substituted with trivalent metal (Fe3+, Al3+) cations, ensuing in a cationic brucite-like structure. In the interlayer space, these positive charges are balanced by anions and water molecules. The cavities and large specific surface areas (SSA) of LDHs expand their reach as multifunctional materials. Generally, LDHs are widely used as ion-exchangers, catalysts, fillers in polymers, and adsorbents. 2D clay materials have large SSAs, biocompatibility and pH sensitivity; thus, they are fascinating materials for drug and gene transport. Indeed, LDHs are potential inorganic carriers for genes, DNA, and other anionic bio-molecules, with an extra benefit of solubility in acidic medium. LTMHOs, e.g., Mn(OH)2 and double hydroxides, are frequently synthesized by wet chemical methods and are finding applications in CO2 reduction, energy storage, and hydrogen evolution. Layered materials based on actinides (USe2) and rare earth metals (GdCl3) have also been synthesized and characterized; however, their applications have not been explored extensively. LDHs contain numerous –OH groups covalently bonded in 2D host films; they are anticipated to function as inorganic anion conductors. Generally, for bulk or lamellar LDH-OH, the ion conductivities are up to 10−3 S cm−1, which is considered to be insufficient for real applications. ML-LDH nanosheets displayed remarkably high in-plane conductance, attaining 10−1 S cm−1, which is the highest reported among anion conductors and similar to those of proton conductors in commercially available proton exchange membranes (e.g., Nafion). The in-plane direction conductivities are four to five times higher in magnitude than the cross-plane magnitude of the restacked LDH nanosheets. This impressive 2D ionic transport feature possesses enormous potential in different applications.
Hydrogen bonding networks among water molecules in aqueous phases are responsible for the propagation of protons and –OH ions, according to the Grotthuss mechanism,248 with enormously increased ion mobility. In comparison, other hydrated ions are generally proliferated via physical interactions with low ion mobility that is one order of magnitude lower than those of –OH and proton ions.249,250 Therefore, broad extended hydrogen bonding networks supplied by adsorbed water and the covalently bound –OH host layer in LDH nanosheets may assist the ultrafast conduction of –OH ions based on fast hydrogen bond breakage/reorganization. Consequently, the conduction of physically transferred interlayer hydrated anions is expected to be much slower than that of –OH ions and thus can be overlooked. The in-plane –OH ion conductivities of ML LDH nanosheets (10 to 100 layers) on comb electrodes were investigated. Both Co–Al and Mg–Al-LDH nanosheets demonstrated amplified conductivities with increasing temperature and RH. For a general 2D-LDH material at 80% RH and 60 °C, the measured values are on the order of 10−2 S cm−1, which indicates that high in-plane –OH conductance should maintained. Particularly, the lateral dimension reduction from several 100 nm to one nm leads to enhanced in-plane ion conductivities.
However, it is remarkable that multilayer in-plane conductivities are lower than that of ML-LDH; this indicates that in-plane conduction may be slightly compromised by increased steric incarceration from the narrowed interlayer spacing in addition to electrostatic repulsion from the sandwich and double interlayer anions. For multilayer Mg–Al-LDH nanosheets, in a representative sample deposited on comb electrodes, the in-plane ionic conductivity was measured with temperature dependence for over half a year (a large time interval). The results demonstrated that the difference in ionic conductivity was negligible after this long time, proving that the as-exfoliated LDH nanosheets possess outstanding stability in the form of –OH ion conduction. It is notable that the measured conductivities of the LDH nanosheets appeared to be more sensitive to changes in humidity compared to those of LDH platelets, concluding that the LDH nanosheet surfaces may be more available to water compared to the interlayer LDH platelet spaces. This can be simplified as a significant advantage of exfoliating lamellar LDHs to ML sheets to reveal considerably more available SSA and adsorb additional water content under these conditions. For improving –OH ion transportation characteristics, LDH nanosheets and hexagonal lamellar platelets with typical –OH ion conductivities are compared and summarized in Fig. 6. For Mg–Al and Co–Al-LDH nanosheets, all the in plane conductivities are extremely high, on the order of 10−2 S cm−1, and 10−1 S cm−1 is reached for MLs; meanwhile, the cross-plane values are very low, on the order of 10−6 S cm−1.251
 Fig. 6  Hydroxyl ion conductivity comparison. (A) –OH ion conductivity measurements in dissimilar directions for both hexagonal lamellar platelets and LDH nanosheets. (B) Comparison and summary of conductivities measured at 60 °C and 80% RH. (Courtesy P. Sun et al.).251 

2.5.1. Shortcomings and solutions of 2D layered double hydroxides (LDHs). 
In the fabrication of ultrathin ML-LDHs, surface atoms are effortlessly removed or misplaced, leading to local structure deformation and vacancy defects. These defects strongly affect the electronic and photocatalytic efficiency of LDH materials. To gain insight into the defect types, positron XPS, ESR and annihilation measurements are regularly performed. In LDH systems with Ti-metal, defects such as monovacancies or O2 vacancy clusters and micropores can be investigated using positron annihilation with the aid of the relative intensity (I) and positron lifetime (τ). Generally, oxygen vacancies (τ1) or monovacancies exist in bulk materials, while oxygen-vacancy clusters (τ2) have a higher prospect of being positioned on the sample surface. These defects, especially surface defects, can provide trapping sites for electrons and thus improve e–h separation efficiency in photocatalytic reactions. The applications of LDH-based materials are restricted due to the insulating nature of metal oxides/–OH.252 To overcome these shortcomings, hybridization at the molecular level for very thin LDH MLs along with highly conductive C substrate MLs, e.g., carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, or conductive polymers, may be an ideal approach to achieve excellent electrocatalytic efficiencies through direct interaction of the catalytic metal oxides/–OH with the conductive substrate material. Very recently, superlattice-type composite nanomaterials have been fabricated via introducing highly ultra-conductive graphene, CNTs and polymer MLs within the interlayer spaces of LDH materials.253,254 The BGs of 2D materials extend from 0 eV in the case of single-layered graphene to 5 eV in the case of h-BN, as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Outline of BGs (eV) and related detecting wavelengths for a range of 2D materials. 

3. 2D composite materials
Composite materials are synthesized by combining two or more constituent materials to obtain enhanced or tailored properties.7,8,13,255–258 Sometimes, the properties of pristine materials are not sufficient to meet device application criteria, such as the 2D material pristine graphene. The pristine 2D MXenes as well as composite materials such as layered graphene/semiconductors may have large impacts in myriad applications. Composite materials that act as single-photon emitters may be valuable in quantum information technology, where the ability to produce a single photon on demand enables new applications. Because graphene can function at any wavelength, from deep and far-infrared to visible and UV wavelengths, it has an edge over other materials. Graphene has received the most attention due to its combination characteristics, some of which have led to IR transceivers with very low power consumption. These devices are typically operated at 1550 and 1300 nm. These transceivers move data through fiber optic cables over long distances between cities as well as over much shorter spans of a few kilometers within data centers. While Si photonics consume picojoules of power per transmitted bit, graphene requires orders of magnitude less power, potentially as low as 10 fJ per bit. This can result in 1000-fold energy savings; this is important for data centers, which are occupying a growing share of overall power consumption. Within the graphene flagship, in 2019, a 5G transceiver was created that functions at 330 gigabits per second. Progress is being made toward the goal to more than triple the current maximum transmission rates inside a data center; additionally, there are no fundamental roadblocks to this goal. However, there is a need to determine how best to incorporate graphene into standard Si processing. For years, other single photon sources have been used, such as QD centers in diamond. These sources are desirable in quantum information technology and other applications because they are reliable, robust and can produce photons on demand, as shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Chart showing the 2D material library categorized by their stability in air for quantum applications. (Courtesy C. Zhu et al.)259 *BCN = 2D nano-composite bearing B, C and N, *BSCCO = bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide. 
Research has shown that 2D materials offer some important advantages. In contrast to all other single-photon sources, strain must be considered when positioning these materials, because strain arises when a 2D material is draped across nanostructures. The material conforms to microscopic hills and valleys, creating strain potential that can serve to position single-photon emitters at known spots.260 This can be placed next to a waveguide to obtain single photons. Theoretical approaches are helpful to select suitable combinations to fabricate new composite materials for new quantum applications. The materials in the Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB) were originally produced by decorating practically recognized crystal structures with atoms selected from chemically reasonable periodic table groups, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  The materials in the computational 2D materials database (C2DB) were originally produced by decorating practically recognized crystal structures with atoms selected from chemically reasonable periodic table groups. (Courtesy S. Haastrup et al.).261 
The 2D MXenes have been proven to be potential candidates for anticancer PTT applications due to their exceptional photothermal activity. Inorganic 2D nanomaterials have biocompatible stability in physiological conditions; however, MXene-based nanoplatforms lack this property. The fabrication of smart MXene-based nanoplatforms with targeting ability and controlled discharge of drugs for cancer therapy remains a challenge. Cellulose/MXene composites have shown rapid responses when stimulated at near-IR wavelengths. Consequently, the anticancer drug doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX) loaded in cellulose/MXene hydrogels is competent to significantly accelerate DOX release. This performance is due to pore extension within the cellulose 3D networks, which is activated at the 808 nm wavelength. Due to their outstanding photothermal performance and ability to control and sustain DOX release, cellulose/MXene hydrogels are used as multifunctional nanoplatforms for tumor treatment by intra-tumor injection. The 2D-composite approach opens opportunities for the synthesis of well-tuned MXene-based nanocomposites; in addition to their potential application in cancer treatment, this approach may provide a route for the development of other inorganic 2D composites for biomedicine applications. In addition to biomedical applications, the 2D composite approach also has applications in FET-based electronics. MXene nanocomposites with superior efficiency and few or no shortcomings are critically required.
4. 2D material applications
When examining a new technology for electronic applications, it is highly significant to define the key figures of merit (FOM) and judge them against the requirements of the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS). Hence, after reviewing the electron mobility of 2D materials and the BG tuning of the few elemental 2D materials and 2D heterostructures, their possible applications in optoelectronic and electronic devices can be categorized as follows, based on their properties:
a. Electrical phenomena and device applications
1. Flash memories, tunneling and FETs, etc.
2. Heat discharge form nano-circuits via 2D systems
3. Electrical and mechanical devices derived from 2D materials
4. Environmental, chemical, and biological sensor devices based on 2D materials
5. Magnetic tunnel junctions
b. Optoelectronic phenomena and device applications
1. Spintronics and plasmonics
2. LEDs and lasers
3. Photodetectors
4. Photonic crystals and cavities
5. Microwave, millimeter-wave, and terahertz (THz) devices
6. Tunable optical metamaterials
7. Quantum optics and nano-photonic devices
8. Nonlinear optical properties and devices
9. Flexible optoelectronic devices
10. Opto-mechanical devices and systems
The continuous scaling and microelectronic miniaturization of transistors is a promising application of atomic layer materials. Typically, electrical characterization of their fundamental criteria is carried out by fabricating FETs using 2D materials as active channel materials. The electrical property characterization focuses on obtaining information concerning metrics such as contact resistance, Ion/Ioff ratio, and charge carrier mobility. While a wide range of 2D materials exists, specific attention is paid to semiconductor materials. 2D materials have a broad range of applications, e.g., optoelectronics (LEDs, lasers, and photodetectors), photonics and sensors (gas, chemical, magnetic, biological, and strain), composites, and even biomedical applications. Researchers can obtain better understanding regarding applications where 2D materials may impart effects as the field becomes more mature. At the same time, while it is implausible that 2D materials will substitute Si complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology in the near future, they certainly have potential to accompany this technology in suitable applications, and 2D materials may be established to be superior to current technology in many areas. Considerable developments are being made in transparent screens and flexible wearable gadgets, where 2D materials have effects in different future applications. In each area, 2D materials now have the possibility to disrupt present technology; however, they have yet to achieve their best material quality or device activity. Graphene already has potential in the cellular phone component market. In electronics and optoelectronics, after graphene, the most mature fields in 2D materials are phosphorenes and dichalcogenides.
4.1. 2D-TMDC semiconductor applications
Flexible technology comprises a large group of increased surface area devices, including thin film transistors (TFTs), transducers, sensors, and displays. Doping methods are carried out on 2D semiconductors to modify their BGs for device applications. The MoS2 in transistors is naturally n-type doped, and the doping is relatively facile. One type of doping, called electrostatic doping, is used to generate depletion mode and enhancement mode of MoS2; MoS2-based transistors generate pseudo-complementary inverters. p-Type or n-type doping in WSe2 channels is achieved via employing either contact metal WFs or an amalgamation of chemical and electrostatic doping of the contact metal. For ambipolar phosphorene, a parallel charge neutrality point splitting method was utilized to electrostatically dope n- and p-type transistors to generate corresponding pairs. Single 2D materials face challenges in complementary inverters because the conventional chemical doping method is not promising due to the atomically thin nature of the material channels. Combining inverters with transistors to acquire the benefits of doping with two diverse materials has been proved to generate CMOS inverters, which are not dependent on electrostatic doping.
Regarding electronic properties such as on/off (Ion/Ioff) ratio versus mobility spectrum, commonly known TMDCs, such as MoS2, have relatively small mobilities but exceptionally high Ion/Ioff ratios. Due to their wide BGs, numerous TMDCs have very small Ioff values; thus, they are very suitable for small power applications. In graphene, due to the poor Ion/Ioff current ratio and absence of a BG, graphene transistors are more useful in high power consumption devices than other commonly used FET technologies. Phosphorene can bypass the gap between MoS2 and graphene with an Ion/Ioff ratio around 104 by means of its mobility of 100s of cm2 V−1 s−1. A major side effect is contact resistance, which much be decreased for suitable device performance. Graphene devices possess the lowest contact resistances. In comparison to graphene, the contact engineering of phosphorene and TMDCs is less developed because of the relatively juvenile nature of 2D materials, especially the latter. W and Mo-based TMDC MLs possess direct BGs in the range of 1.5 to 1.9 eV. For MoS2 and WSe2-based transistors, the FE mobility ranges from 1 to 200 cm2 V−1 s−1, with switch Ion/Ioff ratios typically approaching 105 to 107. Compared to Si, these well-known 2D materials do not have good electrical properties; however, they appear to be suitable for use in some functional applications. With their ability to withstand 30% strain, which limits irreparable damage to the crystal lattice, TMDCs have revealed potential applications in foldable electronics; they compare satisfactorily to Si lattices, which are irreversibly damaged upon application of more than 10% strain. When their flexibility is compared to that of generally used semiconductors, such as amorphous Si (a-Si) and OSCs, TMDCs possess a minimum of an order of magnitude higher FE mobility, enabling advanced switching when transformed. Due to the lack of BG in graphene and its poor Ion/Ioff ratio, graphene transistors are inclined to expend more power than other FET technologies.
Composite material synthesis approaches have been found to be very helpful to improve Rc for MoS2 devices, e.g., TMDC devices fabricated using graphene. The use of graphene as a contact has unlocked electrostatic tuning possibilities to decrease the distinction between the electron affinity of the semiconductive channel and the effective WF of the contact, which ultimately decreases the device Rc. Unlike graphene or MoS2, phosphorene has a unique property of anisotropy. The anisotropic nature of phosphorene suggests its use in new devices, e.g., (i) plasmonic devices and (ii) highly efficient thermoelectrics, by orthogonal-direction electron transport and heat transfer. Unfortunately, phosphorene exfoliation degrades in the atmospheric environment. A capping agent, ALD, effectively protects the phosphorene sheets and facilitates their air stability for months of surveillance. Both Si and OSCs usually have electronic conduction less than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is very small. The other 2D materials discussed in this review are less mature in photonic, electronic, and sensor applications due to their lower stability at ambient conditions.

4.1.1. Electrical and optoelectronic applications of 2D-TMDCs. 
Traditional Si-based technology is reaching greater limits than in the last decades; this suggests that atomically thin semiconducting materials such as TMDCs may be useful in future generation commercial electronics,55 and their industrialization and assimilation drawbacks should be resolved. Certainly, the first customer product of graphene used in touch screens in smartphones was launched in 2014 in China; this occurred after only one decade of worldwide graphene research, which is a comparatively small duration of an innovation series. Fabrication of WS2 films through an atomic layer deposition (ALD) process for large area synthesis with controlled thickness, i.e., mono, bi, and tetralayer WS2 on Si/SiO2 substrate, has been achieved (Fig. 10(a)).262 The I–V characteristic curves for WS2 obtained at different voltages are shown in Fig. 10(c), and its application in smart cell phones is illustrated in Fig. 10(b). Fig. 10(c) shows that the transfer properties of the ML WS2 FET indicate that it is an n-type conductor.262 Subsequent to dynamic investigation and expansion over numerous years, large numbers of 2D-TFTs prepared from MoS2 are currently being manufactured. At RT, the operating characteristics of TFTs, i.e., high current saturation and Ion/Ioff ratio, are predicted to be suitable for good quality TMDCs (Fig. 11(a) and (b)263). A maximum current density of ∼250 mA mm−1 and electron mobility of ∼50 cm2 V−1 s−1 have been calculated, which are desirable in high-performance TFTs. It is remarkable that cutoff frequencies greater than 5 GHz have been observed on flexible plastic substrates with 0.5 mm channel lengths (Fig. 11(c)263). This was quite unexpected due to the relatively low mobility of MoS2; however, high fields are required for maximum high frequency function. The transportation is determined by the saturation velocity (vsat), which appears to be satisfactorily practical (∼2 to 106 cm s−1) to accomplish GHz speeds for sub-micron channel lengths.263 Additionally, flexible ML MoS2 TFTs present robust electronic activity for 102 s cycles of mechanical bending (Fig. 11(d)263). A simple flexible wireless radio receiver was demonstrated using ML CVD MoS2 to receive a signal. The central signal processing function of the wireless receiver is shown in Fig. 11(e). Based on the experimental vsat values of different 2D materials, including TMDCs, compared to graphene, high-frequency applications provide room for flexible nanosystems, as shown in Fig. 11(d).264
 Fig. 10  (a) ALD process scheme for synthesis of a large area WS2 film with controlled thickness. (b) Mono, bi, and tetralayer WS2 fabricated on a Si/SiO2 substrate with a large area. The growth area is shown relative to a cellular phone display screen. (c) ML WS2 FET transfer properties, showing that it is an n-type conductor. (Courtesy J.-G. Song et al.).262 
 Fig. 11  The CVD-based 280 nm MoS2 FET (W = 2.6 mm, L = 1 mm) on SiO2/Si. (a) Electrical transfer properties, including a low-field mobility of ∼54 cm2 V−1 s1, which is at the high end for ML MoS2. (b) ID-VD characteristics and linear vsat profile predicted for well-behaved FET semiconductors. (c) Extracted cut-off frequencies with intrinsic fT for flexible MoS2 transistors, where the inset shows the 5.6 GHz (L = 0.5 mm) device structure. (d) Flexible MoS2 multi-cycle bending tests at 1% tensile strain with high electrical stability after 10000 cycles. (e) Flexible MoS2 RF transistor scheme utilized as an AM demodulator in a wireless AM receiver (AM radio band 0.54 to 1.6 MHz), where the inset shows the spectrum of the AM receiver output. (Courtesy H. Y. Chang et al.).265 
TMDCs are appropriate in low-power IOT and RF devices; a BP with high vsat is fascinating for 5G systems and wireless microwaves, and graphene, with the highest mobility and vsat, may be used in flexible communication and THz detectors.266,267 Encapsulated phosphorene layers with appropriate materials are shown in Fig. 12(a). Wu et al. recently demonstrated a facile encapsulation technique utilizing SnO2 film to control water vapor action and prevent O2 from air from corroding a phosphorene surface. A SnO2 film was also fabricated using electron-beam evaporation of a Sn film followed by exposure to air for natural oxidation. The fabricated back-gate FETs from the passivated phosphorene showed p-type properties and maintained a constant hole mobility of ≈200 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high Ion/Ioff ratio of ≈104 for over 15 days (Fig. 12(c) and (d)).268
 Fig. 12  (a) BP-FET with SnO2 passivation scheme. (b) Passivated BP-FET transfer curves at different times, i.e., as fabricated, 10 h and 15 days, Vds = −0.1 V. (c) Hole mobility (peak field-effect mobility at Vds = −0.1 V). (d) Ion/Ioff ratio changes with time upon exposure to air. (Courtesy D. K. Sang et al.).268 

4.2. Applications of 2D layered transition metal oxides (TMOs)

4.2.1. Gas sensor application of TMOs. 
TMOs such as TiO2, MoO3, WO3 and SnO2 are widely applied in gas sensing.269,270 At high temperature, they are used for chemisorption, and below 150 °C, they are used for physisorption due to their high SSAs. In the chemisorption procedure, 2D V2O5, SnO2, and TiO2 cooperate in a reductive way while O2 is removed, whereas 2D WO3, Nb2O5 and MoO3 are interconnected and become ultra-doped with reducing gases such as H2. This interaction finally leads to water production. In addition to their conductance, Nb2O5, WO3 and MoO3 are gasochromic oxides; their color changes when they are exposed to reducing gases.271–273 2D MoO3 has also been studied in plasmonic gas sensing and possesses a BG in the visible to IR range for plasmon absorption.274


4.2.2. Biological, optical and chemical sensor applications of TMOs. 
2D-TMOs have shown diversity in biological sensors. For example, TiO2, FeOx, ZnO, MnO2, WO3 and MoO3 have been demonstrated for biosensors, bio-imaging and drug delivery to date. They offer abilities to increase and facilitate contrast in imaging, electro and photo-luminescence, facile surface decoration with functional groups, opportunity for producing polymeric composites, high surface areas, liquid media stability and anisotropic charge transfer benefits. TMOs are popular due to their low toxicity; only V2O5 is slightly genotoxic, and recently there has also been some concern regarding MoO3 toxicity.275 At present, 2D TMO exploration for biological applications is still limited. This is due to the basic nature and toxicity of these materials, which arises from the exposed crystals at their edge facets, chemical compositions and defect concentrations, with similar trends to 2D TMDs.276 The in vitro cell viability of 2D TMOs, including MnO2 and MoO3, has been reported to evaluate their toxicity. It was found that 2D MoO3 layers increase toxicity in the Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) breast cancer cell line with the aid of caspase activation, but not in HaCAT cells; this suggests promising applications in breast cancer treatment.277 The platelets of 2D MoO3 have also been observed to be toxic to bacteria. On the other hand, 2D MnO2 was reported to considerably decrease cell feasibility in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7, suggesting that 2D TMO use should be restricted to avoid cell deterioration.278 The in vivo toxicity of 2D TiO2 was tested in a mouse model; it demonstrated low toxicity subsequent to intra-peritoneal inoculation, although accumulation of particles in the liver was noted, leading to slight abnormalities after long-term exposure.279
Balendhran et al. synthesized an FET-based biosensor platform using 2D αMoO3 nanoflakes as a conductive channel.280 These biosensors showed activity within 10 s for bovine serum albumin, and the detection limit was as low as 250 μg m L−1; the outstanding response characteristics were attributed to the high permittivity of the 2D αMoO3. It is remarkable that the αMoO3 detection limit for bovine serum albumin changed to 1 pg m L−1; the high level of ndoping in αMoO3 enabled its application in a plasmonic biosensing platform.281 In a 2D MnO2, Yuan et al. utilized MnO2 nanosheets to fabricate independent ochratoxin A and cathepsin D biosensors with correspondingly favorable activities; this indicates that MnO2 nanosheets can be used as nano-platforms in homogeneous biosensing.282 Alternatively, Zhai et al. studied the mechanism of interaction of ML MnO2 nanosheets with 7hydroxycoumarin283 and established a new procedure for in vivo sensing of ascorbic acid with enhanced efficiency using MnO2 nanosheets. Due to their strong d–d transitions and ultimately rigorous light absorption, 2D-TMOs are appropriate for use in constructing optical biosensing platforms. Consequently, they show decreased fluorophore luminescence after conjugation, mostly due to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET).284 After analyte exposure, 2D-TMO causes alteration either in the binding affinity or structure and luminescence of the target material, and that of 2D-TMO is decreased. These two mechanisms result in re-establishment of the luminescence. The most studied biosensor material in the 2D-TMO domain is 2D MnO2 (Fig. 13(a)).
 Fig. 13  (a) Sensor response as the percentage change in resistance to diverse concentrations of BSA (1, 2.5, 10, and 25 mg m L−1). (b) Sensitivity graph of concentration vs. percentage change in resistance.280 (c) The gas response to 100 ppm NO2 for a WO3 thin film at 300 °C. PTAx represents a WO3 thin film obtained through deposition using x mL PTA solution. (d) Active sensing of PTA6 thin film in the 10 to 100 ppm NO2 concentration range.290 (e) Tumor-bearing mice injected with 2D MnO2 whose nanosheet surface was decorated with folic acid and PEG in vivo: T1-weighted MRI images for 90 min.291 (f) 2D MnO2-sgc8 nanoprobe optical and FL images in the presence and absence (control) of CCRF-CEM. (Courtesy Z. Zhao et al.).292 
For various luminescent materials, such as C-based materials and organic fluorophores, the limits of detection for biomolecules, e.g., H2O2, ascorbic acid, aflatoxin B, glucose, DNA, micro RNA, ascorbic acid, adenosine, cathepsin D, glutathione, ochratoxin A, and thrombin, range between pM (pico molar) and M (molar).285,286 On the other hand, 2D TMOs such as MoO3, WO3, and Nb2O5 can provide numerous charged species in the presence of electrochemical forces.287 The electrochemical implantation of ions and the associated electron injection of the 2D-TMO crystal structure increase the free electron concentration in the structure and alter the electronic band structure. As a result, the plasmonic properties may also be stimulated. Plasmonic 2D TMOs can be utilized in biomolecule sensing because their plasmonic surfaces are receptive to the nearby dielectric surroundings and charge exchange. A plasmonic 2D MoOx/MoO3 hybrid showed SERS in the presence of a model dye.288 The WO3 nanoplates fabricated by Shendage et al. showed high NO2 gas selectivity and outstanding sensing response at low operating temperatures (at 100 °C, 10 for 5 ppm NO2 and about 131.75 for 100 ppm NO2).289 Harale et al. studied the potential of WO3 for fast response recovery to NO2 gas, i.e., the response time of the gas was 16 s and the recovery time was 260 s at 100 ppm (Fig. 13(e)).290 Alsaif et al. observed that 1% H2 gas-based αMoO3 nanoflakes with a thickness of ≈1.4 nm had a 7 s response time and 24 s recovery time at 200 °C.270


4.2.3. FL tagging and magnetic resonance imaging applications of TMOs. 
Because of their magnetic Fe cores, 2D-TMOs, e.g. FeOx, are extensively used in FL tagging and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in positive or negative MRI contrast agents based on their lateral proportions.293 2D FeOx with >10 nm lateral dimensions was observed to extensively enhance MRI activity. However, other 2D paramagnetic TMOs, such as 2D MnO2, show low MRI competence because in the MnO2 lattice, the Mn ions are covered with water and do not participate in the spin–spin relaxation of protons.294,295 As a substitute, paramagnetic Mn2+ ions are recognized as high T1-weighted MRI contrast agents that permit well-organized interactions with water molecules.278 The reductive dissolution in 2D MnO2 is confirmed to be due to the reduction of Mn2+ in the presence of intracellular bio-reductants (e.g. glutathione) following endocytosis, which activates T1 MRI (Fig. 13(a) and (b)).284,294,295 The Mn ion d–d transition in the MnO6 octahedral arrangement in 2D MnO2 shows strong light absorption and results in luminescence quenching when conjugated with luminescent materials. The reduction of 2D MnO2 to Mn2+ in the presence of glutathione (a cancer cell biomarker) can enable re-occurrence of luminescence and is therefore proficient in fluorescent cancer cell imaging (Fig. 13(c)).284,294,295


4.2.4. Electronic property-based applications of TMOs. 

Fig. 14 shows typical FET electrical properties for diamond: H/H2.3MoO2.5 FETs and diamond: H/MoO3 devices with equal dimensions. Both devices illustrate p-type performance; however, the diamond: H/H2.3MoO2.5 FETs are greatly superior to the diamond: H/MoO3 devices. The diamond: H/H2.3MoO2.5 FETs display saturated output properties with five orders of on/off ratio. In contrast, the diamond: H/MoO3 FETs show very low current, higher output conductivity, and decreased sub-threshold properties. This may be due to degradation of the diamond: H/MoO3 interface for the duration of dispensation, which results in unfavorable energy level synthesis at the diamond: H/MoO3−x interface due to the decreased O2 gap levels. Key factors of the two types of transistors are summarized in Fig. 14(B). The Hall bar structure measurements mentioned above were performed on samples fabricated discretely via a moderately simple fabrication method. A 22.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 hole mobility was yielded by Hall measurements with a 1.9 × 1013 cm−2 sheet concentration for diamond: H/H2.3MoO2.5 (following 3 min RTA), compared to 26.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 7.9 × 1013 cm−2 for diamond: H/MoO3 (without RTA). The difference between the electrical characteristics of the Hall structures and FETs is very clear. The FET assembly results of the diamond: H/MoO3 structures showed severe degradation compared to the diamond: H/HyMoO3−x structures. Conventional two-port transmission line model (TLM) dimensions were accepted due to a 7 fold lower contact resistance (Rc = 11 kW mm) due to the remarkably lower sheet resistance value (Rsh of the diamond: H/HyMoO3−x and diamond: H/MoO3 samples following device fabrication: 43 kW sq−1) of diamond: H/HyMoO3−x than of diamond: H/MoO3 (Rc = 75 kW mm and Rsh = 260 kW sq−1). These findings additionally demonstrate the increased resilience of the diamond: HyMoO3−x structures to the FET manufacturing procedure.296
 Fig. 14  (A) I–V curves measured from TLM test structures: diamond: H/HyMoO3−x (red lines) samples (right) and H/MoO3 (black lines). (B) Linear fitting curves of the corresponding sample TLM pattern. Rsh and Rc are the sheet and contact resistance, respectively. (C–E) FET properties using similar dimensions: 24 mm gate length, 40 mm gate width, and 15 mm source/drain to gate separation. (F) Diamond:H/MoO3 (top) and diamond: H/HyMoO3−x (bottom) FETs and their respective electronic band energy structures with different oxidation state ratios. (VB = valence band; CB = conduction band.) (Courtesy Z. Yin et al.).296 

4.3. Applications of 2D layered halide perovskites

4.3.1. 2D halide perovskite optoelectronic applications. 
For 2D halide perovskites, the most interesting optoelectronic property is the quantum confinement effect, which emerges due to the large exciton BE as the dielectric screening is decreased. In 2D-RPPs, the excitons mostly show ML (n = 1) and Wannier-type BEs. The 2D-RPPs are generally in a 170 to 480 meV range, depending on the encapsulate organic layer. Typically, this large exciton BE is higher than the thermal energy at RT (kBT = 25.7 meV), i.e., the e–h pairs originating from photogeneration are bound collectively by Coulomb attraction, so they are stable at RT and difficult to break down through thermal fluctuation. Through this approach, a sharp and strong peak underlying the BG onset can be observed at RT because of bound excitons (Fig. 15(a)). Yaffe et al. observed that the BE of BA2PbI4 (a 2D material with single unit cell thickness) is as high as 490 meV.163 This value is already much higher compared to its bulk material configuration and compared with MLs of subsequent 2D-RPPs (360 meV); this was attributed to the different ε environment. The exciton BE is also extremely dependent on the number of layers (i.e. the QW width), in which larger 2D-RPPs may have smaller exciton BEs due to decreased quantum confinement.297,298 Furthermore, the exciton BE can be approximately estimated from the difference between the onset of absorption and the first exciton absorption peak in the corresponding absorption spectrum at low temperature.299,300 Still, it is difficult to obtain a precise exciton BE value from the RT absorption spectrum due to the thermal broadening range.
 Fig. 15  Optoelectronic properties of 2D halide perovskites. (a) BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 absorption spectra and PL with different n values at RT. (b) Corresponding absorption spectrum of 2D perovskite at 5 K. (c) Spectra of BA2PbBr4PL samples with different thicknesses. (d) PL spectra of MAPbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses. (e) Perovskite PL peak position and BG as a function of the number of unit cells. (f) PEA2PbBr4(1−x)Cl4x absorption spectra. (Courtesy C. Lan et al.).301 
Significantly, due to the large exciton BE of 2D-RPP, they are suitable choices for LED devices due to their enhanced radiative recombination and sharp exciton emission peaks. In reality, 2D-RPPs also have high PL QYs. Yuan et al. observed that colloidal 2D-RPP microdisks demonstrate up to 53% PL quantum yield by means of a fine dark blue emission.302 The large exciton BE of 2D RP perovskite demonstrates especially quick rapid radiative recombination of photo-generated holes. Through this method, the lifetime of the charge carriers is shorter than that in 3D perovskites, ranging from several to 10 ns.303 The large n values (>2) for 2D-RPPs indicated another attractive photophysics occurrence, which is exciton disintegration into free carriers at lower energy levels. In other words, once the carriers are entrapped at the edges, they will remain confined, and their energy will not decrease due to side-to-side non-radiative processes. Therefore, this activity can be developed to improve optoelectronic device performance. The 2D-RPPs with increasing n values show decreased BGs because of decreased quantum confinement.297 The combined effects of the BG and exciton BE on 2D-RPPs with a number of layers simultaneously influence the PL and absorption spectra; thus, it is more complicated to set the optical parameters. In any case, the photoluminescence peak shift and excitonic absorption peak to the low energy edge were observed with increasing layer number n (Fig. 15(b)).304
Blancon et al. systematically studied the exciton property dependence of 2D perovskite BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 on the n value using optical spectroscopy and calculated the magnetoabsorption at 60 T. The findings showed that both the exciton BE and BG decreased with increasing n together with decreasing exciton-reduced mass.305 Furthermore, the BG of 2D-RPP is also affected by its weak physical thickness. Fig. 15(c) shows that the emission peaks of BA2PbBr4 sheets move toward lower wavelengths as their thickness increases.164 The PL peak blue shift may be due to structural relaxation of the in-plane crystal lattice; this shows that the vdW interactions between layers can also affect the 2D-RPP electrical properties even though the interactions are very weak. For PEA2PbI4, similar results were observed.306 Similar to other 2D inorganic semiconductors, the BG of atomically thin MAPbI3 was observed to decrease with increasing number of layers.307 For ML MAPbI3, a PL emission peak centered at ∼720 nm was observed, and it increased stepwise to ∼765 nm for the bulk (Fig. 15(d)). The BGs and PL peaks of MAPbI3 nanoplates were observed to change with thickness, as shown in Fig. 15(e). The enlarged BG of the ultra-thin MAPbI3 nanoplates can be attributed to the quantum confinement effect. However, the BG of ML MAPbI3 was still much smaller than that of 2D RPP MLs. The only difference between the MAPbI3 ML and 2D-RPP MLs is the existence of an organic encapsulating layer on the 2D-RPPs, which may lead to inorganic layer lattice distortion. Consequently, the different BGs can be ascribed to the different dielectric environments and lattice distortions. The 2D-RPP absorption spectrum, like those of 3D perovskites, can be readily engineered through partial substitution of halide cations, which are appropriate for tunable wavelength LEDs and arrangement of solar cells. Lanty et al. observed that the excitonic absorption of PEA2PbX4 (X = I, Br) can be readily modified through the partial substitution of Cl with Br, as illustrated in Fig. 15(f).308 The tunable absorption was attributed to BG tuning through the partial substitution of cations. Weidman et al. observed RPP nanoplatelets and concluded that the absorption spectrum and emission energy of materials with the chemical formula L2An−1BnX3n+1 could be changed by changing the n values, B halide cation and X anion, while variation of the A cation only led to subtle changes.173 In addition, mixed halide nanoplatelets showed continuous spectral tunability from 2.2 to 3.7 eV, covering a spectral range of 1.5 eV.


4.3.2. Light emitting diode (LED) applications of 2D halide perovskites. 
2D perovskites have large exciton BEs (>26 meV) and high PL QYs; therefore, they are also appropriate for use in LED devices. Initial investigations on LEDs based on 2D-RPPs can be traced back to the mid 1990s.309,310 For example, Era et al. synthesized the first 2D-RPP (PEA2PbI4)-based LEDs and illustrated a sharp emission at 520 nm with a full width half maximum (FWHM) of 10 nm at liquid-N temperature with high luminescence (10000 cd m−2 at 24 V).28 The electroluminescence activity of RT was very small, possibly due to exciton thermal ionization. At any rate, its low working temperature considerably limited its advancement. Due to the growing interest of perovskites in LEDs, 2D-RPPs have regained consideration. At RT, 2D-RPP material-based LED devices with a single constituent can function efficiently; however, their external quantum efficiency (EQE) is still low.176,311 For example, Liang et al. observed (PEA)2PbBr4 nanoplates-based LEDs with deep blue (410 nm) emission in an ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/PEA2PbBr4/TPBi (35 nm)/Ca (25 nm)/Al (100 nm) device structure (Fig. 16(a)).312 These devices showed strong light discharge by means of an ultra-narrow (14 nm) FWHM (Fig. 16(b)), and the EQE was found to be 0.04%, which is remarkably high for deep blue LEDs. The improved EQE was due to the conversion of the polycrystalline PEA2PbBr4 films into single-crystal nanoplates (Fig. 16(c)). Li et al. also reported 526 nm LED multilayer (C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4 devices, which emitted light with a narrow FWHM of 15 nm.31 These devices provided ∼9 cd m−2 luminescence at 5 V with a low (0.005%) EQE. In addition, these devices could only work for 1 min and were not stable. This low EQE has not been well recognized to date; it may be attributable to strong exciton–phonon coupling in ML 2D-RPPs.312 For n ≥ 2, it is generally complicated to obtain pure phase 2D-RPP materials. However, several researchers found that LEDs consisting of 2D-RPP mixed phases could yield excellent activity compared to those prepared with single constituent counterparts.313–315
 Fig. 16  Structures and performance of LED devices. (a) SEM image of the PEA2PbBr4 LED device. (b) A typical PEA2PbBr4 nanoplatelet-based LED device to obtain normalized luminescence. (c) AFM images of pristine and annealed PEA2PbBr4 films. (d) PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 multi-phase perovskite channel energy crossways and inhomogeneous energy scenery with the carrier concentration of the smallest BG emitter. (e) Perovskite LED device structure. On the right, a schematic of the nanometer grains with BA cation decoration is shown. (f) Band alignment of each functional layer in the LED device. (g) Typical electroluminescence spectra of a PEA2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 (n = 3 composition)-based LED under different bias voltages. The insets in (f and g) show the LED electroluminescence spectra. (h) Schematic of the perovskite nanoplatelet LED device architecture as the emitter and diagram of the horizontal band energy levels of the different material layers, indicating the valence and CB levels with respect to vacuum. (i) Electroluminescence spectra at 4 V bias current, where the inset shows a 56 mm2 device. (j) External quantum efficiency (EQE) vs. current density graph. (Courtesy L. Ni et al.).312 
In mixed phase 2D-RPPs, it was also found that with different n values, the photo-generated carriers showed a trend to transfer toward small BGs for large n value perovskites, as illustrated in Fig. 16(d).313–315 Using this approach, high EQE was reported in 2D-RPP mixed phase LED applications. For example, Yuan et al. demonstrated LEDs based on mixed 2D-RPPs (PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1) with optimized compositions that showed a high EQE of 8.8% and a radiance of 80 W sr−1 m−2.315 They predicted that layered perovskite materials function based on charge carrier concentration; this guarantees effective radiative recombination. Wang et al. prepared mixed 2D-RPP NMA2FAn−1PbnI3n+1 (NMA = C10H7CH2NH3+) with fractional substitution of I with Br and obtained a high EQE of 11.7% in LEDs with good stability and outstanding high power activity.313 Typically, electroluminescence was generated in the lower BG regions that were effectively confined by perovskite manifold QWs with higher energy gaps because of their outstanding performance. In addition, Xiao et al. used thick BA2MAn−1PbnX3n+1 (X = Br, I) nano-crystal (n ∼ 19)-based films in LEDs as the emitting layers (Fig. 16(e)); the layers possessed very smooth surfaces and showed outstanding activity, with high EQEs of 10.4% for X = I (at 748 nm emission) and 9.3% for X = Br (at 513 nm emission).316 The ultra-small crystal granules were assumed to aid the high EQE. Furthermore, notably, these LEDs demonstrated outstanding stability; their activity lasted for more than 8 months after storage. Compact, pinhole-free, ultra-smooth perovskite films containing long alkyl bulky chains efficiently stabilize the crystalline surfaces, imparting greatly enhanced stability. By optimizing the composition of PEA2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 and including a trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) layer on the perovskite film surface as a passivation layer (Fig. 16(f)), Yang et al. observed high luminescence of 9120 cd m−2 at 532 nm and a high EQE of 14.36% (Fig. 16(g)). These LEDs continuously functioned for 120 min, showing superior device stability. Quan et al. modified mixed-n 2D perovskites to achieve direct transfer of energy to the lowest BG more rapidly than through the nonradiative midpoint.317 Through this approach, photoexcited states were entrapped in a small subpopulation of radiative domains, leading to high QYs even at low excitation intensities. The LEDs based on mixed 2D perovskites showed an EQE of 7.4% and a high luminescence of 8400 cd m−2. Other approaches are currently being developed to promote the efficiency and stability of LEDs based on 2D-RPPs, such as dissolving 2D-RPPs in an organic matrix. For example, Ling et al. fabricated OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelet-based efficient green LEDs at 12 V at RT that showed a high luminescence of 10590 cd m−2,318 with the device structure exhibited in 16(h). In particular, OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets were dispersed in bipolar organic solvent, which served as an emitting layer. The extraordinary LED brightness achieved was credited to the optimum charge balance in the emitting layer achieved by using composition-engineered bipolar solvent. On the other hand, the corresponding EQE (0.48%) was still low. Kumar et al. utilized the same nanoplatelets and device structure to prepare LEDs.319 They controlled the n value, which is equivalent to the nanoplatelet thickness; therefore, the emitting wavelength could be consistently tuned. In this way, 520 nm pure green emission for n = 8 to 11, 492 nm sky blue emission for n = 6, 456 pure blue emission for n = 4, and 432 nm deep blue emission for n = 2 were successfully observed in the LEDs. Moreover, the LEDs exhibited high EQE (2.31% pure green emission) due to the well-separated 2D perovskites in the organic matrix in addition to the flatter emission layer. Other 2D-RPPs in which the interior perovskite layer is completely inorganic were also utilized in the construction of high-efficiency LEDs because of their naturally recognized QW. Si et al. reported the first MLs-PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 (X = Br, I, n = 12 to 16)-based LEDs.320 The synthesized LEDs exhibited sharp color spectra (Fig. 16(i)) with outstandingly high EQE (10.4% for X = Br, 514 nm, and 7.3% for X = I 683 nm) (Table 4).
Table 4 MXenes applied in biosensors, antibacterial activity, therapeutics, bioimaging, and theranostics358




MXene
Sheet thickness
Surface modification
Applications




Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and ∼30 nm thick
N.A.
Detection of ethanol, methanol, acetone, and ammonia gases through resistance changes


Nafion/Hb/TiO2–Ti3C2
Laterally micrometer sheets
N.A.
Detection of hydrogen peroxide through amperometry changes


Nafion/Hb/Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Detection of nitrite through amperometry changes


Nafion/Gox/Au/Ti3C2
∼200 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
N.A.
Detection of glucose through amperometry changes


Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Detection of Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+ through amperometry changes


Ti3C2
∼10 nm nanodots
Polyethylenimine
Ratiometric photoluminescence sensing of intracellular pH


Ag, Au or Pb-grafted Ti3C2
2 to 3 μm laterally and a few nanometers thick
N.A.
Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of methylene blue


Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of Rhodamine 6G


Ti2N
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of Rhodamine 6G


Ti3C2
∼500 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
N.A.
Antibacterial activity toward E. coli and B. subtilis cells through ROS production


Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Ti3C2 antibacterial membrane for anti-biofouling applications


Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick
N.A.
Probing neural activity


Ti3C2
2 to 7 nm nanodots
N.A.
Multicolor luminescent cell imaging


Ti3C2
2 to 5 nm nanodots
N.A.
Size- and defect-selective multi-color emissions


Ti3C2
4 to 10 nm nanodots
PVP
Luminescent cell imaging


Ti3C2
∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
First demonstration of MXenes for PTT


Ti3C2–DOX
∼100 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Hyaluronic acid
Synergistic PTT/PDT/chemotherapy


Ti3C2–DOX
∼120 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
PA imaging-guided pH-responsive and NIR laser-triggered DOX release for synergistic PTT/chemotherapy


Ti3C2–MnOx
∼220 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
MR/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window


Nb2C
∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
PVP
PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I and NIR-II windows


Ta4C3–MnOx
∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
MR/CT/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window


Ta4C3
∼100 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
CT/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window by both intravenous and intratumoral administration


Ti3C2
∼4.9 nm laterally and ∼1.2 nm thick dots
N.A.
PAI-guided PTT in the NIR-I window


Ta4C3–iron oxide
∼250 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick
Soybean phospholipid
CT/MR imaging-guided PTT of breast cancer


Ti3C2
Micrometers laterally and ∼30 nm thick
N.A.
Detection of ethanol, methanol, acetone, and ammonia gases through resistance changes




Huang's group deeply explored mixed phase NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1-based LEDs.321–323 They established that the insertion of Cl in NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 supports the growth of larger-n QWs and enhances the crystallinity, which paves a path to improved EQE (3.7%) and modest PL at 688 nm (440 cd m−2).37 The overall performance of mixed phase NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 material LEDs can be considerably increased by engineering the perovskite QW dimensionality via changing the ratio of large cations to small cations in the material mixtures. The mixed phase NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 LEDs at 694 nm emitted red light with a luminance of 732 cd m−2 and a maximum EQE of 7.3%. From small n by means of a larger BG to large n through a smaller BG, the energy transfer was also considered to be a factor to obtain high EQE. Later, they also investigated the limited substitution of Cs+ with FA+ cations to aid the synthesis of wider QWs, which minimized efficiency while preventing Auger recombination.39 The partially substituted perovskite-based LEDs achieved the highest external EQE (7.8%) (Fig. 16(j)). The most important factor of these perovskites is their stability; this can be significantly enhanced by partial substitution, as the manufactured LEDs possess longer lifetimes of 31 h.39 Tian et al. stated that spectrally stable and efficient red LEDs can be realized using BA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1/poly(ethylene oxide) composite thin films as the light emitting layer.324 The LED emission peak can be engineered by tailoring the n value. The LEDs with emission at 680 nm showed a brightness of 1392 cd m−2 and an EQE of 6.23%. In addition, these LEDs exhibited great air operation stability, with an electroluminescence decrease of almost 20% after 4 h of continuous work. 2D perovskites had already showed outstanding LED activity, indicating their stimulating potential in practical devices. In Table 5, the performance of 2D perovskite-based LEDs is summarized.
Table 5 Typical activities of LEDs based on 2D perovskite301




Material
Wavelength (nm)
FWHM (nm)
Max-EQE (%)
Max-current efficiency (cd A−1)
Luminescence (cd m−2)
Stability




PEA2PbBr4
410
14
0.04
—
—
—


(C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4
526
15
0.005
—
9
A lifetime of ∼1 min


PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 5
∼740
∼50
8.8
—
—
—


NMA2FAPb2I6Br
763
∼50
11.7
—
—
50% after 2 h under operation


BA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 19
513
∼30
9.3
17.1
8000
No degradation after storage for 4 months in N2


BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 19
748
∼50
10.4
0.09
50
No degradation after storage for 8 months in N2


PEA2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 3
532
∼25
14.36
62.43
9120
Lifetime of 120 min in dry air with encapsulation


PEA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 5
526
∼20
7.4
∼20
8400
50% after 5 min under operation


OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets
530
20
0.48
—
10590
Stable in air for at least one week


OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets with n = 7 to 10
520
∼25
2.31
8.1
∼1000
—


PEA2Csn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplates
514
17
10.4
31.2
14000
Stable in glove box for at least one month


PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 nanoplates
683
34
7.3
—
∼100
—


NMA2CsPb2I6Cl
688
∼30
3.7
—
440
50% after 5 h under operation


NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1
694
∼30
7.3
—
732
—


NMA2(FA0.93Cs0.07)n−1PbnI3n+1
783
∼50
7.8
—
—
50% after 31 h under operation


BA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1
680
∼50
6.23
1.74
1392
Decrease of 20% after 4 h under operation






4.3.3. Shortcomings of 2D halide perovskites. 
The long term stability of metal-halide perovskites in humid environments is a major limitation to the industrialization of perovskite optical applications; incorporating graphene or other 2D-TMDCs in perovskite films may represent a plausible solution to this shortcoming and enhance the properties of the films. Recent developments have confirmed that perovskite stability can be greatly enhanced through chemical surface-ligand termination and functionalization/passivation; however, more attention should be paid to improving the long-term stability of perovskite materials and the reproducibility of these devices. Although 2D perovskites, particularly 2D-RPPs, are more stable than 3D perovskites, the established devices still face durability problems. Understanding their deterioration mechanisms is the first and uppermost requirement; later, simple techniques should be established to recover their stability.

4.4. Applications of 2D carbide/nitride Mxenes
A conductive TM carbide/nitride core layer facilitates high electronic conductivity; thus, in applications of thin films of Ti3C2Tx, the first and most studied MXene, conductance up to 10000 S cm−1 can be achieved. The electronic conductance of MXenes is related to their delamination and etching methods in addition to their post-synthesis treatments. Due to the strong response of carbide MXene conductivity to external stimulus, they are potential candidates for light, pressure, and chemical molecule sensors. The 2D nature of MXenes enables them to form vdW heterostructures with other 2D materials with appealing electronic properties. By exploiting their plasmonic and optical properties, applications such as optical communication, ultrafast lasers, metamaterial broadband absorbers and light-to-heat conversion are realized. Predominantly, using MXenes in PTT is a growing interest. Despite several years of widespread investigation of MXenes, research into this stimulating material family is still in an early phase. Eventually, MXenes without surface functionalization should be fabricated by CVD in vacuum or by other methods. Furthermore, pristine MXene semiconductors have not been experimentally synthesized to date, in spite of DFT calculations. The experimental dimensions of their electronic band structures and surface termination effects in addition to their TM oxidation states have not been reported. A number of stimulating properties, e.g., SC, topological insulation, and half-metallicity, are predicted by DFT and are awaiting experimental evidence. A number of MXenes are proposed to display strong magnetization at RT, which is attractive in 2D spintronics. The optical properties of MXenes have also been observed. However, the mechanisms of the interaction of MXenes with electromagnetic waves have not been clearly explained; this is of vital importance in photonics, EMI shielding, and plasmonic applications. MXenes produced from non-fluorinated etchants are efficient to produce in large amounts and are particularly used in biomedical devices. Chemical modifications or heating procedures should be developed to obtain homogeneous surface terminations. The experience built up from fundamental studies of TMDCs, graphene, and other 2D materials, such as their optical, electronic, and magnetic properties, should be applied in carbide/nitride MXenes.

4.4.1. Applications of 2D carbide/nitride MXenes in electromagnetic interference shielding. 
Due to the high electrical conductance of MXenes, they are promising in EMI shielding effect (SE) applications, where high conductance is a prerequisite. EMI-SE is directly related to the thickness and electrical conductance of the material, as depicted by Simon formalism.325Fig. 17(a)201 shows the electrical conductivities of the Ti3C2Tx, Mo2TiC2Tx, and Mo2Ti2C3Tx films, and Fig. 17(b) shows their analogous EMI-SEs with 2.5 μm thick films. EMI-SEs for other MXene material films with the same thickness are given in Fig. 17(c).201 A 45 μm thick Ti3C2Tx film showed 92 dB EMI-SE, which converts to 99.99% EMI blockage in the microwave range. To enhance their environmental and mechanical stabilities and shrink their masses, MXenes are inserted into polymer matrices. Due to their high conductance and large characteristic ratios, MXenes may cause network strain at moderately small filler concentrations. For example, Ti3C2Tx/sodium alginate (SA) composites showed 0.5 and 3000 S cm−1 at 10 and 90 wt% MXene weight, respectively. The 9 μm thick composite film demonstrated 57 dB EMI-SE. Further new work on Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene (PS) composites showed 10.8 S cm−1 at 1.9 vol% with 54 dB EMI-SE.326 The latter study indicated that comparatively high conductance was achieved with low MXene concentrations, probably due to the electrostatic assemblage used to synthesize the composites, as shown in Fig. 17(d). Certainly, the percolation threshold was attained at 0.26 vol%, which is much lower than those of MXene/polymer composites.327 A SEM image of the Ti3C2Tx/PS composite is shown in Fig. 17(e),201 representing that the PS microspheres were enclosed collectively by MXene sheets. The composite EMI-SE is given in Fig. 17(f).201 One method to enhance the EMI characteristics of MXene/polymer composites is to utilize a polymer conductance matrix that provides both electrical conduction and mechanical support. Tong et al. synthesized Ti3C2Tx/polypyrrole (PPy) composites utilizing an in situ chemical oxidative method; they indicated that a 25 wt% composite 3 mm film showed −49.2 dB loss of reflection (≈99.99% absorption).328 The EMI-SE of Ti3C2Tx/PPy composites must be improved to decrease MXene oxidation for the duration of polymerization; this can be attained using oxidant-free polymerization techniques. In addition, other conducting polymers have been reported to form composites with Ti3C2Tx MXenes,329,330 which may be appealing in EMI-SE devices.
 Fig. 17  (a and b) EMI shielding properties of MXenes: (a) electrical conductance comparison and (b) EMI-SE activities of Mo and Ti-based MXene films. (c) EMI-SE performance comparison of MXenes and various materials. (d) Synthesis scheme. (e) SEM image of a Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene composite synthesized by an electrostatic self-assembly method. (f) EMI SE composites displayed improved absorption. (g) Scheme of Ti3C2Tx MXene integration into a nanoscale slot antenna arrangement. (h) Comparison of the transmitted THz signals of the MXene nanoarrays and bare Si substrate. (i) Normalized transmittance spectra of the MXene nanoarrays with 150 nm width and a variety of thicknesses. (Courtesy M. Naguib et al.).201 
Cao et al. synthesized MXene/cellulose composites with EMI-SE ≈ 25 dB after loading 80 wt% MXene. The composites showed enhanced mechanical properties, including 135 MPa tensile strength.331 MXene composites using other active EMI absorbers, such as ZnO, hexagonal barium ferrites and CNTs, were also prepared.332–334 Ti3C2Tx inserted into a nanoscale slot antenna arrangement was demonstrated to possess improved EMI-SE in the terahertz (THz) range.335 Device fabrication was carried out through drop-casting of delaminated Ti3C2Tx solution onto a pre-patterned Au nano-slot-antenna arrangement on Si substrate, as shown in Fig. 17(g). THz transmission was suppressed when the MXene was incorporated into a nanoarray of 150 and 500 nm wide antennae (Fig. 17(h)), and the nanoantenna at 1 THz decreased when 65 nm thickness was attained by the MXene; the transmitted intensity decreased in magnitude by two times when the thickness of the MXene film was 1 μm, from 0.5 to 2.0 THz, in accordance with theoretical calculations, which indicates that Ti3C2Tx is an efficient absorber in the THz range.336 Moreover, the effects of thermal annealing on the EMI-SE and dielectric properties of Ti3C2Tx were investigated by Han et al.337 They reported that an HF-etched Ti3C2Tx MXene annealed at 800 °C under Ar flow enabled the formation of TiO2 nanoparticles and amorphous carbon supported on MXene flakes. The thermal annealing further contributes to the EMI SE activity because of the higher electrical conductance and lower permittivity of both TiO2 and carbon. The 1.7 mm thick 50 wt% Ti3C2Tx/wax composites after annealing showed an EMI-SE and dielectric loss of 32 dB and −48.4, correspondingly. For EMI-SE applications, porous structures are potentially beneficial because of their enhanced internal reflection.338 Liu et al.339 fabricated hydrophobic porous Ti3C2Tx foam through a hydrazine-induced foaming process. The resulting porous foam displayed 70 dB EMI-SE, and its hydrophobicity enhanced its environmental stability.


4.4.2. Application of 2D carbide/nitride MXenes as sensors. 
4.4.2.1. Applications of 2D carbide/nitride MXenes as pressure and strain sensors. 
MXenes are already utilized as strain and pressure sensors based on their electronic responses to strain originating from an external force. MXene pressure sensors have piezoresistance, where the outside pressure is transformed into a resistance change. Logically, the conductance of MXenes increases (decreases) while the interlayer space shrinks (expands). Ma et al.213 utilized ML-Ti3C2Tx in a pressure sensor as a pressure-sensitive layer (Fig. 18(a)). The MXene conductance directly improved monotonically with increasing pressure, with a high gauge factor (GF) of 180 and a rapid detection time of less than 30 ms;213 0.19% to 2.1% strain was observed with high accuracy. In situ TEM images of the interlayer space response of MXenes to applied pressure established that the process is dynamic (Fig. 18(b)), representing the working mechanism in piezoresistive sensors. In addition, it was recognized that this sensor can be utilized to perceive movement of the human body, such as breathing and joint bending, as illustrated in Fig. 18(c). The same group also showed that a MXene/rGO aerogel has 22.56 kPa−1 sensitivity to external strain after 10000 cycles. The low detection limit (10 Pa) of the aerogel is suitable for human pulse detection.340 Development of sensing activity was attained with a d-Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite sensor, as illustrated in Fig. 18(d).214 The sensing layer was fabricated by alternating spray-coating of d-Ti3C2Tx and single-wall CNTs in aqueous solution on a latex substrate. The resulting composites showed mechanical flexibility and could be expanded to 200% strain without breakdown (Fig. 18(e)). Fig. 18(f) shows the piezoresistive response of the composite to strain fluctuation from 0% to 80%. In a low strain range of 0% to 30%, the composite showed 64.6 GF, while the GF was enhanced up to 772 at high strain (40% to 70%). Furthermore, the composite exhibited stable activity for more than 5000 cycles. In contrast to preceding MXene sensor studies, where the conductance changes originated from changes in the ML Ti3C2Tx interlayer spacing, the d-Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite response results from d-MXene flakes and CNT sliding, which cut off the conductance. Consequently, the d-Ti3C2Tx/CNT sensor conductance decreases with external pressure. d-Ti3C2Tx/PVA hydrogel composites with more than 3400% mechanical flexibility were reported (Fig. 18(g)). The hydrogel exhibited 80 and 25 GF under compressive and tensile strain, correspondingly. More fascinatingly, the hydrogel demonstrated anisotropic electrical detection of strain direction, where its conductance decreased (increased) under tensile (compressive) strain, as shown in Fig. 18(h). This occurrence was attributed to the MXene nanosheet arrangement in the 3D network structure inside the hydrogel matrix, where compressive strain decreases the gaps between MXene sheets, resulting in enhancement of the composite conductance (Fig. 18(i)).215 A Ti3C2Tx/poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride) layer-by-layer arrangement on a flexible polymeric substrate demonstrated decreased conductance upon stretching and bending because of microcrack formation on the surface of the MXene. Fascinatingly, the gaps and cracks were repaired upon discharge of external pressure, improving the conductance and permitting the device to operate for 1000 cycles.341 Pressure sensors based on MXenes have received much consideration because of their outstanding activity and simple device manufacturing. To further enhance the sensing performance of MXene-based pressure sensors, suitable material selection and design of the composite/foam structure are necessary. Although the strain engineering effects on the band structure alignment in MXenes in MXene-based devices have still not been experimentally studied, highly sensitive pressure sensors may be achieved based on strain-induced metal-to-insulator transitions.
 Fig. 18  Strain and pressure sensors based on MXenes. (a) A ML-Ti3C2Tx-based pressure sensor scheme. (b) ML-Ti3C2Tx interlayer spacing changes with applied pressure. (c) A human finger gesture response sensor. (d) SEM image of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite. (e) Strain sensor. (f) Strain range. (g) Optical images of a highly stretchable Ti3C2Tx/PVA hydrogel composite. (h) The H2 resistance response when an object moves in parallel (right) and perpendicular (left) directions to the current direction. (i) The mechanism of the electromechanical response of the Ti3C2Tx/PVA hydrogel. (Courtesy K. Hantanasirisakul et al.).201 
4.4.2.2. Molecule-based sensor applications of 2D carbide/nitride MXenes. 
The conductance of MXenes is responsible for their high sensitivity to adsorbed species; due to the numerous adsorption sites on their functionalized surfaces, they have applications in molecule sensors. Theoretically, it has been shown that semiconducting M2CO2 (M = Zr, Sc, Ti, and Hf) is highly sensitive to NH3 adsorption (Fig. 19(a)). Theoretical predictions showed that NH3 adsorption leads to charge transfer from NH3 molecules to TM atoms on the MXene surface, causing an increase in the electronic conductance of the MXene.342 Furthermore, it was found that NH3 molecules can be desorbed from the MXene surface after electrons transfer into the MXene layer; thus, the sensors are reusable. This occurs because the electronic states of MXenes have special properties, in which the DOS near EF mainly originates from the metal atoms. Therefore, the infused electrons spread mainly on the TMs due to the increase in the NH3 adsorption energy and metal bond length; thus, it is less actively favorable for NH3 to adsorb on the MXene surface.342 Sc2CO2 is sensitive to SO2 gas. Transfer of charge from SO2 to Sc2CO2 at the EF results in great enhancement in the DOS and several orders of increment in the electronic conductance of MXenes. Theoretical investigation has shown that O-terminated M2C (M = V, Ti, Mo and Nb) can be utilized in gas detection with Nb2CO2 and Ti2CO2, which are more sensitive to NH3, while Mo2CO2 and V2CO2 are more sensitive to NO. It is remarkable that transfer of charge from adsorbates to the bare MXene surface may cause dissociation of the adsorbate; thus, MXenes are potential catalysts for activation of small molecules.343 Despite intensive theoretical studies on MXene gas sensors, only a few experimental results have been reported.
 Fig. 19  Molecule sensing properties. (a) Ti2CO2 MXene adsorption location for diverse gases. (b) Distribution of charge density. (c) Calculated Ti2CO2I–V characteristics for adsorbed NH3 and CO2 molecules. (d) A d-Ti3C2Tx-based gas sensor on an integer's digitized circuit. (e) Resistivity response of an MXene after adsorption of different gases. (f) Calculated adsorption energies of a Ti3C2Tx MXene for NH3 and acetone molecules in comparison with other 2D materials. (g) Neural activity detection by a d-Ti3C2Tx-based FET device. (h) Transfer curve for the device. (i) Dopamine concentration response of the device. (Courtesy K. Hantanasirisakul et al.).201 
Lee et al. and Kim et al. fabricated Ti3C2Tx for sensing of volatile organic compounds (Fig. 19(d)).212,344 The study by Lee et al. indicated that the Ti3C2Tx gas sensing device could detect as little as 100 ppm of organic compound vapors, e.g., methanol, ethanol, NH3 and acetone, at RT. The lowest detection limit of 25 ppm was obtained for acetone, and the original resistance of the device was recovered after gas desorption except for NH3, showing strong bonding between Ti3C2Tx and the NH3 surface.212 Another observation of acetone detection was reported, with a detected value of 50 ppb at RT.64 In addition, Ti3C2Tx has been shown to be more sensitive to volatile organic vapors than acidic vapors such as SO2 and NO2, as shown in Fig. 19(e). In contrast to the work by Lee et al., where the gas sensor was more sensitive to NH3 than other gases, the sensor reported by Kim et al. provided the highest sensitivity for a 100 ppm concentration of ethanol with 1.7% vapor response.319 Furthermore, upon gas adsorption, the increase in resistance of the MXene was attributed to a decrease in the metal conductivity of the charge carriers. The DFT calculations indicated that the surface terminations of MXenes greatly affect the BEs of different gases with Ti3C2(OH)2, which shows the strongest bonding with both NH3 and acetone, as illustrated in Fig. 19(f). It is worth mentioning that increments in the resistance of the MXene after adsorption of gas were observed in both experiments, in comparison to DFT calculations.342 This is most probably due to the more metallic nature of the Ti3C2Tx used in the experiments in comparison to the semiconductor MXenes that are studied theoretically. One probable clarification of the increased device resistance with the adsorption of gas is the space increase between the MXene sheets which decreasing inner electron hopping deterioration. In gas sensing mechanisms, MXenes require additional investigation to clarify the interactions between the adsorbate molecules and MXenes. ML-MXenes may also be suitable for manufacturing high-performance gas detecting devices. MXenes are also applied in biological sensing. For example, a Ti3C2Tx-based FET was utilized for neural activity and dopamine detection, as illustrated in Fig. 19(g).345
Interestingly, this device demonstrated gate-dependent ambipolar characteristics (Fig. 19(h)), and the device conductivity was enhanced as the dopamine concentration increased; this is probably due to the dopamine hole-doping effect (Fig. 19(i)).201 The device provided wide detection ranges of dopamine concentration, from 1 × 10−7 to 2 × 10−3 M. In addition, MXenes have shown outstanding stability and bio-compatibility in neural motion measurements despite a predictably high F-factor on the surface. MXenes have also been utilized as substrates for other functional materials in sensing applications. For example, a stimuli-responsive poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) polymer was embedded in a V2CTx MXene. This composite was sensitive to temperature variation and CO2 adsorption.346 Hemoglobin immobilized on Ti3C2Tx particles was sensitive to H2O2 and nitrite.347,348 A glucose biosensor fabricated by immobilizing glucose oxidase dissolved in an Au/MXene nano-composite on Nafion can be utilized as a support material.349 A MXene/DNA/Pd/Pt nanocomposite showed high selectivity and sensitivity for dopamine sensing.350 Partially oxidized Ti3C2Tx thin films have shown photoactivity in the UV region because of TiO2 nanocrystals produced on MXene sheets.351 It is noteworthy that MXene-based sensors depend on changes in electrochemical, electrical, or optical properties with outside stimulus. Consequently, considering the effects and mechanisms of stimuli on the abovementioned MXene properties is a significant consideration for developing these sensors.
4.4.2.3. Optoelectronic property-based applications of 2D-carbide/nitride MXenes. 
Light–matter interaction in a system is called nonlinear optics, where materials nonlinearly react to an electromagnetic field. This is necessary in applications such as photonic devices, laser optics, and optical communication. The nonlinear optical properties of MXenes have been demonstrated.352–355 The Ti3C2Tx Z-scan measurement is the nonlinear light absorption (saturate absorption, SA) via the nonlinear increment in transmission with increasing luminance intensity. In general, the effective nonlinear absorption coefficient decreases with increasing luminance intensity in anticipation of the threshold intensity (Ith). The nonlinear absorption coefficient of Ti3C2Tx was found to be 10 to 21 m2 V−2, which suggests its potential utilization in optical switching.354 This performance is believed to originate from plasmon-induced ground state absorption when the Ti3C2Tx MXene is illuminated with a laser equal to its plasmon resonance frequency.352 This is evident from the imaginary component of the peak dielectric constant (ε2) and the real component (ε1) at wavelengths of 800 and 1130 nm, respectively, where the previous 800 nm corresponds to surface plasmon resonance and the aforementioned 1130 nm corresponds to free-carrier oscillation. Similar plasmonic performance was observed in an electron energy loss spectroscopic study.356 Fascinatingly, SA occurred at dissimilar wavelengths in the 800 to 1800 nm range, which signifies that there may be a number of mechanisms participating in the non-linear SA performance of Ti3C2Tx.354 For Ti3C2Tx, it was anticipated that one-photon process SA takes place at lower intensity, while multiple-photon SA takes place at higher intensity, and the other nonlinear SA processes were found to be the dominant mechanism above the Ith laser intensity.354 Due to the SA ability of MXenes, they can be utilized in ultrafast laser applications. For this purpose, MXene acts as a spectral filter that stimulates mode-lock laser pulses. Metallic Ti3C2Tx is used in fs mode-locked lasers.353,354 Ti3C2Tx produces stable mode-lock laser pulses through a 65 ns period and 660 fs sequential width.353 Analogous performance was obtained for Ti3C2Tx.354 The broadband wavelength produced by Ti3C2Tx in the 1550 to 1620 nm range covers the necessary telecommunication band (C-band), representing promise for communication applications. The nonlinear optical activity of MXenes is analogous to that of other 2D materials, such as TMDCs, BP and graphene.354 Moreover, it was shown that Ti3C2Tx with a 5 nm thickness is more elastic at high laser intensity than other 2D materials.352 When Ti3C2Tx was coupled with C60, a reverse SA material was obtained that behaved as an optical diode.357 The device can be utilized to filter optical signals with a high refinement ratio. Ti3C2Tx was also shown to produce an arbitrary laser effect; when sonicated in rhodamine 101 solution, it showed metamaterial behavior.201 The study of the nonlinear optical properties of MXenes is still young; however, to date, it has shown potential in numerous applications. The interaction of MXenes with light requires additional efficient research. The optoelectronic, photonic, and plasmonic properties of different MXenes are awaiting further investigation prior to their practical application.

4.5. 2D-LDH applications

4.5.1. 2D-LDHs as non-enzymatic electrochemical biosensors. 
Non-precious metals intercalated with LDH nanostructures with different morphologies, e.g., MnO2–MgAl LDHs359 and CuO–MnAl LDHs,360 have been synthesized through facile hydrothermal and co-precipitation methods and show applications in non-enzymatic H2O2 biosensing, with 5 μM and 0.126 μM detection limits in addition to wide linear ranges of 0.05 to 78 mM and 6 μM to 22 mM, respectively. In biological systems, H2O2 was measured by electrodeposited gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) on an ITO electrode modified with CoMn-LDH with a low sensing limit. The as-obtained results were also correlated with those of MgMn-LDHs or CoAl-LDHs, and it was inferred that the presence of a binary TM in the LDH layers results in multiple interactions and nanoscale interfusion cooperation between Au-NP and the CoMn-LDH support.361 Clinical diagnosis of diabetes involves exploring abnormalities in blood glucose levels due to malfunctioning pancreatic β cells; these cells are responsible for insulin generation, which controls the blood glucose levels in the body and metabolic disorders.362 Some lethal diseases, such as cardiac, renal, nervous, and ocular diseases, are directly connected with life-threateningly high blood glucose levels.363 The analytical performance of several recently reported LDH nanostructure-based electrochemical biosensors for H2O2 and glucose quantitative analysis was reviewed.364 LDHs are mostly studied as photocatalysts for water splitting applications; however, here, only FET-based sensors, electronic and optoelectronic devices are covered, so electrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications are beyond the scope of this discussion. To the best of our knowledge, electrocatalytic and photocatalytic applications of LDH materials in FET-based devices have not yet been discovered.


4.5.2. 2D-LDHs as FET devices. 
FETs were fabricated using LDH crystals as channels and by spreading microsheets of LDHs on SiO2/Si (Fig. 19(a)). In this fabrication process, first, the LDH crystals were covered with poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) by EBL; then, Au electrodes were formed by electron beam evaporation. The SEM results show a channel length and width of 1 and 8 μm, respectively (Fig. 20(b)). Fig. 20(c) shows that the typical output characteristics (Id–Vd) and the curves are strongly nonlinear, which is typical for semiconductor channels with SB at the contacts. The conductance of MgAl–CO3-LDH (Id = 43 nA)-based devices was higher than that of a ZnAl–CO3-LDH (Id = 0.4 nA)-based transistor at Vd = 50 V, which is due to the differences in the ionic radii and intralayer metal cation electronic structures and the dissimilar degrees of distortion of the MO6 octahedra in the 2D-LDH layers. Theoretically, it was estimated that the BE of ZnAl-LDH is higher than that of MgAl-LDH; thus, the MgAl-LDH host layers have lower carrier binding capacity. Fig. 20(d) shows the Id–Vg curve for Mg–Al–CO3-LDH; it displays a typical downward trend with increasing Vg, possibly because the LDH hole conductivity and charge carrier concentration in the channel are slightly overtuned and the gate voltage changes. The MgAl–CO3-LDH device carrier mobility365 was 1.07 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is analogous to that of a previously studied organic C60-based FET.366
 Fig. 20  (a and b) Fabricated FET device 3D scheme and SEM image. (c) Id–Vd curves of the MgAl–CO3-LDH and ZnAl–CO3-LDH microcrystal devices measured at Vg = 0 V. (d) Id–Vg curves of the MgAl–CO3-LDH device at a bias voltage Vd = 40 V. (Courtesy Y. Zhao et al.).365 
Furthermore, efforts have been made to calculate the characteristic output curves at various gate voltages; however, the devices do not allow enough current control to obtain a consistent output. In an earlier investigation, the electric conductivity of an LDH-based crystalline material was possibly affected by doped anions in the interlayer region.367 Due to this fact, a third LDH with a dissimilar interlayer, MgAl–NO3-LDH, was fabricated for additional electronic conductance comparison. The MgAl–NO3-LDH microcrystals were synthesized by reacting the already synthesized MgAl–CO3-LDHs with a salt-acid mixed solution; this provides a method to de-intercalate carbonate ions following ion exchange. The I–V curves showed that the electric conductivity of the NO3− LDHs-based device was enormously increased compared to that of CO3-LDHs. After studying their work, the properties of these two LDH materials were critically compared to determine the origin of their large differences in electrical conductance. The binding forces between NO3 and the host LDH layer (such as hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions) are much smaller than those between CO3 and LDH, as demonstrated by the dissimilar interlayer spacing between the LDH layers, which is important to the carrier mobility. The carrier mobility of the MgAl–NO3-LDH device was calculated to be 9.30 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. In addition, the electrical conductances of ZnAl–CO3-LDH and ZnAl–NO3-LDH were compared and illustrated, and a similar tendency to the carrier mobility was observed as 1.06 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.50 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Based on these outcomes, it is concluded that the LDH carrier transport properties can be engineered through modification of the interlayer species. This association is extremely important for electrical properties in other 2D materials because the ratio of the surface and bulk charges determines the tenability of the material in FET devices.41 When compared with 260 nm thick crystals, it was clear that LDH crystal conductance declined quickly with decreasing thickness. For example, at Vds = 30 V, the Ids of 15 nm thick LDH was about 6 times greater than that for 5 nm thick LDH, and it was about 900 times greater for 260 nm thick LDH compared to that for 5 nm thick LDH. This occurrence is also in accord with the conductance mechanism stated above, in which holes are the main carriers in the layers. The thinner LDH layers hold fewer carriers; therefore, the conductance is also smaller. Furthermore, the ultrathin LDH transfer characteristic curves were measured. The LDH crystal gate tenability decreased as the thickness decreased. This arises because the LDH nanosheets are ultrathin and the number of anions near the host layer is comparatively large, leading to strong binding forces between the host and carrier layers.366

5. 2D heterostructure material applications
5.1. 2D-TMDCs-based heterostructure approach
In 2D materials, the vdW interactions between layers and dangling free bonds permit their incorporation with other 2D materials, e.g., graphene, to fabricate a diversity of vertical and planar functional heterostructures with diverse properties. For a sample geometry, 2D layer semiconductors such as InSe,368 WS2,369 MoTe2,370 and graphene were utilized as light absorbing materials and both-side electrodes, respectively, to fabricate planar metal–semiconductor–metal-type phototransistors. In comparison to metal electrodes, graphene electrode has the benefit of modifying the SB between the 2D semiconductors and graphene via calculating the graphene EF. Ideal ohmic contact between the 2D semiconductor layer and graphene can be attained through SB tuning. High R values (4 × 103 W−1) and fast rise/fall times (1/10 ms) were observed in planar graphene/n-InSe/graphene vdW heterostructures.368 For a broad range equilibrium of applied gate voltages, electrons travel from graphene to n-InSe because of the higher WF of graphene, resulting in an accumulation layer at the graphene/n-InSe interface. This innovative device architecture provides high broadband spectral response and fast electrical speed. In another study, irregular reliance of R on different incident light intensities was observed in a graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructure device.369 In this device, in the off state, R increases directly with optical power because of an efficient photo-induced charge transfer process where electrons dwell in the graphene and holes in WS2. Conversely, in the on state (Vg = 30 V), as the optical power increases, R decreases. In the phototransistor in the on state, the photo-gating effect can decrease the contact resistance and increase the EF. As a consequence, the effect of graphene illumination is decreased; this causes diverse power dependence on R.
In device fabrication, photo-gating effects can be diminished by using a 2D semiconductor as a medium for light production, while graphene provides a conduction channel for carrier transfer and exchange. Heterostructure phototransistor graphene-MoS2 fabricated by mechanical exfoliation displayed high R values of 5 × 108 and 1 × 1010 A W−1 at 130 K and RT, respectively.371 Here, under illumination in ambient conditions, the photogenerated holes in MoS2 are trapped and the electrons are relocated to graphene through the gate electric field, resulting in high R. Conversely, the entrapped holes behave as local gates, conferring a considerable photo-gating effect on graphene via capacitive coupling. Ultimately, due to the long life of the trapped holes, the response time is slowed. An analogous phototransistor was fabricated with CVD-induced MoS2 and graphene.372 This hybrid heterostructure device demonstrated a comparatively low response of ∼1.2 × 107 A W−1 due to the low carrier mobility of CVD-graphene and its slow response time (several 100 s); however, it is suitable for practical applications due to its facile synthesis on a large scale. Graphene/TMDC heterostructures also displayed important photodiode-type functionalities. Modulation of the production, separation, and transport processes of EF carriers was demonstrated by adjusting the heights of graphene and SB in vertically arranged graphene/TMD/graphene heterostructures. For example, graphene/WS2/graphene stack heterostructures demonstrated competent light-matter interactions, leading to improved photon absorption and e–h production.373 Furthermore, an increment in R was observed from ∼102 to ∼1010 A W−1 upon assimilating plasmonic metal nanostructures and heterostructures, which can enhance the absorption of light. These results can be utilized to construct dual-gate-type graphene/WS2/graphene heterostructures to regulate the polarity and amplitude of the PC by regulating the direction and intensity of the intrinsic electric potential.374 A typical heterostructure with trilayer WSe2 (2.2 nm thick) in graphene/WSe2/graphene, illustrated in Fig. 21(a),375 shows a fast response of 5.5 ps and high internal QE of 70%, as shown in Fig. 21(b) and (c). The 7.3% EQE could be further improved via using optical cavities or plasmon nanostructures in TMD films to enhance light-matter interactions.
 Fig. 21  (a) Setup and heterostructure of a graphene/WSe2/graphene PC; (b) photocurrent between two pulses as a function of time; (c) IQE as a function of potential drop across the WSe2 layer (ΔV) for devices with 2.2, 7.4, and 28 nm conduit lengths; (d) top: optical image of a vdWs-assembled MoS2–graphene–WSe2-based device, bottom: heterostructure side view; (e) typical device R and specific directivity (D*) in the 400 to 2400 nm wavelength range in ambient atmosphere at Vg = 0 V and VDS = 1 V. (Courtesy M. Massicotte et al.).375 
Effective charge transfer occurs between graphene and ZnO-QDs, as illustrated in Fig. 22(a) and (b).376 In UV light, the electrons segregated from holes under photoexcitation are confined in the surface states to release absorbed O2 ions on ZnO QDs. The relatively long lifetime and unpaired electron transfer to the graphene layer followed by conveyance in the graphene conduit lead to modulation of the transport properties of graphene. When the UV irradiation is disconnected, the neighboring O2 re-adsorbs on the QD surface; thus, the electrons are trapped, decreasing the EF level and resulting in recovery of the graphene transport proprieties. This photogeneration effect leads to a high photoconductive gain of 107via further device optimization (Fig. 22(c)). Other semiconductor TMOs such as ZrO2377 are analogous to graphene/ZnO hybrid structures and have been studied as deep UV PDs consisting of ML graphene/Ga2O3 junctions, as shown in Fig. 22(d). At forward bias voltage, an important current increase was observed through deep-UV illumination (254 nm), as illustrated in Fig. 22(e). Fig. 22(f) shows a D* and R of 5.92 × 1013 Jones and 39.3 A W−1, respectively, compared to Ga2O3-based nanostructure PDs. The PD was stable and remained reproducible with repeated incorporation of Ga2O3379,380 into graphene to shape heterostructures for PD applications. In the ZrO2 QDs-graphene heterostructure, R was as high as 22 A W−1 at 254 nm deep-UV wavelength, and ZrO2 is a potential material for deep-UV detection applications.377 The maximum performance was measured at ∼220 nm, although almost no illumination with a wavelength longer than 280 nm was observed. The graphene/Ga2O3/graphene PD demonstrated notable properties and outstanding solar-blind UV photoluminescence, with fast 0.96/0.81 s fall/rise times and an Ilight/Idark ratio of 82.88 under 254 nm illumination.
 Fig. 22  (a) ZnO QD coating on a graphene device. (b) O2-assisted charge transfer mechanism. (i) Irradiation of photon energy greater than the QD BG, e–h pair generation; (ii) the holes are trapped in the surface states, leaving unpaired electrons. At the surface, the trapped holes will discharge O2 ions and desorb O2 molecules; (iii) electrons are transferred from QDs to the graphene layer; (iv) e–h pairs are not generated when the laser is turned off. The QDs re-adsorb O2 molecules and the remaining captured electrons to form O2 ions. (c) Excitation intensity. (d) Schematic of the MLG/-Ga2O3 PD. (e) I–V characteristics of the device under dark and 254 nm-light irradiation, where the inset shows the I–V characteristics on a logarithmic scale. (f) Multilayer graphene–Ga2O3 heterojunction R and detectivity PD as a function of bias voltage. (Courtesy D. Shin et al.).378 
5.2. 2D-LTMO-based heterostructure approach
A heterostructure approach was utilized by Fu et al., who fabricated a 2D netlike SnO2/ZnO heterostructure.381 It was observed that SnO2/ZnO can sense 10 ppb H2S gas at 100 °C; this is more sensitive than netlike SnO2 and ZnO homo-structures. In addition, Liu et al. examined the sensing properties of ultrathin ZnO nanosheets for ethanol.382 Although pure ZnO nanosheets previously demonstrated elevated ethanol detection, the nanosheets functionalized with CuO nanoparticles caused a twofold increase in the response time to ethanol vapor. The response and recovery curves for pristine ZnO, 2 min CuO–ZnO, 6 min CuO–ZnO, and 12 min CuO–ZnO NS samples upon exposure to 1 to 2000 ppm ethanol at Tw = 320 °C were obtained. The dynamic resistances of pure ZnO, 2 min CuO–ZnO, 6 min CuO–ZnO and 12 min CuO–ZnO NS samples were acheived to 20 ppm ethanol at a Tw of 320 °C.382
5.3. 2D layered halide perovskite-based heterostructure approach
2D metal-halide perovskites, in contrast to conventional 2D-based heterostructure materials, can form heterostructures by means of broad changes in chemical composition rather than preserving analogous crystal configurations. Therefore, a number of 2D crystals (e.g. metal nanosheets, graphene, and TMDCs) are promising to generate a considerable diversity of 2D perovskite heterostructures. For the development of an uncontaminated interface over a large 2D-material area, the mechanical assembly technique is attractive; however, its low production has significantly delayed its applications.383,384 Similar to the fabrication of pristine 2D perovskites, the PVD method is utilized for the controlled production of perovskite platelets on other 2D substrates. Niu et al. used different kinds of substrates, ranging from semimetallic to insulating materials, i.e., semimetallic graphene (Fig. 23(a)–(c)), semiconducting (MoS2) (Fig. 23(d)–(f)), and insulator (h-BN) (Fig. 23(g)–(i)), to fabricate CH3NH3PbI3 nanoplatelets to synthesize different 2D perovskite-based heterostructures.385 These vertical heterostructures were fabricated on a large scale and designed to illustrate higher activity based on the synergistic effect between enhanced edge engineering effectiveness and the high mobility of conventional 2D material charges. For example, a MAPbI3 film was grown on the surface of ML graphene, and EQE (5 × 104%) and high photoresponse (180 A W−1) resulted from the superior electron transfer from graphene to MAPbI3 and the decreasing e–h recombination under photoexcitation.386,387
 Fig. 23  2D perovskite-based PD design. (a) Design of the PD. (b) An example of 2D perovskite-based PDs along a mesa configuration BG. (c) Representative model. (d) A 2D perovskite-based PD band diagram with asymmetric metal contacts. (e) Representative diagram. (f) Typical 2D perovskite-based PDs with a vertical configuration band diagram. (g) Representative model. (h) PD scheme. (i) Schematic and BG diagram of 2D perovskite-based plasmon PDs. (j) Enhanced mechanism of a 2D perovskite microcavity PD. (k) Hybrid 2D perovskite-QD PD enhanced mechanism. (Courtesy X. Qi et al.).392 
A series of mixed halide perovskite heterostructures with halide-exchange reactions (MAPbBr3−xIx or MAPbBr3−xClx) with tunable BGs over a broad range (1.6 to 3.0 eV) showed potential for optoelectronic applications in a broad wavelength range.388 One fascinating case is the in-plane heterostructure consisting of CH3NH3PbBrxI3−x and CH3NH3PbI3, as illustrated in Fig. 23(j)–(l), in which diverse areas provide diverse wavelength emissions. Dou et al. used an anion exchange method to fabricate CsPbX3 nanowire heterostructures that showed competitive advantages, such as tunable optical properties and multicolor display.389 Motivated by the novel optoelectronic characteristics of diverse perovskite atom arrangements, materials with the same dimensional geometries can be utilized to generate mixed dimensional heterostructure geometries390,391 (2D–0D, 2D–1D, and 2D–3D), which is anticipated to be a novel example of nanoscale material incorporation and advancement of surprising applications.
5.4. 2D-MXene-based heterostructure approach
Baihai Li et al. studied a flexible 2D molecular bilayer heterostructure of asymmetric MXene/ML transition metal dichalcogenide (aMXene/mTMDC) with a high interfacial built-in electric field. In the bottom or top plane of the aMXene, the electronegative atoms of MXene were removed. The specific structural design of a MXene aims to achieve a high dipole moment perpendicular to the 2D molecular plane. However, the instability in the aMXene generated by un-passivated metal atoms can be overcome by electropositive coupling to the electronegative chalcogenide atoms in the aMXene/mTMDC bilayer. The precise composition of aMXene/mTMDC engineered through the dipole field is leveraged to provide unusual band alignment, structures, and charge injection/redistribution in the bilayer. Several aMXene/mTMDC bilayer designs with possible applications in microelectronics, optoelectronics, spintronics, and catalysis/photocatalysis have been shown.393
Yangfan Shao et al. studied the experimental synthesis of 2D MoS2-on-MXene heterostructures. Here, the mechanical, electronic, and electrochemical properties as well as the structural morphologies of MoS2@Ti2C and MoS2@Ti2CO2 heterostructures as anode materials for LIBs were systematically examined by taking advantage of vdW-corrected spin-polarized DFT to offer an atomistic approach. The results showed that for the MoS2@Ti2CO2 heterostructure, the MoS2 polymorph significantly influenced the electronic structure and Li diffusion at the interface. At the dT-MoS2@Ti2CO2 interface, the Li diffusion barrier along the zigzag direction (0.15 eV) is much smaller than that of H-MoS2@Ti2CO2 (0.67 eV). However, for the MoS2@Ti2C heterostructures, the Li diffusion performance and electronic structure are comparatively unaffected by the MoS2 morphology. Particularly, the MoS2@Ti2C heterostructures demonstrate an ultralow diffusion barrier, very low open-circuit voltage (0.62 to 0.25 V), high charge/discharge rates, and high mechanical flexibility. These outcomes suggest that MoS2@MXene heterostructures are potential anode materials in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 24).394
 Fig. 24  Proposed mechanism of H-MoS2@Ti2CO2 intercalation. (Courtesy Yangfan Shao et al.).394 
5.5. LDH-based heterostructure approach
Graphene has been incorporated into the LDH crystal lattice to overcome the semiconductor nature of LDH materials; in response, their conductance increases. For example, nickel iron LDH/graphene nanocomposites395 and NiCo LDH nanosheets/graphene nanoribbons396 were prepared by electrochemical deposition and co-precipitation, respectively, to increase their electro-oxidation ability. These modified electrodes exhibited high diffusion coefficients as electro-catalysts in addition to outstanding efficiencies in glucose electrochemical sensing. The arrangement of graphene QDs, CoNiAl-LDH397 and NiCo-LDH nanosheets was fabricated on carbon cloth398 by one-pot co-precipitation and directly tested for glucose electro-oxidation. The consequentially improved electrocatalytic performance of the non-enzymatic glucose sensor is due to the parallel effects of the carbon support and interrelated 3D structures with plentiful electrochemical active surfaces and fast charge transfer at the kinetic and nano-scale edges.399
5.6. OSC-based heterostructure approach
OSCs, including polymers and SMs, are very important in device applications because of their simple production from solution processes at low temperatures;400 moreover, OCSs are lightweight and inexpensive materials.401,402 In piezoelectric materials, graphene/P3HT heterostructures illustrated about 10 times greater R compared to a SiO2 substrate.403 This enhancement in light response was due to vertical field polarization along the piezoelectric substrate, which enables spatial segregation of photo-generated holes and electrons, thus increasing the light response of the graphene hole doping. For example, a graphene/pentacene heterostructure that offers a multifunctional PD for storing optical signals with nonvolatile memory (NVM) function is shown in Fig. 25(a) and (b). At 400 to 800 nm, the PD showed excellent photoresponse, with maximum specific D* and R of 1013 Jones and 700 A W−1, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 25(c). In the transfer characteristics, large hysteresis was observed, in which the Dirac point voltage was transferred in the direction of positive gate voltage in the dark and under illumination. Charge carrier trapping/detrapping occurs in the Au-NPs, which causes a hysteresis loop from tunneling via the ε layer. The PD also illustrated exceptional retention properties, with retention times of over 104 s and constant PC for more than 200 cycles (Fig. 25(e) and (f)). A stepwise increase in PC was observed as the optical power increased, showing multiple NVM.399 The establishment of MOS-FET technologies will soon face a major obstacle of decreasing the applied voltage and current leakage in high-efficiency devices. These obstacles are increasingly difficult to overcome in MOS-FET power consumption technologies. In MOS-FETs, the thermionic nature of the charge carriers also imposes a theoretical limit on how rapidly one can switch the device between Ion/Ioff conditions. As a consequence, device conceptions that are different from conventional MOS-FET technologies are the only option. 2D material exploration and advances in electronic devices provide a solution to address these limitations. Numerous efforts to resolve the speed and power obstacles have received outstanding consideration in the last few years, with a move toward materials based on layered materials and their exclusive properties. Valleytronic tunneling and memristor device structures are small advances that are being discovered, and the large effective mass of charge carriers and large BGs in TMDCs are main obstacles to attain large current densities. However, the enriched characteristic diversity of 2D materials and device designs demonstrate enormous promise in increasing current densities (Table 6).
 Fig. 25  (a) Structure of a graphene PD and Au-NP charge trapping layer device. The device comprises Au as the source/drain electrode, and ITO acts as an electrode; (b) graphene PD fabricated on a PEN substrate photographic image; (c) photodetectivity and photoresponsivity versus illumination; (d) |E2| 2D profile for hybrid PDs including and excluding Au NPs; (e) retention time; (f) graphene PD cycle tests with a memory function under a range of illumination. (Courtesy S. Jang et al.).399 
Table 6 2D heterostructure-based device applications




Heterojunction type
Layer structure
Application
Device performance
Ref




Semi-metal/semiconductor
Graphene/WS2/graphene/h-BN
Vertical FETs
ON/OFF ratio > 1 × 106

404



Graphene/MoS2
Vertical FETs
Current density 5000 A cm2 ON/OFF ratio > 103

405



Graphene/MoS2
Vertical FETs
Current density 104 A cm2 ON/OFF ratio 105

406



Graphene/h-BN/MoS2/graphene
FETs
Electron mobility 33 cm2 V−1 s−1, ON/OFF current ratio > 106

407



Graphene/h-BN/MoS2(WS2)/h-BN/graphene
Electroluminescence
Extrinsic quantum efficiency 10%

408



Graphene/MoS2/graphene
Photodetector
External quantum efficiency 55%, internal quantum efficiency 85%, photoresponsivity 0.22 A W−1

374



Graphene/WS2/graphene
Photodetector
External quantum efficiency 30% Photoresponsivity 0.1 A W−1

373



Graphene/MoS2
Photodetector
Photogain > 108 Internal quantum efficiency 15% Photoresponsivity > 107 A W−1

409



Semi-metal/insulator
Graphene/h-BN
FETs
Mobility 60 k cm2 V−1 s−1

410



h-BN/Gra./h-BN/Gra./h-BN; h-BN/Gra./MoS2/Gra./h-BN
Vertical FET
B/G/B/G/B: ON/OFF ratio 50, B/G/M/G/B: ON/OFF ratio 1 × 104

411



Graphene/h-BN/graphene
Thermoelectrical power
Seebeck coefficient 99.3 mV K−1, ZT = 1.05 × 106

412



Semiconductor/semiconductor
p-WSe2/n-WSe2
CMOS
Full logic swing voltage gain up to 38

76



WSe2/MoS2 p–n diode
Photodetector
Electroluminescence, current rectification factor 1.2, external quantum efficiency 12%

413



Black phosphorus/MoS2
p–n diode Photodetector
Current rectification factor 105, external quantum efficiency 0.3%, photoresponsivity 418 mA W−1

414



MoS2/p-Ge
Band-to-band tunneling FET
Sub-threshold swing minimum of 3.9 mV per decade, average 31.1 mV per decade

415



Semiconductor/insulator
MoS2/h-BN/graphene
FETs
Mobility > 45 cm2 V−1 s−1 ON/OFF ratio 104 to 106

416





6. 2D-material-based device challenges
Since the discovery of graphene (2004), the 2D material world has entered its “teenage years,” particularly in the fast-growing research areas of chemistry, condensed matter physics, material science, and nanotechnology. The development of 2D layered materials is ambitious; however, their applications are promising. 2D-material-based manufactured devices include high quality, high performance optical encoders for a multitude of industries and applications. Through BG engineering, zero BG 2D materials are potential candidates for electronic devices, and their stability issues have mostly been addressed by functionalization; however, some issues remain to be solved. Therefore, heterostructure approaches in 2D materials are also utilized because of their mixed properties; hence, the BGs are broadened in different required ranges. Heterostructure approaches have been found to be very helpful to improve the efficiency of electronic devices. Graphene as a contact has unlocked electrostatic tuning possibilities to decrease the distinction between the electron affinity of the semiconductive channels and the effective WF of the contacts, which ultimately decreases the device Rc. Both Si and OSCs usually have electronic conduction of less than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is very small. The stability problem can be overcome by functionalization of 2D materials, and stable 2D-semiconducting materials with suitable BGs can be applied in transistor technology, which can be used in electronics, optoelectronics and sensing applications.
Although 2D materials should be available for consumer-feasible products, consistent, more cost-efficient methods need to be developed. It should be noted that the major challenges to resolve for 2D materials to attain market growth include (1) large production, especially roll-to-roll manufacturing, (2) repeatable and reliable fabrication methods, (3) low Rc, and (4) 2D-material-based precise characterization techniques. It is evident that one key to a favorable outcome is the capability to prepare 2D materials at the wafer level. In this way, it will be possible to create large amounts of 2D devices for fabrication and decrease the product cost. To date, wafer-scale deposition techniques have been developed for graphene, WS2 and MoS2. The second obstacle is progress of repeatable and reliable fabrication procedures. Fabrication processes involve transfer, etching, doping and deposition of dielectrics. Due to the novelty of 2D materials, novel methods are required to be developed to decrease impurities due to transfer, selectively exfoliate a variety of 2D materials, avoid defect configuration, and avoid oxidation, stability issues, and alternative doping of materials. 2D materials may have thicknesses of one or more atom, and Rc has been established to be a major problem. Development processes are needed to decrease the effects of the contacts by means of EF; doping and pinning of 2D materials may be applicable.
Although 2D-material-based devices have been created through exfoliation from their bulk counterparts utilizing diverse techniques, manufacturing procedures with ‘on-demand’ tuning of electronic and structural properties have not yet been completely achieved. Development of large area, high-quality, and single-crystal 2D materials are needed for real application of 2D-material-based technologies and for high-volume manufacturing; this may be one of the most demanding tasks. At the atomic level, the control of layered material synthesis related to surface science and defect control should be comprehended at a level far above those explored in other multi-component material classifications. Another way to overcome the limitations of 2D material device applications is the fabrication of devices based on heterostructures. Atomically thin 2D materials offer a broad range of basic building blocks with exceptional, optical, electrical, and thermal properties that do not exist in their bulk counterparts. Interlayer vdW interactions provide the opportunity to exfoliate and reconstruct diverse 2D materials into randomly and vertically stacked heterostructures. Currently, vapor phase methods for 2D materials are being developed, providing another direction for directly manufacturing lateral and vertical heterojunctions. The variety of 2D-material-based heterostructures will open a novel research field, and BG engineering through heterostructure configuration offers the opportunity to develop novel devices with required properties and potential energy applications. It is predictable that advancement in 2D material growth, heterostructure configuration and device fabrication shall show the way for future real applications. To date, researchers have only scratched the surface of 2D material development, and time will enlighten where the field will advance.
For great utilization of the novel properties of 2D materials, it is essential to expand new characterization techniques to synthesize and investigate 2D materials. For the thickness of 2D materials, regular techniques such as SEM and TEM are used to illustrate and adjust the 2D materials. There are also detection problems for other techniques because of the minimum material quantity available for characterization. It is expected that with patience and time, these problems will be solved. At the same time, researchers will continue to push forward with the examination of novel 2D materials. Through research findings, we should produce a master chart of 2D materials detailing their properties and possible applications and decide how they can be utilized in combination with one another to shape functional devices. In addition, the layer stacking and heterostructure construction master chart will be enlarged to explain the stacking effects on each layer and include novel composite devices by means of engineered BG properties. At present, the elementary comprehension of 2D materials is entering the limelight, based on a quick search of their use in electronic devices. It is undeniable that rapid advancement in these applications is valuable; however, it may not be totally carried out on the basis of basic scientific understanding, but in the future will lead to much smarter and more efficient methods for harnessing 2D materials. Currently, it is necessary to establish stable key properties of how unique, tunable electronic structures based on 2D materials can be utilized in mature industrial-based electronic devices. Looking forward, 2D material synthesis methods are needed to control the transition from fundamental outcomes to large scale technologies. At the same time, the high-quality crystals synthesized through ME will continue to be crucial in elementary research; LPE and CVD possess immense promise for applications. It is clear that surmounting the shortcomings that hinder future inventions could bring about a novel era of 2D material tunable electrochemical devices and their heterostructures with enormously increased surface-to-mass ratios and apparently infinite functionalities.
Even after obtaining required 2D layer materials by suitably inexpensive and facile synthesis techniques and studying them with emerging highly precise modern characterization techniques, still there is another problem related to the conversion of these layer materials to devices, i.e., the contact between the 2D materials and metals. Hence, this critical point for electronic device manufacturing through contact between metals and 2D-Ms requires ohmic contact with low resistance to comply with the performance requirements of the ITRS (total parasitic series source–drain resistance of ∼130 Ω μm) because a high parasitic resistance restricts the general device performance. Much effort has been devoted to the development of contact resistance between metals and 2D materials, with surface contamination being one of the major causes of high contact resistance. Numerous attempts have been carried out to decrease graphene surface contamination, such as through utilizing elevated temperature vacuum annealing or surface treatments with ozone or O2 plasma, in which the contact in the presence of O2 plasma is made on a clean surface while the edge contact suffers from defects. A substitute route for 2D material-metal contacts that avoids surface contamination is the utilization of a pristine edge contact with graphene (i.e., 1D electrical contacts with 2D materials). For 2D materials that have BGs, the contact should be a metal with an appropriate work function in order to prevent the development of a Schottky barrier. Hence, if we are able to overcome all these limitations, we can enable omnipresent electronics in windows, walls or fabrics, and 2D materials will generate a totally new marketplace for electronic commerce rather than contending with or demanding to replace present well-established technologies to offer higher performance. Scientists around the globe at the academic and industrial levels are working on this task and agree that this is most likely an easier path towards the first utilization of this truly incredible material family.
7. Conclusion
More than a decade after the discovery of graphene, the world of 2D materials is reaching its “teenage years”, especially in fast-developing condensed matter physics, material science, and nanotechnology research. The emerging field of 2D materials provides the optical community with many exciting new opportunities for exploration of science and technologies across a very wide electromagnetic spectral range; however, these materials have some limitations. In this review, we also review the current progress in the applications of 2D heterostructures. The various heterostructures based on 2D materials open a new research field, and band structure engineering by heterostructure formation provides a possibility to develop novel devices with desired properties and potential energy applications. It is anticipated that further progress in 2D material growth, heterostructure formation and device fabrication shall lead to further practical applications on an economical level in the future. Therefore, it is time to introduce more facile large-scale synthesis methods and further advance our understanding of exploring new properties of 2D materials and their heterostructures to further identify their most promising applications in industrial electronic devices. We hope that this review will serve as a guide to those exploring the electronic and optical properties of 2D materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Photodetectors Based on Two-Dimensional Layered Materials Beyond Graphene, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
P. Wan, 
            et al., Flexible Transparent Films Based on Nanocomposite Networks of Polyaniline and Carbon Nanotubes for High-Performance Gas Sensing, Small, 2015, 11, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Dhanabalan, 
            et al., Emerging trends in phosphorene fabrication towards next generation devices, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600305 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, 
            et al., Flexible transparent electronic gas sensors, Small, 2016, 12, 3748–3756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, 
            et al., Environmentally Robust Black Phosphorus Nanosheets in Solution: Application for Self-Powered Photodetector, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606834 CrossRef .
R. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, Electrochemical analysis graphite/electrolyte interface in lithium-ion batteries: p-Toluenesulfonyl isocyanate as electrolyte additive, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. K. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of cationic doped [Ca24Al28O64]4+(4e−) composite via rapid citrate sol–gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(11), 3819–3830 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, J. Li, U. Khan, A. Nairan, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang, M. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of tin-doped mayenite electride compositeas a non-noble metal, durable electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(38), 13498–13506 RSC .
S. Chen, J. Duan, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, N-doped graphene film-confined nickel nanoparticles as a highly efficient three-dimensional oxygen evolution electrocatalyst, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3693–3699 RSC .
H. Mu, 
            et al., Graphene–Bi2Te3 heterostructure as saturable absorber for short pulse generation, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
F. Torrisi and J. N. Coleman, Electrifying inks with 2D materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bao, 
            et al., Band Structure Engineering in 2D Materials for Optoelectronic Applications, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800072 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, A comprehensive review on synthesis of pristine and doped inorganic room temperature stable mayenite electride, [Ca24Al28O64]4+(e−)4 and its applications as a catalyst, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 54, 1–19 CrossRef .
J. Li, 
            et al., Black phosphorus: a two-dimension saturable absorption material for mid-infrared Q-switched and mode-locked fiber lasers, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, 
            et al., Black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Guan, D. Liu and D. Tománek, Designing isoelectronic counterparts to layered group V semiconductors, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8284–8290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coleman, H. Goldwhite and W. Tikkanen, A review of intercalation in heavy metal iodides, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2794–2800 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, 
            et al., Generalized self-assembly of scalable two-dimensional transition metal oxide nanosheets, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ida, 
            et al., Photoluminescence of perovskite nanosheets prepared by exfoliation of layered oxides, K2Ln2Ti3O10, KLnNb2O7, and RbLnTa2O7 (Ln: lanthanide ion), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7052–7059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, 
            et al., Heteroepitaxial growth of two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride templated by graphene edges, Science, 2014, 343, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Graphitic carbon nitride “reloaded”:
emerging applications beyond (photo) catalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
C. E. Boott, A. Nazemi and I. Manners, Synthetic Covalent and Non-Covalent 2D Materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13876–13894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, 25th anniversary article: MXenes: a new family of two-dimensional materials, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L.-P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Omnipotent phosphorene: a next-generation, two-dimensional nanoplatform for multidisciplinary biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(15), 5588–5601 RSC .
Q. Bao, 
            et al., Broadband graphene polarizer, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tao, 
            et al., Emerging two-dimensional monoelemental materials (Xenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Recent advances in two-dimensional materials and their nanocomposites in sustainable energy conversion applications, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(45), 21622–21678 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Going green with batteries and supercapacitor: Two dimensional materials and their nanocomposites based energy storage applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2019, 100254 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Q. Khan, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, A. S. Saleemi, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Zhang and Z. Ouyang, Novel Two-Dimensional Carbon–Chromium Nitride-Based Composite as an Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 738 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wu and Y. J. Song, The environmental stability of large-size and single-crystalline antimony flakes grown by chemical vapor deposition on SiO 2 substrates, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9671–9674 RSC .
S. Bagheri, N. Mansouri and E. Aghaie, Phosphorene: a new competitor for graphene, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4085–4095 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Gao and J. Zhao, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 012007 Search PubMed  , IOP Publishing, 2007.
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Atomically thin group V elemental films: theoretical investigations of antimonene allotropes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Nourbakhsh, et al., Beyond-CMOS Technologies for Next Generation Computer Design, Springer,  2019, pp. 43–84 Search PubMed .
R. Frindt, Single crystals of MoS2 several molecular layers thick, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 1928–1929 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, M. B. Whitwick and A. Kis, Integrated circuits and logic operations based on single-layer MoS2, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9934–9938 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fivaz and E. Mooser, Electron–phonon interaction in semiconducting layer structures, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136, A833 CrossRef .
R. Fivaz and E. Mooser, Mobility of charge carriers in semiconducting layer structures, Phys. Rev., 1967, 163, 743 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, 
            et al., Progress, challenges, and opportunities in two-dimensional materials beyond graphene, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, i. V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Single-layer MoS2 transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kappera, 
            et al., Phase-engineered low-resistance contacts for ultrathin MoS2 transistors, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Yoshida, R. Suzuki and Y. Iwasa, 2D crystals of transition metal dichalcogenide and their iontronic functionalities, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 044004 CrossRef .
M. Bernardi, C. Ataca, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Optical and electronic properties of two-dimensional layered materials, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 479–493 Search PubMed .
K. Kaasbjerg, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phonon-limited mobility in n-type single-layer MoS2 from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115317 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, 
            et al., Realization of Room-Temperature Phonon-Limited Carrier Transport in Monolayer MoS2 by Dielectric and Carrier Screening, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 547–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, H.-Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, High performance multilayer MoS2 transistors with scandium contacts, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 100–105 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. D. Retamal, D. Periyanagounder, J.-J. Ke, M.-L. Tsai and J.-H. He, Charge carrier injection and transport engineering in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 7727–7745 RSC .
J. A. Wilson, F. Di Salvo and S. Mahajan, Charge-density waves and superlattices in the metallic layered transition metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Phys., 1975, 24, 117–201 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. Yoffe, The transition metal dichalcogenides discussion and interpretation of the observed optical, electrical and structural properties, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Graphene-like two-dimensional materials, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wilson, F. Di Salvo and S. Mahajan, Charge-density waves and superlattices in the metallic layered transition metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1171–1248 CrossRef .

          A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Phase-engineered low-resistance contacts for ultrathin MoS2 transistors,  2014 Search PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Emerging device applications for semiconducting two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1102–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fiori, 
            et al., Electronics based on two-dimensional materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Komsa, 
            et al., Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides under electron irradiation: defect production and doping, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 035503 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tongay, 
            et al., Monolayer behaviour in bulk ReS2 due to electronic and vibrational decoupling, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3252 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, 
            et al., Single-layer MoS2 phototransistors, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 74–80 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, 
            et al., Gate-tunable phase transitions in thin flakes of 1T-TaS2, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 270 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Bhimanapati, 
            et al., Recent advances in two-dimensional materials beyond graphene, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, 
            et al., High-mobility three-atom-thick semiconducting films with wafer-scale homogeneity, Nature, 2015, 520, 656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Atomically thin MoS2: a new direct-gap semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Koppens, 
            et al., Photodetectors based on graphene, other two-dimensional materials and hybrid systems, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lui, 
            et al., Trion-induced negative photoconductivity
in monolayer MoS2, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 166801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Liquid exfoliation of layered materials, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, Chemically tailoring semiconducting two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and black phosphorus, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bandurin, 
            et al., High electron mobility, quantum Hall effect and anomalous optical response in atomically thin InSe, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Jung, 
            et al., Red-to-ultraviolet emission tuning of two-dimensional gallium sulfide/selenide, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9585–9593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Ahn, 
            et al., Deterministic two-dimensional polymorphism growth of hexagonal n-type SnS2 and orthorhombic p-type SnS crystals, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3703–3708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bansil, H. Lin and T. Das, Colloquium: Topological band theory, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2016, 88, 021004 CrossRef .
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Electronic transport properties of transition metal dichalcogenide field-effect devices: surface and interface effects, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7715–7736 RSC .
A. Allain, J. Kang, K. Banerjee and A. Kis, Electrical contacts to two-dimensional semiconductors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, 
            et al., Fermi level pinning at electrical metal contacts of monolayer molybdenum dichalcogenides, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1588–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, 
            et al., Towards intrinsic charge transport in monolayer molybdenum disulfide by defect and interface engineering, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, 
            et al., Interface Engineering for High-Performance Top-Gated MoS2 Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamamoto, S. T. Wang, M. Ni, Y.-F. Lin, S.-L. Li, S. Aikawa, W.-B. Jian, K. Ueno, K. Wakabayashi and K. Tsukagoshi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, D. Liu and J. Robertson, Chalcogen vacancies in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides and Fermi level pinning at contacts, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173106 CrossRef .
R. W. Keyes, The electrical properties of black phosphorus, Phys. Rev., 1953, 92, 580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, 
            et al., Band-like transport in high mobility unencapsulated single-layer MoS2 transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 173107 CrossRef .
S. Das and J. Appenzeller, Where does the current flow in two-dimensional layered systems?, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3396–3402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma and D. Jena, Charge scattering and mobility in atomically thin semiconductors, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 011043 Search PubMed .
M. L. Trolle, T. G. Pedersen and V. Véniard, Model dielectric function for 2D semiconductors including substrate screening, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 39844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Scholz, T. Stauber and J. Schliemann, Plasmons and screening in a monolayer of MoS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 035135 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, 
            et al., Dielectric screening of excitons and trions in single-layer MoS2, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5569–5576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ma and D. Jena, Carrier statistics and quantum capacitance effects on mobility extraction in two-dimensional crystal semiconductor field-effect transistors, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 015003 CrossRef .
A. Kuc and T. Heine, The electronic structure calculations of two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides in the presence of external electric and magnetic fields, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2603–2614 RSC .

          B. K. Ridley, Quantum processes in semiconductors, Oxford University Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
W. Bao, X. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, High mobility ambipolar MoS2 field-effect transistors: Substrate and dielectric effects, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042104 CrossRef .
S. Ghatak, A. N. Pal and A. Ghosh, Nature of electronic states in atomically thin MoS2 field-effect transistors, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7707–7712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, 
            et al., Ultra-high mobility transparent organic thin film transistors grown by an off-centre spin-coating method, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, 
            et al., High-mobility and low-power thin-film transistors based on multilayer MoS2 crystals, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, ncomms2018 Search PubMed .
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Intrinsic electronic transport properties of high-quality monolayer and bilayer MoS2, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4212–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Mobility engineering and a metal–insulator transition in monolayer MoS2, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Ong and M. V. Fischetti, Mobility enhancement and temperature dependence in top-gated single-layer MoS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 165316 CrossRef .
M. Poljak, V. Jovanovic, D. Grgec and T. Suligoj, Assessment of electron mobility in ultrathin-body InGaAs-on-insulator MOSFETs using physics-based modeling, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2012, 59, 1636–1643 CAS .
I. S. Kim, 
            et al., Influence of stoichiometry on the optical and electrical properties of chemical vapor deposition derived MoS2, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10551–10558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Barquinha, L. Pereira, G. Goncalves, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, Toward high-performance amorphous GIZO TFTs, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, H161–H168 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Sangwan, 
            et al., Fundamental performance limits of carbon nanotube thin-film transistors achieved using hybrid molecular dielectrics, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7480–7488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Omomo, T. Sasaki, L. Wang and M. Watanabe, Redoxable nanosheet crystallites of MnO2 derived via delamination of a layered manganese oxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3568–3575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sasaki and M. Watanabe, Osmotic swelling to exfoliation. Exceptionally high degrees of hydration of a layered titanate, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 4682–4689 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, Macromolecule-like aspects for a colloidal suspension of an exfoliated titanate. Pairwise association of nanosheets and dynamic reassembling process initiated from it, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Two-dimensional dielectric nanosheets: novel nanoelectronics from nanocrystal building blocks, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 210–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Kim, Y. K. Jo, J. M. Lee, L. Wang and S.-J. Hwang, Unique advantages of exfoliated 2D nanosheets for tailoring the functionalities of nanocomposites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4149–4161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sennu, H. S. Kim, J. Y. An, V. Aravindan and Y. S. Lee, Synthesis of 2D/2D Structured Mesoporous Co3O4 Nanosheet/N-Doped Reduced Graphene Oxide Composites as a Highly Stable Negative Electrode for Lithium Battery Applications, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 1776–1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ida, Y. Okamoto, M. Matsuka, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, Preparation of Tantalum-Based Oxynitride Nanosheets by Exfoliation of a Layered Oxynitride, CsCa2Ta3O10−xNy, and Their Photocatalytic Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15773–15782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reid, W. Mumme and A. Wadsley, A new class of compound Mx + Ax3+ Ti2−xO4 (0.60< x< 0.80) typified by RbxMnxTi2−xO4, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1968, 24, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Kim, S. Salim, M. J. Huq and T. E. Mallouk, Visible-light photolysis
of hydrogen iodide using sensitized layered semiconductor particles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 9561–9563 CrossRef CAS .
V. Patake and C. Lokhande, Chemical synthesis of nano-porous ruthenium oxide (RuO2) thin films for supercapacitor application, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2820–2824 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, I. Nakai, Y. Ebina, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Colloidal unilamellar layers of tantalum oxide with open channels, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4787–4789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, 
            et al., Scalable salt-templated synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal oxides, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rostami, A. G. Moghaddam and R. Asgari, Spin relaxation and the Kondo effect in transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 505002 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, 
            et al., Two dimensional and layered transition metal oxides, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Exfoliated oxide nanosheets: new solution to nanoelectronics, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2503–2511 RSC .
T. Sasaki and M. Watanabe, Semiconductor nanosheet crystallites of quasi-TiO2 and their optical properties, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10159–10161 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. Tarascon, Nano-sized transition-metal oxides as negative-electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Walia, 
            et al., Transition metal oxides-Thermoelectric properties, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1443–1489 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Oxygen vacancies in transition metal and rare earth oxides: Current state of understanding and remaining challenges, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219–270 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-Zadeh, 
            et al., Synthesis of nanometre-thick MoO3 sheets, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 429–433 RSC .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, 
            et al., Synthesis of atomically thin WO3 sheets from hydrated tungsten trioxide, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5660–5666 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, 
            et al., Synthesis of two-dimensional β-Ga2O3 nanosheets for high-performance solar blind photodetectors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3254–3259 RSC .
G. Terán-Escobar, J. Pampel, J. M. Caicedo and M. Lira-Cantú, Low-temperature, solution-processed, layered V2O5 hydrate as the hole-transport layer for stable organic solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3088–3098 RSC .
J.-Y. Kim, I. Chung, J.-H. Choy and G.-S. Park, Macromolecular nanoplatelet of aurivillius-type layered Perovskite oxide, Bi4Ti3O12, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2759–2761 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Ozawa, 
            et al., Enhancement of host excitation-mediated photoluminescence and preferential quenching of direct photoactivator excitation-mediated photoluminescence by exfoliation of layered KLa0.90Sm0.05Nb2O7 into La0.90Sm0.05Nb2O7 nanosheets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8735–8742 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Self-assembly of tiled perovskite monolayer and multilayer thin films, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2513–2516 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, 
            et al., Ultrathin two-dimensional MnO2/graphene hybrid nanostructures for high-performance, flexible planar supercapacitors, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takada, 
            et al., Superconductivity in two-dimensional CoO2 layers, Nature, 2003, 422, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, W. Zhu, Y. Ran, N. Nagaosa and S. Okamoto, Interface engineering of quantum Hall effects in digital transition metal oxide heterostructures, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 596 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Nagaraju, Q. Wang, P. Beaujuge and H. N. Alshareef, Two-dimensional heterostructures of V2O5 and reduced graphene oxide as electrodes for high energy density asymmetric supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17146–17152 RSC .
D. Jena and A. Konar, Enhancement of carrier mobility in semiconductor nanostructures by dielectric engineering, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ritter, W. Ranke and W. Weiss, Growth and structure of ultrathin FeO films on Pt (111) studied by STM and LEED, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 7240 CrossRef CAS .
T. Franz, 
            et al., Deformed surface oxides: uncommon structure of a (6 × 1) NiO surface oxide on Rh (111), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 186–190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoiswohl, S. Surnev, F. Netzer and G. Kresse, Vanadium oxide nanostructures: from zero-to three-dimensional, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, R1 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barcaro, 
            et al., Structure of reduced ultrathin TiOx polar films on Pt (111), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5721–5729 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, 
            et al., Study on electrical defects level in single layer two-dimensional Ta2O5, Chin. Phys. B, 2016, 25, 047304 CrossRef .
L. Giordano, 
            et al., Oxygen-induced transformations of an FeO (111) film on Pt (111): a combined DFT and STM study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21504–21509 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hinterding and A. Feldhoff, Two-Dimensional Oxides: Recent Progress in Nanosheets, Z. Phys. Chem., 2018, 233, 117–165 Search PubMed .
J. Schoiswohl, 
            et al., Reduction of vanadium-oxide monolayer structures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 165437 CrossRef .
M. Denk, 
            et al., Metal tungstates at the ultimate two-dimensional limit: fabrication of a CuWO4 nanophase, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3947–3954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pomp, 
            et al., Two-dimensional iron tungstate: A ternary oxide layer with honeycomb geometry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7629–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Wandelt, Encyclopedia of Interfacial Chemistry: Surface Science and Electrochemistry, Elsevier,  2018 Search PubMed .
F. Li, 
            et al., Two-dimensional manganese oxide nanolayers on Pd (100): the surface phase diagram, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 134008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Khan, 
            et al., High mobility 2-dimensional electron gas at LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface prepared by spin coating chemical methods, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 435701 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Gu, J. Ye, S. M. Huang, R. Gu, B. Chen, S. Zhu and Y. Zheng, Two-dimensional electron Gas in ZnMgO/ZnO heterostructures, Acta Phys. Sin., 2011, 99(21), 1372 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., Observation of conducting filament growth in nanoscale resistive memories, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 732 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, 
            et al., Resistive Switching and Magnetic Modulation in Cobalt-Doped ZnO, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3515–3520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Memristive devices for computing, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haghiri-Gosnet, T. Arnal, R. Soulimane, M. Koubaa and J. Renard, Spintronics: perspectives for the half-metallic oxides, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1392–1397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyazaki and N. Tezuka, Giant magnetic tunneling effect in Fe/Al2O3/Fe junction, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1995, 139, L231–L234 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moodera, L. R. Kinder, T. M. Wong and R. Meservey, Large magnetoresistance at room temperature in ferromagnetic thin film tunnel junctions, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 3273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, X. Li and G. Xiao, Inverse magnetoresistance in chromium-dioxide-based magnetic tunnel junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1894–1896 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dörr, Ferromagnetic manganites: spin-polarized conduction versus competing interactions, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, R125 CrossRef .
R. von Helmolt, J. Wecker, B. Holzapfel, L. Schultz and K. Samwer, Giant negative magnetoresistance in perovskitelike La2/3 Ba1/3MnOx ferromagnetic films, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Jo, N. Mathur, N. Todd and M. Blamire, Very large magnetoresistance and coherent switching in half-metallic manganite tunnel junctions, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, R14905 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Ogale, Dilute doping, defects, and ferromagnetism in metal oxide systems, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3125–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bibes, J. E. Villegas and A. Barthelemy, Ultrathin oxide films and interfaces for electronics and spintronics, Adv. Phys., 2011, 60, 5–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rodrıguez Contreras, 
            et al., Resistive switching in metal-ferroelectric-metal junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4595–4597 CrossRef .
J. Kanamori, Superexchange interaction and symmetry properties of electron orbitals, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1959, 10, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Subramanian, C. Varma, G. Lawes and A. Ramirez, Magnetodielectric Effects from Spin Fluctuations in Isostructural Ferromagnetic and Antiferromagnetic Systems,  2003 Search PubMed .
E. Lundgren, 
            et al., Two-dimensional oxide on Pd (111), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 246103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Carlisle, D. King, M.-L. Bocquet, J. Cerdá and P. Sautet, Imaging the surface and the interface atoms of an oxide film on Ag{111} by scanning tunneling microscopy: Experiment and theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gustafson, 
            et al., Self-limited growth of a thin oxide layer on Rh (111), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 126102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tao, T. Luttrell and M. Batzill, A two-dimensional phase of TiO2 with a reduced bandgap, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yaffe, 
            et al., Excitons in ultrathin organic–inorganic perovskite crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045414 CrossRef .
L. Dou, 
            et al., Atomically thin two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, 
            et al., Variable temperature and high-pressure crystal chemistry of perovskite formamidinium lead iodide: a single crystal X-ray diffraction and computational study, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7537–7540 RSC .
M. A. McGuire, H. Dixit, V. R. Cooper and B. C. Sales, Coupling of crystal structure and magnetism in the layered, ferromagnetic insulator CrI3, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 612–620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Thomas, G. Jezequel and I. Pollini, Optical properties of layered transition-metal halides, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1990, 2, 5439 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, 
            et al., Visualization and Studies of Ion-Diffusion Kinetics in Cesium Lead Bromide Perovskite Nanowires, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1807–1813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J.-C. Blancon, et al., Unusual thickness dependence of exciton characteristics in 2D perovskite quantum wells, 2017, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1710.07653.
X. Gong, O. Voznyy, A. Jain, W. Liu, R. Sabatini, Z. Piontkowski, G. Walters, G. Bappi, S. Nokhrin and O. Bushuyev, Electron–phonon interaction in efficient perovskite blue emitters, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 550–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, A layered hybrid perovskite solar-cell absorber with enhanced moisture stability, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, 
            et al., Light-induced lattice expansion leads to high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, Science, 2018, 360, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Weidman, M. Seitz, S. D. Stranks and W. A. Tisdale, Highly tunable colloidal perovskite nanoplatelets through variable cation, metal, and halide composition, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7830–7839 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Y. Shu, Y. Xin and B. Ma, Highly luminescent nanoscale quasi-2D layered lead bromide perovskites with tunable emissions, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3887–3890 RSC .
W. Niu, A. Eiden, G. Vijaya Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, Exfoliation of self-assembled 2D organic–inorganic perovskite semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 171111 CrossRef .
D. Liang, 
            et al., Color-pure violet-light-emitting diodes based on layered lead halide perovskite nanoplates, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6897–6904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage. Nature Reviews, Materials, 2017, 2, 16098 CAS .
Y. Fu, 
            et al., Multicolor Heterostructures of Two-Dimensional Layered Halide Perovskites that Show Interlayer Energy Transfer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15675–15683 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, 
            et al., Recent advances in ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Blancon, 
            et al., Extremely efficient internal exciton dissociation through edge states in layered 2D perovskites, Science, 2017, 355, 1288–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, 
            et al., Generalized Self-Doping Engineering towards Ultrathin and Large-Sized Two-Dimensional Homologous Perovskites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14893–14897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Chu, F. Zhou, W. Ji and G. Eda, Excitonic properties of chemically synthesized 2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite nanosheets, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704055 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mounet, 
            et al., Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computational exfoliation of experimentally known compounds, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, 
            et al., Ultrathin two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite nanosheets with bright, tunable photoluminescence and high stability, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 4316–4319 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, 
            et al., van der Waals Hybrid Perovskite of High Optical Quality by Chemical Vapor Deposition, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700373 CrossRef .
V. A. Hintermayr, 
            et al., Tuning the Optical Properties of Perovskite Nanoplatelets through Composition and Thickness by Ligand-Assisted Exfoliation, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9478–9485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, 
            et al., Solution synthesis approach to colloidal cesium lead halide perovskite nanoplatelets with monolayer-level thickness control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Highly luminescent colloidal nanoplates of perovskite cesium lead halide and their oriented assemblies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lv, 
            et al., Generalized colloidal synthesis of high-quality, two-dimensional cesium lead halide perovskite nanosheets and their applications in photodetectors, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13589–13596 RSC .
J. Song, 
            et al., Monolayer and Few-Layer All-Inorganic Perovskites as a New Family of Two-Dimensional Semiconductors for Printable Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shamsi, 
            et al., Colloidal synthesis of quantum confined single crystal CsPbBr3 nanosheets with lateral size control up to the micrometer range, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7240–7243 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, 
            et al., High-quality whispering-gallery-mode lasing from cesium lead halide perovskite nanoplatelets, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6238–6245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, 
            et al., Highly compact CsPbBr3 perovskite thin films decorated by ZnO nanoparticles for enhanced random lasing, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, 
            et al., Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3AlC2, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, MXene Ti3C2: An effective 2D light-to-heat conversion material, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, 
            et al., Interlayer coupling in two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20256–20260 RSC .
L. Feng, 
            et al., Structures and mechanical and electronic properties of the Ti 2 CO 2 MXene incorporated with neighboring elements (Sc, V, B and N), J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 2460–2466 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zha, 
            et al., Role of the surface effect on the structural, electronic and mechanical properties of the carbide MXenes, EPL, 2015, 111, 26007 CrossRef .
K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical
applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Computational studies on the structural, electronic and optical properties of graphene-like MXenes (M2CT 2, M = Ti, Zr, Hf; T = O, F, OH) and their potential applications as visible-light driven photocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12913–12920 RSC .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Electronic and optical properties of 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804779 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Magne, V. Mauchamp, S. Célérier, P. Chartier and T. Cabioc'h, Spectroscopic evidence in the visible-ultraviolet energy range of surface functionalization sites in the multilayer Ti 3 C 2 MXene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 201409 CrossRef .
H. Kumar, 
            et al., Tunable magnetism and transport properties in nitride MXenes, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7648–7655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chandrasekaran, A. Mishra and A. K. Singh, Ferroelectricity, antiferroelectricity, and ultrathin 2D electron/hole gas in multifunctional monolayer MXene, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3290–3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei, 
            et al., Novel electronic and magnetic properties of two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, 
            et al., Tuning magnetic properties of Cr2M2C3T2 (M = Ti and V) using extensile strain, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 139, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, 
            et al., Biocompatible 2D titanium carbide (MXenes) composite nanosheets for pH-responsive MRI-guided tumor hyperthermia, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8637–8652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, 
            et al., Laminated and two-dimensional carbon-supported microwave absorbers derived from MXenes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20038–20045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hantanasirisakul, 
            et al., Fabrication of Ti3C2Tx MXene transparent thin films with tunable optoelectronic properties, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600050 CrossRef .
A. D. Dillon, 
            et al., Highly conductive optical quality solution-processed films of 2D titanium carbide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4162–4168 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, 
            et al., Electromagnetic interference shielding with 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, 
            et al., Metallic Ti3C2Tx MXene gas sensors with ultrahigh signal-to-noise ratio, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, 
            et al., A highly flexible and sensitive piezoresistive sensor based on MXene with greatly changed interlayer distances, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1207 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cai, 
            et al., Stretchable Ti3C2Tx MXene/Carbon Nanotube Composite Based Strain Sensor with Ultrahigh Sensitivity and Tunable Sensing Range, ACS Nano, 2017, 12, 56–62 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zhang, 
            et al., MXenes stretch hydrogel sensor performance to new limits, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0098 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Guo, 
            et al., Ar plasma modification of 2D MXene Ti3C2Tx nanosheets for efficient capacitive desalination, FlatChem, 2018, 8, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
P. Srimuk, 
            et al., MXene as a novel intercalation-type pseudocapacitive cathode and anode for capacitive deionization, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18265–18271 RSC .
P. Srimuk, 
            et al., Two-dimensional molybdenum carbide (MXene) with divacancy ordering for brackish and seawater desalination via cation and anion intercalation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3739–3747 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Handoko, 
            et al., Tuning the basal plane functionalization of two-dimensional metal carbides (MXenes) to control hydrogen evolution activity, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2017, 1, 173–180 CrossRef .
H. Kim, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Thermoelectric properties of two-dimensional molybdenum-based MXenes, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6472–6479 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Two-dimensional molybdenum carbides: potential thermoelectric materials of the MXene family, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7841–7849 RSC .
A. Sarycheva, 
            et al., Two-Dimensional Titanium Carbide (MXene) as surface-enhanced Raman scattering substrate, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19983–19988 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chaudhuri, 
            et al., Highly
broadband absorber using plasmonic titanium carbide (MXene), ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 1115–1122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, 
            et al., Synthesis of Two-Dimensional Nb1.33C (MXene) with Randomly Distributed Vacancies by Etching of the Quaternary Solid Solution (Nb2/3Sc1/3)2AlC MAX Phase, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2455–2460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, 
            et al., Synthesis and characterization of two-dimensional Nb4C3 (MXene), Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9517–9520 RSC .
R. Meshkian, 
            et al., W-Based Atomic Laminates and Their 2D Derivative W1.33C MXene with Vacancy Ordering, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706409 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, 
            et al., Synthesis and electrochemical properties of two-dimensional hafnium carbide, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3841–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, 
            et al., A two-dimensional zirconium carbide by selective etching of Al3C3 from nanolaminated Zr3Al3C5, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 5092–5097 CrossRef .
R. Meshkian, 
            et al., Theoretical stability and materials synthesis of a chemically ordered MAX phase, Mo2ScAlC2, and its two-dimensional derivate Mo2ScC2 MXene, Acta Mater., 2017, 125, 476–480 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Tan, H. M. Jin, M. B. Sullivan, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, High-throughput survey of ordering configurations in MXene alloys across compositions and temperatures, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4407–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai, T. Sasaki and S. Yunoki, Electronic properties and applications of MXenes: a theoretical review, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2488–2503 RSC .
M. Naguib, 
            et al., New two-dimensional niobium and vanadium carbides as promising materials for Li-ion batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, 
            et al., 2D molybdenum and vanadium nitrides synthesized by ammoniation of 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17722–17730 RSC .
M. Naguib, 
            et al., Two-dimensional transition metal carbides, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, 
            et al., Synthesis of two-dimensional titanium nitride Ti4 N3 (MXene), Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .

          M. W. Barsoum, MAX phases: properties of machinable ternary carbides and nitrides, John Wiley & Sons,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Persson, Atomically resolved structural and chemical investigation of single MXene sheets, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, 
            et al., Atomic Defects in Monolayer Titanium Carbide (Ti3C2Tx) MXene, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie and P. Kent, Hybrid density functional study of structural and electronic properties of functionalized Tin+1Xn (X = C, N) monolayers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
S. Wang, J.-X. Li, Y.-L. Du and C. Cui, First-principles study on structural, electronic and elastic properties of graphene-like hexagonal Ti2C monolayer, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 83, 290–293 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shein and A. Ivanovskii, Graphene-like titanium carbides and nitrides Tin+1Cn, Tin+1Nn (n = 1, 2, and 3) from de-intercalated MAX phases: First-principles probing of their structural, electronic properties and relative stability, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 65, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, 
            et al., Monolayer MXenes: promising half-metals and spin gapless semiconductors, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8986–8994 RSC .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Computational studies on the structural, electronic and optical properties of graphene-like MXenes (M 2 CT 2, M = Ti, Zr, Hf; T = O, F, OH) and their potential applications as visible-light driven photocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12913–12920 RSC .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Searching for highly active catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction based on O-terminated MXenes through a simple descriptor, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9026–9032 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hope, 
            et al., NMR reveals the surface functionalisation of Ti3C2 MXene, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099–5102 RSC .
V. M. H. Ng, 
            et al., Recent progress in layered transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes) and their composites: synthesis and applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, Two-dimensional titanium nitride (Ti2N) MXene: synthesis, characterization, and potential application as surface-enhanced Raman scattering substrate, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Agmon, The grotthuss mechanism, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 244, 456–462 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Pier, Le phénomène de la moyennabilité, Rend. Semin. Mat. Fis. Milano, 1983, 53(1), 319–332 CrossRef .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical data,  1952 Search PubMed .
P. Sun, 
            et al., Single-layer nanosheets with exceptionally high and anisotropic hydroxyl ion conductivity, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602629 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and F. Wei, Hierarchical nanocomposites derived from nanocarbons and layered double hydroxides-properties, synthesis, and applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, 
            et al., Periodic stacking of 2D charged sheets: Self-assembled superlattice of Ni–Al layered double hydroxide (LDH) and reduced graphene oxide, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, 
            et al., A superlattice of alternately stacked Ni-Fe hydroxide nanosheets and graphene for efficient splitting of water, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Khan, 
            et al., Low Temperature Synthesis of Nano Porous 12CaO·7Al2O3 Powder by Hydrothermal Method, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2016, 31, 1201–1205,  DOI:10.1007/s11595-016-1512-7 .
K. Khan, 
            et al., Facile metal-free reduction-based synthesis of pristine and cation-doped conductive mayenite, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 24276–24285,  10.1039/c8ra02790krsc.li/rsc-advances .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 9, 4967 Search PubMed .
W. Zou, 
            et al., Direct Fabrication of C12A7 Electride Target and Room Temperature Deposition of Thin Films with Low Work Function, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 1–20,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/aa63c7 .
C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Graphene and graphene-like 2D materials for optical biosensing and bioimaging: A review, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 032004 CrossRef .
J. Kern, 
            et al., Nanoscale Positioning of Single-Photon Emitters in Atomically Thin WSe2, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7101–7105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Haastrup, et al., The Computational 2D Materials Database: High-Throughput Modeling and Discovery of Atomically Thin Crystals, 2018, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1806.03173.
J.-G. Song, 
            et al., Layer-controlled, wafer-scale, and conformal synthesis of tungsten disulfide nanosheets using atomic layer deposition, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11333–11340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chang, 
            et al., Large-Area Monolayer MoS2 for Flexible Low-Power RF Nanoelectronics in the GHz Regime, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1818–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, 
            et al., Recent development of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and their applications, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chang, 
            et al., Large-Area Monolayer MoS2 for Flexible Low-Power RF Nanoelectronics in the GHz Regime, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1818–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J.-S. Moon, et al., 2015 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium, pp. 1–4 (IEEE).

          S. Park, PhD thesis, Chemical vapor deposited two-dimensional material based high frequency flexible field-effect transistors, 2018.
D. K. Sang, H. Wang, Z. Guo, N. Xie and H. Zhang, Recent Developments in Stability and Passivation Techniques of Phosphorene toward Next-Generation Device Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1903419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Yin, L. Zhang, D. Xiang and R. Gao, Metal oxide gas sensors: sensitivity and influencing factors, Sensors, 2010, 10, 2088–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Alsaif, 
            et al., Two dimensional α-MoO3 nanoflakes obtained using solvent-assisted grinding and sonication method: application
for H2 gas sensing, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ab Kadir, 
            et al., Optical gas sensing properties of nanoporous Nb2O5 films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4751–4758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Breedon, 
            et al., Synthesis of nanostructured tungsten oxide thin films: A simple, controllable, inexpensive, aqueous sol− gel method, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 10, 430–439 CrossRef .
Y. Li, 
            et al., CuO nanosheets grown on cupper foil as the catalyst for H2O2 electroreduction in alkaline medium, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13611–13615 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Alsaif, 
            et al., Substoichiometric two-dimensional molybdenum oxide flakes: a plasmonic gas sensing platform, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12780–12791 RSC .
Z. Wang, 
            et al., Biological and environmental interactions of emerging two-dimensional nanomaterials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1750–1780 RSC .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, 
            et al., Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides in biosystems, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5086–5099 CrossRef CAS .
T. Anh Tran, K. Krishnamoorthy, Y. W. Song, S. K. Cho and S. J. Kim, Toxicity of nano molybdenum trioxide toward invasive breast cancer cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2980–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, 
            et al., Large-scale synthesis of ultrathin manganese oxide nanoplates and their applications to T1 MRI contrast agents, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3318–3324 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Song, 
            et al., Two dimensional TiO2 nanosheets: in vivo toxicity investigation, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42598–42603 RSC .
S. Balendhran, 
            et al., Field effect biosensing platform based on 2D α-MoO3, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9753–9760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Electron-rich two-dimensional molybdenum trioxides for highly integrated plasmonic biosensing, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 347–352 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, S. Wu, F. Shu and Z. Liu, An MnO2 nanosheet as a label-free nanoplatform for homogeneous biosensing, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1095–1097 RSC .
W. Zhai, C. Wang, P. Yu, Y. Wang and L. Mao, Single-layer MnO2 nanosheets suppressed fluorescence of 7-hydroxycoumarin: mechanistic study and application for sensitive sensing of ascorbic acid in vivo, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12206–12213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fan, 
            et al., A smart DNAzyme-MnO2 nanosystem for efficient gene silencing, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4883–4887 CrossRef .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Fluorescent glutathione probe based on MnO2-phenol formaldehyde resin nanocomposite, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Jiang, J. Zhu, L. Zhang and H. Lin, A FRET-based carbon dot-MnO2 nanosheet architecture for glutathione sensing in human whole blood samples, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12748–12751 RSC .
J. Z. Ou, 
            et al., Ion-driven photoluminescence modulation of quasi-two-dimensional MoS2 nanoflakes for applications in biological systems, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 857–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, 
            et al., Plasmonic MoO3−x@ MoO3 nanosheets for highly sensitive SERS detection through nanoshell-isolated electromagnetic enhancement, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2893–2896 RSC .
S. Shendage, 
            et al., Sensitive and selective NO2 gas sensor based on WO3 nanoplates, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
N. Harale, 
            et al., Single-step hydrothermally grown nanosheet-assembled tungsten oxide thin films for sensitive and selective NO 2 gas detection, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 6094–6105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Break-up of Two-Dimensional MnO2 Nanosheets Promotes Ultrasensitive pH-Triggered Theranostics of Cancer, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7019–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Activatable fluorescence/MRI bimodal platform for tumor cell imaging via MnO2 nanosheet-aptamer nanoprobe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11220–11223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Macher, 
            et al., Ultrathin iron oxide nanowhiskers as positive contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 490–494 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, 
            et al., Activatable fluorescence/MRI bimodal platform for tumor cell imaging via MnO2 nanosheet–aptamer nanoprobe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11220–11223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, 
            et al., Multifunctional nanosheets based on folic acid modified manganese oxide for tumor-targeting theranostic application, Nanotechnology, 2015, 27, 025101 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, 
            et al., Enhanced transport in transistor by tuning transition-metal oxide electronic states interfaced with diamond, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau0480 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tanaka and T. Kondo, Bandgap and exciton binding energies in lead-iodide-based natural quantum-well crystals, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2003, 4, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, 
            et al., Ruddlesden–Popper hybrid lead iodide perovskite 2D homologous semiconductors, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Smith, 
            et al., Decreasing the electronic confinement in layered perovskites through intercalation, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 1960–1968 RSC .
M. D. Smith, E. J. Crace, A. Jaffe and H. I. Karunadasa, The diversity of layered halide perovskites, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2018, 48, 111–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lan, Z. Zhou, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Two-dimensional perovskite materials: from synthesis to energy-related applications, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 61–82 CrossRef .
Z. Yuan, Y. Shu, Y. Tian, Y. Xin and B. Ma, A facile one-pot synthesis of deep blue luminescent lead bromide perovskite microdisks, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16385–16388 RSC .
Y. Tong, 
            et al., Dilution-induced formation of hybrid perovskite nanoplatelets, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10936–10944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, 
            et al., High members of the 2D Ruddlesden–Popper halide perovskites: synthesis, optical properties, and solar cells of (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)4Pb5I16, Chem, 2017, 2, 427–440 CAS .
J.-C. Blancon, 
            et al., Scaling law for excitons in 2D perovskite quantum wells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2254 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Chu, F. Zhou, W. Ji and G. Eda, Excitonic properties of chemically synthesized 2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite nanosheets, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704055 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, 
            et al., Two-dimensional CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite: Synthesis and optoelectronic application, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lanty, 
            et al., Room-temperature optical tunability and inhomogeneous broadening in 2D-layered organic–inorganic perovskite pseudobinary alloys, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3958–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Era, S. Morimoto, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Organic-inorganic heterostructure electroluminescent device using a layered perovskite semiconductor (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 676–678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hattori, T. Taira, M. Era, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Highly efficient electroluminescence from a heterostructure device combined with emissive layered-perovskite and an electron-transporting organic compound, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 254, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, 
            et al., Room-temperature electroluminescence from two-dimensional lead halide perovskites, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 151101 CrossRef .
L. Ni, 
            et al., Real-Time Observation of Exciton–Phonon Coupling Dynamics in Self-Assembled Hybrid Perovskite Quantum Wells, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, 
            et al., Perovskite light-emitting diodes based on solution-processed self-organized multiple quantum wells, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699 CrossRef CAS .
J. Byun, 
            et al., Efficient Visible Quasi-2D Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7515–7520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, 
            et al., Perovskite energy funnels for efficient light-emitting diodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, 
            et al., Efficient perovskite light-emitting diodes featuring nanometre-sized crystallites, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, 
            et al., Tailoring the energy landscape in quasi-2D halide perovskites enables efficient green-light emission, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3701–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, 
            et al., Bright light-emitting diodes based on organometal halide perovskite nanoplatelets, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, 
            et al., Efficient blue electroluminescence using quantum-confined two-dimensional perovskites, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9720–9729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Si, 
            et al., Efficient and high-color-purity light-emitting diodes based on in situ grown films of CsPbX3 (X = Br, I) nanoplates with controlled thicknesses, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11100–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Efficient Red Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Solution-Processed Multiple Quantum Wells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606600 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chang, 
            et al., Enhanced performance of red perovskite light-emitting diodes through the dimensional tailoring of perovskite multiple quantum wells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 881–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, 
            et al., Reduced Efficiency Roll-Off and Enhanced Stability in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes with Multiple Quantum Wells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2038–2042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, 
            et al., Highly Efficient Spectrally Stable Red Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707093 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Simon, EMI shielding through conductive plastics, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng., 1981, 17, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sun, 
            et al., Highly conductive transition metal carbide/carbonitride (MXene)@ polystyrene nanocomposites fabricated by electrostatic assembly for highly efficient electromagnetic interference shielding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702807 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, 
            et al., Ti3C2Tx (MXene)-polyacrylamide nanocomposite films, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 72069–72073 RSC .
Y. Tong, 
            et al., Hybridizing polypyrrole chains with laminated and two-dimensional Ti3C2Tx toward high-performance electromagnetic wave absorption, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, 
            et al., Charge transfer induced polymerization of EDOT confined between 2D titanium carbide layers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5260–5265 RSC .
M. Boota, 
            et al., Interaction of polar and nonpolar polyfluorenes with layers of two-dimensional titanium carbide (MXene): intercalation and pseudocapacitance, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2731–2738 CrossRef CAS .
W.-T. Cao, 
            et al., Binary strengthening and toughening of MXene/cellulose nanofiber composite paper with nacre-inspired structure and superior electromagnetic interference shielding properties, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4583–4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, 
            et al., Fabrication of urchin-like ZnO-MXene nanocomposites for high-performance electromagnetic absorption, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 10757–10762 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, 
            et al., Layered PVB/Ba3Co2Fe24O41/Ti3C2 Mxene composite: enhanced electromagnetic wave absorption properties with high impedance match in a wide frequency range, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 200, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al., Ti3C2 MXenes modified with in situ grown carbon nanotubes for enhanced electromagnetic wave absorption properties, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4068–4074 RSC .
G. Choi, 
            et al., Enhanced Terahertz Shielding of MXenes with Nano-Metamaterials, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701076 CrossRef .
Y. Jhon, M. Seo and Y. Jhon, First-principles study of a MXene terahertz detector, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 69–75 RSC .
M. Han, 
            et al., Ti3C2 MXenes with modified surface for high-performance electromagnetic absorption and shielding in the X-band, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21011–21019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-X. Yan, 
            et al., Efficient electromagnetic interference shielding of lightweight graphene/polystyrene composite, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18772–18774 RSC .
J. Liu, 
            et al., Hydrophobic, flexible, and lightweight MXene foams for high-performance electromagnetic-interference shielding, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702367 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, 
            et al., 3D synergistical MXene/reduced graphene oxide aerogel for a piezoresistive sensor, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3209–3216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. An, 
            et al., Surface-agnostic highly stretchable and bendable conductive MXene multilayers, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaaq0118 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Xiao, Y.-c. Li, X.-f. Yu and J.-b. Cheng, MXenes: Reusable materials for NH3 sensor or capturer by controlling the charge injection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 235, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Junkaew and R. Arroyave, Enhancement of the selectivity of MXenes (M2C, M = Ti, V, Nb, Mo) via oxygen-functionalization: promising materials for gas-sensing and-separation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6073–6082 RSC .
E. Lee, 
            et al., Room temperature gas sensing of two-dimensional titanium carbide (MXene), ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37184–37190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, 
            et al., Ultrathin MXene-micropattern-based field-effect transistor for probing neural activity, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, 
            et al., CO2 and temperature dual responsive “Smart” MXene phases, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
F. Wang, 
            et al., An organ-like titanium carbide material (MXene) with multilayer structure encapsulating hemoglobin for a mediator-free biosensor, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, B16–B21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, 
            et al., A novel nitrite biosensor based on the direct electrochemistry of hemoglobin immobilized on MXene-Ti3C2, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 218, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rakhi, P. Nayak, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Novel amperometric glucose biosensor based on MXene nanocomposite, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, B. Wang, A. Ding, B. Weng and J. Chen, Synthesis of MXene/DNA/Pd/Pt nanocomposite for sensitive detection of dopamine, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 816, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chertopalov and V. N. Mochalin, Environment-sensitive photoresponse of spontaneously partially oxidized Ti3C2 MXene thin films, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6109–6116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, 
            et al., Saturable absorption in 2D Ti3C2 MXene thin films for passive photonic diodes, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705714 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. I. Jhon, 
            et al., Metallic MXene Saturable Absorber for Femtosecond Mode-Locked Lasers, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702496 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, 
            et al., Broadband nonlinear photonics in few-layer MXene Ti3C2Tx (T = F, O, or OH), Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700229 CrossRef .
M. Alhabeb, 
            et al., Guidelines for Synthesis and Processing of Two-Dimensional Titanium Carbide (Ti3C2Tx MXene), Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mauchamp, 
            et al., Enhanced and tunable surface plasmons in two-dimensional Ti3C2 stacks: electronic structure versus boundary effects, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235428 CrossRef .
C. E. Ren, 
            et al., Charge-and size-selective ion sieving through Ti3C2Tx MXene membranes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4026–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .
M. Asif, 
            et al., Real-time tracking of hydrogen peroxide secreted by live cells using MnO2 nanoparticles intercalated layered doubled hydroxide nanohybrids, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 898, 34–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asif, 
            et al., Metal oxide intercalated layered double hydroxide nanosphere: with enhanced electrocatalyic activity towards H2O2 for biological applications, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 243–252 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, M. Lian, X. Chen, Y. Lu and W. Yang, Amperometric sensing of hydrogen peroxide via an ITO electrode modified with gold nanoparticles electrodeposited on a CoMn-layered double hydroxide, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 3989–3996 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. R. F. C. G. M. S. Group, Continuous glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes, N. Engl. J. Med., 2008, 359, 1464–1476 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-M. Kim, 
            et al., Disposable all-solid-state pH and glucose sensors based on conductive polymer covered hierarchical AuZn oxide, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 165–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asif, A. Aziz, M. Azeem, Z. Wang, G. Ashraf, F. Xiao, X. Chen and H. Liu, A review on electrochemical biosensing platform based on layered double hydroxides for small molecule biomarkers determination, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 262, 21–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Hu, X. Yang, D. Yan and Q. Dai, Tunable electronic transport properties of 2D layered double hydroxide crystalline microsheets with varied chemical compositions, Small, 2016, 12, 4471–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wakahara, 
            et al., Fullerene/cobalt porphyrin hybrid nanosheets with ambipolar charge transporting characteristics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7204–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, F. Zhang, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Layered double hydroxide films: synthesis, properties and applications, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5197–5210 RSC .
G. W. Mudd, 
            et al., High broad-band photoresponsivity of mechanically formed InSe-graphene van der Waals heterostructures, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3760–3766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, 
            et al., Ultrathin 2D photodetectors utilizing chemical vapor deposition grown WS2 with graphene electrodes, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7866–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, 
            et al., Strong electrically tunable MoTe2/graphene van der Waals heterostructures for high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 193111 CrossRef .
K. Roy, 
            et al., Graphene-MoS2 hybrid structures for multifunctional photoresponsive memory devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultrahigh-gain photodetectors based on atomically thin graphene-MoS2 heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Britnell, 
            et al., Strong light-matter interactions in heterostructures of atomically thin films, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, 
            et al., Highly efficient gate-tunable photocurrent generation in vertical heterostructures of layered materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Massicotte, 
            et al., Picosecond photoresponse in van der Waals heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, 
            et al., Oxygen-Assisted Charge Transfer Between ZnO Quantum Dots and Graphene, Small, 2013, 9, 3031–3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, X. Liu and H. Zeng, ZrO2 quantum dots/graphene phototransistors for deep UV detection, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 458–462 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shin and S.-H. Choi, Graphene-Based Semiconductor Heterostructures for Photodetectors, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 350 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Y. Kong, 
            et al., Graphene-β-Ga2O3 heterojunction for highly sensitive deep UV photodetector application, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10725–10731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ai, 
            et al., Fast-response solar-blind ultraviolet photodetector with a graphene/β-Ga2O3/graphene hybrid structure, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 692, 634–638 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fu, C. Zhu, X. Zhang, C. Li and Y. Chen, Two-dimensional net-like SnO2/ZnO heteronanostructures for high-performance H2S gas sensor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1390–1398 RSC .
X. Liu, 
            et al., Enhanced ethanol sensing properties of ultrathin ZnO nanosheets decorated with CuO nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS .
K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, 2D materials and van der Waals heterostructures, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Cheng, 
            et al., van der Waals heterojunction devices based on organohalide perovskites and two-dimensional materials, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 367–373 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Niu, 
            et al., Controlled Synthesis of Organic/Inorganic van der Waals Solid for Tunable Light–Matter Interactions, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7800–7808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, 
            et al., High-performance perovskite-graphene hybrid photodetector, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Volonakis and F. Giustino, Ferroelectric graphene-perovskite interfaces, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2496–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Jang, 
            et al., Reversible halide exchange reaction of organometal trihalide perovskite colloidal nanocrystals for full-range band gap tuning, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5191–5199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, 
            et al., Spatially resolved multicolor CsPbX3 nanowire heterojunctions via anion exchange, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 7216–7221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Mixed-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, 
            et al., van der Waals heterostructures and devices, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, 
            et al., Photonics and Optoelectronics of 2D Metal-Halide Perovskites, Small, 2018, 14, 1800682 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, 
            et al., Asymmetric MXene/monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures for functional applications, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 16, 1–8,  DOI:10.1038/s41524-019-0155-6 .
Y. Shao, P. Gong, H. Pan and X. Shi, H-/dT-MoS2-on-MXene Heterostructures as Promising 2D Anode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries: Insights from First Principles, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 2, 1900045 CrossRef .
A. Eshghi, Graphene/Ni-Fe layered double hydroxide nano composites as advanced electrode materials for glucose electro oxidation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 15064–15072 CrossRef CAS .
E. Asadian, S. Shahrokhian and A. I. Zad, Highly sensitive nonenzymetic glucose sensing platform based on MOF-derived NiCo LDH nanosheets/graphene nanoribbons composite, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 808, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Samuei, J. Fakkar, Z. Rezvani, A. Shomali and B. Habibi, Synthesis and characterization of graphene quantum dots/CoNiAl-layered double-hydroxide nanocomposite: Application as a glucose sensor, Anal. Biochem., 2017, 521, 31–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Three-dimensional NiCo layered double hydroxide nanosheets array on carbon cloth, facile preparation and its application in highly sensitive enzymeless glucose detection, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 628–635 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, E. Hwang, Y. Lee, S. Lee and J. H. Cho, Multifunctional graphene optoelectronic devices capable of detecting and storing photonic signals, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2542–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y. Y. Noh, Organic light detectors: photodiodes and phototransistors, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4267–4295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cao, 
            et al., Recent progress in degradation and stabilization of organic solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 168–183 CrossRef CAS .
A.-B. Zakiya, C. Pearson, C. Groves and M. C. Petty, Enhanced lifetime of organic photovoltaic diodes utilizing a ternary blend including an insulating polymer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 101–106 CrossRef .
W. C. Tan, W. H. Shih and Y. F. Chen, A Highly Sensitive Graphene-Organic Hybrid Photodetector with a Piezoelectric Substrate, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6818–6825 CrossRef CAS .
T. Georgiou, 
            et al., Vertical field-effect transistor based on graphene–WS 2 heterostructures for flexible and transparent electronics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, 
            et al., Vertically stacked multi-heterostructures of layered materials for logic transistors and complementary inverters, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Moriya, 
            et al., Large current modulation in exfoliated-graphene/MoS2/metal vertical heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 083119 CrossRef .
T. Roy, 
            et al., Field-effect transistors built from all two-dimensional material components, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6259–6264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Withers, 
            et al., Light-emitting diodes by band-structure engineering in van der Waals heterostructures, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, 
            et al., Ultrahigh-gain photodetectors based on atomically thin graphene-MoS 2 heterostructures, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Dean, 
            et al., Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electronics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, 
            et al., Field-effect tunneling transistor based on vertical graphene heterostructures, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, Z. Li, L. Shi and S. B. Cronin, Thermoelectric transport across graphene/hexagonal boron nitride/graphene heterostructures, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 666–672 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cheng, 
            et al., Electroluminescence and photocurrent generation from atomically sharp WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction p–n diodes, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, 
            et al., Black phosphorus–monolayer MoS2 van der Waals heterojunction p–n diode, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sarkar, 
            et al., A subthermionic tunnel field-effect transistor with an atomically thin channel, Nature, 2015, 526, 91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Lee, 
            et al., Flexible and transparent MoS2 field-effect transistors on hexagonal boron nitride-graphene heterostructures, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7931–7936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Equal contribution as first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Karim Khan
	Dr Karim Khan (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his BSc degree (2005) from Gomal University, his MSc (2009) in Physics from the University of Peshawar, and his MPhil (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan; he also performed research at the National Centre for Physics, Quaid-e-Azim University, Pakistan. He obtained his PhD (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and he also served as a Postdoctoral fellow (2019) at Shenzhen University, China. To date, he has published over 45 scientific publications and 2 patents. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.

Ayesha Khan Tareen
	Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7238-6366) is a Post-Doctoral fellow at Shenzhen university. She obtained her PhD (Physical chemistry/Materials) from 2015 to 2018 at the Ningbo Institute Of Material Technology And Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy Of Sciences (CAS), her MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) from 2013 to 2015 at The Islamia University of Bahawalpur and her BSc (Honors) in Chemistry from 2008 to 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are magnetic/superconductivity and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different directions, especially magnetic materials, photocatalysts, fuel cells, and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).

Muhammad Aslam
	Muhammad Aslam (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2694-<?pdb_no 511X?>511X<?pdb END?>) received his BSc in Physics and Mathematics (Physical Sciences, 2018) from Government Degree College Paharpur, Gomal University, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K. P. K., Pakistan; currently, he is studying to obtain a Master of Science (MSc) in Physics. His current research focuses on 2D materials and their applications in energy producing/storage devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.

Renheng Wang
	Dr Renheng Wang received his PhD degree in Metallurgical Engineering from Central South University (CSU) in 2015. From January 2016 to October 2018, he worked as a postdoctoral follow at Shenzhen University and Nanyang Technological University. He is now a researcher in the College of Physics and Optoelectonic Engineering, Shenzhen University. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials and composites for clean energy storage, such as high-power/high-energy lithium ion batteries.

Yupeng Zhang
	Dr Yupeng Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2351-5579) received his PhD from Wuhan University. From 2014 to 2017, he was a postdoctoral research fellow at Monash University. Currently, he is a Research Fellow in the College of Physics and Optoelectonic Engineering, Shenzhen University. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials and composites for energy production, saving, and storage, such as OLEDs and high-power/high-energy lithium ion batteries.

Asif Mahmood
	Dr Asif Mahmood (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6438-<?pdb_no 438X?>438X<?pdb END?>) is from Pakistan; he received his MS degree (2011) from National University of Science and Technology, Pakistan, in Materials and Surface Engineering. He obtained his PhD (2016) from Peking University, Beijing, China, in Material Science and Engineering, from the College of Engineering, and he served as a Research Fellow (2018) at Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. Recently, he has been working as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the University of Sydney, Australia, in the School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices as well as the development of sensors for biomedical applications.

Zhengbiao Ouyang
	Prof. Dr Zhengbiao Ouyang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1466-7813) received his BE in Radio Engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in 1983 and a PhD in Electron Physics from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China in 1988. He then worked at Shenzhen University. He is currently a professor at Shenzhen University, Vice Director of the THz Technical Research Center of Shenzhen University, and Vice Director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology. He is a member of the Council of the Chinese Society for Optical Engineering, a senior member of the Optical Society of America, and a Committeeman of the Opto-Electronic Committee of the Chinese Space Aeronautics Association. He was awarded 2nd prize of Progress in Science and Technology from the Chinese Ministry of Machine and Electronics in 1990, an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship in 1991, and a Guangdong Province-Level Scholar award in 2007. His research interests focus on photonic crystal materials and applications in optical integrated devices.

Han Zhang
	Prof. Han Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-1973) received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and his PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently a director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D Materials and Devices and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focus is the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D materials. He was also a Highly Cited Researcher of Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019 and a Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including in Physics Reports (2), PNAS (1), Chem. Soc. Rev. (3), Nat. Commun. (6), and Adv. Mater. (10). The total citations of all his publications are about 29000, and his H index is 79.

 	Fig. 1  Various nanostructure dimensions: zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) materials, and the corresponding applications of 2D materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  TMDC crystal and electronic structures. (a) Octahedral coordination (left) frequently generates 1T structures, while triangular prismatic coordination (right) forms 2H or 3R structures. (b) Top view of MLs assembled from triangular prismatic (right) and octahedral (left) coordination. (c) Polytype structure side views of 1T, 2H, and 3R. (d) TMD element constituents of the periodic table. One TM atom (group IV, V, and VI) and two chalcogen atoms (group XVI) form TMD crystals. (e) TMD BG diagrams of octahedron and triangular prism-based structures. The d orbitals of the TMs lie above the p bonding orbitals (named σ) of the chalcogen atoms. The dark arrows along with the Roman numbers show the TMDs corresponding to each TM group FE. In group VI triangular prism TMDs, the BG opens around the FE as a result of ligand field splitting (courtesy Y. Zhang et al.).43 (f) Type-I and (g) type-II band alignments at hetero-bilayer interfaces. The VB maximum and CB minimum energy levels of each ML consist of the interface along the direction of the electron/hole transfer (courtesy M. Bernardi et al.).44	 

 	Fig. 3  2D material charge screening and scattering. (a) 2D layer FET in a dual-gated geometry. (b) Schematic of the current distribution in a 13-layer MoS2 FET showing the position of the maximum current density (hot spot) determined by the competing effects of conductivity and charge screening. (c) Effects of ε mismatch on screening in ML MoS2. The inset shows scattering of the conduction electrons on the FE circle from wave vector ki to kf by a phonon of wave vector q = kf − ki. (d) Top: Calculated values of phonon-limited mobility of ML MoS2 for different combinations of dielectrics. εe = (k1 + k2)/2 is the average dielectric constant shown by MoS2. Bottom: Critical density of charged impurities (CIs) NI at which phonon-limited mobility equates to CI-limited mobility. A high-k dielectric is more effective when MoS2 is already disordered with CIs, resulting in marginal improvements in mobility. (e) Experimental mobility values (circles) compared with mobilities calculated from different scattering mechanisms (lines) for few layer MoS2 FET on SiO2 substrate. (Courtesy N. Ma et al.).81	 

 	Fig. 4  2D-TMOs and their selected properties. (a) Layered -MoO3 and V2O5. (b) Images of ultra-thin films of perovskites epitaxially grown on Si substrate measured by high angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM). (c) Optical microscopy of Ti0.87O2 nanosheets for thickness measurement: (I) optical image of 100 nm nanosheets on SiO2/Si (for 450 nm); (II) AFM image of the same location. (d) AFM image of a TaO3 nanosheet. (e) MnO2 nanosheet XRD profile: (1) onset of ageing and after (2) 2.3 h, (3) 4.7 h, (4) 7.0 h, (5) 9.3 h, (6) 11.7 h, and (7) 23.3 h. (f) Different layered perovskites. (Courtesy K.Kalantar-zadeh et al.).112	 

 	Fig. 5  2D perovskite heterostructures. (a) RP perovskite crystal structures with diverse n values. (b) A 3D perovskite configuration equivalent to n = ∞. (c) Illustrations of vertical heterostructures shaped in microplates which have 2D perovskite layers n = 1, 2, and 3. (Courtesy Y. Fu et al.).178	 

Metals	Co(OH)2, CoO2, ErHCl, ErSel, EuOBr, EuOl, FeBr, Fel2, FeTe, LaCl, NdOBr, PrOBr, ScCl, SmOBr, SmSl, TbBr,ImI2, ImOl, VS2, VSe2, VTe, YCl, YOBr, YbOCl	CoI2, CrSe2, FeO2, FeOCl, FeSe, PrOI, VOBr


Semiconductors	CdOCl, CoBr2, CoCl2, CrOBr, CrOCl, CrSBr, CuCl2, ErSCl, HoSl, LaBr2, NiBr2, NiCl2, NiI2	CrBr2, CrI2, LaBr, Mn(OH)2, MnBr2, MnCl2, MnI2, VBr2, VCl2, VI2, VOBr2, VOCl2

Sc2C	O	1.8

	F	1.03

	OH	0.45
Ti2C	O	0.24
Zr2C	O	0.88
Hf2C	O	1.0
Cr2C	F	3.49

	OH	1.43
Mo2TiC2*	O	0.12

	F	0.5

	OH	0.05
Mo2ZrC2*	O	0.13
Mo2HfC2*	O	0.24
W2TiC2*	O	0.29
W2ZrC2*	O	0.28
W2HfC2*	O	0.41
Hf2MnC2	O	0.24

	F	1.03
Hf2VC2	O	0.06
Cr2TiC2	F	1.35

	OH	0.84
Hf3C2	O	0.16

Ti2C	ML-compressed disc	0.147

	Transparent film (spin casting)	5250
Mo2C	Free-standing film	4.35

	Free-standing film	0.8
V2C	Free-standing film	384.6
Nb2C	ML-compressed disc	0.00164
Mo2N	Free-standing film	2083
V2N	Free-standing film	4166
TiNbC	ML-compressed disc	0.192
Ti3CN	ML-compressed disc	0.27

	Free-standing film	1045
Mo2TiC2	Free-standing film	50
Nb4C3	ML-compressed disc	2.17
Ta4C3	ML-compressed disc	0.476
Mo2Ti2C3	Free-standing film	100

	Free-standing film	15
Ti2C	ML-compressed disc	0.147

 	Fig. 6  Hydroxyl ion conductivity comparison. (A) –OH ion conductivity measurements in dissimilar directions for both hexagonal lamellar platelets and LDH nanosheets. (B) Comparison and summary of conductivities measured at 60 °C and 80% RH. (Courtesy P. Sun et al.).251	 

 	Fig. 7  Outline of BGs (eV) and related detecting wavelengths for a range of 2D materials.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chart showing the 2D material library categorized by their stability in air for quantum applications. (Courtesy C. Zhu et al.)259 *BCN = 2D nano-composite bearing B, C and N, *BSCCO = bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide.	 

 	Fig. 9  The materials in the computational 2D materials database (C2DB) were originally produced by decorating practically recognized crystal structures with atoms selected from chemically reasonable periodic table groups. (Courtesy S. Haastrup et al.).261	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) ALD process scheme for synthesis of a large area WS2 film with controlled thickness. (b) Mono, bi, and tetralayer WS2 fabricated on a Si/SiO2 substrate with a large area. The growth area is shown relative to a cellular phone display screen. (c) ML WS2 FET transfer properties, showing that it is an n-type conductor. (Courtesy J.-G. Song et al.).262	 

 	Fig. 11  The CVD-based 280 nm MoS2 FET (W = 2.6 mm, L = 1 mm) on SiO2/Si. (a) Electrical transfer properties, including a low-field mobility of ∼54 cm2 V−1 s1, which is at the high end for ML MoS2. (b) ID-VD characteristics and linear vsat profile predicted for well-behaved FET semiconductors. (c) Extracted cut-off frequencies with intrinsic fT for flexible MoS2 transistors, where the inset shows the 5.6 GHz (L = 0.5 mm) device structure. (d) Flexible MoS2 multi-cycle bending tests at 1% tensile strain with high electrical stability after 10000 cycles. (e) Flexible MoS2 RF transistor scheme utilized as an AM demodulator in a wireless AM receiver (AM radio band 0.54 to 1.6 MHz), where the inset shows the spectrum of the AM receiver output. (Courtesy H. Y. Chang et al.).265	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) BP-FET with SnO2 passivation scheme. (b) Passivated BP-FET transfer curves at different times, i.e., as fabricated, 10 h and 15 days, Vds = −0.1 V. (c) Hole mobility (peak field-effect mobility at Vds = −0.1 V). (d) Ion/Ioff ratio changes with time upon exposure to air. (Courtesy D. K. Sang et al.).268	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Sensor response as the percentage change in resistance to diverse concentrations of BSA (1, 2.5, 10, and 25 mg m L−1). (b) Sensitivity graph of concentration vs. percentage change in resistance.280 (c) The gas response to 100 ppm NO2 for a WO3 thin film at 300 °C. PTAx represents a WO3 thin film obtained through deposition using x mL PTA solution. (d) Active sensing of PTA6 thin film in the 10 to 100 ppm NO2 concentration range.290 (e) Tumor-bearing mice injected with 2D MnO2 whose nanosheet surface was decorated with folic acid and PEG in vivo: T1-weighted MRI images for 90 min.291 (f) 2D MnO2-sgc8 nanoprobe optical and FL images in the presence and absence (control) of CCRF-CEM. (Courtesy Z. Zhao et al.).292	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) I–V curves measured from TLM test structures: diamond: H/HyMoO3−x (red lines) samples (right) and H/MoO3 (black lines). (B) Linear fitting curves of the corresponding sample TLM pattern. Rsh and Rc are the sheet and contact resistance, respectively. (C–E) FET properties using similar dimensions: 24 mm gate length, 40 mm gate width, and 15 mm source/drain to gate separation. (F) Diamond:H/MoO3 (top) and diamond: H/HyMoO3−x (bottom) FETs and their respective electronic band energy structures with different oxidation state ratios. (VB = valence band; CB = conduction band.) (Courtesy Z. Yin et al.).296	 

 	Fig. 15  Optoelectronic properties of 2D halide perovskites. (a) BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 absorption spectra and PL with different n values at RT. (b) Corresponding absorption spectrum of 2D perovskite at 5 K. (c) Spectra of BA2PbBr4PL samples with different thicknesses. (d) PL spectra of MAPbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses. (e) Perovskite PL peak position and BG as a function of the number of unit cells. (f) PEA2PbBr4(1−x)Cl4x absorption spectra. (Courtesy C. Lan et al.).301	 

 	Fig. 16  Structures and performance of LED devices. (a) SEM image of the PEA2PbBr4 LED device. (b) A typical PEA2PbBr4 nanoplatelet-based LED device to obtain normalized luminescence. (c) AFM images of pristine and annealed PEA2PbBr4 films. (d) PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 multi-phase perovskite channel energy crossways and inhomogeneous energy scenery with the carrier concentration of the smallest BG emitter. (e) Perovskite LED device structure. On the right, a schematic of the nanometer grains with BA cation decoration is shown. (f) Band alignment of each functional layer in the LED device. (g) Typical electroluminescence spectra of a PEA2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 (n = 3 composition)-based LED under different bias voltages. The insets in (f and g) show the LED electroluminescence spectra. (h) Schematic of the perovskite nanoplatelet LED device architecture as the emitter and diagram of the horizontal band energy levels of the different material layers, indicating the valence and CB levels with respect to vacuum. (i) Electroluminescence spectra at 4 V bias current, where the inset shows a 56 mm2 device. (j) External quantum efficiency (EQE) vs. current density graph. (Courtesy L. Ni et al.).312	 

Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and ∼30 nm thick	N.A.	Detection of ethanol, methanol, acetone, and ammonia gases through resistance changes
Nafion/Hb/TiO2–Ti3C2	Laterally micrometer sheets	N.A.	Detection of hydrogen peroxide through amperometry changes
Nafion/Hb/Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Detection of nitrite through amperometry changes
Nafion/Gox/Au/Ti3C2	∼200 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	N.A.	Detection of glucose through amperometry changes
Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Detection of Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+ through amperometry changes
Ti3C2	∼10 nm nanodots	Polyethylenimine	Ratiometric photoluminescence sensing of intracellular pH
Ag, Au or Pb-grafted Ti3C2	2 to 3 μm laterally and a few nanometers thick	N.A.	Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of methylene blue
Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of Rhodamine 6G
Ti2N	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Substrate for sensitive SERS detection of Rhodamine 6G
Ti3C2	∼500 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	N.A.	Antibacterial activity toward E. coli and B. subtilis cells through ROS production
Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Ti3C2 antibacterial membrane for anti-biofouling applications
Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and nanometers thick	N.A.	Probing neural activity
Ti3C2	2 to 7 nm nanodots	N.A.	Multicolor luminescent cell imaging
Ti3C2	2 to 5 nm nanodots	N.A.	Size- and defect-selective multi-color emissions
Ti3C2	4 to 10 nm nanodots	PVP	Luminescent cell imaging
Ti3C2	∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	First demonstration of MXenes for PTT
Ti3C2–DOX	∼100 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Hyaluronic acid	Synergistic PTT/PDT/chemotherapy
Ti3C2–DOX	∼120 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	PA imaging-guided pH-responsive and NIR laser-triggered DOX release for synergistic PTT/chemotherapy
Ti3C2–MnOx	∼220 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	MR/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window
Nb2C	∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	PVP	PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I and NIR-II windows
Ta4C3–MnOx	∼150 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	MR/CT/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window
Ta4C3	∼100 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	CT/PA imaging-guided PTT in the NIR-I window by both intravenous and intratumoral administration
Ti3C2	∼4.9 nm laterally and ∼1.2 nm thick dots	N.A.	PAI-guided PTT in the NIR-I window
Ta4C3–iron oxide	∼250 nm laterally and a few nanometers thick	Soybean phospholipid	CT/MR imaging-guided PTT of breast cancer
Ti3C2	Micrometers laterally and ∼30 nm thick	N.A.	Detection of ethanol, methanol, acetone, and ammonia gases through resistance changes

PEA2PbBr4	410	14	0.04	—	—	—
(C6H5CH2NH3)2PbI4	526	15	0.005	—	9	A lifetime of ∼1 min
PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 5	∼740	∼50	8.8	—	—	—
NMA2FAPb2I6Br	763	∼50	11.7	—	—	50% after 2 h under operation
BA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 19	513	∼30	9.3	17.1	8000	No degradation after storage for 4 months in N2
BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 19	748	∼50	10.4	0.09	50	No degradation after storage for 8 months in N2
PEA2FAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 3	532	∼25	14.36	62.43	9120	Lifetime of 120 min in dry air with encapsulation
PEA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 with average 〈n〉 = 5	526	∼20	7.4	∼20	8400	50% after 5 min under operation
OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets	530	20	0.48	—	10590	Stable in air for at least one week
OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplatelets with n = 7 to 10	520	∼25	2.31	8.1	∼1000	—
PEA2Csn−1PbnBr3n+1 nanoplates	514	17	10.4	31.2	14000	Stable in glove box for at least one month
PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 nanoplates	683	34	7.3	—	∼100	—
NMA2CsPb2I6Cl	688	∼30	3.7	—	440	50% after 5 h under operation
NMA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1	694	∼30	7.3	—	732	—
NMA2(FA0.93Cs0.07)n−1PbnI3n+1	783	∼50	7.8	—	—	50% after 31 h under operation
BA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1	680	∼50	6.23	1.74	1392	Decrease of 20% after 4 h under operation

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) EMI shielding properties of MXenes: (a) electrical conductance comparison and (b) EMI-SE activities of Mo and Ti-based MXene films. (c) EMI-SE performance comparison of MXenes and various materials. (d) Synthesis scheme. (e) SEM image of a Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene composite synthesized by an electrostatic self-assembly method. (f) EMI SE composites displayed improved absorption. (g) Scheme of Ti3C2Tx MXene integration into a nanoscale slot antenna arrangement. (h) Comparison of the transmitted THz signals of the MXene nanoarrays and bare Si substrate. (i) Normalized transmittance spectra of the MXene nanoarrays with 150 nm width and a variety of thicknesses. (Courtesy M. Naguib et al.).201	 

 	Fig. 18  Strain and pressure sensors based on MXenes. (a) A ML-Ti3C2Tx-based pressure sensor scheme. (b) ML-Ti3C2Tx interlayer spacing changes with applied pressure. (c) A human finger gesture response sensor. (d) SEM image of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT composite. (e) Strain sensor. (f) Strain range. (g) Optical images of a highly stretchable Ti3C2Tx/PVA hydrogel composite. (h) The H2 resistance response when an object moves in parallel (right) and perpendicular (left) directions to the current direction. (i) The mechanism of the electromechanical response of the Ti3C2Tx/PVA hydrogel. (Courtesy K. Hantanasirisakul et al.).201	 

 	Fig. 19  Molecule sensing properties. (a) Ti2CO2 MXene adsorption location for diverse gases. (b) Distribution of charge density. (c) Calculated Ti2CO2I–V characteristics for adsorbed NH3 and CO2 molecules. (d) A d-Ti3C2Tx-based gas sensor on an integer's digitized circuit. (e) Resistivity response of an MXene after adsorption of different gases. (f) Calculated adsorption energies of a Ti3C2Tx MXene for NH3 and acetone molecules in comparison with other 2D materials. (g) Neural activity detection by a d-Ti3C2Tx-based FET device. (h) Transfer curve for the device. (i) Dopamine concentration response of the device. (Courtesy K. Hantanasirisakul et al.).201	 

 	Fig. 20  (a and b) Fabricated FET device 3D scheme and SEM image. (c) Id–Vd curves of the MgAl–CO3-LDH and ZnAl–CO3-LDH microcrystal devices measured at Vg = 0 V. (d) Id–Vg curves of the MgAl–CO3-LDH device at a bias voltage Vd = 40 V. (Courtesy Y. Zhao et al.).365	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Setup and heterostructure of a graphene/WSe2/graphene PC; (b) photocurrent between two pulses as a function of time; (c) IQE as a function of potential drop across the WSe2 layer (ΔV) for devices with 2.2, 7.4, and 28 nm conduit lengths; (d) top: optical image of a vdWs-assembled MoS2–graphene–WSe2-based device, bottom: heterostructure side view; (e) typical device R and specific directivity (D*) in the 400 to 2400 nm wavelength range in ambient atmosphere at Vg = 0 V and VDS = 1 V. (Courtesy M. Massicotte et al.).375	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) ZnO QD coating on a graphene device. (b) O2-assisted charge transfer mechanism. (i) Irradiation of photon energy greater than the QD BG, e–h pair generation; (ii) the holes are trapped in the surface states, leaving unpaired electrons. At the surface, the trapped holes will discharge O2 ions and desorb O2 molecules; (iii) electrons are transferred from QDs to the graphene layer; (iv) e–h pairs are not generated when the laser is turned off. The QDs re-adsorb O2 molecules and the remaining captured electrons to form O2 ions. (c) Excitation intensity. (d) Schematic of the MLG/-Ga2O3 PD. (e) I–V characteristics of the device under dark and 254 nm-light irradiation, where the inset shows the I–V characteristics on a logarithmic scale. (f) Multilayer graphene–Ga2O3 heterojunction R and detectivity PD as a function of bias voltage. (Courtesy D. Shin et al.).378	 

 	Fig. 23  2D perovskite-based PD design. (a) Design of the PD. (b) An example of 2D perovskite-based PDs along a mesa configuration BG. (c) Representative model. (d) A 2D perovskite-based PD band diagram with asymmetric metal contacts. (e) Representative diagram. (f) Typical 2D perovskite-based PDs with a vertical configuration band diagram. (g) Representative model. (h) PD scheme. (i) Schematic and BG diagram of 2D perovskite-based plasmon PDs. (j) Enhanced mechanism of a 2D perovskite microcavity PD. (k) Hybrid 2D perovskite-QD PD enhanced mechanism. (Courtesy X. Qi et al.).392	 

 	Fig. 24  Proposed mechanism of H-MoS2@Ti2CO2 intercalation. (Courtesy Yangfan Shao et al.).394	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Structure of a graphene PD and Au-NP charge trapping layer device. The device comprises Au as the source/drain electrode, and ITO acts as an electrode; (b) graphene PD fabricated on a PEN substrate photographic image; (c) photodetectivity and photoresponsivity versus illumination; (d) |E2| 2D profile for hybrid PDs including and excluding Au NPs; (e) retention time; (f) graphene PD cycle tests with a memory function under a range of illumination. (Courtesy S. Jang et al.).399	 

Semi-metal/semiconductor	Graphene/WS2/graphene/h-BN	Vertical FETs	ON/OFF ratio > 1 × 106	
404

Graphene/MoS2	Vertical FETs	Current density 5000 A cm2 ON/OFF ratio > 103	
405

Graphene/MoS2	Vertical FETs	Current density 104 A cm2 ON/OFF ratio 105	
406

Graphene/h-BN/MoS2/graphene	FETs	Electron mobility 33 cm2 V−1 s−1, ON/OFF current ratio > 106	
407

Graphene/h-BN/MoS2(WS2)/h-BN/graphene	Electroluminescence	Extrinsic quantum efficiency 10%	
408

Graphene/MoS2/graphene	Photodetector	External quantum efficiency 55%, internal quantum efficiency 85%, photoresponsivity 0.22 A W−1	
374

Graphene/WS2/graphene	Photodetector	External quantum efficiency 30% Photoresponsivity 0.1 A W−1	
373

Graphene/MoS2	Photodetector	Photogain > 108 Internal quantum efficiency 15% Photoresponsivity > 107 A W−1	
409

Semi-metal/insulator	Graphene/h-BN	FETs	Mobility 60 k cm2 V−1 s−1	
410

h-BN/Gra./h-BN/Gra./h-BN; h-BN/Gra./MoS2/Gra./h-BN	Vertical FET	B/G/B/G/B: ON/OFF ratio 50, B/G/M/G/B: ON/OFF ratio 1 × 104	
411

Graphene/h-BN/graphene	Thermoelectrical power	Seebeck coefficient 99.3 mV K−1, ZT = 1.05 × 106	
412

Semiconductor/semiconductor	p-WSe2/n-WSe2	CMOS	Full logic swing voltage gain up to 38	
76

WSe2/MoS2 p–n diode	Photodetector	Electroluminescence, current rectification factor 1.2, external quantum efficiency 12%	
413

Black phosphorus/MoS2	p–n diode Photodetector	Current rectification factor 105, external quantum efficiency 0.3%, photoresponsivity 418 mA W−1	
414

MoS2/p-Ge	Band-to-band tunneling FET	Sub-threshold swing minimum of 3.9 mV per decade, average 31.1 mV per decade	
415

Semiconductor/insulator	MoS2/h-BN/graphene	FETs	Mobility > 45 cm2 V−1 s−1 ON/OFF ratio 104 to 106	
416

Footnote
† Equal contribution as first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
