Photoelectrochemical water splitting using one-dimensional nanostructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA04829E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04829E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21576-21606Photoelectrochemical water splitting using one-dimensional nanostructures

        
          
            Joo-Won 
            Lee†
b, 
      
        
          
            Ki-Hyun 
            Cho†
c, 
      
        
          
            Joon-Soo 
            Yoon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young-Min 
            Kim
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yun-Mo 
            Sung
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: ymsung@korea.ac.kr
bMaterials Architecturing Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 5, Hwarang-ro 14-gil, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA
Received 
      8th June 2021
    , Accepted 8th September 2021First published on 22nd September 2021AbstractHydrogen energy is an attractive alternative to fossil fuels. Among the various methods for H2 production, solar-driven photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is considered as the representative technique because of its ecofriendly process and the abundance of resources. To achieve higher PEC performance, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures have been highlighted owing to their considerable potential as photocatalyst materials. Not only the enhanced surface area, but also the unique and novel properties ascribed to their anisotropic characteristics have allowed enhanced PEC performance compared to thin-film photoelectrodes. In this manuscript, we review the recent research on 1D nanostructured photoelectrodes for solar-driven PEC water splitting. The brief synthetic approaches to develop 1D nanostructured photoelectrodes and various strategies to improve their performance are summarized, which can provide a roadmap on the development of advanced photoelectrodes for H2 generation.
1. Introduction
Fossil fuels have facilitated not only the development of industries and technologies but also the improvement of the quality of human life. Owing to their high energy density and ease of storage and transport, fossil fuels have been essential as primary energy sources for more than a century. For the last century, however, the use of fossil fuels has caused global energy shortages as well as environmental problems. In particular, burning fossil fuels emits several harmful gases such as CO2, N2O, etc. which engenders and accelerates air pollution and the greenhouse effect, which lets us explore alternative energies for eco-friendly and sustainable development.
Hydrogen (H2) is one of the candidates as an efficient and clean energy carrier for future sustainable energy systems.1 H2 and air mixture has lower ignition energy than gasoline, and its theoretical heat of combustion per unit mass is approximately 2.5 times higher than that of hydrocarbons.2 More importantly, the combustion of H2 generates no harmful gases, but H2O as a byproduct. Consequently, H2 has been highlighted as a promising eco-friendly alternative energy source that can replace fossil fuels. At present, however, >90% of hydrogen energy is supplied by the reforming of fossil fuels, which is neither eco-friendly nor economical because of carbon emissions and high-temperature processes, respectively.3 Therefore, an environmentally friendly method to obtain H2 is required.
Since Fujishima and Honda first demonstrated H2 generation via photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting using TiO2 thin films in the early 1970s, solar-driven (PEC) water splitting has engaged attention intensively because it is entirely eco-friendly.4 In PEC water splitting, a semiconductor photocatalyst converts solar energy into electrochemical energy which can allow the uphill water-splitting reaction requiring external energy of 1.23 V.5 That is, H2 can ideally be generated infinitely by splitting Earth's abundant water under solar illumination, which is eco-friendly and economical. Hence, PEC water splitting can be an ideal technique to generate H2 which can replace fossil fuels.247–252
Efforts have been made to design photocatalysts exhibiting high solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency using various semiconductor photocatalysts. It is important not only to employ proper semiconductors but also to design heterostructures for energy band engineering to minimize the loss of charge carriers generated in photocatalysts under illumination. To enhance catalytic reaction which occurs on the surface of photocatalysts, furthermore, nanostructured photocatalysts having zero- to two-dimensional morphologies are synthesized to maximize their surface area.6,7 For PEC water splitting H2 generation, on the other hand, those proper semiconductors with a heterostructure should be synthesized or grown on conducting substrates to fabricate a photoelectrode. As a result, vertically standing one-dimensional nanostructures on conducting substrates are ideal for PEC water splitting reactions to enhance the surface area. However, the formation of vertically standing one-dimensional nanostructures and their heterostructures on conducting substrates uniformly is challenging due to the limited synthetic approaches compared to those for colloidal photocatalysts.
Our group has been making efforts to develop synthetic methods to grow one-dimensional nanostructures on conducting substrates for various applications.8,21,180 Especially, we have reported that the solution–liquid–solid method can be applied to the growth of vertically standing one-dimensional nanostructured semiconductors on low-cost glass substrates uniformly for the first time.8 Consequently, our attention has been paid to the development of high-performance photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting H2 generation. In this article, therefore, we provide a comprehensive summary on PEC water splitting H2 generation particularly based on one-dimensional nanostructured photoelectrodes. This review encompasses various semiconductor photocatalysts employed for PEC water splitting system from their novel synthetic approaches to various strategies for enhancing the performance of one-dimensional nanostructured photoelectrodes. Finally, in the last section of this paper, a brief outlook and conclusions regarding high-efficiency solar-driven PEC water splitting using 1D nanostructures are presented.
1.1 PEC water splitting H2 generation reaction: basic concepts
Solar-driven PEC water splitting utilizes semiconductors as a photoelectrode for light absorption and splitting water (H2O) into H2 and O2via redox reactions. In semiconductors, charge carriers such as electrons and holes are excited by the absorption of photons with energy exceeding their bandgap (Eg). Then, these photoexcited charge carriers are forced to separate in opposite directions because of band bending developed in the space-charge region in the vicinity of the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. Thus, the minority carriers (holes for photoanodes and electrons for photocathodes) migrate to the surface of the photoelectrodes through the space-charge region. The remaining majority carriers (electrons for photoanodes and holes for photocathodes) are simultaneously driven to the opposite electrodes to complete the redox reaction of water splitting, as shown in Fig. 1.25 Consequently, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) occur on the surface of the photoanode and photocathode, respectively, as expressed by the following equations: (1) (2) (3)
 Fig. 1  Tandem configuration with a photoanode and a photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In short, the overall PEC water splitting process can be described as follows: (i) light absorption, (ii) charge separation of photoexcited electrons and holes, (iii) migration of minority carriers to the interface between photoelectrodes and electrolytes, and (iv) the water splitting reaction (O2 evolution at photoanodes and H2 evolution at photocathodes). Because electrons and holes directly induce catalytic water splitting reactions (water reduction and water oxidation, respectively), therefore, effective charge separation and migration to electrolytes are necessary for achieving high-efficiency solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion.
The STH conversion efficiency describes the performance of H2 generation via PEC water splitting in a reliable and comparative manner. The STH conversion efficiency is used to estimate the rate of solar-energy conversion into the chemical energy of H bonding. To measure the STH conversion efficiency, the PEC device should be in the two-electrode configuration without a reference electrode under a zero-bias and the AM 1.5G solar radiation condition. The STH conversion efficiency is given as follows: (4)where jSC represents the short-circuit photocurrent (mA cm−2), 1.23 V is the thermodynamic potential for water splitting, Pin represents the energy density of incident illumination under the AM 1.5G condition (mW cm−2), and ηF is the faradaic efficiency for H2 production. The faradaic efficiency of the photoelectrode can be demonstrated by measuring the H2 generation rate (mmol s−1) using a gas chromatograph and jSC using a potentiostat simultaneously. Notably, the STH conversion efficiency is applicable only when measurements are conducted without sacrificial agents. The values of 1.23 V in eqn (4) is selected under the assumption that water undergoes oxidation and reduction catalysis without sacrificial agents. If measurements are conducted with sacrificial agents, another diagnostic efficiency is more appropriate for obtaining new findings.
Photoelectrodes are generally examined under the electrical bias condition in the three-electrode configuration (working, counter, and reference electrodes). This measurement does not precisely depict the STH conversion process. However, the PEC properties, such as the onset potential and saturated photocurrent, can be identified simply by controlling the external bias. Therefore, the ability of photoelectrodes under bias voltage can be expressed as the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) and the ABPE formula gives the efficiency with respect to the external bias, in contrast to the STH conversion efficiency: (5)where jph represents the measured photocurrent according to the applied bias potential Vb.
1.2 Semiconductor photocatalysts
As shown in eqn (3), the overall water splitting reaction is endothermic, which is not a spontaneous process without external energy. Thus, the semiconductor of photoelectrodes requires a solar spectrum with a photon energy of >1.23 eV (λ < 1000 nm). Not only the bandgaps, but also the band edge levels of the conduction band (ECB) and valence band (EVB) significantly affect the PEC water splitting performance. For effective water splitting catalysis, the EVB of photoanodes should be more positive than the OER potential (O2/H2O), and the ECB of photocathodes should be more negative than the HER potential (H+/H2). Additionally, the kinetic overpotentials are approximately ∼0.3 eV for water oxidation and ∼0.15 eV for water reduction.9–11 Therefore, semiconductors with a bandgap of 1.7–2.0 eV are promising candidates for efficient PEC water splitting.12–15 Additionally, semiconductors with a broad absorption spectrum (Eg < 2.0 eV) are effective for harvesting solar energy.
Semiconductors with small bandgaps (1.23–2.0 eV) can be excited by a broad solar spectrum including ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near-infrared light. However, some of these materials suffer from inappropriate band edge positions with regard to the kinetic overpotentials, as mentioned previously. On the other hand, semiconductors with an absorption edge of 2.0–3.0 eV can absorb visible light, which accounts for a relatively large proportion of solar energy. However, many semiconductors satisfying these criteria exhibit poor photostability and instability in certain electrolytes. In contrast, metal oxides with a large bandgap (>3.0 eV) have been the focus of research because of their high chemical stability against photo-dissolution. Nevertheless, it is challenging to enhance the solar absorption for metal-oxide semiconductors.
1.2.1 One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures for PEC
In addition to the electronic properties of semiconductors, such as the bandgap and band edge levels, the morphology of semiconductors should be considered for efficient PEC water splitting. Generally, in water splitting, a large surface area is beneficial for maximizing the amount of H2 produced. In this context, the growth of 1D nanostructured oxide semiconductors has attracted attention because of their feasible synthesis, high stability, and large volumetric surface area. 1D nanostructured oxides have significantly impacted the PEC research field; outstanding progress has been achieved even though their light absorption is confined to the UV range.16–20 In addition to the large surface area of 1D nanostructures, the anisotropic morphology of 1D nanostructures reduces the recombination rate of charge carriers. As shown in Fig. 2a, the distance to the electrolytes of minority carriers is extremely short owing to the unique physical dimensions of 1D nanostructures: the orthogonality of the electron and hole diffusion directions in the semiconductor is established in 1D nanostructures. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis is usually employed to describe whole electrochemical behaviors especially at the 1D nanostructures/electrolyte interface. The Nyquist plot, one of main EIS analysis, provides quantitative and qualitative information of equivalent circuit components from 1D photoelectrodes such as solution resistance, bulk resistance, charge transfer resistance, double layer capacitance, and etc. Thus, the effective charge transfer mechanism caused by the orthogonality of 1D nanostructures could be examined by the Nyquist plot. With the advancements in the fabrication of 1D nanostructures, photoelectrodes using non-oxide 1D nanostructures with absorption edges in the visible and IR ranges have been reported.21,22 The extended absorption range is necessary to realize outstanding PEC performance. Additionally, a periodic array of 1D nanostructures reduces the light reflection through the multiple scattering of incident photons.23
 Fig. 2  (a) 2D thin-film structure (left) and the array of 1D nanostructures (right) with advantages of hole diffusion and light absorption. Schematics of the (b) type-II heterojunction and (c) Z-scheme heterojunction. 
On the other hand, newly emerged 2D materials such as graphene, g-C3N4, BN, MoS2, black phosphorous, etc. are widely studied for the water splitting application.220 These materials are composed of a number of atomically thin layers and easily transformed to mono to few layered catalysts because of the weak van der Waals bonding within layers. The monolayer 2D catalysts show totally different band gap and light harvesting properties compared to the bulk counterparts. Also 2D catalysts generally show enhanced charge transport behaviors, causing lower recombination loss of electrons and holes. In addition, 2D catalysts possess enlarged specific surface area, resulting in a higher exposure probability of active sites for higher PEC performance.
1.2.2 One-dimensional (1D) heteronanostructures
Heterojunctions are widely adopted to enhance the PEC performance by reducing the charge recombination, modifying the band edge positions, extending the absorption range, and obtaining extra photopotential.24–28 Hetero-band structure configurations, e.g., type-II and Z-scheme, are the most well-known heterojunction strategies in PEC research community. For 1D nanostructures, core/shell nanowires, nanorods, and branches are used to develop heterojunctions. For 1D nanostructured oxides, semiconductors absorbing visible radiation are utilized to support 1D oxides (core) as sensitizers (shell) for broad absorption of solar energy.29,30 The type-II heterojunction is usually developed by constructing a core/shell nanorod, which results in effective charge separation.31,32 As shown in Fig. 2b, photoexcited electron–hole pairs are separated by the type-II band alignment. The Z-scheme configuration has been widely studied in zero-dimensional (0D) photocatalysts by forming heterostructured nanoparticles.33,34 This heterojunction utilizes electrons of higher conduction-band level and holes of lower valence-band level, which results in a high photopotential of electron–hole pairs, as shown in Fig. 2c. Recently, 1D core/shell heterostructures have been fabricated to develop the Z-scheme configuration for efficient PEC water splitting.35,36
1.2.3 One-dimensional (1D) photoelectrodes
To investigate the PEC characteristics properly, it should be ensured that only the performance from semiconductor photocatalysts of concern is measured without external contributions such as leakage current from conductive substrates. In this case, a thorough sealing is necessary to prevent the electrolyte from contacting conductive substrates. Also, a good ohmic contact between the semiconductor photocatalyst and the conductive substrate is highly required to minimize the electrical resistance in photoelectrodes. In the case of 1D nanostructured photoelectrodes, 1D nanostructures are not efficient for covering the surface of conductive substrates to prevent leakage current. Further, development of a good ohmic contact between 1D nanostructures and substrates highly depends on a preparation process. The buffer layer is widely adopted for the settlement of these fabrication issues. When the buffer layer is introduced to photoelectrodes, fabrication factors have to be considered such as the proper deposition technique corresponding to the substrate type, the crystallinity, and thickness of the buffer layer.
2. UV- or visible-light-absorbing oxide 1D photoelectrodes
Owing to their facile synthesis (particularly via wet chemical growth), 1D nanostructured oxides have been widely studied for H2 production using the solar spectrum or UV radiation.37–40 Various strategies have enabled notable and meaningful PEC research on 1D nanostructured oxides, e.g., increasing the surface area, doping, co-catalysts, and heterostructures, despite their wide bandgaps. 1D nanostructured oxides are still the most promising candidates for PEC applications owing to their low production cost and high stability.
2.1 ZnO nanostructured photoanodes
Wurtzite ZnO is attractive for water oxidation because of its high oxidation power and chemical stability. Also, intrinsic defects such as oxygen vacancies and zinc interstitials are advantageous to the high PEC performance by modifying carrier concentrations of ZnO.206 Well-aligned 1D ZnO nanostructures have been studied as photoanodes for maximizing their surface area and optimizing the surface defect chemistry.207 In particular, seed-assisted hydrothermal growth allowed the simple and effective fabrication of 1D arrays of ZnO nanostructures.41 Wang et al. compared the PEC properties of ZnO in the form of well-oriented nanorod arrays, randomly oriented nanorod arrays, and consolidated nanoparticles.42 Only well-oriented nanorod arrays exhibited redshifted photocurrent responses at 385 nm, while randomly oriented nanorod arrays and nanoparticles exhibit less intense photocurrent responses at 345 nm, as shown in Fig. 3a. In this study, well-oriented ZnO nanorod arrays were found to be more suitable for PEC water oxidation because of their enhanced light absorption and large active surface area with high electron mobility and crystallinity.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photoresponses of (i) ZnO nanoparticles, (ii) randomly distributed ZnO nanorods, (iii) a thick film of randomly distributed ZnO nanorods, and (iv) well-aligned ZnO nanorods electrodes with respect to the wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Increase in the aspect ratio with the increasing reaction time. (c) XPS spectra of ZnO nanorods with different lengths, indicating the presence of three O species: OL (lattice O), OV (O vacancy), and OC (chemically adsorbed O). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 the Owner Societies. 
In addition to the large surface area, the unique morphology of 1D ZnO nanostructures significantly affects the PEC performance. Leelavathi et al. fabricated 1D ZnO nanorods with different aspect ratios (length ranging from 0.25 to 3 μm with the same diameter).43 The ZnO nanorods exhibited an increase in the photocurrent density with the increasing aspect ratio. This phenomenon was directly related to the number of adsorbed O atoms on the surface of ZnO and the reduced charge recombination due to adsorbed O. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) revealed that prism planes of ZnO nanorods are preferable to basal planes for the adsorption of O atoms, as shown in Fig. 3b. Because 3 μm-long ZnO nanorods have the largest prism plane area and the largest number of adsorbed O atoms, 3 μm-long ZnO nanorods exhibit the highest photocurrent density.

2.1.1 Core/shell structured heterojunctions. 
Against limited solar spectrum harvesting in the UV range, semiconductors with visible-light absorption edges, such as cadmium sulfide (CdS) and cadmium selenide (CdSe), have been studied as supplementary light-absorbing materials. Additionally, the more negative ECB of CdSe (vs. ECB of ZnO) and the more positive EVB of ZnO (vs. EVB CdSe) promote the charge separation of electrons and holes, as shown in Fig. 2b. This charge transport is the typical benefit of the type-II configuration.
Miao et al. fabricated ZnO/CdSe heterostructures, which exhibited a photocurrent response in the visible range because of CdSe having a bandgap of ∼1.7 eV.44 The ZnO/CdSe photoelectrode exhibits most outstanding IPCE result through extended light absorption and enhanced charge separation induced by the type-II heterojunction. Tak et al. reported a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire prepared via the successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method for growing CdS as a sensitizer.45Fig. 4a presents short-circuit photocurrents with respect to the different numbers of CdS SILAR cycles. The short-circuit photocurrent density increased as the number of SILAR cycles increased from 15 to 120. The improvement of the photocurrent was related to the type-II band alignment between ZnO and CdS. With an increase in the CdS shell thickness, the absorption edge of ZnO/CdS was modified from 3.2 eV (bare ZnO) to 2.4 eV (120 cycles). Additionally, the open-circuit potential (OCP) of the ZnO/CdS heterostructure was negatively shifted to −1.55 V vs. a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) compared with −0.8 V vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) for bare ZnO, indicating enhanced charge separation between ZnO and CdS. The CdS sensitizer increases the visible-light absorption and induces a negative shift of the OCP through the type-II heterojunction.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current densities of the pristine ZnO nanowire and ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays with 5, 15, 30, 60, or 120 CdS SILAR cycles under chopped illumination. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Band alignments and charge-transport mechanism of ZnO/CdS/CdSe double-shelled nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Mott–Schottky analysis of BiVO4 nanoparticles and ZnO nanorods. (d) PL spectra of pristine BiVO4 and ZnO/BiVO4 core/shell heterostructures with an incident-laser wavelength of 325 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH. 
Kuang et al. reported double-shelled ZnO nanotube arrays with CdS and CdSe for constructing a heterostructure of ZnO/CdS/CdSe, as shown in Fig. 4b.46 The carrier density of ZnO/CdS/CdSe was identified to be 86.5 times higher than that of pristine ZnO via Mott–Schottky analysis. Additionally, the light-absorption range of ZnO/CdS/CdSe is extended by the co-sensitization effect compared with those of single heterojunctions of ZnO/CdS and ZnO/CdSe. Consequently, double-shelled ZnO nanotube arrays exhibit a higher photocurrent density (20.03 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. SCE) than the single heterojunctions of ZnO/CdS and ZnO/CdSe.
Monoclinic BiVO4 is a well-known visible-light absorber with a direct bandgap of 2.4 eV. However, its PEC water splitting application is limited by severe charge recombination, poor electron mobility, and slow hole transfer for water oxidation. Moniz et al. studied ZnO as an electron acceptor to prevent the rapid charge recombination of BiVO4.47 1D ZnO nanorods were investigated for the formation of a ZnO/BiVO4 heterostructure owing to its high electron mobility and internal electric field. In this study, appropriate type-II band alignment between ZnO and BiVO4 was demonstrated by measuring the flat-band potentials and photoluminescence spectra, as shown in Fig. 4c and d, respectively. The measured flat-band potentials of 0.05 V vs. RHE (BiVO4) and 0.25 V vs. RHE (ZnO) indicated feasible electron transfer from BiVO4 to ZnO. The quenched PL spectra of ZnO/BiVO4 proved effective charge separation between BiVO4 and ZnO. Under visible-light illumination, the photocurrent of bare BiVO4 was 0.25 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE, and that of ZnO/BiVO4 was increased to 2 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. RHE.


2.1.2 Elemental doping (enhanced light harvesting). 
As the PEC application of ZnO alone is limited to UV radiation harvesting, a doping strategy has been studied for introducing an impurity energy level in the forbidden energy gap, reducing the bandgap.48–50 Doping of the ZnO lattice with N narrows the effective bandgap, allowing visible light absorption above 380 nm.51 Yang et al. prepared N:ZnO (N-doped ZnO) nanowire arrays via heat treatment in ammonia for incorporation of N as a doping agent.52 Compared with ZnO (IPCE of 3.3%), the IPCE of the N:ZnO nanowire arrays increased to 14.6% at a wavelength of 400 nm. The maximum ABPE of N:ZnO was evaluated to be 0.15% at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
Ion implantation is a doping process that introduces an ionized impurity into the selected substrate region with a certain penetration depth. Wang et al. fabricated ZnO nanorods with N dopants distributed with a gradient concentration along the c-axis via the ion implantation method.53 With an increase in the nominal doses of N, the absorption abilities of N:ZnO in the visible range were improved, as expected. The increased IPCE in the visible range of 380–550 nm proved the enhanced photon absorption of N:ZnO nanorods. As shown in Fig. 5a, the N doping concentration decreases with the increasing etching depth of ZnO nanorods measured through serial XPS etching measurements. As the N doping level increased from 0 to 3.5 wt%, a terraced band structure was formed along the vertical direction of the ZnO nanorods, leading to a built-in electric field to enhance the charge transfer, as shown in Fig. 5c. Cai et al. investigated the effect of V doping on the ZnO band structure.54 Vanadium was incorporated into the ZnO lattice by ion implantation as V4+ or V5+, as confirmed by serial XPS measurements. V4+ ions are responsible for the extended optical absorption range of ZnO to the visible region, because they create impurity levels above the EVB of ZnO, as shown in Fig. 5b. In contrast to the absorption onset of 380 nm for ZnO, V:ZnO nanorods exhibit an absorption edge around 590 nm. A considerable photocurrent of 10.5 μA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl under visible light (λ > 420 nm) was measured for the V:ZnO, whereas a negligible photocurrent was detected for ZnO (1.95 μA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl). This was due to the extended absorption range and increased carrier density of ZnO after V doping.
 Fig. 5  (a) XPS profile of the N doping concentration with respect to the etching depth. (b) Band diagram for V-doped ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2014 Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. (c) Schematic of N gradient doping in ZnO nanorods and the resultant terraced band structure with enhanced charge separation. 


2.1.3 Metal decoration for surface plasmon resonance (SPR). 
Decorating ZnO with metal nanoparticles such as Ag,55–57 Au,58–61 Cu,62 and Pt63 is a typical method for increasing the photoresponse in the visible range via the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) mechanism. Metal nanoparticles are extensively used in various applications owing to their LSPR characteristics, such as biosensing technologies, photonics, optics, and catalysis. Table 1 presents the PEC performance of 1D ZnO nanostructures with various metal nanoparticles.
Table 1 PEC performance and measurement conditions of 1D ZnO nanostructures with metal nanoparticles




Photoanode
Ratio (metal/ZnO) or wt%
Illumination light and intensity
Electrolyte
Photocurrent density
Reference




ZnO/Au NP
2 wt%
Visible light (>420 nm), 100 mW cm−2
0.1 M Na2SO4
30 μA cm−2 (0.8 V vs. ag/AgCl)

58



Matchlike ZnO/Au
0.032 atomic ratio
AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2
0.1 M Na2SO4
9.11 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)

59



ZnO/Au nanopencil
0.4 wt%
AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.5 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)

60



ZnO/Au/Al2O3
0.013 atomic ratio
AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 40 mW cm−2
0.5 M Na2SO4
0.55 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)

61



Tip-grafted ZnO/Ag Np
—
300 W Xe lamp, 200 mW cm−2
0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3
2.4 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. SCE)

55



ZnO/Ag NP
18.19 wt%
Visible light (>500 nm)
0.2 M Na2SO4
0.15 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)

56



ZnO/Pt NP
0.007 atomic ratio
AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2
0.5 M Na2SO4
0.43 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)

63





Zhang et al. reported enhanced PEC photoresponses of ZnO nanorod arrays decorated with Au nanoparticles.58 The absorption spectra of the ZnO/Au nanorod arrays exhibited peaks at 515–532 nm due to the plasmonic absorption effect of Au nanoparticles. Accordingly, the photogenerated carrier density in the ZnO nanorods was increased by the hot electron injection from Au. This hot injection was mainly attributed to the enhanced photoresponse under visible-light illumination (λ > 420 nm). Additionally, the Schottky barrier formed at the ZnO/Au interface can hinder the backward electron-transfer process from ZnO to electrolytes, reducing the photoconversion efficiency. Wu et al. enhanced the PEC properties by forming matchlike ZnO/Au heterostructures.59 The absorption edge of the matchlike ZnO/Au nanorods was extended to the visible region, as shown in Fig. 6a, by the SPR effect of Au nanoparticles. The corresponding photocurrent density reached 9.11 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl with an ABPE of 0.48%, which was 16 times higher than that of pristine ZnO. ZnO/Au nanopencil arrays exhibited a photocurrent of ∼1.5 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In this work, Wang et al. suggested a working mechanism involving two aspects: extending the carrier lifetime through the plasmon resonance energy transfer (PRET) process and light harvesting through the SPR effect.60 The ZnO/Au nanopencil arrays exhibited absorption ability in the visible range, as expected. Additionally, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) revealed that the ZnO/Au nanopencil arrays had a prolonged charge-carrier lifetime, as shown in Fig. 6b. In this study, the PRET process from Au to ZnO could modify the electric field in ZnO, affecting the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. Liu et al. studied the synergistic effect of SPR and surface passivation by constructing the ZnO/Au/Al2O3 structure.61 As shown in Fig. 6c, Al2O3, which has a negatively fixed charge increased the charge lifetime of ZnO, which is injected from Au via the SPR effect. This synergistic effect led to a higher ABPE of ZnO/Au/Al2O3 (0.67%) compared with the pristine ZnO (0.1%) and ZnO/Au (0.39%).
 Fig. 6  (a) Absorption spectra of the pristine ZnO nanorod and ZnO/Au heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Impedance analysis (Nyquist plots) of ZnO nanopencils and ZnO/Au heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematics of the working mechanism and energy band structure of ZnO/Au/Al2O3 nanorods. (d) Band diagram of ZnO/Ag heterostructures, indicating the enhanced charge separation. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Transmission electron microscopy image of the ZnO/Cu@Cu2O core/shell heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH. 
Wang et al. reported ZnO nanowire arrays that were tip-grafted with Ag nanoparticles.55 Photochemical reduction was used to selectively deposit Ag nanoparticles onto the top basal plane of ZnO nanowires. Because of the difference in the work functions of Ag (4.2 eV) and ZnO (5.2 eV), Ag nanoparticles functioned as an electron sink, reducing the probability of charge recombination after the Fermi-level equilibrium was reached (Fig. 6d). Additionally, the absorption edge of the ZnO/Ag nanowire arrays was extended to the visible region because of the SPR effect of the Ag nanoparticles. Consequently, the ZnO/Ag nanowire arrays exhibited a higher photocurrent density (2.4 mA cm−2) than ZnO (1.6 mA cm−2) at 0.2 V vs. SCE.
Lou et al. investigated the LSPR effect of Cu nanoparticles by growing 1D ZnO/Cu@Cu2O nanorods, as shown in Fig. 6e.62 Cu is less considered for LSPR applications than Au and Ag, because Cu nanoparticles suffer from severe surface oxidation during the LSPR process. In the study of Lou et al., the plasmonic Cu core nanoparticles were stabilized by partial oxidation, forming Cu@Cu2O structures. The 1D ZnO/Cu@Cu2O nanorods exhibited the highest H2 generation rate of 1472.2 μmol h−1 g−1 at approximately 600 nm because of the extended absorption spectrum, owing to the SPR effect of the Cu nanoparticles. In the case of the noble metal Pt, an absorption peak was observed at approximately 215 nm through the LSPR mechanism. Nevertheless, the deep UV region makes Pt difficult to use in photocatalysis applications. Hsu et al. reported ZnO nanorod arrays decorated with noble Pt nanoparticles serving as co-catalysts,63 which is far from Au, Ag, and Cu. ZnO/Pt nanorod arrays exhibit more effective charge separation and faster charge transport than pristine ZnO.


2.1.4 Hierarchical structures. 
Morphological control of 1D ZnO nanostructures is a promising strategy for achieving an extremely large surface area and modifying the electronic properties. Many hierarchical 1D nanostructures of ZnO have been reported, such as nanopencils,64 template-assisted nanobranches,65 and nanoforests.66,67 As mentioned previously, ZnO nanopencil arrays were reported by Wang et al. for developing the ZnO/Au heterostructure.60 In this study, ZnO nanopencils were confirmed to have slightly less O vacancies than ZnO nanorods, where charge recombination is likely to occur through the trapping of free carriers. Additionally, the ZnO nanopencil arrays exhibited a prolonged charge-carrier lifetime because of their nanopencil morphology. The minority carrier (hole) diffusion length was confined to <50 nm by the nanopencil morphology with an average diameter of 20 nm. Overall, the ZnO nanopencil arrays exhibited better PEC performance than the ZnO nanorod arrays because of the enhanced charge-transport mechanism.
Zhang et al. fabricated branched ZnO nanowire arrays via the following steps: (i) forming ZnO/ZnS core/shell heterostructures through ion exchange, (ii) converting ZnS into a ZnO seed shell, and (iii) growing ZnO branches on the ZnO seed shell.66 As shown in Fig. 7a, this synthesis process yielded single-crystalline ZnO in both first-grown nanowire backbones and newly grown branches. The branched ZnO nanowire arrays exhibited a higher photocurrent (0.7 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. RHE) than pristine ZnO nanowire arrays (0.5 mA cm−2). Sun et al. studied the morphology-tunable synthesis of ZnO nanostructures including brush-like and willow-like ZnO nanoforests with the systematic control of the precursor concentrations.68 As shown in Fig. 7b, both brush-like and willow-like ZnO nanoforests exhibited enhanced absorption efficiencies compared with pristine ZnO because of multiple photon scattering. Thus, the willow-like ZnO nanoforest exhibited the highest photocurrent density of 0.919 mA cm−2 at 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl with an ABPE of 0.299% at 0.89 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 7  (a) Processes for the growth of attached Au nanoparticles and 3D branched ZnO nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Absorption and scattering spectra of the pristine ZnO, brush-like nanoforest, and willow-like nanoforest (left) and schematics of the enhanced light-absorption process of the ZnO nanoforest compared with ZnO nanowires (right). Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schemes of the proposed PEC reaction mechanism and heterojunctions of CdS/ZnO (top) and TiO2/CdS/ZnO (bottom) heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH. 
Z. Bai et al. reported the TiO2/CdS/ZnO hierarchical heterostructures and verified the PEC reaction mechanism by means of morphology and the band alignments as shown in Fig. 7c.230 Backbone ZnO nanowire arrays were hydrothermally grown on a substrate and secondary ZnO nanowires were grown on the surface of the first-grown ZnO backbone. Then TiO2/CdS layers were coated on the hierarchical ZnO nanowire arrays via an atomic layer deposition (ALD) and SILAR method, respectively. For effective PEC water splitting catalysis, the photoelectrode is suggested to contain some sequential heterojunctions with various functions. In this work, the authors utilized the 1D hierarchical ZnO nanowires to enable the integration of heterojunctions with various morphologies such as 0D (CdS), 1D (ZnO), and 2D (TiO2) layers.225 The photoanode showed the enhanced light absorption by photon reflection effect and the enlarged electrode/liquid interface area, which is attributed to the hierarchical ZnO structures. As shown in Fig. 7c, CdS/ZnO forms the type-II heterojunction and benefits from effective charge separation between CdS and ZnO. Also, stability against photocorrosion which is the critical issue of CdS was enhanced by introducing the ALD-grown TiO2 passivation layer. The 1D based TiO2/CdS/ZnO photoelectrode showed 3.58 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE owing to the sequential deposition of TiO2/CdS without a certain reduction of the large surface area.

2.2 TiO2 nanostructured photoanodes
Since Fujishima and Honda reported PEC water splitting using TiO2 electrodes in 1972,4 TiO2 has attracted considerable attention because of its low cost, eco-friendliness, high chemical stability, photocorrosion resistance, and favorable band edge levels for water oxidation.221,222 Despite its attractive features, the commercialization of TiO2 has limitations, such as the large bandgap (3.0 eV for rutile and 3.2 eV for anatase), high charge-recombination rate, low electron mobility, and short minority carrier diffusion length. Despite the smaller band gap of rutile TiO2, the PEC activity of anatase TiO2 is higher because of intrinsic defects.208 In addition to nanostructuring for increasing the surface area of TiO2, modifying the phase such as anatase and rutile is suggested for consideration.

2.2.1 Elemental doping (enhanced light harvesting). 
To achieve efficient TiO2 photoelectrodes, numerous attempts have been made to increase the light absorption of TiO2 in the visible range. Through doping with metal or nonmetal elements, new energy states are introduced into the TiO2 forbidden energy gap, which leads to the shrinkage of the bandgap. Table 2 presents the doping methods and performance of TiO2 photoanodes with various dopants.69,71–73,76,79,254–262 However, the performances of TiO2 still are not sufficient to fill application demand even with enhanced visible light absorption. Reduced TiO2, so called black TiO2, is widely studied in photocatalyst applications because of its extremely narrowed bandgap of around 1.0 eV and corresponding high PEC performance.209,210
Table 2 PEC performance with respect to the dopant species of 1D TiO2 nanostructures




Dopant
Nanostructure
Doping method
Electrolyte

J/mA cm−2
Ref.




N
Nanowires
Annealing in an NH3 flow
1 M KOH
0.23 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

69



N
Nanotube
Immersion in an NH3 solution
0.05 M phosphate buffer
0.116 at 0.2 V

71



C
Nanotube
Annealing in an CO gas flow
1 M KOH
1.7 at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl

72



S
Nanotube
Annealing in an H2S flow
0.1 M Na2SO4
0.45 at 1.5 V vs. SCE

73



S
Nanotube
Annealing in an H2S flow
0.1 M KOH
2.92 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

254



P
Nanotube
Annealing in a PH3 flow
1.0 M NaOH
2.8 and 0.25 at 1.23 V RHE under AM 1.5G and visible light, respectively

76



Si
Nanorod
Adding tetraethoxysilane in a hydrothermal solution
0.1 M NaOH
0.83 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

255



Sn
Nanowire
Adding SnCl4 in a hydrothermal solution
1 M KOH
1.85 at 1.0 V vs. RHE

256



Sr
Nanotube
Adding Sr(OH2) salt in an anodizing electrolyte
1 M KOH
1 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl

257



Li
Nanotube
Applying −1.55 V vs. SCE for 3 s in 1 M LiClO4
0.1 M phosphate buffer
1.5 at 1.65 V vs. RHE

258



Al
Nanorod
Adding Al(NO3)3·9H2O in a hydrothermal solution
0.1 M NaOH
0.8 at 1.0 V vs. RHE

259



Ta
Nanorod
Hydrothermal growth on Ta foil
0.2 M Na2SO4
1.1 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

79



Mo
Nanotube
Adding Na2MoO4 in an anodizing electrolyte
0.05 M Na2SO4
0.008 at 0 V vs. SCE under visible-light irradiation

260



Co
Nanowire
Adding Co(NO3)2·6H2O in a hydrothermal solution
0.1 M Na2SO4
1.0 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl

261



Fe
Nanorod
Adding Fe(NO3)3·9H2O in a hydrothermal solution
1.0 M NaOH
0.55 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

262





Doping with nonmetal elements such as N,69–71,223 C,72 S,73 B,74 P,75,76 and F77 is widely adopted for narrowing the bandgap. Because the atomic orbital energy of these nonmetal elements is higher than the O 2p atomic orbital energy, the newly generated dopant level is slightly more negative than the valence-band edge of TiO2. Thus, doping reduces the optical bandgap with the unchanged conduction-band edge. These nonmetal dopants are generally introduced into the TiO2 lattice via thermal heat treatment with precursor gases, e.g., NH3, CO, and H2S for N, C, and S doping, respectively.
The N dopant can be incorporated either substitutionally or interstitially into the TiO2 lattice. In the case of substitutional sites, hybridized states of the N 2p and O 2p orbitals are formed. The energy state of the hybridized orbital is lower than those of N 2p and O 2p. Despite the bandgap shrinkage after N doping, poor PEC performance of TiO2 nanowires was observed compared with undoped TiO2 nanowires. This phenomenon was due to the fast charge recombination of electron–hole pairs at the N doping sites.
Park et al. reported the preparation of vertically grown C-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays and their application in solar water splitting.72 Similar to N-doped TiO2, C-doped TiO2 exhibits an extended absorption ability in the visible range (∼2.22 eV). In this study, the doping concentration of C in TiO2 was controlled by changing the annealing temperature. Up to 600 °C (low doping concentrations), the photocurrent density gradually increased because of the enhanced visible light absorption. However, the photocurrent density started to decrease at temperatures above 700 °C (high doping concentrations) because the photocatalytic sites of TiO2 deteriorated.
In contrast to other nonmetal dopants, P can be incorporated into the TiO2 lattice with two different oxidation states, i.e., P5+ and P3−, by replacing Ti4+ and O2− species, respectively. Qin et al. doped TiO2 nanorod arrays with P5+ and P3− through annealing in a phosphine atmosphere.75 Although the carrier lifetime was reduced after the P doping, an improved photocurrent density (1.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE) was achieved because of the extended absorption edge which results in an increased carrier density. TiO2 nanotubes doped with P were fabricated via the same doping process that was used for the P-doped TiO2 nanorods. Interestingly, XPS measurements revealed that the dopant species differed between the TiO2 nanorods and nanotubes, as shown in Fig. 8a and b.76 While only P5+ was incorporated into the TiO2 nanotubes, for the nanorods, P5+ and P3− were both incorporated into the TiO2 lattice. Because doping with a cation having oxidation states above 4 (of Ti4+) has no effect on the bandgap shrinkage, the bandgap of P-doped TiO2 nanotubes is not affected by P doping.
 Fig. 8  (a) XPS spectra of TiO2 nanorod arrays before and after PH3 treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) XPS spectra of pristine and P-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Transition metals are among the most effective dopants for narrowing the bandgap of TiO2 for light harvesting in the visible range. Various metal-doped TiO2 nanostructures have been fabricated via simple anodization of Ti–M (M = metal dopants) alloys. Dong et al. performed Ni doping of TiO2 nanotubes by anodizing Ti–Ni alloys.78 Ni-doped TiO2 nanotubes with a low doping concentration exhibited an ABPE 3.35 times higher than that of undoped TiO2 nanotubes owing to the harvesting of visible light and effective separation of photogenerated carriers. However, when the doping concentration was higher, dopants become recombination centers, reducing the PEC activity. Ta is an attractive doping agent because it does not induce significant distortion to the TiO2 lattice arising from its similar atomic radius to that of Ti. He et al. fabricated Ta-doped porous TiO2 nanorod arrays through hydrothermal treatment.79 The Ta-doped TiO2 nanorods exhibited a significantly enhanced ABPE of 0.32% at 0.79 V vs. RHE, which was attributed to the cathodic shift of the band edge levels of TiO2 rather than the bandgap shrinkage.
The doping strategy involving foreign cations has achieved the desired result of light harvesting in the visible region. Nevertheless, impurities in the TiO2 lattice generally induce thermal instability and fast charge recombination. To overcome these drawbacks caused by foreign atoms, a self-doped TiO2 approach has been employed.80,81 In the self-doping method, Ti3+ dopants in reduced TiO2−x allow light absorption in the visible range. Several processes have been adopted to fabricate self-doped TiO2, such as hydrogenation, heating under vacuum or reducing conditions, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and high-energy particle bombardment. While these methods involve multiple steps and expensive facilities, Yang et al. used a simple electrochemical anodization method to prepare self-doped TiO2 nanotubes.81 Self (Ti3+)-doped TiO2 nanotubes exhibited an enhanced absorption ability in the visible region compared with pristine TiO2 nanotubes. In this study, the fast charge-transfer mechanism was observed after self-doping, which was attributed to the new energy level that provided a shallow donor state, promoting the separation of photogenerated carriers.
Several co-doped TiO2 nanorods or nanotube arrays have exhibited synergistic effects on the PEC performance. Various combinations of dopants have been suggested to enhance the PEC abilities of TiO2.82–88 Song et al. reported C/N co-doped TiO2 nanowires using a co-implantation method.82 In contrast to the conventional chemical doping method, implantation involves controlling the distribution and impurity-free dopants. The formation of a chemical bond between C and N results in a high concentration of N–Ti states, which is responsible for visible-light absorption. Thus, N–Ti states are activated to a greater degree in C/N co-doped TiO2 than in N-doped TiO2. As shown in Fig. 9a, the IPCE results confirm that the C/N co-doped TiO2 was the most photoactive in the visible range among all the previously reported TiO2-based materials. Additionally, the C/N co-implanted TiO2 nanowire arrays exhibited a higher photocurrent density (0.76 mA cm−2) under visible-light illumination than not only the undoped TiO2 but also the C- or N-doped TiO2, as shown in Fig. 9b.
 Fig. 9  (a) IPCE results measured at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl and (b) photocurrent under chopped visible-light illumination (>420 nm) at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl of TiO2, C:TiO2, N:TiO2, and C/N:TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH. (c) Absorption spectra of several photoanodes, e.g., undoped, single-doped, and co-doped TiO2 nanotubes. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhang et al. fabricated N/Si co-doped TiO2 nanorods via a one-step hydrothermal process.83 After co-doping, some of the Ti lattice sites were substituted by Si dopants, forming Ti–O–Si bonds, which reduced the trapped-electron density around the Ti4+. As with previous studies of N doped TiO2, N/Si co-doped TiO2 nanorods showed the enhanced light harvesting ability at the visible range. N/Si co-doped TiO2 nanorods also exhibited improved electrical conductivity by the increased donor density with co-doping. Furthermore, the Si increased the density of functional hydroxyl group (–OH) attachment to the TiO2 surface. It was beneficial for forming OH radicals at the TiO2/electrolyte interface, enhancing the photocatalytic activity. The resultant photocurrent density of 1.77 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE was approximately 2–4 times higher than those of undoped, N-doped, and Si-doped TiO2 nanorods.
Liu et al. reported reduced TiO2 nanotube photoanodes co-doped with N/Ni.84 In this study, Ni-doped TiO2 nanotubes were first fabricated by anodizing a Ti–Ni alloy, and N was incorporated into the Ni-doped TiO2 nanotubes by dipping the sample in an aqueous NH3 solution. A reduction process involving NaBH4 treatment was conducted to increase the amount of O vacancies. All the dopant species, including N, Ni, and O vacancies, facilitated light absorption in the visible range, as shown in Fig. 9c. Although O vacancies can be trap sites for charge carriers, they also facilitate the charge-carrier transport. Consequently, the N/Ni co-doped and reduced TiO2 nanotube photoanodes exhibited an ABPE of 1.12% at −0.52 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a photocurrent of 2.52 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
Both Ni- and Mo-doped TiO2 have been studied for visible-light harvesting. Allam et al. fabricated Ti–Mo–Ni mixed oxide nanotube arrays via the anodization of Ti–Mo–Ni alloys.85 After the anodization, the NiO phase and substitutional Mo6+ species were introduced in the TiO2 lattice. Overlapping between the d-orbitals of Ti and Ni results in bandgap shrinkage. Additionally, the energy level of NiO is preferable for fast hole transport toward electrolytes. Mo6+ species provided extra electrons during incorporation, increasing the carrier concentration. Overall, the Mo/Ni co-doped TiO2 nanotubes exhibited an ABPE (1.04%) 10 times higher than that of pristine TiO2 nanotubes.
However, not all combinations of co-doping have a synergistic effect on photocatalytic activity. Zhou et al. fabricated B and P co-doped TiO2 nanotubes for the first time via the simple anodization of Ti sheets.86 Although there was an enhancement of photocurrent for both B- or P-mono-doped and B/P co-doped TiO2 nanotubes, co-doping with B and P had no synergistic effect, because B has no interaction with P.


2.2.2 Heterojunctions. 
TiO2 is a polymorphic material including anatase and rutile phases, and both have been widely used for photocatalytic applications.89–91 The bandgaps of the anatase and rutile phases are 3.26 and 3.05 eV, respectively.92,93 While their valence-band edges are located at the same energy level, the conduction-band edge of rutile is more positive than that of anatase. Thus, the conduction-band edge is sometimes less negative than (or comparable to) the HER potential (H+/H2), which is not suitable for non-biased water splitting. Sensitizers with small bandgaps, such as CdS and CdSe, have been incorporated into 1D TiO2 nanostructures for utilizing visible light. Additionally, the charge separation of electron–hole pairs is significantly enhanced with the appropriate heterojunction, similar to the type-II cascade structure.
Banerjee et al. achieved a nine-fold enhancement in the photocurrent density by decorating TiO2 nanotubes with CdS nanoparticles.94 The improved PEC performance was mainly attributed to the sensitizing effect of the CdS nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 10a. Luo et al. compared the PEC performance among different morphologies of CdS sensitizers on TiO2.95 CdS sensitizers in the form of nanorods or nanostumps exhibited higher PEC performance than CdS nanoparticles. Additionally, three types of Cd chalcogenides, i.e., CdS, CdSe, and CdSeS, were evaluated as sensitizers, as shown in Fig. 10b. Although the TiO2/CdSe heterostructure exhibited the highest photocurrent initially because CdSe had the smallest bandgap, its photostability was inferior to those of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/CdSeS. Overall, TiO2/CdSeS heterostructures were considered to be the most suitable heterojunctions for the sensitizing process. In 2015, G. Ai et al. reported the efficient water splitting performance without any sacrificial agents using Co–Pi/CdS/TiO2 nanowire arrays.231 In the work, TiO2 nanowire arrays offered an electron carriers pathway and a backbone structure for sequential loading of Co–Pi/CdS heterostructures. Co–Pi served as hole transfer co-catalysts and CdS provided the extended light harvesting ability to the visible range (Fig. 10c). Many chalcogenides are usually introduced as a light sensitizer due to their superior properties, but they suffer from photocorrosion where a photocatalyst oxidizes or reduces itself rather than the water splitting redox species. Co-catalysts with high stability during photocatalysis are highly demanded to be in contact directly with electrolytes instead of the photocorrosive semiconductors. By using 1D TiO2 nanowire arrays, sequential loading of the sensitizer and co-catalyst layer was successfully realized without significant reduction of the surface area. As a result, Co–Pi/CdS/TiO2 nanowire arrays showed the enhanced photocurrent density of ∼1.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE with improved stability (∼72% of the initial photocurrent after 2 h operation). The preparation methods and characteristics of various TiO2/sensitizers are presented in Table 3.17,94,95,263–269
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the heterojunction alignment of CdS and TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Band diagrams of TiO2 and Cd chalcogenides, i.e., CdS, CdSe, and CdSeS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the heterojunction of Co–Pi/CdS/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH. 
Table 3 PEC performance of 1D TiO2 heterostructures




Structure
Preparation
Electrolyte

J/mA cm−2
Ref.




A-TiO2 NT/CdS
Anodization (TiO2 NT)
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S
9.5 at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl

94



Electrodeposition (CdS)


A-TiO2 NW/CdS
Alkali hydrothermal growth, ion exchange, thermal annealing (TiO2 NW)
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S (pH 13)
3.6 at 1.23 V RHE

263



SILAR method (CdS)


R-TiO2NR/CdS nanoflower
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.1 M Na2S·9H2O and 0.02 M Na2SO3
3.23 at 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl

264



Hydrothermal (CdS NF)


TiO2 NR/CdSeS
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S
8 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl

95



CVD (CdSeS)


TiO2 NR/BiVO4/Co–Pi
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 7)
1.86 at 1.0 V RHE

265



Electrodeposition (BiVO4)


TiO2 NR/Bi2S3 NW
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S (pH 11.5)
2.4 at 0.7 V RHE

266



Hydrothermal method after BiVO4 layer by soaking and annealing treatment


TiO2NR/MoS2 nanosheet
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.5 M Na2SO4
2.4 at 1.2 V vs. AgAgCl

267



Drop-casting (MoS2 NS)


TiO2NR/ZnIn2S4 nanosheet
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S (pH 11.5)
1.2 at 1.5 V RHE

17



Hydrothermal (ZnIn2S4 NS)


TiO2 NR/CdS/CdSe
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.3 M Na2S and 0.2 M Na2SO3
>35 at 0.3 V vs. SCE

268



CBD (CdS and CdSe)


TiO2 NR/CdS/NiOx
Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)
0.5 M Na2S and 0.5 M Na2SO4
30 at 1 V vs. SCE

269



Hydrothermal (CdS)


DC sputtering (NiOx)






2.2.3 Metal decoration and co-catalysts. 
Surface decoration of TiO2 with noble metals such as Ag, Au, and Pt224 is effective for extending the light-absorption range. Noble metals are valuable in photocatalysis because of their photocorrosion resistivity and visible-light harvesting based on the LSPR effect. Three mechanisms have been demonstrated to enhance the PEC water splitting performance: (i) PRET, (ii) scattering and anti-reflection effects, and (iii) hot electron injection (LSPR).96
Zhang et al. used Au nanoparticles to decorate TiO2 nanotubes, and the photocurrent was increased by a factor of 50 compared with that of the pristine TiO2 nanotubes.97 This increase was attributed to light absorption in the visible range due to the SPR of Au nanoparticles. The shape effect of Au was investigated by Pu et al.98 While Au nanorods exhibited enhanced photoresponses in both the visible and UV regions, Au nanoparticles exhibited enhanced performance only in the visible region. Chen et al. reported that core/shell and bimetallic nanoparticles were effective for enhancing the PEC performance.99 In this study, the nonconductive SiO2 shell prevented unwanted electron flow from TiO2 to Au nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 11a, enhancing the charge separation at the TiO2 surface.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematics of the charge separation of photogenerated carriers in pristine TiO2 nanorods (left) and Au@SiO2-decorated TiO2 nanorods (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2014 Science China Press and Springer. (b) Band diagrams indicating the improved catalytic mechanism of Co–Pi on the TiO2 surface. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Coupling with co-catalysts is useful for providing photoactive sites and reducing the barrier for water oxidation. Metal oxides such as RuO2,100 IrO2,101 Co3O4,102 and MnO2 (ref. 103) have been widely used as water oxidation co-catalysts for semiconductor photoanodes. Recent studies have focused on the use of Co-based co-catalysts—particularly Co–Pi (cobalt phosphate)—to improve the PEC performance. Co–Pi deposition can catalyze the water-oxidation reaction so that it occurs at a reduced overpotential through different reaction pathways. Additionally, it induces greater band bending, reducing the rate of charge recombination. Ai et al. reported Co–Pi-deposited TiO2 nanowire arrays for PEC water splitting applications.104 The Co–Pi-deposited TiO2 nanowires exhibited higher PEC performance than pristine TiO2 owing to the modified catalysis mechanism and enhanced band bending, as shown in Fig. 11b.


2.2.4 Hierarchical structures. 
Although TiO2 nanowire arrays have the advantage of large surface areas, in recent studies, the surface area has been further increased using hierarchical structures of TiO2. Additionally, hierarchical structures are favorable for greater light absorption, a higher charge-collection efficiency, and a shorter minority carrier diffusion length. Various approaches have been developed for controlling the morphologies of the backbones and branches and for combining different materials in the structure.
Cho et al. first reported branched rutile TiO2 photoelectrodes. The photogenerated holes in the branched TiO2 are readily transferred to electrolytes because the branched TiO2 nanorods have a surface area four times larger than that of conventional TiO2 nanorods.105 The maximum IPCE under simulated AM 1.5G illumination was measured to be 42% and 67% at 380 nm for nanorods and branched nanorods, respectively. Pan et al. fabricated hyperbranched hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays for photoanodes.106 With the advantage of efficient electron transport, the hyperbranched nanowire arrays exhibited improved light absorption in the UV region owing to multiple light scattering, leading to a high photocurrent density of 1.21 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE.
Hetero-branched structures of TiO2 with other semiconductors are studied in the form of either TiO2 backbones or TiO2 branches. Zhong et al. studied CdS-branched TiO2 nanorod arrays on F-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates via a consecutive hydrothermal process.107 By controlling the water/alcohol ratio, the morphology, e.g., the surface-to-volume ratio, was adjusted, as shown in Fig. 12a. The maximum IPCE was calculated to be 34% under 450 nm visible illumination. Cheng et al. used hierarchically branched SnO2/TiO2 backbone/branch nanowire arrays as a photoanode.108 SnO2 nanowires—the backbones of the structure—were grown via CVD. Then, TiO2 nanorod branches were grown on the surfaces of the SnO2 nanowires, as shown in Fig. 12b. Compared with conventional core/shell SnO2/TiO2 structures, the branched SnO2/TiO2 nanowires exhibited a fivefold enhancement in the photocurrent density (1 mA cm−2 at 1 V vs. Ag/AgCl). TiO2 nanobelts were synthesized for realizing TiO2/ZnO heterostructures via the hydrothermal method.215 Bulk TiO2 powders were dissolved in NaOH solution and then heat-treated in Teflon-lined autoclaves. Final TiO2 nanobelts were obtained through the calcination process at 700 °C. The TiO2/ZnO exhibited the enhanced efficiency of photoexcited electrons and holes. 1D TiO2 nanofibers arrays were reported via the electrospinning method. Mali et al. fabricated TiO2 nanofibers using tetrahydrofuran (THF) and heat treatments after the electrospinning of TiO2.216 Nguyen et al. also reported the TiO2 nanofibers/Au nanoparticles using the electrospinning method and photoreduction method, respectively.217
 Fig. 12  (a) Growth mechanism of CBT-x (CdS branched TiO2) samples based on the control of the water/alcohol ratio. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (b) Fabrication process of 3D SnO2/TiO2 hierarchical core/branch nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd. 

2.3 WO3 nanostructured photoanodes
WO3 is an attractive oxide material for water oxidation because of its low cost, good photostability, and moderately tunable bandgaps in the range of 2.6–3.0 eV. Bulk WO3 shows crystallographic polymorphism including tetragonal, orthorhombic, monoclinic I, triclinic, and monoclinic II. In some nanostructured WO3, the hexagonal and orthorhombic crystal phases were retained at room temperature.211 Few studies have been performed on 1D WO3 nanostructures for PEC applications. Studies on WO3 nanostructures have focused on two-dimensional (2D) structures such as nanoflakes,109 nanosheets,110 and sandwiches.111
Su et al. fabricated WO3 nanoarrays via a solvothermal method using a solution mixture of H2WO4, HCl, and acetonitrile.112 By controlling the synthesis parameters, the morphology of the 1D WO3 nanostructures was changed from nanoflakes to nanowires. Among the various nanostructures, 1D WO3 nanoflakes exhibited the highest photocurrent density (1.43 mA cm−2), which is attributed to the tuned bandgap of 2.51 eV. Xu et al. fabricated 1D WO3 nanofibers with a high aspect ratio via the electrospinning method.113 1D WO3 nanofibers were utilized as a framework for the successful construction of the WO3/BiVO4 heterojunction for supplementing its unfavorable conduction band edge. The nanofibers exhibited a photocurrent density of 2.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE with the formation of the WO3/BiVO4 heterojunction. WO3 often shows the relatively positive onset potential of about 0.4–0.8 V vs. RHE because of its conduction band edge which is located below the HER potential (H+/H2). Various heterostructures such as WO3/ZnWO4,235 WO3/CdS,236 and WO3/BiVO4 (ref. 237 and 238) were fabricated to overcome this drawback. In their works, WO3/ZnWO4 and WO3/CdS heterojunctions were developed through a facile wet chemical method such as hydrothermal and SILAR. Because both ZnWO4 and CdS have their conduction band edges above compared to that of WO3, the onset potentials were shifted toward the cathodic direction, which is ascribed to the effective charge separation by WO3/ZnWO4 and WO3/CdS heterojunctions. To fabricate vertically standing 1D WO3 nanostuctures, GLAD (glancing angle deposition) sputtering technique was employed. Y. Pihosh et al. reported the formation of uniform 1D WO3 nanorods via GLAD sputtering and subsequent thermal annealing.237 V. Madhavi et al. also introduced GLAD sputtering method to fabricate 1D WO3 photoelectrodes and studied the effect of surface porosity on the PEC performance.238
Song et al. fabricated Fe doped WO3 nanofibers for the enhanced PEC performance through the electrospinning method. The electrospinning solution containing WCl6 and FeCl3 with the various ratios was used for Fe-doped WO3 nanofiber synthesis.218 Song et al. reported the enhanced PEC activity of mesoporous WO3 nanobelts compared to cylindrical WO3 nanofibers.219 With the aid of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) which modifies the viscosity of the solution, WO3 nanobelts were prepared through the electrospinning method rather than WO3 nanofibers. The PEC performance of the WO3 nanobelt was about 2 times higher than the WO3 nanofiber because of the boosted charge transport.
2.4 Fe2O3 nanostructured photoanodes
Iron oxide—particularly hematite (α-Fe2O3)—is a narrow-bandgap semiconductor with an absorption edge of approximately 600 nm (2.1 eV) and is favorable owing its chemical stability, Earth-abundance, and low cost. It is one of the most promising candidates for solar water splitting.114–118 However, its poor charge transport due to its severe electron–hole recombination ranging from pico- to milliseconds and the short diffusion length of holes (2–20 nm) significantly limits its PEC performance.119 Also, the sluggish electrocatalysis at the hematite/electrolyte interface which arises from a slow OH− adsorption causes a high OER overpotential.212 The charge-transfer properties and light-absorption ability of α-Fe2O3 have been improved through photon scattering via the construction of 1D nanostructures. Mohapatra et al. investigated the PEC performance of α-Fe2O3 nanotubes grown via simple anodization.120 The absorption and charge-transport properties of the nanotubes were enhanced compared with those of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles, owing to the features of 1D nanostructures. Consequently, the measured photocurrent density of the α-Fe2O3 nanotubes (1.4 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl) was higher than that of the α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. Carvalho et al. studied the PEC properties of highly oriented hematite nanorod arrays.121 The maximum photocurrent of the nanorod arrays was measured to be 3.0 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. In this study, the high PEC performance was attributed to the formation of oxy-hydroxyl groups on the surface of α-Fe2O3. The authors suggested the following intermediate slow step before the OER.
Step 1: OH− adsorption (slow) 4α-Fe2O3 + 4OH− → 4α-Fe2O3(OH)ads−(6)
Step 2: molecular oxygen evolution 4α-Fe2O3(OH)ads− + 4hv → 4α-Fe2O3 + ↑O2 + 2H+(7)
Mao et al. utilized an anode aluminum oxide (AAO) template for the synthesis of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays on an Au nanorod conductive substrate.122 Using the AAO template method, the Au nanorod array was grown, and then an α-Fe2O3 nanorod array was deposited on the Au conductive substrate. The photocurrent was high (8 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl) because of the short transport distances for the photogenerated carriers along their lateral direction. In 2010, S. D. Tilley et al. reported the nanostructured hematite (α-Fe2O3) photoanode realized by the CVD method.232 The saturated photocurrent density of the IrO2/α-Fe2O3 heterostructure was increased to 3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE by introducing 1D α-Fe2O3 and IrO2 co-catalysts. Also, the photocurrent onset potential exhibited the cathodic shift to the value of 0.4 V more negative than the flat-band potential of bare α-Fe2O3. In the work, introducing 1D nanostructured hematite provided two advantages for the enhanced PEC performance. As shown in Fig. 13a, the enlarged surface area due to 1D morphology affected the plateau photocurrent density of the α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode. Additionally, the whole interface area of α-Fe2O3/electrolyte was covered by IrO2 nanoparticles with simple electrodeposition. By introducing hetero- and nano- structured IrO2/α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode, the difference between the flat-band and onset potential was greatly reduced, which is attributed to effective charge separation of electrons (to the counter electrode) and holes (to the electrolyte).
 Fig. 13  (a) Ideal PEC performance of the hematite photoelectrode realized by the parameters of nanostructure and catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH. (b) Sn diffusion from the FTO substrate into the hematite results in thermal deformation and conductivity loss in the FTO substrate during activation of hematite at a high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the OER process for the Fe2O3/NixFe2−xO3 structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM images of Fe2O3 (left) and Fe2O3/FeTaO4 core/shell nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH. 
Typically, α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays are grown on FTO substrates. Additionally, the high-temperature annealing process is occasionally introduced to obtain high-crystallinity hematite. During heat treatment, Sn from the FTO substrate is likely to diffuse into the hematite lattice, resulting in doping. Ling et al. controlled the Sn doping process to investigate the PEC performance of Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 nanowire arrays.123 Sn4+ from the FTO substrate was substitutionally introduced to the Fe3+ sites in the lattice of the hematite and functioned as an electron donor. Ultrafast laser spectroscopy analyses revealed that the Sn doping did not affect the fast electron–hole recombination nature at the early stage but did increase the donor density. Therefore, the increased electrical conductivity was responsible for the enhanced PEC performance by affecting the longer time dynamics of photoexcited electrons and holes. Annamalai et al. studied the effect of Sn diffusion on the electronic properties of both 1D hematite nanostructures and FTO substrates with respect to the sintering time.124 As shown in Fig. 13b, the diffused Sn concentration in the hematite lattice increased with the sintering time at 800 °C. However, the resistivity of the FTO decreased with the increasing sintering time, because of the crystal-structure deformation of SnO2. With these two compensating factors induced by Sn diffusion, the best PEC performance of the 1D hematite nanostructures was observed at a moderate sintering time of 10 min.
Another study on Sn doping in α-Fe2O3 was performed by Jang et al.,125 who found that the shallow donor level was introduced by Sn4+ doping, which did not significantly affect the photocurrent density, because of the localized state of Sn4+. Rather, the Sn4+ induced a micro-strain to the hematite lattice, which results in the poor bond ordering of Fe–O. The micro-strain and localized states of Sn4+ were stabilized with Be2+ co-incorporation into the α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. The Sn4+ and Be2+ co-doped Fe2O3 showed the improved photocurrent density of 1.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE due to the enhanced electrical conductivity. Fu et al. reported Nb-doped hematite nanorods prepared via a facile solution-based method using an NbCl5 solution.126 The moderate doping concentration increased the charge-transport rate, which was responsible for the enhanced PEC performance. However, surplus Nb ions resulted in the destruction of 1D nanostructures. Pu et al. reported the coupling effect of Ti doping and O vacancies as dopants on 1D hematite nanostructures.127 The photocurrent density of Ti-doped 1D hematite nanostructures with an optimum O vacancy concentration was 2.25 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. In this study, O vacancies (acting as dopants) increased the carrier density as expected, while Ti co-doping affected the catalytic abilities by providing photoactive sites on the surface of hematite.
To overcome the sluggish hole transport kinetics of α-Fe2O3, Cheng et al. coated an NixFe2−xO3 layers on the surface of hematite nanotubes.128 The photocurrent density of the α-Fe2O3/NixFe2−xO3 nanotube arrays was estimated to be 3.3 mA cm−2 at 0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl with an ABPE of 1.37%. This remarkable PEC performance was attributed to the enhanced surface catalysis, as shown in Fig. 13c. In the α-Fe2O3/NixFe2−xO3 structure, Ni-ion-associated kinetic reactions allow improved utilization of hole carriers compared with the direct OER on the pristine hematite surface. Kim et al. reported the outstanding PEC performance of hematite nanostructures, i.e., 4.32 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G illumination.129 This result corresponds to 34% of the theoretical performance limit of hematite. In this study, Pt doping and Co–Pi co-catalysts were introduced to worm-like 1D nanostructures after calcination at 800 °C. As a result, the Pt-doped α-Fe2O3/Co–Pi nanostructures exhibited the best charge-transfer properties. H. Zhang et al. proposed the synergistic effects of Ta and Sn doped Fe2O3/FeTaO4 core/shell nanorods on the enhanced PEC performance.233 The authors utilized the synthetic strategy of hybrid microwave annealing to fabricate Ta and Sn doped Fe2O3/FeTaO4 nanorods. During hybrid microwave annealing, the formation of core/shell structure and elemental co-doping occurred spontaneously, but the diameter of nanorods was relatively maintained as shown in Fig. 13d. Effective charge separation through the Fe2O3/FeTaO4 heterojunction and the increased electrical conductivity by co-doping of Ta and Sn contributed to the enhanced PEC performance of 2.86 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE. In the case of hematite, the sluggish kinetic of OER is the main obstacle as mentioned above. In the work, the small diameter of nanorods was maintained after the deposition of FeTaO4, which means that the distance to electrolytes for photoexcited holes was also restricted to the diameter of nanorods. Rather, the hole transport kinetic was supported by the heterojunction and increased conductivity. In the 2D heterojunction, 2D/2D interface is beneficial for intimate bonding nature overcoming a slight lattice mismatch between heterostructures.234 However, an unwantedly elongated diffusion length from semiconductor to electrolytes may hinder the transport kinetic of hole carriers in the case of hematite.
2.5 Cu2O nanostructured photocathodes
Cu2O—a natural p-type material—is one of the promising materials for PEC water-reduction applications because of its Earth-abundance and non-toxicity, as well as its suitable direct bandgap of 2.1 eV.130,131 However, there are two major drawbacks to the practical use of Cu2O.132 First, the corrosion potentials (self-oxidation and reduction) of Cu2O lie within the bandgap, which promotes the photo-dissolution of Cu2O under illumination rather than water splitting. Thus, a protective layer for preventing corrosion must be deposited on the Cu2O surface, which is the standard process for utilizing 2D thin film Cu2O as photocathodes. A buried junction is widely adopted for an enhanced photovoltage of Cu2O during the thin film deposition. Second, the diffusion length of minority carriers (∼200 nm) is significantly shorter than the absorption length of incident light, which limits efficient solar light harvesting of relatively thicker 2D Cu2O (>200 nm). Hence, 1D Cu2O nanostructures are favorable for enhanced light absorption through multiple photon scattering and minority carrier transport with a confined diameter.133,134
Developing efficient Cu2O photocathodes requires the creation of a high-quality protection layer to prevent the photo-dissolution of Cu2O. Huang et al. evaluated several oxide heterostructures as protective layers, such as Cu2O/CuO, Cu2O/CuO/TiO2, and Cu2O/TiO2 core/shell nanowire arrays.135 While bare Cu2O nanowires were severely decomposed during measurements, the Cu2O/CuO/TiO2 nanowires exhibited higher stability under illumination. The Cu2O/CuO/TiO2 nanowires demonstrated a 74% increase in the photocurrent density, which was attributed to the efficient separation of electrons and holes before the self-dissolution of Cu2O. When an n-type protective layer was introduced, a p–n junction could be developed with p-Cu2O at the interface. In the work of Martínez-García et al., highly crystalline n-CuWO4 and n-WO3 were deposited as protective layers to prevent the photocorrosion of Cu2O.136 The established p–n junction and protective layer together enhanced the carrier lifetime, improving the PEC performance by a factor of 5. A branch-type protection layer was demonstrated by Bai et al.137 ZnO nanowires were grown to cover the Cu2O nanowire surface fully, as shown in Fig. 14a. Similar to the aforementioned protection layers, the ZnO nanowires were advantageous for preventing the degradation of Cu2O and promoting the charge separation. Additionally, the enlarged surface area of the hierarchical structure led to a remarkable photocurrent of −4.55 mA cm−2. Recently, the sol–gel method was suggested to form a TiO2 protection layer for Cu2O in the replacement of commonly used atomic layer deposition (ALD) processes, as shown in Fig. 14b.139 By hydroxylating the surface of Cu2O, TiO2 was grown, thoroughly covering the entire surface. The TiO2 protective layer significantly enhanced the stability, lasting for >1 d.
 Fig. 14  (a) Scanning electron microscopy image of 3D Cu2O/ZnO core/branch nanoarrays. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Long-term PEC stability measurements of Cu2O nanowires and Cu2O nanowires with a TiO2 sol–gel coating on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of Cu2O/Ga2O3 core/shell structures. (d) HRTEM and elemental mapping images of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/NiMo structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The Cu2O photocathode showing the best performance was reported by Pan et al.138 A buried p–n junction was achieved between 1D Cu2O nanowires and Ga2O3 coating layers as shown in Fig. 14c. They emphasized the importance of band energy-level alignment, as the quasi-Fermi level difference is the factor limiting the photovoltage obtained from the p–n junction. To maximize the photovoltage, Ga2O3 was selected, because of its small conduction-band offset compared with that of Cu2O. The Cu2O/Ga2O3 core/shell nanowires were coated with TiO2 protective layers via ALD, and then a RuOx catalyst was deposited to enhance the catalytic performance. The maximum photocurrent was 10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE. Additionally, only a small reduction in the photocurrent was observed after 100 h of stability test at 0.5 V vs. RHE. Alternative NiMo co-catalysts instead of RuOx were deposited on the surface of 1D Cu2O nanowires as shown in Fig. 14d for verifying better stability in alkaline electrolytes. In this feature, the diffusion length of electrons is still restricted to the diameter of nanowires with the extremely enlarged surface area retained. Although the ALD-grown TiO2 passivation layer is a general strategy for high stability also in 2D PEC applications, 2D based photoelectrodes can hardly extend the surface area out of the exposed photoelectrode area to electrolytes.

2.5.1 CuO nanostructured photocathodes. 
CuO is a p-type material with a more narrow band gap of 1.2 eV compared to Cu2O (∼2.1 eV). J. Li et al. reported the fabrication of 1D CuO nanowires on Cu foils by a simple annealing process.239 The prepared 1D CuO photocathode showed a photocurrent of ∼1.4 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE) with a positive onset potential of 0.7 V. The authors utilized the 1D morphology as a building block of integrated nano-systems by introducing Pt co-catalysts on the surface. The enhanced PEC performance was studied by X. Zhao et al. by introducing surface plasmon of Ag nanoparticle decorations.240 In the work, 1D CuO nanowire arrays were realized through oxidation of Cu foils, and the CuO/Ag (semiconductor/metal) interface took the advantage of SPR related energy transfer from Ag to 1D CuO nanowires. Y. Chen et al. reported hierarchical CuO@ZnFe2O4@NiS photocathodes through a multi-step synthetic procedure.241 First, CuO nanowires were grown on a copper mesh by thermal treatment and CuO@ZnO core/shell structure was developed as an intermediate form. Then ZnFe2O4 shell material was converted from ZnO by another annealing process. Finally, NiS nanoparticles were decorated on the surface of CuO@ZnFe2O4 by a chemical bath deposition. The final CuO@ZnFe2O4@NiS structure showed a porous core/shell morphology and resultant large active surface area through the compositional and structural designed multi-step process, starting from 1D CuO nanowires.

3. Visible-light-absorbing 1D photoelectrodes
3.1 Si photoelectrodes
Si is an Earth-abundant and low-cost material that has been intensively studied in various fields. It has a narrow bandgap of ∼1.1 eV and a proper conduction-band edge position for water reduction,140 making it one of the best candidates for PEC water splitting applications over the past decade. In the photovoltaic (PV) research community, single-crystalline semiconductors are highly recommended to minimize trap states such as grain boundaries, dislocations, and lattice mismatches. Although PV water splitting with electrolyzers has the advantage of relatively high STH efficiencies, the cost for producing single-crystalline PVs are still far from meeting practical demands.213 Considerable effort has been directed toward developing high-efficiency photoelectrodes for solar water splitting using Si, particularly by overcoming the main limitations of PEC photoelectrodes: the reflection of 25% for solar radiation, surface oxidation, low photovoltages, and slow charge-transfer kinetics at the interface.141–143

3.1.1 Si photocathodes. 
1D Si nanostructures are effective for maximizing the light-harvesting capability especially in PEC applications. Multiple scattering of incident light can be achieved in the highly oriented Si nanowire arrays, resulting in a suppressed reflectivity of <5% in the visible region.143–146 The enhanced light absorption can induce higher photovoltages.142 In addition to suppressing the reflection, the nanowire structure can increase the specific surface area, increasing the solar-energy conversion efficiency compared with the planar structure. In the case of PV research, however, 1D nanostructuring is believed to reduce the open-circuit voltage (VOC), which is affected by a diluted photon flux at the enlarged junction area.225
Si based photoelectrodes suffer from photocorrosion of Si itself in aqueous electrolytes.226 Especially in the case of Si photoanodes, the energy level of Si valence band edge (∼0.67 V vs. RHE) is higher than that of OER (1.23 V vs. RHE), which is inappropriate for active water oxidation without external bias. Also, an insulating SiO2 layer is inevitably generated on the Si surface from dissolved oxygen molecules during water splitting reaction.227 Sluggish kinetics of OER and HER at the electrolyte/Si interfaces also accelerate the photocorrosion rate of Si. For stable and effective charge transfer at the electrolyte/Si interface, co-catalysts have been loaded onto the Si photoelectrode surface. Pt is the most suitable co-catalyst and can accelerate the reaction kinetics for the HER. Oh et al. reported that Si nanowire photocathodes impregnated with Pt nanoparticles improved the PEC H2 evolution.147 The Pt-coated Si nanowire photocathode exhibited a photocurrent density of ∼18 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE. The onset potential was positively shifted to 0.42 V vs. RHE, which is among the highest photovoltages achieved for Si photocathodes. In 2013, Pt nanoparticles with sizes of 0.5–3 nm were deposited on TiO2/Si nanowire arrays via ALD.148 With an increase in the number of ALD cycles from 0 to 10, the photocurrent density increased from 7 to 21 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, indicating a higher catalytic activity, which was ascribed to the Pt nanoparticles under illumination.
In addition to Pt, various metals and metal chalcogenides, e.g., NiCoSex,143 Ni-Mo,149,150 MoSx,146,151–158 NbS2,159 and NiSe2,160,161 have been used as co-catalysts with Si nanowire arrays, providing active sites for PEC H2 generation. Y. Hou et al. studied the bioinspired molecular clusters as a substitute of Pt co-catalysts.153 In the work, the pillared Si photocathode decorated with Mo3S4 clusters showed the better H2 evolution performance with enhanced stability against photocorrosion. Zhang et al. reported p-Si nanopillar arrays coated with an NiCoSex electrocatalyst, which achieved a remarkable photocurrent density of 37.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE.143 In 2019, 2D NbS2 was used to enhance the PEC H2 evolution performance of Si nanowire photocathodes.159 This study indicated that NbS2 co-catalysts can replace current Pt catalysts for Si-based photocathodes. A STH conversion efficiency of 2.6% and a flat-band potential of 0.34 V vs. RHE were achieved with NbS2 formation on the surface, suppressing the energy barrier for the HER. Consequently, the NbS2/Si photocathodes exhibited a stable photocurrent density of 28 mA cm−2 for 10000 s. Park et al. reported the bifunctional catalytic performance of NiSe2 on Si nanowires for the HER and OER.160,161 The photocurrent densities of the NiSe2/p-Si and NiSe2/n-Si nanowire photoelectrodes were estimated to be 6.7 and 5.6 mA cm−2 at 0 and 1.23 V vs. RHE, respectively. In strong acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and basic (1 M KOH) solutions, the NiSe2 co-catalyst on the Si nanowire arrays achieved stable catalytic activity toward the HER and OER, respectively.


3.1.2 Si based heterojunctions. 
Heterostructures of Si nanowire/semiconductor photoelectrodes have proven to be effective for enhancing the PEC performance. To compensate for the negative valence-band edge of Si compared with the OER potential (O2/H2O), various Si nanowire-based heterostructures have been investigated. The Si nanowires in the heterostructures not only result in sufficient oxidation power but also improve the stability and photovoltage. Hwang et al. fabricated an n-/n-type heterojunction by employing n-type TiO2 to form n-TiO2/Si nanowire array photoanodes.145 The formation of a TiO2 layer on the Si surface resulted in a stable photocurrent density at zero bias voltage, which was maintained for 1 h. The energy band bending behavior at the junction was investigated by comparing TiO2/n-Si with TiO2/p-Si photoelectrode configurations, confirming that the n-TiO2/n-Si heterojunction had a higher photovoltage and more effective charge separation at the Si/TiO2 interface, as shown in Fig. 15a and b. This result contributes to our understanding of the n-/n-type Z-scheme band alignment in PEC cells for water splitting. Accordingly, various semiconductor materials have been applied to the surfaces of Si nanowires, e.g., TiO2,145 Fe2O3,162–164 WO3,165,166 ZnO,167,168 CdSe,169 and Cu2O,170 to realize high-performance photoanodes. Y. Yu et al. reported the TiO2/black Si (nano-porous Si) heterostructures for a photoanode application.228 The ALD-grown TiO2 layer successfully contributed to passivation of the black Si surface, which enables significantly enhanced operational stability for 3 months. It was demonstrated that unclefted and hole-conductive nature of the ALD-grown TiO2 passivation layer was mainly attributed to outstanding stability of Si photoanodes against photocorrosion. In 2016, TiO2 NRs were grown on a p-Si substrate to promote the transportation of minority carriers from Si to electrolytes.229 In addition, reflectance of Si was extremely reduced through introducing TiO2 NRs, enhancing the light harvesting performance. The TiO2/p-Si wafer showed a >40 h stability with the outstanding photocurrent density of 40 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 15  Band diagrams with the band bending and VOC for (a) n-Si/TiO2 and (b) p-Si/TiO2 arrays under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Tantalum nitride photoanodes
Tantalum nitride (Ta3N5) is an n-type semiconductor with a narrow direct bandgap of 2.1 eV, which has attracted research attention since Hitoki et al. reported its photocatalytic performance for water splitting.171 In addition to the visible-light absorption edge of Ta3N5, its conduction- and valence-band edge positions straddle the water redox potentials, which is favorable for splitting water without an external bias.172 Theoretically, the maximum STH conversion efficiency is ∼15.9% under AM 1.5G illumination.173
Domen et al. investigated not only the photocatalytic ability of Ta3N5 but also the PEC performance of 1D Ta3N5 photoanodes for water oxidation for the first time. Vertically aligned single-crystalline Ta3N5 nanorod arrays were successfully fabricated on Ta metal substrates using a through-mask anodization method followed by nitridation, as shown in Fig. 16a.174 With the aid of an IrO2 co-catalyst, the IrO2/Ta3N5 nanorod photoanodes exhibited a photocurrent density of ∼3.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and a maximum IPCE of ∼41.3% at 440 nm. In a subsequent study, they improved the PEC performance of Ta3N5 nanorod photoelectrodes via Ba doping.175 The doping of Ba increased the carrier concentration and the surface hydroxyl concentration, which introduced a cathodic shift of the flat-band potential by 90 mV, resulting in a Ba-doped Ta3N5 nanorod photoanode assisted by a Co–Pi co-catalyst with a photocurrent density of 6.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and a conversion efficiency of 1.56% at 0.87 V vs. RHE. The stoichiometric evolution of H2 and O2 on the photoanode and Pt counter electrode was confirmed, and the faradaic efficiencies of the HER and OER were measured to be 96% and 98%, respectively. In 2020, the FeNiOx/Ta3N5 nanorod photoanodes were reported with the state-of-the art STH conversion efficiency of 2.72%.253 The polycrystalline Ta3N5 nanorods were successfully fabricated via the GLAD and nitridation processes. In the work, large grains contribute to the enhanced conductivity of Ta3N5 nanorods and light absorption.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for vertically aligned Ta3N5 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) of the bare Ta3N5, NiFe-LDH/Ta3N5, CoPi + Co(OH)x/Ta3N5, and Co–Pi + Co(OH)x/NiFe-LDH/Ta3N5 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Despite the outstanding PEC performance of 1D Ta3N5 photoelectrodes, their poor stability in aqueous media is a drawback for their application to the long-term stable water splitting reaction. To enhance the stability and activity of 1D Ta3N5 photoelectrodes, various co-catalysts have been explored, such as Pt, IrO2, and Co–Pi. Cong et al. examined the PEC water-oxidation properties of Ta3N5 nanotube arrays with different co-catalysts: Pt, IrO2, Co–Pi, and Co3O4.176 Relative to the nanotube arrays without co-catalysts, the nanotube arrays with IrO2, Co–Pi, and Co3O4 exhibited higher photocurrent densities and stabilities, whereas Pt was ineffective. The faradaic efficiency of the Ta3N5/Co3O4 nanotube arrays was measured to be ∼88%, indicating the potential of earth-abundant Co3O4 as a co-catalyst. A Ni–Fe layered double hydroxide (LDH) co-catalyst was suggested for PEC water oxidation using Ta3N5 nanorod arrays, as shown in Fig. 16b.173 The NiFe LDH-loaded Ta3N5 nanorod arrays with Co(OH)x and Co–Pi co-catalysts resulted in remarkable stability, with a stable photocurrent of ∼5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in a 1 M KOH solution for 2 h.
Notwithstanding the efforts directed toward the development of high-efficiency and stable Ta3N5 photoelectrodes, the degradation mechanism remains ambiguous. Furthermore, the measured photovoltage is significantly lower than that predicted using density functional theory calculations. He et al. suggested that these two issues are related and ascribed them not to photocorrosion but to the thin amorphous oxide layer causing Fermi-level pinning on the Ta3N5 surface.177 Upon water oxidation in H2O, the surface is chemically oxidized, and then an amorphous oxide layer with a thickness of ∼3 nm forms on the surface, creating an additional energy barrier for the charge transition and shifting the Fermi level toward the valence-band edge by 0.4–0.5 V owing to Fermi-level pinning at the Ta3N5/oxide layer interface. For improving the performance of Ta3N5 according to these results, MgO was introduced as a passivation layer on the Ta3N5 nanorod surface to separate the nanorod surface from H2O, and Co(OH)x was used as a water-oxidation catalyst. The Co(OH)x/MgO/Ta3N5 nanorod arrays generated a higher and more stable photocurrent density than Co(OH)x/Ta3N5 nanorod arrays.

3.2.1 Tantalum oxynitride photoanodes. 
Tantalum oxynitride (TaON) is a promising n-type semiconductor for photoanode applications due to its visible light harvesting by a narrow bandgap of 2.4 eV. J. Hou et al. investigated the p-Cu2O/n-TaON heterojunction with the ultrathin carbon sheath as a photoanode for OER reaction.242 In the work, the anisotropic p–n heterojunction was developed in each p-Cu2O/n-TaON nanorod structure. This structure accounts for a photocurrent density of 3.06 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE with a maximum IPCE of 59% at the 400 nm illumination. For realizing the 1D p-Cu2O/n-TaON nanostructures, Ta2O5 nanorods were firstly grown on Ta metal substrates via a hydrothermal route and converted into TaON semiconductor through a heat treatment with a flow of ammonia gas. Copper precursors were deposited on the surface of 1D TaON nanorods and the p-Cu2O/n-TaON heterojunction was formed by oxidation of copper species. The enhanced light absorption and effective charge separation by p–n heterojunction along with carbon sheath protective layer contributed to the enhanced PEC performance. N. K. Allam et al. fabricated Ta2O5 nanorod arrays through an anodization method as a precursor of 1D TaON photoanodes.243 Ta2O5 was converted into TaON after nitridation in an NH3 atmosphere. In the work, the single or double layer of 1D TaON structures were developed corresponding to the anodizing condition of Ta2O5. The bandgap narrowing nature when TaON is developed from Ta2O5 was demonstrated by the density functional theory (DFT) and experimental results. The resulting IPCE value of 7.5% at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 1 M KOH electrolytes was achieved because of the extended absorption edge.

3.3 Metal chalcogenide photoelectrodes
Metal chalcogenides mostly have a direct energy bandgap, which is responsible for the large absorption coefficient. In addition to their strong light-absorption features, their relatively small energy bandgaps in the visible range and strong quantum confinement effect compared with other oxide semiconductors can be beneficial for PEC water splitting, which has led to extensive research on metal chalcogenide photocatalysts, e.g., CdS, CdSe, antimony selenide (Sb2Se3), and Cu2−xS. Table 4 presents the PEC performance of several chalcogenide semiconductors.
Table 4 PEC performance of chalcogenide semiconductors




Configuration
Electrode type
Electrolyte
pH
Photocurrent density
Reference electrode
Reference




CdS NR/Cu2S
Photoanode
0.5 M Na2SO4 and 0.2 M Na2SO3
7.2
8.12 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. RHE
Ag/AgCl

192



CdS NR/Co–Pi
Photoanode
0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3
12.5
4.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE
Ag/AgCl

193



CdS NR/MoS2
Photoanode
Lactic acid electrolyte (10% by volume)
3
1.9 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. RHE
SCE

194



Grad-O CdS NR
Photoanode
1.0 M Na2SO4 with 1.0 M N2H4·H2O
11
6.0 ± 0.1 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE
SCE

185



CdS NR/CdO
Photoanode
0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3
13.5
4.35 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)
SCE

181



CdS Nr/ZnSe
Photoanode
0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3
13.5
3.89 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)
SCE

180



CdS NR/SnSx NS heterostructures
Photoanode
0.5 m Na2SO4
6.8
1.59 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V RHE
Ag/AgCl

184



CdS NR/CdO/TiO2
Photoanode
0.3 M Na2S and 0.2 M Na2SO3
—
3.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

195



CdS NR/CdSe
Photoanode
Na2SO3 (0.5 M)


5.3 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Ag/AgCl

196



CdS NR/Cu2O
Photoanode
0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3


4.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
Ag/AgCl

197



CdS NR/g-C3N4
Photoanode
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S
12
1.16 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

198



CdS NR/ZnS
Photoanode
0.25 M Na2S + 0.35 M Na2SO3


7.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)
SCE

193



CdS NT
Photoanode
0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3
12.5
6 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)
SCE

179



CdSe NT
Photoanode
0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S


3.0 mA cm−2 at −0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)
Ag/AgCl

199



CdTe NT
Photoanode
1 M Na2SO4 aqueous


∼2.1 mA cm−2 at ∼1.4 V (vs. SCE)
SCE

200



CuInS2 NR/CdS/ZnS
Photocathode
0.5 M Na2SO4 and NaOH (for pH)
10
∼10 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V (vs. RHE) (dark: ∼8.25 mA cm−2)
Ag/AgCl

201



Cu7S4 NR/TiO2/CoCr-LDH
Photoanode
0.5 m Na2SO4 solution
6.8
2.04 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

202



CuInS2 NR/CdS
Photocathode
1.0 M KCl
5.97
1.14 mA cm−2 at −0.1 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

203



Sb2Se3 NW
Photocathode
0.5 M H2SO4
0
−1.1 mA cm−2 at −0.3 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

188



Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt
Photocathode
0.5 M H2SO4
0
2 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

190



Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt
Photocathode
0.1 M H2SO4
1
12.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

204



Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt
Photocathode
0.1 M H2SO4
1
17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

205



Sb2Se3 NR/MoS2
Photocathode
0.5 M Na2SO4
6.5
10 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

189



Sb2Se3 TF/NR/TiO2/Pt
Photocathode
0.1 M H2SO4
1
30 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)
Ag/AgCl

191






3.3.1 CdS photoanodes. 
CdS is a well-known semiconductor photocatalyst with a direct bandgap of 2.4 eV.178 Its appropriate energy band edge positions for both water redox potentials can facilitate single-photocatalyst water splitting; thus, it has attracted considerable attention for water splitting H2 generation. However, the PEC performance of CdS is highly restricted by the serious photo-corrosion under illumination conditions.214 Hexagonal wurtzite CdS shows relatively high stability against the photo-corrosion than cubic zinc blende CdS because of the high crystallinity and lower adsorbed oxygen species on the surface. Facet engineering as well as nanostructuring of CdS is widely adopted to reduce the photo-corrosion under illumination.
Freestanding 1D CdS photoelectrodes were fabricated by using ZnO nanorod arrays as a sacrificial template.179 CdS shells were formed on the ZnO surface, and then the ZnO nanorods were etched in aqueous sulfuric acid, resulting in freestanding CdS nanotube arrays on Ti substrates. The nanotube photoelectrodes exhibited a negatively shifted onset potential and a higher photocurrent density (−1.34 V vs. SCE and 6 mA cm−2, respectively) than planar electrodes, indicating that the nanotubes increased the surface area and enhanced the light trapping.
Zhang et al. proposed ZnS/CdS nanorod array photoelectrodes with a quasi-type II energy band structure.183 The Zn-vacancy and S-interstitial created localized acceptor states with higher energy levels than the valence band of ZnS so that the photogenerated holes in CdS could be transferred to these acceptor states. Consequently, the core/shell nanorod electrodes exhibited a photocurrent density of 7.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. SCE and an IPCE of 35% at 300 nm with enhanced stability compared with the bare nanorod electrodes.
To maximize the surface area, Cho et al. employed the solution–liquid–solid method and obtained uniformly grown CdS nanorods having diameters of 15–20 nm on FTO substrates.180,181 Then, the n-/n-type Z-scheme energy band structure was investigated with the formation of an n-type CdO shell on the surface, as shown in Fig. 17a.181 The core/shell nanorod photoelectrodes exhibited enhanced PEC performance because of the Z-scheme energy band structure, which consumes photogenerated holes of CdS effectively by the recombination process with electrons of CdO shell. Compared with the bare nanorod photoelectrodes, they had a higher photocurrent density (4.35 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. SCE) and a more negative flat-band potential (−1.33 V vs. SCE). The flat-band potential varied according to the shell thickness. To investigate this, the working mechanism of the n-/n-type Z-scheme energy band structure with respect to the shell thickness was investigated, and it was proposed that the portion of the space-charge region width in a shell material is critical for determining the flat-band potential in the Z-scheme energy band structure.
 Fig. 17  (a) Band diagrams indicating the working mechanism of n-/n-type Z-scheme CdS/CdO core/shell nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic illustration of the growth process for the 1D Sb2Se3 nanoneedles. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Self-degradation under illumination is the main limitation of CdS for PEC water splitting applications.182 Energy band structure engineering can solve this problem—particularly a type-II energy band structure to extract holes from CdS. Thus, heterostructures such as ZnS/CdS,183 ZnSe/CdS,180 and SnSx/CdS184 were proposed, and they exhibited improved stability compared with bare CdS nanorod electrodes. In the mentioned heterojunctions, the photogenerated holes of CdS are forced to migrate into another semiconductors with lower potential energy of valence bands. Among them, the SnSx/CdS nanorod system achieved a relatively stable photocurrent density of 1.59 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and a maximum IPCE of 31.5% at 340 nm in a neutral Na2SO4 electrolyte solution without sacrificial agents.184 The retention rate was measured to be ∼70% after 30 min. Analogous to the type-II energy band structure, continuous built-in band bending due to doping with O occurred in the CdS branched nanorods, resulting in effective charge separation.185 The gradual O doping along the radial direction of the branched CdS nanorods made the energy band edges inclined toward the core, resulting in effective charge separation of electrons and holes. Consequently, a stable photocurrent density of 6 mA cm−2 was retained over 42 h in a 1.0 M Na2SO4 solution with a 1.0 M N2H4·H2O solution.


3.3.2 Sb2Se3 photocathodes. 
Sb2Se3 has recently become a promising semiconductor photocatalyst for PEC water splitting. Sb2Se3 is an earth-abundant p-type semiconductor with a narrow energy bandgap of approximately 1.0–1.2 eV and a high absorption coefficient (>105 cm−3).186 In addition to these ideal optical properties, it has a high hole mobility of 2.59 cm2 V−1 s−1 along the c-axis, which is the preferred growth direction of Sb2Se3.187 Thus, 1D Sb2Se3 can be an ideal structure for a PEC photocathode.
Various synthesis methods for 1D Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes have been developed. Kwon et al. grew Sb2Se3 nanowires on In-doped tin oxide substrates via a two-step rapid thermal annealing method.188 The resulting nanowire electrodes were subjected to PEC measurements in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution. The measured photocurrent density of the nanowire arrays was 1.1 mA cm−2 at −0.3 V vs. RHE. Guo et al. fabricated Sb2Se3 nanorod photocathodes via a close-spaced sublimation method.189 The fabricated photocathodes achieved a photocurrent density of 4.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, which is significantly higher than those of other reported Sb2Se3 photocathodes. However, a rapid reduction in the photocurrent was observed as the number of scans increased. To prevent photocorrosion of the Sb2Se3 nanorod arrays, the nanorod surface was coated with a MoS2 layer via sputtering. Consequently, a higher photocurrent density (10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) and improved stability were achieved.
Moon et al. fabricated self-oriented Sb2Se3 nanoneedle photocathodes via a facile spin-coating method, as shown in Fig. 17b.190 They prepared a Sb–Se precursor solution and spin-coated it onto FTO substrates coated with Au thin films, followed by annealing for several minutes. The resulting photocathodes exhibited a photocurrent density of 320 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE. The deposition of n-type TiO2 and Pt significantly increased the photocurrent density (to 2 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE). Additionally, the PEC properties of Sb2Se3 nanorods with different shapes were investigated. The shapes of the Sb2Se3 nanorods (in particular, their aspect ratios) were varied by changing the ratio of thioglycolic acid (TGA) to ethanolamine in the precursor solution. A higher ratio of TGA in the solution resulted in a higher aspect ratio of the nanorods. Interestingly, the highest photocurrent density (12.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) was obtained for the Pt/TiO2/Sb2Se3 photocathode having the lowest aspect ratio. The short nanorods with preferred orientation on the substrates induced effective carrier transport, confirming the potential of Sb2Se3 nanorods for PEC H2 evolution. In 2019, Moon et al. achieved a photocurrent density of ∼30 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE with bilayer Sb2Se3 nanorod photocathodes.191 Sb2Se3 nanorods were grown on an Sb2Se3 film layer that functioned as an effective light absorber. Thus, the bilayer Pt/TiO2/Sb2Se3 nanorod photocathode achieved an IPCE of 85.7%, as well as PEC performance comparable to that of Si-based photocathodes.

4. Conclusions and perspectives
The application of 1D nanostructures to solar-driven PEC water splitting was reviewed, along with various strategies for enhancing the PEC performance. In the field of PEC water splitting, preventing the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes is essential for maximizing the utilization of charge carriers in water splitting reactions. In this context, PEC research has led to the development of several methods, e.g., heterojunctions, doping, co-catalysts, and hierarchical structures, as well as the growth of 1D nanostructures. Oxide semiconductors are generally stable in aqueous electrolytes under AM 1.5G illumination. However, they typically have a wide bandgap, limiting their ability to harvest solar energy. Therefore, band engineering has been intensively applied to oxide semiconductors to widen their absorption spectrum via doping. Semiconductors, which are capable of visible-light harvesting, suffer from photocorrosion reactions because of the slow charge transport to electrolytes or high kinetic overpotentials of the HER and OER. By introducing a heterojunction and co-catalysts, the charge transfer and surface photoactivity, respectively, have been enhanced for photoelectrodes, increasing the photostability through the effective consumption of charge carriers. Despite the above-mentioned strategies, however, the practical PEC water splitting is still not ready for market entry due to the lack of efficient and stable photoelectrodes.
As an alternative or complementary approach for enhancing the PEC performance, the photovoltaic (PV) research field has been highlighted mostly focusing on small band gap semiconductors such as CdTe, GaAs, GaP, InP and Si. These materials have advantages in absorbing the solar spectrum from the UV to NIR range, which presents outstanding photovoltages comparable to their band gaps. The state-of-the-art PV tandem cell structures have demonstrated their high STH conversion efficiencies compared to other PEC approaches.244–246 However, it takes high costs for realizing high-efficiency and stable PV tandem cells, and most of all PV semiconductors are not stable in an aqueous condition. So far, the strategy of buried junction and protective layers has been widely adopted, which is usually fabricated by ALD technique to ensure pinhole-free deposition. The PEC photoelectrodes with 1D nanostructures could achieve a more efficient water splitting reaction together with PV tandem cell structures. As mentioned above, a tight junction between PV semiconductor thin film and the pinhole-free covering should be take into consideration. Even though there exist less interest in free standing 1D photovoltaics, tightly bounded and aligned 1D PV/PEC photoelectrodes might be a breakthrough for high-efficiency water splitting.
Nanomaterials, such as nanoparticles (0D), nanowires (1D), nanoplates (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures, have been used in many conventional applications, e.g., the development of new materials, biosensing, display, medicine, and energy technology. In energy applications such as batteries, thermoelectric generators, fuel cells, solar cells, and PEC water splitting, nanomaterials have become necessary for new developments and advancements. Nevertheless, nanomaterials have drawbacks that must be overcome for them to be widely used in conventional applications, such as their high cost, safety concerns, and instability. The H2 production industry should be ecofriendly and cost-effective to compete with other future alternative energy sources. Even though high-efficiency PEC water splitting can be achieved by introducing 1D nanostructures, their high cost and safety concerns are the first obstacles to commercialization. Secondly, the PEC water splitting community needs to conduct more intense research on the full cell analysis. For decades, many advances have been achieved with respect to semiconductor stability, OER/HER half reaction efficiency, degradation mechanism and developing protection layers. In addition, the practical issues such as temperature change of the PEC cell during operation and systematic influences induced by H2/O2 bubbling or electrolyte circulation are less concentrated. Thirdly, appropriate synthetic methods are very challenging for introducing PV tandem cells together with 1D PEC photoelectrodes. As mentioned above, PV cells can highly contribute to enhance the photovoltage when appropriately incorporated. However, most fabrication process of PV cells are concentrated in thin film deposition.
Thus, for practical solar-driven PEC water splitting using 1D nanostructures, (i) the light-harvesting spectrum of semiconductors must be extended, (ii) the recombination rate of photogenerated carriers must be reduced, and (iii) ecofriendly and cost-effective fabrication methods for 1D nanostructures must be developed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grants funded by the Korean government (NRF-2021R1F1A1051006).
References
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 Search PubMed .
M. Ashokkumar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 Search PubMed .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645 Search PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnermann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Wu, C. Chang, S. Luo and Z. Cui, Mater. Des., 2020, 196, 109191 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Kwak, T. G. Kim, W. Lee, S.-H. Han and Y.-M. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1615 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, I. E. Castelli, P. C. K. Vesborg, K. W. Jacobsen, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2397 Search PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977 Search PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Weber and M. J. Dignam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1986, 11, 225 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 Search PubMed .
M. D. Archer and J. R. Bolton, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8028 Search PubMed .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605 Search PubMed .
S. Xie, X. Lu, T. Zhai, W. Li, M. Yu, C. Liang and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14272 RSC .
Q. Liu, H. Lu, Z. Shi, F. Wu, J. Guo, K. Deng and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, B.-X. Chen, Y. Lin, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500049 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, T. Asai, T. Hisatomi, J. Uemura, M. Tosa, K. Shimamura, J. Kubota, K. Domen and T. Kitamori, Small, 2014, 10, 3692 Search PubMed .
Y.-M. Sung, W.-C. Kwak and T. G. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 389 RSC .
W.-C. Kwak, S.-H. Han, T. G. Kim and Y.-M. Sung, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 5297 CrossRef CAS .
A. Efimova, A. Eliseev, V. Georgobiani, M. Kholodov, A. Kolchin, D. Presnov, N. Tkachenko, S. Zabotnov, L. Golovan and P. Kashkarov, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2016, 48, 232 CrossRef .
S. Bai, J. Han, K. Zhang, J. Sun, J. Guo, R. Luo, D. Li and A. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4076 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Smith, I. D. Sharp, N. C. Strandwitz and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2851 Search PubMed .
G. Fang, Z. Liu and C. Han, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146095 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, L. Wang, R. Gao, Y.-C. Zhang, L. Pan, C. Huang, K. Liu, X.-Y. Chang, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118079 Search PubMed .
A. Creti, V. Tasco, A. Cola, G. Montagna, I. Tarantini, A. Salhi, A. Al-Muhanna, A. Passaseo and M. Lomascolo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063901 CrossRef .
Y. Wan, M. Han, L. Yu, J. Jia and G. Yi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 78902 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Lin, S. Jiang, Q. Zhang, N. Pan, Y. Luo and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71883 RSC .
B.-X. Zhou, S.-S. Ding, Y. Wang, X.-R. Wang, W.-Q. Huang, K. Li and G.-F. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6037 RSC .
H. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Sun, M. Lv, F. Wu, L. Zhang, L. Li and X. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 13030 RSC .
S. Wang, B. Zhu, M. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Yu and M. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 19 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhang, S. Li, B. K. Liu, D. J. Wang and T. F. Xie, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3724 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Xie, B. Weng and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18804 Search PubMed .
J. Hao, S. Zhang, F. Ren, Z. Wang, J. Lei, X. Wang, T. Cheng and L. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 508, 419 Search PubMed .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Raja, N. Muthukumarasamy, D. Velauthapillai, R. Balasundaraprabhu, S. Agilan and T. S. Senthil, Sol. Energy, 2014, 106, 129 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567 Search PubMed .
D. Commandeur, G. Brown, E. Hills, J. Spencer and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 1570 Search PubMed .
L. Vayssieres, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 464 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, D. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Z. Zhang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Leelavathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10795 RSC .
J. Miao, H. Bin Yang, S. Y. Khoo and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11118 Search PubMed .
Y. Tak, S. J. Hong, J. S. Lee and K. Yong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2627 Search PubMed .
P. Y. Kuang, Y. Z. Su, K. Xiao, Z. Q. Liu, N. Li, H. J. Wang and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16387 Search PubMed .
S. J. A. Moniz, J. Zhu and J. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301590 CrossRef .
S. Xie, X. Lu, T. Zhai, W. Li, M. Yu, C. Liang and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14272 RSC .
M. Yousefi, M. Amiri, R. Azimirad and A. Z. Moshfegh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 661, 106 Search PubMed .
S. Shet, K. S. Ahn, T. Deutsch, H. I. Wang, N. Ravindra, Y. Yan, J. Turner and M. Al-Jassim, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 69 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, H. Deng and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, F. Ren, J. Zhou, G. Cai, L. Cai, Y. Hu, D. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Guo and S. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1 Search PubMed .
L. Cai, F. Ren, M. Wang, G. Cai, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Shen and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Jiao, T. Chen, Y. Li, W. Ren, S. Lin, G. Lu, J. Ye and Y. Bi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7552 RSC .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, M. O. Ansari, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 27023 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, Y. Li, W. Sun, J. Huang, H. Xie and X. Zhao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 149 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Shi, Y. Liang, J. Fu and M. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 25 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, W. J. Chen, Y. H. Shen, F. Z. Huang, C. H. Li and S. K. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, R. Lv, P. Zhang, C. Li and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 77 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Kang, Y. Li, Y. Shen, Y. Sun, L. Wang and Y. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lou, Y. Zhang, L. Cheng, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1505 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Hsu, S. Y. Fu, M. H. Chen, Y. C. Chen and Y. G. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 1 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, T. Wang, F. Su, P. Zhang, C. Li and J. Gong, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 143 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Li, X. Zhang, R. Aguinaldo, A. Kargar, K. Madsen, K. Banu, Y. Zhou, Y. Bando, Z. Liu and D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1515 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, M. Guo, Y. Feng and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5776 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Q. Li, J. Jiang and Y. Mao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8769 RSC .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Xiao, W. Li, Z. Lin, Z. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Li, X. Huang, L. Miao, C. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4692 Search PubMed .
L. Sun, J. Cai, Q. Wu, P. Huang, Y. Su and C. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 525 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5405 Search PubMed .
N. Lu, X. Quan, J. Y. Li, S. Chen, H. T. Yu and G. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11836 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Qin, X. H. Wang, Y. Li, J. Gu, X. M. Ning, J. Chen, X. Q. Lu and C. L. Tao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22195 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Qin, Q. H. Wang, J. Chen, C. H. He, Y. Li, C. H. Wang, J. J. Quan, C. L. Tao and X. Q. Lu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 248 Search PubMed .
W. Q. Fang, Z. Huo, P. Liu, X. L. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Jia, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. G. Yang and X. Yao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, D. Ding, T. Li and C. Ning, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 443, 321 Search PubMed .
S. He, Y. Meng, Q. Wu, J. Yang, S. Huang, X. Li, S. Tong, T. Asefa and M. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19367 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Liao, Y. Li, X. Cao, N. Li, C. Wang and S. Lin, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46871 Search PubMed .
X. Song, W. Li, D. He, H. Wu, Z. Ke, C. Jiang, G. Wang and X. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800165 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Zuo, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10020 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, D. Ding, C. Ning and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95478 Search PubMed .
N. K. Allam, N. M. Deyab and N. Abdel Ghany, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12274 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, B. Jin, S. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Yu and F. Peng, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 127 Search PubMed .
T. Wu, C. Chen, Y. Wei, R. Lu, L. Wang and X. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12096 Search PubMed .
B. A. Aragaw, C. J. Pan, W. N. Su, H. M. Chen, J. Rick and B. J. Hwang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 478 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2012, 13, 169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, C. Ahn, J. Park and S. Jeon, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9747 RSC .
H. Luo, T. Takata, Y. Lee, J. Zhao, K. Domen and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 846 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dette, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, C. S. Kley, P. Punke, C. E. Patrick, P. Jacobson, F. Giustino, S. J. Jung and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Nair, P. K. Gayathri, V. S. Gummaluri, P. M. G. Nambissan and C. Vijayan, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 045107 CrossRef .
S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra, P. P. Das and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6784 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Ma, T. He, C. F. Ng, S. Wang, H. Sun and H. J. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11956 Search PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. Der Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, M. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Shen, M. Wang and L. Guo, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 2191 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohammadi, Y. Ghayeb, T. Sharifi and M. M. Momeni, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 2339 Search PubMed .
W. H. Ryu, Y. W. Lee, Y. S. Nam, D. Y. Youn, C. B. Park and I. D. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5610 RSC .
G. Dong, H. Hu, X. Huang, Y. Zhang and Y. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21003 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, G. Dong, Y. Zhang, C. Feng and Y. Bi, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118723 Search PubMed .
G. Ai, R. Mo, H. Li and J. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6722 RSC .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, Y. Qiu, J. Yang, M. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. Xu, L. Sheng, X. Zhao and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4004 RSC .
Y. Zhong, S. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Cai, Q. Gao, X. Yu, Y. Xu, X. Zhou, F. Peng and Y. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 430, 32 Search PubMed .
C. Cheng, W. Ren and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 132 Search PubMed .
W. Li, P. Da, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Lin, X. Gong and G. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11770 Search PubMed .
S. Ju, H. J. Seok, J. Jun, D. Huh, S. Son, K. Kim, W. Kim, S. Baek, H. K. Kim and H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118362 Search PubMed .
X. Feng, Y. Chen, Z. Qin, M. Wang and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18089 Search PubMed .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, D. Fu, K. Song, L. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Yang and H. Hou, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Makimizu, J. E. Yoo, M. Poornajar, N. T. Nguyen, H.-J. Ahn, I. Hwang, S. Kment and P. Schmuki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1315 Search PubMed .
P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rahman and O.-S. Joo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 13989 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Chen, J. Cheng, W. Ni, B. Wang and E. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9130 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Arumugam, Y. Toku and Y. Ju, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 5407 Search PubMed .
M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. Yan, S.-H. Wei and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 123712 CrossRef .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. N. de Carvalho, R. A. S. Luz, B. H. Lima, F. N. Crespilho, E. R. Leite and F. L. Souza, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 525 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mao, G. Y. Han and J. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2247 Search PubMed .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Annamalai, A. Subramanian, U. Kang, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3810 CrossRef CAS .
A. Annamalai, H. H. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. Y. Lee, E. Gracia-Espino, A. Subramanian, J. Park, K.-J. Kong and J. S. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23183 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu, C.-L. Dong, W.-Y. Lee, J. Chen, P. Guo, L. Zhao and S. Shen, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pu, J. Deng, M. Li, J. Gao, H. Zhang, Y. Hao, J. Zhong and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2491 RSC .
W. Cheng, J. He, Z. Sun, Y. Peng, T. Yao, Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, F. Hu, Z. Xie, B. He and S. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24060 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 02681 Search PubMed .
I. V. Bagal, N. R. Chodankar, M. A. Hassan, A. Waseem, M. A. Johar, D.-H. Kim and S.-W. Ryu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 21351 Search PubMed .
P. P. Kunturu and J. Huskens, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7850 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Siol, J. C. Hellmann, S. D. Tilley, M. Graetzel, J. Morasch, J. Deuermeier, W. Jaegermann and A. Klein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, F. Kang, H. Liu, Q. Li and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2418 RSC .
A. Martínez-García, V. K. Vendra, S. Sunkara, P. Haldankar, J. Jasinski and M. K. Sunkara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15235 RSC .
J. Bai, Y. Li, R. Wang, K. Huang, Q. Zeng, J. Li and B. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22996 RSC .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M. K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, S. W. Cho, N. G. Deshpande, Y. B. Kim, Y. D. Yun, S. H. Jung, D. S. Kim and H. K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14840 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H. C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690 RSC .
S. K. Choi, W. S. Chae, B. Song, C. H. Cho, J. Choi, D. S. Han, W. Choi and H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14008 RSC .
H. Zhang, Q. Ding, D. He, H. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Lei and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3113 RSC .
K. Peng, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. Yan, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Small, 2005, 1, 1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiao, M. Liao, K. Fang, X. He and Y. Zhang, Silicon, 2019, 11, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932 Search PubMed .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573 RSC .
W. Vijselaar, P. Westerik, J. Veerbeek, R. M. Tiggelaar, E. Berenschot, N. R. Tas, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 185 Search PubMed .
P. D. Tran, S. S. Pramana, V. S. Kale, M. Nguyen, S. Y. Chiam, S. K. Batabyal, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. Loo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, C. Wang, L. Pan, F. Tian, X. Zhang and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, A. B. Wong, J. Resasco and P. Yang, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 281 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Guo, J. Zhang and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2832 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, K. C. Yang, C. W. Liu, Y. R. Lu, C. L. Dong, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 422 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiao, M. Liao, J. Wu, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhang and Y. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 22235 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, J. Xiang, Q. Zhou, S. Su, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Jin, L. Nian, R. Nözel, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3518 RSC .
P. Gnanasekar, D. Periyanagounder, P. Varadhan, J.-H. He and J. Kulandaivel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Cha, Y. Myung, K. Park, I. H. Kwak, I. S. Kwon, J. Seo, S. A. Lim, E. H. Cha and J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Kwak, H. S. Im, D. M. Jang, Y. W. Kim, K. Park, Y. R. Lim, E. H. Cha and J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Q. Peng, Y. Hu, F. Q. Zhang, B. Hu, L. Li, M. Wang, X. M. Meng and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qi, G. She, X. Huang, T. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Mu and W. Shi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3182 RSC .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Chen, M. Ning, G. Ma, Q. Meng, Y. Zhang, J. Gao, M. Jin, M. Yuan, X. Wang, J. M. Liu and G. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 275401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xing, S. Shen, M. Wang, F. Ren, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Xiao, W. Wu and C. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 1 Search PubMed .
A. Kargar, K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Choi, H. Jeong, G. Y. Jung, S. Jin and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-Q. Zhang, Y. Hu, R.-N. Sun, H. Fu and K.-Q. Peng, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Devarapalli, C. K. Kamaja and M. V. Shelke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13352 RSC .
Z. Xiong, M. Zheng, S. Liu, L. Ma and W. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 265402 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 31, 736 CrossRef .
W. J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, F. Dionigi, N. T. Nguyen, R. Kirchgeorg, M. Gliech, S. Grigorescu, P. Strasser and P. Schmuki, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2360 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, A. Torres-Pardo, J. M. González-Calbet, Y. Ma, P. Oleynikov, O. Terasaki, S. Asahina, M. Shima, D. Cha, L. Zhao, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1 CAS .
Y. Cong, H. S. Park, S. Wang, H. X. Dang, F. R. F. Fan, C. B. Mullins and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, J. E. Thorne, C. H. Wu, P. Ma, C. Du, Q. Dong, J. Guo and D. Wang, Chem, 2016, 1, 640 CAS .
J. Britt and C. Ferekides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 2851 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, M. Seol, H. Kim, J. B. Miller, A. J. Gellman and K. Yong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9587 RSC .
K.-H. Cho and Y.-M. Sung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H382 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Cho and Y.-M. Sung, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 176 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram, E. Borgarello and M. Gráutzel, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1981, 64, 362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Liu, X. Li and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 535 RSC .
Y. Fu, F. Cao, F. Wu, Z. Diao, J. Chen, S. Shen and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706785 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, Y. Huang, Y. Yu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Leng, Z. Xia, J. Zhong, H. Song, X. Liu, B. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Chen, K. Zhou, J. Han, Y. Cheng and J. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301846 CrossRef .
C. Chen, D. C. Bobela, Y. Yang, S. Lu, K. Zeng, C. Ge, B. Yang, L. Gao, Y. Zhao, M. C. Beard and J. Tang, Front. Optoelectron., 2017, 10, 18 CrossRef .
Y. H. Kwon, M. Jeong, H. W. Do, J. Y. Lee and H. K. Cho, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12913 RSC .
L. Guo, P. S. Shinde, Y. Ma, L. Li, S. Pan and F. Yan, Sol. RRL, 2019, 4, 1900442 CrossRef .
J. Kim, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Lee, H. Shin, J. Kim and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2180 RSC .
J. Park, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. W. Yun, S. G. Shim, Y. S. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 136 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, A. Ghosh, Md. Y. Ali and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6071 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, X. Zhu, Y. Zeng, A. Wang, S. Li, Y. Fan, M. Cai, Q. Cheng, Y. Wei and S. Sun, Catal. Lett., 2020, 150, 1878 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Ho, C. Bae, J. Joe, H. Yang, S. Kim, J. H. Park and H. Shin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Li, C.-W. Hsu and S.-Y. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 521, 216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Shi and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Yao, X. Zhao, H. Shi, M. Cao and Y. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wei, H. Li, R. Wang, J. Feng, H. Yun and A. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14074 RSC .
H. Zhu and Q. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 230 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Li, H. Zhu, J. C. Yu, X. Xiao and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 17 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Y. Oh, J. Kim, H. Kim, H. Shin and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ran and L. Yin, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1800970 CrossRef .
M. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Su, J. Hu, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600494 CrossRef .
W. Yang, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, H.-C. Kwon, J. Kim, W. Jo, J. Kim and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702888 CrossRef .
H. Lee, W. Yang, J. Tan, Y. Oh, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 995 CrossRef CAS .
A. Travlos, N. Boukos, C. Chandrinou, H.-S. Kwack and L. S. Dang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 104307 CrossRef .
F. Kayaci, S. Vempati, I. Donmez, N. Biyikli and T. Uyar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10224 RSC .
Z. Yu, H. Liu, M. Zhu, Y. Li and W. Li, Small, 2019, 15, 1903378 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-H. Lee, S. Park, M. Kim, A. K. Sinha, S. C. Lee, E. Jung, W. J. Chang, K.-S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S.-P. Cho, H. Kim, K. T. Nam and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Wang and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7894 RSC .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724 RSC .
R. Fan, Z. Mi and M. Shen, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ning and G. Lu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1213 RSC .
K. Pan, Y. Dong, W. Zhou, Q. Pan, Y. Xie, T. Xie, G. Tian and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Mali, S. An, M. Liou, S. S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 109 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Nguyen, M. V. Nguyen, T. H. T. Nguyen, M. T. Doan, L. L. T. Ngoc, E. Janssens, A. Yadav, P.-C. Lin, M. S. Nguyen and N. H. Hoang, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 261 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, Z. Ma, W. Yang, H. Hou and F. Gao, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 8338 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, F. Gao, W. Yang, E. Wang, Z. Wang and H. Hou, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Saleem, E. Pervaiz, M. U. Yousaf and M. B. K. Niazi, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 464 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ge, Q. Li, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600152 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, Z. Chen, K.-Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Cai, G. V. Biesold-McGee, J. Huang, Y. H. Ng, H. Sun, J. Wang and Y. Lai, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, J. Huang, A. Wang, G. V. Biesold-McGee, X. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Wang, Y. Lai and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, Y. Su, D. Liu, P. Yang, B. Liu and C. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, S. Dai, W. Dong, X. Su, L. Fang, F. Zheng, X. Wang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 213905 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, J. Shi, W. Zi, P. Wang and S. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Andoshe, S. Choi, Y.-S. Shim, S. H. Lee, Y. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, T. Kim, H. K. Park, M. G. Lee, J.-M. Jeon, K. T. Nam, M. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Oh and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9477 RSC .
Z. Bai, X. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Kang, S. Cao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501459 CrossRef .
G. Ai, H. Li, S. Liu, R. Mo and J. Zhong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5706 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6549 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, W. Y. Noh, F. Li, J. H. Kim, H. Y. Jeong and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805737 CrossRef .
T. Su, Q. Shao, Z. Qin, Z. Guo and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Guo, L. Li, Y. Gu, B.-H. Kim and J. Huang, Catal. Lett., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s10562-021-03756-9 .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Guo, Y. Xin and L. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 790, 493 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11141 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Madhavi, P. Kondaiah, H. Shaik, K. N. Kumar, T. S. S. K. Naik, G. M. Rao and P. C. Ramamurthy, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 274, 125095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Jin, R. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, X. Liu and H. Jiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 1 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, P. Wang, Z. Yan and N. Ren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 609, 59 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Jiang, L. Li, Q. Wang, L. Du, X. Liu and G. Tian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 6174 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, C. Yang, H. Cheng, S. Jiao, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3758 RSC .
N. K. Allam, B.
S. Shaheen and A. M. Hafez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H. J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 653 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700090 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, J. Ma, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604480 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, C.-S. Kim, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701589 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, G. Nam, M. G. Kim, T. Zhang, K. Liu, X. Zhuang, J. Cho, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Feng and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. P. Dagg, J. Liu and P. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pihosh, T. Minegishi, V. Nandal, T. Higashi, M. Katayama, T. Yamada, Y. Sasaki, K. Seki, Y. Suzuki, M. Nakabayashi, M. Sugiyama and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1519 RSC .
S. W. Shin, J. Y. Lee, K.-S. Ahn, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13375 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Wei, G. Yuan, Q. Liu, R. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Cao and P. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701575 CrossRef .
M. Xu, P. Da, H. Wu, D. Zhao and G. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hamedani, N. K. Allam, H. Garmestani and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13480 CrossRef CAS .
L.-K. Tsui, Y. Xu, D. Dawidowski, D. Cafiso and G. Zangari, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19070 RSC .
R. Lu, Y. Wei, C. Chen and T. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 790, 99 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, B. Feng, X. Lu and K. Duan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 18338 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Xu, Q. Liang and Z. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chakhari, J. B. Naceur, S. B. Taieb, I. B. Assaker and R. Chtourou, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 708, 862 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. S. Han, I. S. Cho, W. M. Seong, I. J. Park, J. H. Park, S. Shin, G. D. Park, S. Park, S. Lee and K. S. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 863 CrossRef CAS .
S. David, M. A. Mahadik, H. S. Chung, J. H. Ryu and J. S. Jang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7537 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tong, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Q. Liu, H. Wang, X. Peng, X. Liu, Z. Zhang, H. Wang and P. D. Lund, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 5496 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Yang, W. Li, J. Li, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 302, 717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, Z. Li, D. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang, W. Peng and X. Fan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5175 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Quang, T. T. Hien, N. D. Chinh, D. Kim, C. Kim and D. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 710 CrossRef CAS .
I.-H. Yoo, S. S. Kalanur and H. Seo, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 250, 200 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Tandem configuration with a photoanode and a photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  (a) 2D thin-film structure (left) and the array of 1D nanostructures (right) with advantages of hole diffusion and light absorption. Schematics of the (b) type-II heterojunction and (c) Z-scheme heterojunction.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photoresponses of (i) ZnO nanoparticles, (ii) randomly distributed ZnO nanorods, (iii) a thick film of randomly distributed ZnO nanorods, and (iv) well-aligned ZnO nanorods electrodes with respect to the wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Increase in the aspect ratio with the increasing reaction time. (c) XPS spectra of ZnO nanorods with different lengths, indicating the presence of three O species: OL (lattice O), OV (O vacancy), and OC (chemically adsorbed O). Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 the Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current densities of the pristine ZnO nanowire and ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays with 5, 15, 30, 60, or 120 CdS SILAR cycles under chopped illumination. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Band alignments and charge-transport mechanism of ZnO/CdS/CdSe double-shelled nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Mott–Schottky analysis of BiVO4 nanoparticles and ZnO nanorods. (d) PL spectra of pristine BiVO4 and ZnO/BiVO4 core/shell heterostructures with an incident-laser wavelength of 325 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XPS profile of the N doping concentration with respect to the etching depth. (b) Band diagram for V-doped ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2014 Hydrogen Energy Publications, LLC. (c) Schematic of N gradient doping in ZnO nanorods and the resultant terraced band structure with enhanced charge separation.	 

ZnO/Au NP	2 wt%	Visible light (>420 nm), 100 mW cm−2	0.1 M Na2SO4	30 μA cm−2 (0.8 V vs. ag/AgCl)	
58

Matchlike ZnO/Au	0.032 atomic ratio	AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2	0.1 M Na2SO4	9.11 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	
59

ZnO/Au nanopencil	0.4 wt%	AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.5 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	
60

ZnO/Au/Al2O3	0.013 atomic ratio	AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 40 mW cm−2	0.5 M Na2SO4	0.55 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	
61

Tip-grafted ZnO/Ag Np	—	300 W Xe lamp, 200 mW cm−2	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3	2.4 mA cm−2 (0.2 V vs. SCE)	
55

ZnO/Ag NP	18.19 wt%	Visible light (>500 nm)	0.2 M Na2SO4	0.15 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	
56

ZnO/Pt NP	0.007 atomic ratio	AM 1.5G simulated solar light, 100 mW cm−2	0.5 M Na2SO4	0.43 mA cm−2 (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl)	
63


 	Fig. 6  (a) Absorption spectra of the pristine ZnO nanorod and ZnO/Au heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Impedance analysis (Nyquist plots) of ZnO nanopencils and ZnO/Au heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematics of the working mechanism and energy band structure of ZnO/Au/Al2O3 nanorods. (d) Band diagram of ZnO/Ag heterostructures, indicating the enhanced charge separation. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Transmission electron microscopy image of the ZnO/Cu@Cu2O core/shell heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Processes for the growth of attached Au nanoparticles and 3D branched ZnO nanowire arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Absorption and scattering spectra of the pristine ZnO, brush-like nanoforest, and willow-like nanoforest (left) and schematics of the enhanced light-absorption process of the ZnO nanoforest compared with ZnO nanowires (right). Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schemes of the proposed PEC reaction mechanism and heterojunctions of CdS/ZnO (top) and TiO2/CdS/ZnO (bottom) heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.	 

N	Nanowires	Annealing in an NH3 flow	1 M KOH	0.23 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
69

N	Nanotube	Immersion in an NH3 solution	0.05 M phosphate buffer	0.116 at 0.2 V	
71

C	Nanotube	Annealing in an CO gas flow	1 M KOH	1.7 at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
72

S	Nanotube	Annealing in an H2S flow	0.1 M Na2SO4	0.45 at 1.5 V vs. SCE	
73

S	Nanotube	Annealing in an H2S flow	0.1 M KOH	2.92 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
254

P	Nanotube	Annealing in a PH3 flow	1.0 M NaOH	2.8 and 0.25 at 1.23 V RHE under AM 1.5G and visible light, respectively	
76

Si	Nanorod	Adding tetraethoxysilane in a hydrothermal solution	0.1 M NaOH	0.83 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
255

Sn	Nanowire	Adding SnCl4 in a hydrothermal solution	1 M KOH	1.85 at 1.0 V vs. RHE	
256

Sr	Nanotube	Adding Sr(OH2) salt in an anodizing electrolyte	1 M KOH	1 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
257

Li	Nanotube	Applying −1.55 V vs. SCE for 3 s in 1 M LiClO4	0.1 M phosphate buffer	1.5 at 1.65 V vs. RHE	
258

Al	Nanorod	Adding Al(NO3)3·9H2O in a hydrothermal solution	0.1 M NaOH	0.8 at 1.0 V vs. RHE	
259

Ta	Nanorod	Hydrothermal growth on Ta foil	0.2 M Na2SO4	1.1 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
79

Mo	Nanotube	Adding Na2MoO4 in an anodizing electrolyte	0.05 M Na2SO4	0.008 at 0 V vs. SCE under visible-light irradiation	
260

Co	Nanowire	Adding Co(NO3)2·6H2O in a hydrothermal solution	0.1 M Na2SO4	1.0 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
261

Fe	Nanorod	Adding Fe(NO3)3·9H2O in a hydrothermal solution	1.0 M NaOH	0.55 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
262


 	Fig. 8  (a) XPS spectra of TiO2 nanorod arrays before and after PH3 treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) XPS spectra of pristine and P-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) IPCE results measured at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl and (b) photocurrent under chopped visible-light illumination (>420 nm) at 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl of TiO2, C:TiO2, N:TiO2, and C/N:TiO2 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH. (c) Absorption spectra of several photoanodes, e.g., undoped, single-doped, and co-doped TiO2 nanotubes. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the heterojunction alignment of CdS and TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Band diagrams of TiO2 and Cd chalcogenides, i.e., CdS, CdSe, and CdSeS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the heterojunction of Co–Pi/CdS/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH.	 

A-TiO2 NT/CdS	Anodization (TiO2 NT)	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S	9.5 at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
94

Electrodeposition (CdS)
A-TiO2 NW/CdS	Alkali hydrothermal growth, ion exchange, thermal annealing (TiO2 NW)	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S (pH 13)	3.6 at 1.23 V RHE	
263

SILAR method (CdS)
R-TiO2NR/CdS nanoflower	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.1 M Na2S·9H2O and 0.02 M Na2SO3	3.23 at 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
264

Hydrothermal (CdS NF)
TiO2 NR/CdSeS	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S	8 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
95

CVD (CdSeS)
TiO2 NR/BiVO4/Co–Pi	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.1 M Na2SO3 and 0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 7)	1.86 at 1.0 V RHE	
265

Electrodeposition (BiVO4)
TiO2 NR/Bi2S3 NW	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S (pH 11.5)	2.4 at 0.7 V RHE	
266

Hydrothermal method after BiVO4 layer by soaking and annealing treatment
TiO2NR/MoS2 nanosheet	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.5 M Na2SO4	2.4 at 1.2 V vs. AgAgCl	
267

Drop-casting (MoS2 NS)
TiO2NR/ZnIn2S4 nanosheet	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S (pH 11.5)	1.2 at 1.5 V RHE	
17

Hydrothermal (ZnIn2S4 NS)
TiO2 NR/CdS/CdSe	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.3 M Na2S and 0.2 M Na2SO3	>35 at 0.3 V vs. SCE	
268

CBD (CdS and CdSe)
TiO2 NR/CdS/NiOx	Hydrothermal (TiO2 NR)	0.5 M Na2S and 0.5 M Na2SO4	30 at 1 V vs. SCE	
269

Hydrothermal (CdS)
DC sputtering (NiOx)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematics of the charge separation of photogenerated carriers in pristine TiO2 nanorods (left) and Au@SiO2-decorated TiO2 nanorods (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2014 Science China Press and Springer. (b) Band diagrams indicating the improved catalytic mechanism of Co–Pi on the TiO2 surface. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Growth mechanism of CBT-x (CdS branched TiO2) samples based on the control of the water/alcohol ratio. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 Elsevier B.V. (b) Fabrication process of 3D SnO2/TiO2 hierarchical core/branch nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Ltd.	 
4α-Fe2O3 + 4OH− → 4α-Fe2O3(OH)ads−	(6)
4α-Fe2O3(OH)ads− + 4hv → 4α-Fe2O3 + ↑O2 + 2H+	(7)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Ideal PEC performance of the hematite photoelectrode realized by the parameters of nanostructure and catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH. (b) Sn diffusion from the FTO substrate into the hematite results in thermal deformation and conductivity loss in the FTO substrate during activation of hematite at a high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the OER process for the Fe2O3/NixFe2−xO3 structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) HRTEM images of Fe2O3 (left) and Fe2O3/FeTaO4 core/shell nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Scanning electron microscopy image of 3D Cu2O/ZnO core/branch nanoarrays. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Long-term PEC stability measurements of Cu2O nanowires and Cu2O nanowires with a TiO2 sol–gel coating on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of Cu2O/Ga2O3 core/shell structures. (d) HRTEM and elemental mapping images of Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/NiMo structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 15  Band diagrams with the band bending and VOC for (a) n-Si/TiO2 and (b) p-Si/TiO2 arrays under visible-light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for vertically aligned Ta3N5 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) of the bare Ta3N5, NiFe-LDH/Ta3N5, CoPi + Co(OH)x/Ta3N5, and Co–Pi + Co(OH)x/NiFe-LDH/Ta3N5 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

CdS NR/Cu2S	Photoanode	0.5 M Na2SO4 and 0.2 M Na2SO3	7.2	8.12 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs. RHE	Ag/AgCl	
192

CdS NR/Co–Pi	Photoanode	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3	12.5	4.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE	Ag/AgCl	
193

CdS NR/MoS2	Photoanode	Lactic acid electrolyte (10% by volume)	3	1.9 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V vs. RHE	SCE	
194

Grad-O CdS NR	Photoanode	1.0 M Na2SO4 with 1.0 M N2H4·H2O	11	6.0 ± 0.1 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE	SCE	
185

CdS NR/CdO	Photoanode	0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3	13.5	4.35 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)	SCE	
181

CdS Nr/ZnSe	Photoanode	0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3	13.5	3.89 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)	SCE	
180

CdS NR/SnSx NS heterostructures	Photoanode	0.5 m Na2SO4	6.8	1.59 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V RHE	Ag/AgCl	
184

CdS NR/CdO/TiO2	Photoanode	0.3 M Na2S and 0.2 M Na2SO3	—	3.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
195

CdS NR/CdSe	Photoanode	Na2SO3 (0.5 M)	
	5.3 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Ag/AgCl	
196

CdS NR/Cu2O	Photoanode	0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3	
	4.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	Ag/AgCl	
197

CdS NR/g-C3N4	Photoanode	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.25 M Na2S	12	1.16 mA cm−2 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
198

CdS NR/ZnS	Photoanode	0.25 M Na2S + 0.35 M Na2SO3	
	7.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)	SCE	
193

CdS NT	Photoanode	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3	12.5	6 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. SCE)	SCE	
179

CdSe NT	Photoanode	0.35 M Na2SO3 and 0.24 M Na2S	
	3.0 mA cm−2 at −0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl)	Ag/AgCl	
199

CdTe NT	Photoanode	1 M Na2SO4 aqueous	
	∼2.1 mA cm−2 at ∼1.4 V (vs. SCE)	SCE	
200

CuInS2 NR/CdS/ZnS	Photocathode	0.5 M Na2SO4 and NaOH (for pH)	10	∼10 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V (vs. RHE) (dark: ∼8.25 mA cm−2)	Ag/AgCl	
201

Cu7S4 NR/TiO2/CoCr-LDH	Photoanode	0.5 m Na2SO4 solution	6.8	2.04 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
202

CuInS2 NR/CdS	Photocathode	1.0 M KCl	5.97	1.14 mA cm−2 at −0.1 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
203

Sb2Se3 NW	Photocathode	0.5 M H2SO4	0	−1.1 mA cm−2 at −0.3 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
188

Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt	Photocathode	0.5 M H2SO4	0	2 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
190

Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt	Photocathode	0.1 M H2SO4	1	12.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
204

Sb2Se3 NR/TiO2/Pt	Photocathode	0.1 M H2SO4	1	17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
205

Sb2Se3 NR/MoS2	Photocathode	0.5 M Na2SO4	6.5	10 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
189

Sb2Se3 TF/NR/TiO2/Pt	Photocathode	0.1 M H2SO4	1	30 mA cm−2 at 0 V (vs. RHE)	Ag/AgCl	
191


 	Fig. 17  (a) Band diagrams indicating the working mechanism of n-/n-type Z-scheme CdS/CdO core/shell nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Schematic illustration of the growth process for the 1D Sb2Se3 nanoneedles. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
