Tailored Au@TiO 2 nanostructures for the plasmonic effect in planar perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02937C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02937C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12034-12042Tailored Au@TiO2 nanostructures for the plasmonic effect in planar perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Rundong 
            Fan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ligang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yihua 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guanhaojie 
            Zheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziliang 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Huanping 
            Zhou
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn
bDepartment of Energy and Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
Received 
      5th April 2017
    , Accepted 15th May 2017First published on 15th May 2017AbstractAmong the various methods to advance solar cell technologies, the implementation of nanoparticles with plasmonic effects is an effective way to make better use of incident light and manage carrier dynamics. Herein, for the first time we report the systematic synthesis of gold nanospheres or nanorods coated with a thin layer of titanium oxide (Au@TiO2) and use them to examine the plasmonic effect in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. The most efficient assembly mode is to embed the Au@TiO2 nanorods into the electron transport layer (ETL), which elevates the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 15.76% to 16.35%, mainly attributed to the short-circuit current enhancement. The optimized device assembled with Au@TiO2 nanorods delivers an efficiency of 20.10%. We further explored the plasmonic enhancement effect of Au@TiO2 nanorods based on the combination of UV-visible absorption spectroscopy, incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE), photoluminescence (PL) and transient photocurrent decay (TPC). The results indicate better charge separation/transfer as well as facilitated carrier transport in the presence of plasmonic particles. This work provides an insightful understanding of plasmonic effects in planar perovskite solar cells and also presents a promising approach for simultaneous photon and electron management.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have been under intensive study due to their promise as a future photovoltaic technology. The excellent optoelectronic properties of perovskite materials, such as optimal/tunable band gaps, high absorption coefficients and long carrier diffusion lengths,1–4 enable the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells to increase from 3.81%5 to over 20%,6–8 which is comparable to the PCE of silicon-based solar cells. There are various strategies to boost the performance of perovskite solar cells, including perovskite absorber design,9 film formation,10–12 defect passivation,13,14 and interface engineering.15–17 Among these methods, interface engineering in perovskite solar cells is of vital importance to enable the control of carrier dynamics within the entire device. The implementation of plasmonic nanoparticles in either the absorber or carrier transport layers presents a promising method to engineer both optical and electronic device characteristics by making better use of incident light and engineering the carrier dynamics.
The application of plasmonic effects in perovskite solar cells is greatly benefited from the associated advances in photocatalysis, photosynthesis, and particularly dye sensitized solar cells.18–21 Thus, much attention has been paid to plasmonic effects for mesoporous perovskite devices, which have analogous structures to dye-sensitized solar cells. For instance, it has been shown that plasmonic nanoparticles can cooperate well with the perovskite absorber to further harvest incident light, especially in the broad wavelength range, as well as to facilitate charge separation and collection. In an earlier study, Snaith et al.22 incorporated core–shell Au@SiO2 nanoparticles into mesoporous halide perovskite solar cells, improving the PCE from 10.7 to 11.4% with an enhancement of the short circuit current density (Jsc) from 14.76 to 16.91 mA cm−2. This improvement was attributed to a reduction in the exciton binding energy of the perovskite material. Subsequently, plasmonic enhancement effects including light absorption,23,24 charge transfer or separation,23,25,26 local heating effects,24 or hot electron injection27 have also been observed in perovskite solar cells. Generally speaking, numerous electrons are locally confined at the metal surface and may then be redistributed under the influence of an external electromagnetic field. Meanwhile, coulombic effects of the positively charged surface nuclei tend to restore the carriers and induce a collective oscillation of charges in the highly conductive nanocrystals. The oscillations of electrons and electromagnetic fields are defined as localized surface plasmons.20 The oscillation amplitude will reach a maximum at a certain wavelength of the incident light, which depends on the size and morphology of the plasmonic materials. In the state of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), the extinction cross section of the nanocrystal as well as the localized electric field will be greatly enhanced,21 thus confining the energy of the incident light and inducing special photoelectric effects. Despite the progressive understanding of the plasmonic effect, there is still limited success of its impact in perovskite solar cells in terms of a systematical fundamental study and achieving high performance devices. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to systematically study the plasmonic effect by delicate control of the metal geometry, as well as the metal–dielectric interface and its assembly mode, to ultimately boost the device efficiency.
Here, we systematically studied the plasmonic effect of Au@TiO2 in terms of both fundamental insights into physical properties and device application. Different from previously reported Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles, or Au@SiO2 nanoparticles applied in the perovskite solar cells, the benefit of Au@TiO2 nanorods in the present devices is their influence on the aspect ratio and the extended LSPR excitation at long wavelengths (over 800 nm) without obvious light trapping competition with the perovskite absorbing layer. We further studied the metal–dielectric interface as well as the coupling between the Au@TiO2 and adjacent absorber/transport materials, and found that all the interfaces play vital roles. With the aid of Au@TiO2 nanorods (NRs), we demonstrated an improved device performance (average PCE elevated from 15.76% to 16.35%) by showing a higher conversion efficiency that was wavelength independent. Furthermore, the plasmonic effect in the planar perovskite device architecture was thoroughly analyzed and a better charge separation/transfer and collection in the devices was presented in the presence of Au@TiO2 NRs. The optimized device based on Au@TiO2 nanorods yielded a PCE of 20.10%, which further provided insight into the development of ideal plasmonic functionality for future optoelectronic systems.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Characterization of Au@TiO2 NRs
In the present work, gold nanospheres and nanorods are both prepared to investigate the geometrical impacts on plasmonic enhancement effects. The gold nanospheres were prepared via the reduction of chloroauric acid with sodium citrate and titanium oxide was then directly coated onto the gold nanospheres. Through this process, a thin shell layer of TiOx was uniformly coated onto the 10 nm gold nanospheres. The gold nanorods, however, were prepared by the reduction of chloroauric acid with the assistance of cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB). The resulting surface of gold NRs was terminated by CTAB, and a further surface modification by poly(sodium-p-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) was required to facilitate the absorption of the Ti precursor (Fig. 1a). Thus, we successfully coated a thin layer (around 5 nm) of TiOx onto the gold nanorods with a longitudinal length of 32 nm and a width of 8 nm (Fig. 1c and d). The decoration of a thin layer of titanium oxide was further confirmed by the linear elemental profile scanning as shown in Fig. 1e. The width of the gold's signal intensity peak turned out to be around 10 nm along the scanning line, whereas the signal of Ti could be detected over a longer range, which supported the encapsulation of Au NRs by titanium oxide. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the Au@TiO2 NR and Au NR samples showed no obvious differences except for a tiny weak peak at 25.3°, which indicated that amorphous titanium oxide was coated on the gold nanorods (Fig. 1b). We also characterized the Au@TiO2 nanospheres, and the detailed results are shown in Fig. S1.†
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Au@TiO2 NRs; (b) XRD pattern of Au and Au@TiO2 NRs. (c and d) TEM images of the as-synthesized core–shell Au@TiO2 NRs. (e) The linear elemental profile scanning of Au@TiO2 NRs. 
2.2 Devices based on Au@TiO2 NRs

2.2.1 The device structure effects. 
Two typical assembly modes for embedment of plasmonic nanoparticles into perovskite solar cells are either through the transport layer (structure A) or at the transport layer/perovskite interface (structure B), as shown in Fig. 2a and b. In the initial attempt, the plasmonic nanoparticles were incorporated at the TiO2/perovskite interface via spin-coating. However, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results showed that the plasmonic nanoparticles aggregated into an island-like configuration on the top of the ETL after thermal treatment, which adversely affected the film quality and uniformity of the sequentially deposited perovskite film (Fig. S2†). To overcome this problem, a certain amount of Au@TiO2 nanomaterials was assembled into the as-prepared TiO2 ETL solution, as shown in structure A. It was found that there were no apparent morphological differences for the morphology of the ETL or perovskite layers through incorporation of Au@TiO2 nanomaterials into the TiO2 compact layer (Fig. 2c–f). Accordingly, we fabricated Au@TiO2 nanosphere- and Au@TiO2 nanorod-based perovskite solar cells (Fig. S3a†), from which we found that incorporation of Au@TiO2 NRs into perovskite solar cells via structure A was the optimal choice. The improved plasmonic effect in Au@TiO2 NR-based devices compared to that with Au@TiO2 nanospheres was likely due to the more optimal LSPR excitation wavelength in collaboration with the perovskite absorber.21,25 In consideration of these factors, we finally chose structure A with Au@TiO2 NRs dispersed into the TiO2 compact layer to further study its impact on the perovskite solar cell.
 Fig. 2  The schematic structure of the perovskite solar cell based on Au@TiO2 nanoparticles (a) embedded in the ETL (structure A); and (b) at the interface of ETL/perovskite. (Structure B) From top to bottom: Au electrode/HTL/Perovskite/ETL/ITO substrate. SEM images of the ETL without (c) and with (d) Au@TiO2; perovskite film deposited on the ETL layer for without (e) and with (f) Au@TiO2 NRs. 


2.2.2 Metal–dielectric interfaces. 
The dielectric shell of the plasmonic nanoparticles is one of the key parameters for developing an optimal electromagnetic field distribution of the LSPR, which further affects the incident light absorption and carrier dynamics of the devices. Typically, the assembled plasmonic nanoparticles in the devices were coated with a thin oxide layer e.g. SiO2 or TiO2. The shell layer could not only prevent the undesired direct contact between perovskite and metal particles that may serve as the recombination center, but also increase the chemical and thermal stability of the metal particles. However, since the LSPR enhanced electric field at the metal surface can decay very quickly within a few nanometers, it is crucial to obtain a uniform dielectric shell with appropriate thickness. Accordingly, we investigated this effect based on coating Au NRs with 5 and 10 nm TiO2 shells. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, Au@TiO2 NRs with different thicknesses were prepared by controlling the hydrolysis process of the titanium precursor with the assistance of a NaHCO3 solution. It was found that all the devices based on Au@TiO2 NRs showed improved performances, regardless of the TiO2 thickness (Fig. 3c). However, they differed in their underlying mechanism for the performance enhancement. For instance, Au@TiO2 NR devices with thicker shells exhibit an unchanged short circuit current (Jsc), but an improved open circuit voltage (Voc) from 1.02 to 1.08 V when compared with the reference cell. In contrast, for the thinner shell devices no distinct Voc improvement was observed, while the Jsc was enhanced from 20.68 to 22.23 mA cm−2. This is in excellent agreement with the previous report that plasmonic nanoparticles with a thinner shell tend to improve the current whereas a thicker shell will result in a voltage improvement.28 The Voc improvement induced by plasmonic nanoparticles is likely associated with hot electron injection that may change the surface potential of the TiOx layer, thus increasing the built-in potential of the device.27 The Voc enhancement phenomenon was not so obvious once the TiO2 shell thickness was reduced below a certain threshold. This is because the TiO2 shell can vary the distance between the plasmonic particles and perovskite absorber, where a thinner dielectric layer will initiate an interaction between the hot electrons from Au and the excitons from the perovskite. The improved Jsc may be an indication of a facilitated carrier separation and transfer within the devices with plasmonic Au@TiO2 NRs, which will be discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 3  Au@TiO2 nanorods with a shell thickness of (a) around 10 nm and (b) around 5 nm. (c) Shell thickness influences on the device performance. 


2.2.3 The particle concentration effect. 
In addition to the metal dielectric interface, the concentration of plasmonic particles assembled within the solar cell can also significantly affect the resulting device performance. Particles with a too low concentration would not demonstrate plasmonic effects; while a high concentration of plasmonic particles could be detrimental to the device performance since those extra plasmonic particles might serve as traps for photo-generated carriers.29,30 According to the statistical results (Fig. 4a and b and S4†) based on 20 identical Au@TiO2 NR-based devices, the optimal concentration (weight ratio of Au@TiO2versus the TiO2 ETL calculated by the precursor amount) was around 1%. At the optimized concentration, the average Jsc of Au@TiO2 NR-based perovskite solar cells was improved from 21.10 mA cm−2 to 21.53 mA cm−2, resulting in an improvement of PCE from 15.76% to 16.35%. Representative J–V curves of devices with/without Au@TiO2 NRs are shown in Fig. 4c. Compared to the reference sample, the Au@TiO2 NR-based devices showed an increase in absolute efficiency, mainly associated with the increased Jsc and FF. By optimizing the perovskite layer, we can further improve the efficiency of the devices incorporated with Au@TiO2 NRs up to 20.1%, (Fig. 4d) compared to the reference sample with an efficiency of 18.18%. Steady state efficiency was also enhanced from 15.5% to 16.5% after 100 s of operation at 0.88 V (Fig. S3b†). The relatively low steady state efficiency was related to the low crystallinity of the amorphous TiO2 ETL.
 Fig. 4  Statistical analysis of device characteristics by varying the concentration of Au nanorods/TiO2 embedded into the ETL in the perovskite solar cell. (a) PCE. (b) Jsc. (c) J–V curve of the representative device with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (d) J–V curve of the optimized device with Au@TiO2 NRs, under reverse and forward scans. 

3. The plasmonic enhancement mechanism
We attempted to understand the plasmonic enhancement mechanism and the potential of this effect in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was first used to characterize the increased short circuit current of the devices, as shown in Fig. 5a. The EQE was improved via the introduction of Au@TiO2 NRs; however it was wavelength independent, indicating that the plasmon-related absorption contributes negligibly to the Jsc enhancement. The absorption spectra of the perovskite layer deposited on the ETL with/without Au@TiO2 NRs are provided in Fig. 5b. No obvious difference was detected for the samples, even in the range of specific absorption wavelengths associated with Au@TiO2 NRs. This result pointed out that the incorporation of the as-prepared Au@TiO2 NRs in the planar perovskite solar cells had negligible impact on the absorption enhancement. We further confirm this conclusion based on the simulated electric field profile of Au@TiO2 NRs under the incident light with a wavelength of 500 nm and 780 nm respectively (Fig. 5c and d). The finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation results showed that the LSPR effect led to a substantially non-uniform electric field distribution, which depended a lot on the wavelength of the incident light. However, this wavelength-dependent difference was not observed in the EQE or absorption testing results, which suggested that the Jsc enhancement cannot be attributed to the optical effect of the plasmonic nanoparticles but other effects.
 Fig. 5  (a) EQE results of the perovskite solar cells with/without Au@TiO2 NRs. (b) Optical absorption of perovskite layers deposited onto TiO2 compact layers with/without Au@TiO2 NRs. Absorption of Au@TiO2 NRs dispersed in ethanol. Simulated electric field profile for incident light with a wavelength of 500 nm (c) and 780 nm (d). 
Instead, there could probably be other factors contributing to the performance improvements. One possible reason may be the facilitated carrier transfer or separation in the presence of plasmonic nanoparticles. To confirm this idea, we conducted PL and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements on the perovskite films deposited on TiO2 with or without Au@TiO2. Fig. 6a and b show a distinct quenching effect of the perovskite induced by the Au@TiO2 NRs. Accordingly, the PL lifetime of the TiO2/perovskite sample was 17.73 ns; and that of the corresponding film was reduced to 14.20 ns when the Au@TiO2 NRs were embedded into the TiO2 layer. The quenching effects indicated the facilitated charge transfer and separation induced by the LSPR. To further explore the charge dynamics in the whole device induced by Au@TiO2 nanoparticles, we conducted transient photocurrent decay (TPC) measurement under working device conditions. The TPC measurement had been widely applied in dye-sensitized solar cells to determine the electron lifetime, where a pulse could induce a current flow of the solar device at the short circuit and the current decay could be recorded by using an oscilloscope.31,32 The fitted exponential decay time could represent the electron transport time and a reduced transport time indicated the improvement of electron transport and charge collection efficiency.31 This kind of measurement had also been used to investigate the carrier dynamics in perovskite solar cells and the carrier lifetime τ was reported to be associated with the electron transportation as well as charge carrier transport mobility.33 According to our experimental results, the carrier lifetime was reduced from 1.71 μs to 1.41 μs in the presence of Au@TiO2 NRs (Fig. 6c). This result indicated that plasmonic particles may benefit the dissociation of excitons, the charge transport or even the carrier mobility, which was consistent with the previous work.25 To investigate the conductivity change of the electron transport layers when the Au@TiO2 NRs were introduced, symmetrical dummy devices with a structure of ETL/spiro-OMeTAD/ETL were fabricated and tested. A similar testing method had been applied in the previous study.34 The results showed a higher short-circuit current density and better conductivity when the electron transport layers were assembled with Au@TiO2 NRs (Fig. S5†). What's more, we investigated the electrochemical impedance spectra of the solar devices with or without Au@TiO2 NRs under illumination at 0 bias voltage. The obtained Nyquist plot is shown in Fig. 6d. The semicircle at the higher frequency was related to the transport resistance and the one at lower frequency was related to the recombination resistance.35 It was obvious that the transport resistance of the device was reduced in the presence of Au@TiO2. The improved conductivity combined with the facilitated charge separation/transfer and transport guaranteed an effective carrier collection in the devices induced by Au@TiO2, leading to the Jsc enhancement.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) PL and TRPL testing results of the perovskite on TiO2 with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (c) Transient photocurrent decay (TPC) testing results for devices with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (d) Nyquist plots of the devices with or without Au NRs under light conditions with an intensity of 1000 W m−2 without applied bias. 
The facilitated charge separation, transfer and transportation could be ascribed to the following reasons. One possible explanation is related to the changed exciton bonding energy of the perovskite film in the presence of plasmonic nanoparticles. In 2013, Snaith et al.22 performed a series of PL and TRPL measurements on perovskite films deposited on mesoporous alumina with and without Au@SiO2 nanoparticles. The temperature-dependent PL results indicated that the presence of Au@SiO2 nanoparticles could reduce the exciton binding energy of the perovskite film from ∼98 meV to ∼35 meV, based on the assumption that the majority of the PL originated from radiative exciton recombination. A reduced exciton binding energy could facilitate charge separation in the perovskite materials or at the interfaces. However, the following work pointed out that the exciton binding energy of a CH3NH3PbI3 film was on the order of or less than 10 meV, and that the change in the exciton binding energy of a few meVs had less impact regarding charge carrier behavior.36 Therefore, although the plasmonic metal could change the exciton binding energy of perovskite materials to a certain degree, it may not serve as the major factor that contributes to the Jsc improvement. The other possible reason could be the plasmonic heating effect. When the LSPR phenomenon occurs, the accumulated energy on Au@TiO2 NRs can dissipate either in the form of re-emitted photons or the generated hot electrons. Part of these hot electrons will be transferred to the neighboring dielectric materials and even the absorber semiconductor, which could affect the carrier behavior within the photovoltaic devices.24,28,37 As such, we proposed a mechanism regarding the plasmonic enhancement effect in planar perovskite solar cells, as shown in Fig. 7a. When Au@TiO2 was introduced into the system, collective photon–electron oscillations arising from Au likely enhanced light absorption and emission, thus enabling a localized heating and driving a near-field heat exchange between hot and cold surfaces. The energy of the absorbed photons can be converted into hot electrons which can be further utilized in photovoltaics. The origin of the hot electrons is related to Landau damping, which usually occurs when the electromagnetic wave has a phase velocity approximately equal to that of plasma particles and the strong interaction between each other happens.38 The surface plasmon-driven hot electron flow had been observed in the metal–semiconductor nanodiodes.39 When it comes to the perovskite solar device, the generated hot electrons could act as a medium to realize a more efficient utilization of the energy within surrounding electromagnetic waves and engineer the device carrier dynamics. One possible dissipation form was that the hot electrons on the Au surface further interact with the TiO2, which promoted local electron mobility in TiO2 and finally led to improved charge collection. Additionally, the energy from hot electrons could be transferred to the perovskite to further help the dissociation of bonded excitons. The energy exchange may be based on the interaction of hot electrons and excitons. The probability of charge separation/transfer within the perovskite/TiO2 interface and transportation within the TiO2 material could be largely promoted. To confirm the mobility improvement in the presence of Au@TiO2 NRs, we fabricated testing devices with a structure of Ag/ETL/Ag. Similar testing methods regarding the study of function layers in perovskite solar cells had been reported in the previous work.40–42 In the Ag/ETL/Ag structure, the thickness of the ETL was confirmed to be 72 nm and a dielectric constant of 100 was used for calculation.43,44 According to the J–V curve shown in Fig. 7b, the mobility of the ETL with Au@TiO2 was improved from 7.55 × 10−5 to 9.24 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, as well as the carrier density enhanced from 7.40 × 1017/cm3 to 8.05 × 1017/cm3, when compared to the pristine TiO2 ETL.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the speculated mechanism for the plasmonic enhancement effect. (b) J–V curve for space charge-limited current testing of the electron transport layer without or with Au@TiO2 NRs. 
Here, we further discuss the differences of the plasmonic effect in both planar and mesoporous perovskite architectures. According to previous studies, the efficiency of mesoporous perovskite solar cells could be enhanced by 15.7–28.0% with the aid of plasmonic nanomaterials.23,25,36 In the planar structure, however, this enhancement was limited despite an elaborate design and assembly mode of plasmonic nanomaterials. With this being said, we realized that the potential of applying plasmonic materials into the planar structure was not so much as in the case of mesoporous structures. This could be due to a few possible reasons. First, mesoporous perovskite solar cells typically have a thicker ETL and the absolute amount of the assembled plasmonic nanoparticles in mesoporous perovskite solar cells would be much higher than that for planar, given the same weight ratio of plasmonic nanomaterials to the ETL. The improved loading amount of plasmonic nanomaterials could amplify the LSPR, which would further facilitate the absorption of incident light and charge carrier transport. Second, mesoporous structures generally provide more contact area between transport materials and the absorber, which could provide more plasmonic enhancement effects within the devices. It is well recognized that thin-film cells made of materials with low minority carrier diffusion lengths are expected to benefit most from both the enhanced scattering and surface plasmonic effects modified by a localized high density of states. Until now, the major efficiency boosts of thin-film PV cells stem from localized near-fields generated by plasmonic nanoparticles embedded in the active layer. However, metal inclusions in absorbers can also induce recombination centers, leading to unexpected efficiency losses. The question remains as to whether plasmonic nanoparticles are able to achieve efficiency enhancements with limited side effects, especially when embedded into perovskite layers. Nevertheless, surface plasmons include extreme energy concentrations within sub-wavelength volumes and the ability to generate hot electrons, which opens up new pathways for solar-to-electricity conversion.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have prepared tailored gold nanorods/nanospheres coated with titanium dioxide to systematically investigate plasmonic effects in planar perovskite solar cells. Our study has shown that plasmonic effects depend greatly on the geometry and concentration of the metal used, and the metal–dielectric interaction, as well as the assembly manner of the plasmonic nanoparticles into the device architecture. Based on the embedment of Au@TiO2 NRs into the TiO2 layer, the devices showed an approximately 5% improvement in performance, mainly resulting from the enhanced Jsc. The plasmonic enhancement mechanism is associated with an improved carrier transport as well as more efficient charge separation and transfer induced by the LSPR effect. The plasmonic enhancement effects could provide an effective method to engineer the carrier dynamics in perovskite solar cells and optimize device performances. The optimized device exhibits 20.1% efficiency, which is by far the highest efficiency based on the incorporation of Au@TiO2 NRs into planar perovskite solar cells. The present work provides an ideal model to study plasmonic effects in thin film solar cells and reveal the underlying mechanisms that will enrich fundamental knowledge in the field of perovskite solar cells and help to boost device efficiencies.
5. Experimental section
5.1 Materials and sample preparation
All solvents and regents were of analytically pure quality and used as received: chloroauric acid (AR Beijing Chemical Works), sodium borohydride (AR Beijing Chemical Works), cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB, AR Beijing Chemical Works), sodium chloride (AR Beijing Chemical Works), poly(sodium-p-styrenesulfonate) (PSS, Mw = 80000 Macklin), titanium(III) chloride solution (AR, Beijing Chemical Works), titanium tetrachloride (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), TiAc2 (75 wt% in isopropanol, Sigma-Aldrich), ethanol (AR Beijing Chemical Works), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), PbI2 (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich), isopropanol (IPA 99.99%, Aladdin Industrial Corporation), hydrogen iodide (57%, Alfa Aesar), methylamine (water solution 28%w, Sinopharm), spiro-OMeTAD (Lumtec), and ITO substrates.
5.2 Preparation of Au@TiO2 NRs
The gold nanorods coated with a thin layer of titanium oxide were prepared according to the method reported elsewhere.45 Specifically, the CTAB stabilized Au nanorods dispersed in water were centrifuged to wash out the excess surfactant and redispersed into ultrapure water with a concentration of 10 mg mL−1. 1 mL Au nanorod solution mentioned above was added dropwise into 10 mL aqueous PSS solution (containing 50 μL PSS and 7 mg NaCl) under vigorous stirring. The obtained solution was kept stirring for four hours at room temperature to guarantee the PSS sufficient absorption. Excess PSS was removed by centrifugation and the gold nanorods with surface modification of PSS were redispersed into 200 μL ultrapure water. To coat the gold nanorods with a thin layer of titanium oxide, 100 μL titanium(III) chloride solution was added into 6 mL ultrapure water. After the addition of 0.55 mL of 0.93 M NaHCO3, the PSS-encapsulated gold nanorod solution was immediately injected. The coating process lasts half an hour with vigorous stirring. The obtained Au@TiO2 NRs were washed several times and finally dispersed into 600 μL ethanol.
5.3 Device fabrication and measurement
CH3NH3I, CH3NH3Cl and TiAc2-stabilized TiO2 nanocrystals dispersed in ethanol were synthesized according to the methods reported elsewhere.15 The ITO substrate was sequentially washed with isopropanol, acetone, distilled water and ethanol. The ethanol solution of TiAc2 stabilized TiO2 nanocrystals was spin-coated on ITO substrates at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 150 °C for 30 min. For the Au@TiO2 assembled device, the ethanol solution of Au@TiO2 nanoparticles was injected into the TiAc2-stabilized TiO2 solution (the optimal volume ratio was 1 μL to 300 μL and the mass ratio of gold nanorods to TiO2 nanocrystals was around 1%). The perovskite layer was fabricated via the two-step method. 450 mg mL−1 PbI2 in DMF was spin-coated on the ETL at 3000 rpm for 30 s and then annealed at 90 °C for 10 min, after which 50 mg mL−1 CH3NH3I in IPA (with 5 mg mL−1 CH3NH3Cl) was spin-coated and the as-prepared perovskite layer was annealed at 150 °C for 15 min. After the preparation of the perovskite layer, a hole transport layer solution (80 mg mL−1 spiro-OMeTAD in chlorobenzene with the addition of 35 μL Li–TFSI/acetonitrile (260 mg mL−1) and 30 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine) was coated at 3000 rpm for 30 s. Finally, 100 nm gold was deposited as the counter electrode by thermal evaporation under a pressure of 1 × 10−4 Pa. For the optimized devices with/without Au@TiO2 NRs, the fabrication method was similar to that of the normal devices described above except for increasing the concentration of PbI2 in DMF to 500 mg mL−1 and replacing the IPA solution of MAI/MACl with the mixture of FAI(40 mg mL−1)/MAI(19 mg mL−1)/MACl(5 mg mL−1)/MABr(6 mg mL−1) IPA solution. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of photovoltaic devices were measured using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit under AM 1.5 G illumination at 100 mW cm−2. The active area of each device was 0.102 cm2.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672008), Thousand Young Talents Program and ENN Group. The authors thank Titan Electro-Optics Co. LTD. and Prof. Qingbo Meng and Dr Jiangjian Shi at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences for providing the transient photocurrent decay test platform. The authors thank Prof. Qi Chen at the Beijing Institute of Technology for manuscript modification and Mr Liping You, Senior Engineer at the Electron Microscopy Laboratory of Peking University, for his help in the elemental profile scanning testing.
References
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte and B. Rech, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saparov, J.-P. Sun, W. Meng, Z. Xiao, H.-S. Duan, O. Gunawan, D. Shin, I. G. Hill, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2315–2322 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, T. Zhang, P. Schulz, Z. Li, G. Li, D. H. Kim, N. Guo, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T. B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H. S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T. B. Song, H. H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hawash, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, M. V. Lee and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, Y. Huang, L. Wang, L. Li, G. Zheng and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600460 CrossRef .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577–1601 CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan and M. K. Leung, Molecules, 2016, 21, 180 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, X. Pan, Y. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11175–11179 RSC .
H. Yu, J. Roh, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7322–7329 CAS .
J. Cui, C. Chen, J. Han, K. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500312 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, M. Wang, L. Ding, F. Igbari and X. Yao, Sol. Energy, 2016, 130, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Xia, W. Xu, T. Song, H. Wu, L. Xu, J. Si, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500038 CrossRef .
W. L. Liu, F. C. Lin, Y. C. Yang, C. H. Huang, S. Gwo, M. H. Huang and J. S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7953–7962 RSC .
D. Yang, J. Jang, J. Lim, J. K. Lee, S. H. Kim and J. I. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21522–21530 CAS .
S. H. Hwang, J. Roh and J. Jang, Chemistry, 2013, 19, 13120–13126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Karanjit, L. Zhang, H. Fong, Q. Qiao and Z. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 082114 CrossRef .
V. Roiati, S. Colella, G. Lerario, L. De Marco, A. Rizzo, A. Listorti and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1889 CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Q. Jiang, J. Yang, Y. Luo, X. Li, Y. Hou and S. Zhou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, W. Kim, B. G. Cha, J. Kwon, S. J. Kim, M. Kim, J. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 449–454 CAS .
M. Saliba, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, J. M. Ball, M. B. Johnston, A. Goriely, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5038–5046 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chan, M. Wright, N. Elumalai, A. Uddin and S. Pillai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600698 CrossRef .
H. Lee, Y. K. Lee, E. Hwang and J. Y. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5650–5656 CAS .
Y. K. Lee, C. H. Jung, J. Park, H. Seo, G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4251–4255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Song, M. T. Horantner, H. J. Snaith and T. Park, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6029–6036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, M. S. You, M. H. Chang, W. Yin, T. K. Ahn, S.-J. Lee, S.-J. Sung, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 530–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, H. Rao, W. Yan, Y. Li, W. Sun, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Bian, Y. Li and C. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Chen, Z. Hong, H. Zhou, X. Xu, N. De Marco, P. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. B. Cheng and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11076–11083 CAS .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 CAS .
C. Fang, H. Jia, S. Chang, Q. Ruan, P. Wang, T. Chen and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3431–3438 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02937cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Au@TiO2 NRs; (b) XRD pattern of Au and Au@TiO2 NRs. (c and d) TEM images of the as-synthesized core–shell Au@TiO2 NRs. (e) The linear elemental profile scanning of Au@TiO2 NRs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic structure of the perovskite solar cell based on Au@TiO2 nanoparticles (a) embedded in the ETL (structure A); and (b) at the interface of ETL/perovskite. (Structure B) From top to bottom: Au electrode/HTL/Perovskite/ETL/ITO substrate. SEM images of the ETL without (c) and with (d) Au@TiO2; perovskite film deposited on the ETL layer for without (e) and with (f) Au@TiO2 NRs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Au@TiO2 nanorods with a shell thickness of (a) around 10 nm and (b) around 5 nm. (c) Shell thickness influences on the device performance.	 

 	Fig. 4  Statistical analysis of device characteristics by varying the concentration of Au nanorods/TiO2 embedded into the ETL in the perovskite solar cell. (a) PCE. (b) Jsc. (c) J–V curve of the representative device with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (d) J–V curve of the optimized device with Au@TiO2 NRs, under reverse and forward scans.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) EQE results of the perovskite solar cells with/without Au@TiO2 NRs. (b) Optical absorption of perovskite layers deposited onto TiO2 compact layers with/without Au@TiO2 NRs. Absorption of Au@TiO2 NRs dispersed in ethanol. Simulated electric field profile for incident light with a wavelength of 500 nm (c) and 780 nm (d).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) PL and TRPL testing results of the perovskite on TiO2 with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (c) Transient photocurrent decay (TPC) testing results for devices with or without Au@TiO2 NRs. (d) Nyquist plots of the devices with or without Au NRs under light conditions with an intensity of 1000 W m−2 without applied bias.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the speculated mechanism for the plasmonic enhancement effect. (b) J–V curve for space charge-limited current testing of the electron transport layer without or with Au@TiO2 NRs.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta02937c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
