Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals in energy transfer reactions  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CC00162J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CC00162J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3033-3048Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals in energy transfer reactions

        
          
            Pavel 
            Moroz
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Luis 
            Royo Romero
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Mikhail 
            Zamkov
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio 43403, USA. E-mail: zamkovm@bgsu.edu
bThe Center for Photochemical Sciences, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio 43403, USA
Received 
      7th January 2019
    , Accepted 14th February 2019First published on 15th February 2019AbstractExcitonic energy transfer is a versatile mechanism by which colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals can interact with a variety of nanoscale species. While this process is analogous to dipole–dipole coupling in molecular systems, the corresponding energy transfer dynamics can deviate from that of molecular assemblies due to manifestations of bulk-like features in semiconductor colloids. In particular, weak exciton binding, small singlet–triplet exciton splitting, and the energy disorder across nanocrystal ensembles can all play distinctive roles in the ensuing energy conversion processes. To characterize the variety of energy transfer schemes involving nanocrystals, this feature article will discuss the latest research by both our group and other groups on the key scenarios under which nanocrystals can engage in energy transfer with other nanoparticles, organic fluorophores, and plasmonic nanostructures, highlighting potential technological benefits to be gained from such processes. We will also shed light on experimental strategies for probing the energy transfer in nanocrystal-based assemblies, with a particular emphasis on novel characterization techniques.
Pavel Moroz
Dr Pavel Moroz graduated from Saint-Petersburg State University, Russia, with his master's degree in Chemistry in 2010. He obtained his PhD degree in Photochemistry from the Center for Photochemical Sciences at Bowling Green State University in 2015. Currently, he is a postdoctoral associate under the supervision of Prof. Zamkov at Bowling Green State University. His research is focused on the development of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals and demonstration of functional devices based on these nanoscale materials.
Luis Royo Romero
Luis Royo Romero is a master's student in the Department of Physics at Bowling Green State University. He received his bachelor's degree in Physics and Mathematics from High Point University in 2017. Also in 2017, he spent a summer at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as a Research Intern, where he was working on the engineering and optical characterization of large area, aligned single-wall carbon nanotubes. He is now working in the laboratory of Prof. Zamkov on the colloidal deposition of semiconductor nanocrystal films and photoconductivity measurements.
Mikhail Zamkov
Prof. Mikhail Zamkov obtained his bachelor's degree in Physics from Krasnoyarsk State University, Russia, in 1997 and PhD in Physics from Kansas State University in 2003. Upon completion of his doctoral studies, he has worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, under the guidance of Prof. Dana D. Dlott and now is a Full Professor at Bowling Green State University. His current research focuses on the electronic, chemical, and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures (quantum dots) and hybrid nanoscale materials prepared by means of colloidal synthesis (Web: http://physics.bgsu.edu/~zamkovm/).
Introduction
Energy flow across most quantum-confined systems proceeds via the transfer of electrically neutral excitons, which contrasts charge-mediated energy transfer in bulk semiconductors. Examples of excitonic energy transfer (ET) in nanoscale systems can be found in many biological and poly-molecular materials. For instance, cascade-like ET is the first step in energy conversion during photosynthesis1 and is the primary process of energy flow in excitonic solids2–4 and organic crystals.5 Diffusive energy transport is also pervasive in living tissues and proteins, where excitons are transmitted tens of angstroms away from single-site excitations.6,7
Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) represent a well-known example of artificial systems that support excitonic energy transfer. These materials can engage in a variety of ET processes with other nanoscale partners, including organic molecules, metal nanostructures, and other quantum confined semiconductors (Fig. 1). These energy-transfer systems hold strong promise for the development of new paradigms for solar energy production, solid state lighting, sensing, and near-field optical imaging applications, which will be discussed in depth. We will also highlight experimental strategies for probing the energy transfer in nanocrystal-based assemblies, with a particular emphasis on novel characterization techniques.
 Fig. 1  Possible mechanisms of excitonic energy transfer involving semiconductor nanocrystals. 
One of the well-known energy transfer platforms involving semiconductor NCs represents an assembly of semiconductor nanoparticles and surface-anchored molecules.8–10 The energy exchange in such assemblies modulates the photoluminescence (PL) intensity of the donor moiety, providing a general paradigm for application in biosensing.10–15 On the other hand, the photoinduced charge separation at the nanoparticle–dye interface makes these assemblies attractive candidates for the development of light-harvesting materials.16–18 Semiconductor nanocrystals have also been shown to engage in photoinduced energy transfer with proximal metal nanoparticles. In this case, the near-field interaction between the electric dipoles of a semiconductor nanocrystal and a localized surface plasmon can lead to bilateral transfer of the excitation energy. Such metal–semiconductor energy exchange offers several opportunities for energy conversion on the nanoscale. For instance, plasmon-induced quenching of semiconductor PL represents a popular biosensing strategy,19–21 while plasmon-enhanced absorption in semiconductors can be used to increase the optical extinction of photocatalytic and photovoltaic absorbers.22–24 When processed into solids, semiconductor nanocrystals can engage in energy transfer with other quantum confined semiconductors.25–27 Similar to organic crystals, energy transfer across close-coupled nanocrystal assemblies is mediated by exciton diffusion, whose rate is tunable through the use of interparticle binding motifs. The diffusion of energy in light-emitting nanocrystal solids is typically restricted to a small volume in order to prevent exciton migration towards luminescence-quenching boundaries.28–36 Conversely, the diffusion of excitons to charge-separating interfaces is vastly beneficial for nanocrystal solar cells, where it leads to photocurrent generation.35,37–49
Energy transfer in solids of semiconductor nanocrystals
The dynamics of energy flow in nanocrystal solids represents an intricate combination of bulk and molecular characteristics. While the energy transport across nanocrystal assemblies is excitonic in nature, there is usually a significant driving force for an electron–hole dissociation into a pair of free charges (Fig. 2). Such a high probability of exciton dissociation is characteristic of semiconductor nanocrystals and is a direct result of a large quantum confinement volume, which leads to weak exciton binding.50 In this regime, the splitting of bound electron–hole pairs can be triggered by low-energy processes, such as charge tunneling between neighboring nanocrystals.51 The resulting ET dynamics is therefore different from both the molecular films, where excitons dissociate primarily at phase boundaries and bulk materials, where the electron–hole binding energy is usually negligible. One of the benefits of such weakly bound excitons lies in the ability to control the exciton dissociation probability, pdiss, through the use of different nanoparticle binding motifs. This strategy allows tuning the electronic properties of nanocrystal solids between those of molecular films (low pdiss) and bulk materials (high pdiss).
 Fig. 2  Photoinduced energy conversion in nanocrystal solids. The photon absorption results in the formation of localized excitons that diffuse through a film at a rate determined by the strength of the interparticle coupling. Similar to polymer films, a singlet exciton “hops” through the thermally accessible energy landscape towards the potential energy minimum. The subsequent decay of excitons is then driven by their recombination (radiative or non-radiative) or dissociation into a free electron–hole pair. Adapted from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
A rapid dissociation of excitons in nanocrystal solids is generally desirable for applications that benefit from photoinduced charge separation. In this case, the dissociation represents the conversion of optical energy into an electrical potential of separated charges (ħω → eV), which is required for the operation of photoelectrochemical cells, photodetectors, and solar cell devices.47,52–56 In these applications, the exciton dissociation probability is usually enhanced through the use of short-length interparticle linkers, such as EDT or 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA),53,54,57–60 which increase the charge tunneling rate. From the standpoint of photovoltaic performance, the fast dissociation of excitons can reduce the probability of their radiative recombination, thereby enhancing the overall charge extraction efficiency; meanwhile, the corresponding reduction in the exciton diffusion volume will help in minimizing exciton trapping at potential energy minima associated with larger nanocrystals in the film.
Nanocrystal solids featuring a low exciton dissociation probability are generally preferred in light-emitting applications, where the radiative recombination of electron–hole pairs is beneficial to the device performance. In this case, the probability of exciton dissociation can be reduced through the use of long-chain interparticle linkers that decrease the charge transfer coupling between nanoparticles (see Fig. 3a). For instance, Sun et al. demonstrated that the electroluminescence intensity of PbS NC solids increases proportionally to the lengths of the linker molecules.30 When the dot-to-dot spacing in the emissive layer was increased from three to eight CH2 groups, the efficiency grew by a factor of 150. The steady state PL of nanocrystal solids was shown to follow the same trend. For example, the PL lifetime of 8-mercaptooctanoic acid (MOA)-linked PbS NC films featuring 1.7 nm interparticle distances was found to be 14 times greater than that of MPA-linked PbS NC films featuring a 0.9 nm gap.61 The increased PL of MOA-linked solids was ascribed to the reduced charge transfer rate in weakly coupled PbS NCs.
 Fig. 3  Experimental strategies for tuning the exciton dissociation probability in nanocrystal solids. (a) Long-chain interparticle linkers suppress the exciton dissociation and improve the emission quantum yield of nanoparticle solids. Conversely, short-chain linkers enhance the exciton dissociation rate. (b) The exciton dissociation probability of matrix-encapsulated nanocrystals is inversely proportional to the interparticle distance, which allows tuning the solid properties between light-harvesting (left) and light-emitting (right). (c) The exciton dissociation probability can be controlled via the donor–acceptor spectral overlap, J. Nanocrystal solids featuring a lower J exhibit a lower rate of interparticle energy transfer, which reduces the corresponding exciton diffusion volume. As a result, the probability of an exciton reaching emission-quenching defects decreases, enhancing the emission. An inverse correlation between exciton diffusion rates and the overlap integral J is shown through a comparison of CdSe/CdS and Mn2+-doped Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS NC solids. Owing to the vanishing absorption–emission overlap in Mn2+-doped nanocrystals, the corresponding J integral is 105 times smaller than that of CdSe/CdS films, which was manifested by a much slower exciton diffusion (hopping time ≈ 0.3 ms) and a strongly suppressed exciton dissociation in Mn2+-doped Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS NC solids. 
As an alternative to tuning the interparticle nanoparticle binding motif, the PL of nanocrystal solids can be increased by incorporating nanocrystals within an inorganic matrix of wider band gap materials. As was demonstrated by Kovalenko et al.,62 light-emitting PbS NC solids could be fabricated by the encapsulation of nanoparticles within metal chalcogenide complexes (MCCs).63–65 This methodology relied on sintering of hybrid MCC ligands into As2S3 amorphous matrices, which gave rise to an all-inorganic film architecture exhibiting a stable IR emission. The high dielectric constant of the As2S3 medium also enabled fast radiative rates in otherwise “slow” PbS NCs. In addition to chalcogenide glasses, perovskite-based matrices have also been used to encapsulate semiconductor nanocrystals, leading to near-IR emitting devices with quantum efficiencies exceeding 2%.66 In another study,34 an assembly of emissive nanocrystal films has been achieved by using the semiconductor matrix embedded nanocrystal array (SMENA) approach,46,67 which benefited from heteroepitaxial bonds between nanocrystals and all-inorganic matrices of a wider gap semiconductor. For instance, SMENA-processed solids of CdSe and PbS nanocrystals utilizing CdS matrices have given rise to PL quantum yields of 52% and 3%, respectively.33,34
Increasing the distance between nanocrystals in a solid does not always represent the optimal strategy for improving the PL characteristics of light-emitting devices. For instance, tuning the size of interparticle linkers in a nanoparticle film enables fairly predictive control over exciton diffusion rates, but doesn’t offer a reliable scheme for regulating the spatial extent of exciton diffusion. A large diffusion volume can cause the excitation energy to reach luminescence quenching boundaries, which is potentially detrimental to LED applications. One promising strategy for reducing the diffusion volume relies on lowering the absorption–emission spectral overlap between nanocrystals, J. It was recently demonstrated that solids featuring a low J exhibit an intrinsically slower exciton diffusion (Fig. 3c). Even in solids featuring short interparticle linkers (e.g. oxalic acid), a relatively low diffusivity could be achieved for type II or transition-metal-doped nanoparticles that tend to exhibit a low J value. Assemblies of these colloids foster a desirable combination of short interparticle distances and slow energy diffusion (high brightness), which is crucial for the development of light-emitting applications. For instance, the exciton diffusivity of Mn2+-doped Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS was found to be 105 times lower than that in CdSe/CdS NC films (Fig. 3c), allowing these films to retain their solution emission QY.68
An uneven energy landscape represents another distinctive aspect of the energy transfer in nanocrystal solids. Owing to the inhomogeneous broadening of nanocrystal sizes, the corresponding dispersion of exciton energies in colloidal assemblies could be comparable to room temperature kT. Under these conditions, excitons are likely to be trapped at local minima of the potential energy, which effectively shortens their diffusion lengths. The presence of such “deep” energetic traps in nanocrystal films distinguishes them from polymer and molecular assemblies, where exciton energy variations across molecular subunits are considerably smaller.
The energy disorder exceeding room temperature kT is generally unfavorable for photovoltaic applications of nanocrystal films, as the energy of trapped excitons is typically lost to the radiative recombination or non-radiative decay. Conversely, the presence of excitonic traps could be quite beneficial to the performance of quantum dot light emitting materials.31 The local minima of the potential energy corresponding to large-diameter nanocrystals could be strategically placed within a nanoparticle solid to serve as emissive sites. In this case, the diffusion of excitons from small to large species will allow concentrating the excitation energy within the light-emitting layer.69,70 This idea was exemplified in a recent work,70 where a cascade-like energy transfer across ascending diameter nanoparticle layers was used to enhance the infrared-range emission of PbS solids (Fig. 4b). Here, the transport of excitons along the energy gradient of mixed-diameter PbS films (assembled with 1,3-benzenedithiol linkers) has resulted in a 19-fold improvement in the emission of acceptor nanocrystals. A similar mechanism of energy concentration was demonstrated in assemblies of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals71 as well as in perovskite light-emitting diodes72 developed from a series of differently quantum-size-tuned grains of CH3NH3PbI3. The resulting LED architecture funneled photoexcitations to the lowest-bandgap light-emitter, enabling an external quantum efficiency of 8.8% in the near infrared region. The principle of energy funneling towards the potential minimum of nanocrystal solids was also demonstrated as the light concentration mechanism in photovoltaic devices. Despite the fact that stable excitons are generally unfavorable for the solar cell performance, layers of descending-diameter PbS nanocrystals have been used for concentrating the photoinduced energy within the charge-separating domain.73
 Fig. 4  (a) The process of energy funneling in perovskite nanocrystals.72 An assembly of quantum-size-tuned CH3NH3PbI3 grains was used to funnel photoexcitations to the lowest-bandgap light-emitter, enabling an external quantum efficiency of 8.8% in the near infrared (IR) region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature Publishing. (b) An illustration of the exciton funneling strategy, which is designed to concentrate the energy of small-diameter PbS NCs via a transfer to the sublayer of large-diameter PbS NCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
The ability of nanocrystal solids to funnel the photoinduced energy into acceptor nanoparticles can be harnessed towards multiple exciton generation (MEG). The MEG phenomenon in semiconductor nanocrystals is potentially beneficial to a number of applications, including quantum dot lasers,74–76 where light amplification requires multiple excited carriers, or photoelectrochemical cells,77,78 where catalytic processes often involve several photoinduced charges (e.g. H2 generation). The challenging aspect of utilizing multiple excitations in semiconductor nanocrystals lies in the ability to suppress their non-radiative Auger recombination.75 With the inverse volume dependence of Auger decay rates,79 the general solution for increasing the lifetime of biexcitons is often sought in nanoparticle geometries that allow for a larger excitonic volume. Along these lines, zero-dimensional semiconductors have given way to architectures featuring a mixed dimensionality, such as alloyed core/shell nanoparticles,80,81 nanorod-shaped heterostructures,82–85 and nanoplatelets (NPLs).86–90
Semiconductor nanoshells91–93 represent another viable nanoscale geometry for concentrating multiple excitons. In these nanostructures, the excitonic layer is grown in the form of a shell on the surface of a bulk-size core domain (Fig. 5a–e). The ensuing energy gradient gives rise to two-dimensional excitons that reside primarily in the shell and, therefore, preserve the radial confinement of carriers, regardless of particle size. The existence of shell-confined excitons was recently demonstrated in CdS/CdSe core/shell quantum dots (QDs) featuring a 10–15 nm bulk-size CdS core overcoated with a 4–5 nm CdSe shell (Fig. 5b–e).91 Similar to other quantum well colloids, the nanoshell architecture offers a larger volume of carrier confinement as compared to zero- or one-dimensional nanocrystals, which is expected to reduce the rate of the multiexciton Auger recombination.90 Furthermore, owing to their two-dimensional geometry, semiconductor nanoshells are likely to display a continuous density of states94,95 similarly to 2D nanoplatelet96 and nanosheet colloids.97 Consequently, the number of conduction states per nanoshell is no longer limited to two, as in the case of zero-dimensional CdSe, which should allow lasing without a complete occupation of the lowest-energy excitonic state.98 One fascinating application of the nanoshell geometry lies in the combination of two- and zero-dimensional excitons within the same nanoparticle. An example of such a nanocomposite, comprising a small PbS core, an intermediate shell of a wide-gap CdS, and a secondary shell of quantum-confined CdSe semiconductors, has been recently demonstrated by our group.92 As illustrated in Fig. 5f, the PbS core can engage in the Förster resonant energy transfer with the CdSe shell, causing the flow of excitons from the periphery to the center of the composite nano-object. The spatial separation between donor and acceptor domains in these materials is vital for suppressing their charge transfer interactions. Consequently, the reported PbS/CdS/CdSe core/shell/shell geometry can support an intraparticle energy transfer, a phenomenon that has also been demonstrated using several other semiconductor architectures.99–101
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the CdS/CdSe nanoshell geometry. The potential energy minima of the CdSe conduction and valence bands promote the shell-localization of both photoinduced charges. In this geometry, the core dimensions are allowed to exceed the exciton Bohr radius, leading to quantum confinement in nanostructures approaching 30 nm in diameter. (b–e) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high angle annular dark field (HAADF)-STEM images of CdS/CdSe nanoshell quantum dots. (f) Schematic representation of excited state energy levels in the fabricated core/barrier/shell NCs. (g) Dark field STEM image of a PbS/CdS/CdSe nanocrystal indicating the presence of the PbS and CdSe domains through a color contrast. A somewhat darker shading around a bright central area is ascribed to be a CdS barrier. (h) Low-resolution TEM image of PbS/CdS/CdSe NCs. Figures adapted with permissions from ref. 91 and 92. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Metal–semiconductor energy transfer in plasmonic assemblies
The transfer of localized energy between semiconductor nanocrystals and metal nanoparticles represents another popular mechanism of photoinduced energy conversion. Plasmon–exciton energy exchange has long been investigated towards enhancing light absorption in photovoltaic devices as well as for modulating the emission of proximal dyes in biosensing applications. In the weak coupling regime, metal and semiconductor components exhibit a low overlap of electronic wave functions, allowing energy transfer processes to proceed primarily via dipole–dipole interactions.102 Early studies focusing on metal-enhanced absorption and fluorescence in semiconductors103–112 outlined the basic mechanisms of such energy exchange, concluding that plasmon–exciton interactions in these systems can enable both forward (PIRET) and backward (FRET) directions of energy flow (Fig. 6c). Such bilateral energy exchange is responsible for a frequently observed competition between the plasmon-induced enhancement and quenching of semiconductor excitations, ΔNPIRET > 1 and ΔNFRET < 1, respectively. Overall, the net gain in the exciton population of the semiconductor nanocrystal due to a proximal plasmon can be expressed as: (1)where n = 4–6 depending on whether the dipoles are considered to be surface- or point-like, α represents the wavelength-dependent absorbance coefficient, and R0 is the donor–acceptor distance corresponding to a 50% efficiency. This equation does not take into account the photoinduced charge transfer between metal and semiconductor moieties, which reduces the exciton population of the latter.
 Fig. 6  Plasmon–exciton energy exchange. (a) Extinction cross sections of common nanoscale sensitizers divided by the nanoparticle volume. The comparison highlights superior light-harvesting characteristics of metal nanoparticles in comparison to semiconductor quantum dots and organic polymers (e.g. P3HT). Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) The time scale of the surface plasmon evolution in noble metal nanoparticles, including stages of plasmon dephasing (10–20 fs), hot carrier redistribution (200 fs–1 ps) via electron–electron decay, and electron–phonon cooling (1–10 ps). (c) A diagram illustrating possible FL enhancement and quenching mechanisms in a metal–semiconductor system. The near-field energy exchange between the electrical dipoles of the plasmon and semiconductor allows both forward (PIRET) and backward (FRET) directions of the energy transfer. Photoinduced electron transfer (PET) can also contribute to the quenching of the semiconductor emission. 
Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence (FL) represents one of the most studied realizations of metal–semiconductor energy transfer. Generally speaking, the FL of a semiconductor can be either enhanced by a proximal metal surface through plasmon induced resonant energy transfer (PIRET) or quenched via exciton-to-plasmon ET (via FRET). Many of the literature reports on plasmon-enhanced FL have actually demonstrated quenching of the emission, ΔFLplasmon < 1, particularly when the size of a metal nanoparticle falls below 20 nm.113–117 In this size regime, quenching via FRET (eqn (1)), as well as photoinduced charge transfer back to the metal, overwhelms the effect of PIRET-based enhancement.118 Experimental observations of plasmon-enhanced fluorescence (ΔFLplasmon > 1) have been almost exclusively limited to systems featuring large-diameter metal nanoparticles often exceeding 30 nm in size.119–124 The corresponding FL enhancement factors appeared to be particularly large in the case of metal nanorods, where slower dephasing surface plasmons125–127 exhibited a greater probability of interacting with semiconductor excitons through the PIRET mechanism. In the case of weakly emitting dyes, the PL gain is further increased by the plasmon-enhancement of the semiconductor radiative rates.
The prospect of employing plasmon–exciton energy transfer in photovoltaic devices has received an increased amount of attention in recent years.24,128–137 The expected benefits of incorporating plasmonic materials within solar cells stem from the large optical extinctions of metal nanoparticles, which exceed those of similar size semiconductors by 2 orders of magnitude (Fig. 6a). Consequently, the plasmon-enhanced absorption represents a potentially feasible strategy for improving the performance of solar cells. In this regard, the resonant transfer of plasmon energy offers potential for a higher gain in photoinduced carrier generation than the threshold-limited process of plasmon-induced hot electron transfer.138–142 The expectations are supported by theoretical estimates of the relative plasmon enhancement in Fig. 7a, which compares the relative enhancement factors from far-field (scatter), near-field (PIRET), and hot electron based plasmon energy conversion.
 Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical estimates of the relative plasmon enhancement corresponding to far-field (scattering), near-field (PIRET), and hot electron based plasmon energy conversion processes versus the plasmon's dephasing stage and the semiconductor band gap (the plasmon energy fixed at 1.8 eV). Adapted from ref. 143 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a plasmonic solar cell absorber comprising a matrix-encapsulated (PbS, Au) film. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of plasmonic (Au, PbS) and control (PbS-only) quantum dot solar cells. The relatively low photovoltage of plasmonic solar cells was believed to be caused by Au-induced Fermi level pinning. (d) Schematic of the depleted heterojunction PV cell doped with Au nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The effect of the PIRET process on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices has been investigated in our earlier work on quantum dot solar cells.24 The absorber layer consisted of PbS NC solids blended with spherical Au nanoparticles as shown in Fig. 7d. In this geometry, far field scattering of surface plasmons was suppressed due to the relatively small size of Au nanostructures (<10 nm). The thermal impact of plasmon excitations was mitigated through the use of an all-inorganic film design featuring a crystalline matrix encapsulating array of Au and PbS nanoparticles.33,34,46 The overall benefit of the near-field absorption enhancement strategy was evidenced through a moderate improvement of the solar cell efficiency (Fig. 7c). For instance, the incorporation of 0.3% of Au NPs (by particle volume) has enhanced the average power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 4.0 to 4.2%, with the best performing device exhibiting a PCE of 4.5% (Fig. 7c). The increased short circuit current (a gain of 41 ± 3%) was the primary factor contributing to the enhanced PCE, whose effect was somewhat reduced owing to a small drop in the open circuit voltage.
Dye–semiconductor energy-transfer system
Near-field energy exchange between semiconductor nanocrystals and dye molecules represents another prevalent mechanism of photoinduced energy conversion. Historically, early applications of this process have involved dye-sensitized assemblies of quantum-confined semiconductors and oxides.144–148 These materials were developed primarily as electrodes for photocatalytic or photovoltaic applications as detailed by several relevant reviews on the subject.149–153 Besides the photoinduced energy conversion, the near field interaction of semiconductor nanocrystals and dye molecules has been employed for sensing biological processes in tissues and live cells.7,154–157 This approach relied on detecting distance-dependent changes in the semiconductor–dye FRET efficiency as a strategy for measuring the concentration of a particular analyte that docks at a known distance to a host,158 or for determining the spatial separation between fluorescent labels in targeted macromolecules.159–162
The utilization of semiconductor nanocrystals as FRET donors has been steadily advancing over the years. Some remaining issues concern the explicit location of the nanocrystal's dipole and its orientation compared to molecular fluorophores. In addition, any potential contribution of charge transfer (CT) processes to donor PL quenching represents a potential source of error, which inflates the measured FRET efficiency. Such CT processes were shown to be considerable in the case of dye–nanocrystal assemblies comprising ruthenium complexes,163 metal ions or organic conductors.164–166 In order to distinguish between charge transfer and energy transfer processes in donor–acceptor assemblies, our group has developed the Sample Transmitted Excitation Photoluminescence (STEP) spectroscopy approach167 that correlates the loss of donor excitons with the gain in the acceptor emission. By applying this technique to biosensor assemblies of cyanine dyes (Cy5, Cy7) and CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals, we were able to determine that the charge transfer accounts for 50–99% of donor emission quenching (see Fig. 8). For instance, for a QD–Cy5 system, exhibiting a significant donor–acceptor spectral overlap, approximately half of the total quenching efficiency, Etot = 0.21 (Fig. 8a), was due to FRET (Fig. 8b), with the other half originating from other acceptor induced processes, such as QD → Cy5 charge transfer. Meanwhile, in the case of a low-overlap QD–Cy7 construct (where ET is mostly suppressed), the observed 50–60% reduction in the donor PL lifetime (Etot = 0.5–0.6) was almost entirely attributed to non-FRET processes. This result demonstrates the importance of determining CT efficiencies in a spectroscopic ruler and other FRET-based sensing applications.
 Fig. 8  Donor–acceptor assemblies of CdSe/ZnS semiconductor nanocrystals and cyanine dyes (Cy5) exhibiting an interplay of charge and energy transfer processes. (a) The PL lifetimes of donor-only (CdSe/ZnS NCs) and donor–acceptor (CdSe/ZnS–Cy5) samples were used to calculate the total donor PL quenching efficiency, Etot = 21%. (b) Partial contributions from energy (EET = 11%) and charge (ECT = 10%) transfer processes were determined using the STEP spectroscopy. 
The transfer of singlet excitons represents the most studied mechanism of energy diffusion in nanocrystal assemblies. A number of recent works, however, have demonstrated the possibility of triplet energy exchange between semiconductor nanocrystals and organic molecules.168–173 This process was originally observed to proceed from organic semiconductors (tetracene, pentacene) to lead chalcogenide nanocrystals168,169 and was later demonstrated to progress in the opposite direction, in which case triplet excitons of CdSe and PbS nanocrystals were transferred to organic acceptors, such as surface-anchored polyaromatic carboxylic acid or rubrene films (see Fig. 9).173–177
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the triplet energy transfer between a nanocrystal donor and a triplet acceptor (PCA). (b) Ultrafast transient absorption spectra of CdSe–OA nanocrystals in toluene solution upon selective excitation of CdSe, using 500 nm pulsed laser excitation in the presence of surface-anchored 9-anthracenecarboxylic acid (ACA) in toluene. The inset in (b) shows TA kinetics monitored for the growth of 3ACA at 441 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2016 AAAS. 
The successful transfer of triplet excitons from semiconductor nanoparticles to bulk solutions implies a general scheme by which quantum-confined colloids can be utilized as effective surrogates for molecular triplets. Semiconductor nanoparticles could thus sensitize a variety of chemical reactions relevant to the fields of optoelectronics, solar energy conversion, and photobiology. One attractive possibility in this regard pertains to employing semiconductor nanocrystals as triplet sensitizers of photoredox coordination compounds. Coupling of nanocrystal sensitizers to organometallic catalysts can allow avoiding the energy losses associated with intersystem crossing to a triplet state since the singlet–triplet splitting in nanocrystals is minimal.171,178,179
Experimental strategies for measuring the energy transfer in nanocrystal systems
Experimental measurements of exciton diffusion in nanocrystals are complicated by the fact that no net charge is being transferred between photoexcited species. In this regard, optical techniques provide an almost exclusive probe of energy flow across excitonic materials.2,54,55,180 When the nanocrystal energy is shared with molecular dyes, many aspects of the ET dynamics could be obtained from the acceptor-induced quenching of the donor emission. If τDA and τD are the donor PL lifetimes in the presence and absence of an acceptor, respectively, the energy transfer efficiency, E, and the corresponding ET rate, Γ, are given by: E = 1 −τDA/τD and Γ = 1/τDA − 1/τD(2)
These equations are accurate as long as the energy transfer represents the primary mechanism of the donor emission quenching (negligible charge transfer contribution).
Similar strategies are used for measurements of energy transfer across nanocrystal assemblies. In this case, investigated solids are doped with energy-accepting nanocrystals, which emission characteristics provide important information on the exciton diffusion length.182 The temporal and spatial resolutions of these methodologies have been recently enhanced with new imaging capabilities utilizing time-resolved optical microscopy,183 transient absorption,184–187 and transient photoluminescence quenching.188 Lastly, the STEP spectroscopy has been introduced as a strategy that distinguishes between energy and charge transfer processes in nanocrystal solids.167
Bulk quenching represents one of the early spectroscopic strategies for probing the intermolecular energy transfer in nanoparticle solids. It was first introduced for energy transfer measurements in molecular solids182 and subsequently adapted by the Kagan189 and Klimov190 groups for measuring the exciton diffusion rates in nanocrystal films. Overall, the concept of bulk quenching is based on blending the investigated solid of nanoparticles D with randomly distributed “acceptor” nanoparticles A (Fig. 10a), which trap excitons in potential energy minima. Excitons funneled into acceptor sites may recombine radiatively (bulk activation) or quenched through non-radiative channels (bulk quenching). In both cases, the diffusion length of excitons in a blended solid is restricted to a smaller volume due to the presence of quenching sites. As a result, the lifetime of donor excitons in a blended solid becomes reduced due to a shorter travel, causing the donor PL intensity as well as its lifetime to decrease. If the concentration of quenching nanoparticles is small, nA ≪ nD, the ratio of the emission intensity in a pure sample (D) to that of an acceptor-doped film (DA) is expressed linearly with the quencher concentration, nA: ID/IDA = 1 + KeffnA, where ID is the PL intensity of a pure QD solid, IDA is the emission intensity of a doped film, and keff is an effective energy transfer parameter. The application of the bulk quenching strategy to NC solids usually relies on doping nanocrystal solids with larger nanoparticles of the same semiconductor material55,189,191 or by introducing “energy gradient” bilayer structures (Fig. 11c).69,190,192
 Fig. 10  (a) Bulk quenching approach for measuring the energy transfer dynamics in nanocrystal solids. The technique relies on doping the investigated film with randomly distributed acceptors (A). The resulting reduction in the emission of a blended solid due to exciton quenching by acceptor dots, ID/IAD, is proportional to the concentration of the acceptor A, as expressed by the equation in the inset. A linear fit to this equation can then be used to extract the rate of interparticle energy transfer, ΓET(D → A). Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the known mechanisms of energy transfer in nanocrystal solids, including the Förster, Dexter, and tandem ET processes. This portion of the image is reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Experimental time-evolution of the PL spatial cross-section for CdSe/CdS solids. The linear color scale indicates normalized PL intensity. (b) Schematic representation of the three types of quantum dot samples studied. The right panel shows the change in variance, σ2, of the exciton distribution as a function of time for the three samples. The dashed line represents the hypothetical case of normal diffusion in which the variance grows linearly with time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) A cascaded energy transfer (CET) sample consists of subsequent layers comprising green, yellow, orange, red, orange, yellow, and green emitting NCs. Below the CET sample the HOMO and LUMO are sketched, visualizing the cascaded band gaps used to facilitate cascaded energy transfer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of a mixed (Au + PbS) nanoparticle sample representing a donor (PbS)–acceptor (Au) blend. (e) Schematic illustration of PL lifetime changes in blended films of Au and PbS NCs. By correlating PL changes with a concentration of quenching nanoparticles (Au), we have determined the average number of exciton hops and the corresponding exciton diffusion length. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The spatial extent of exciton diffusion in nanocrystal solids can be characterized by introducing emission-quenching sites in lieu of fluorescent acceptors (A). This strategy was demonstrated in our recent study,61 where “PL quenching” Au nanoparticles were introduced into the investigated solids of PbS nanocrystals (Fig. 11d). By correlating the Au–Au interparticle distance in the film with the corresponding changes in the PbS emission lifetime (Fig. 11e), it was possible to obtain important transport characteristics, including the exciton diffusion length, the number of pre-dissociation hops, the rate of interparticle energy transfer, and the exciton diffusivity. In particular, we found that for MPA-linked solids (interparticle distance = 0.9 nm), excitons diffused to an average length of 5.7 nm in approximately 12 hops, which corresponded to a diffusivity of 0.012 cm2 s−1. Meanwhile, MOA-linked solids (interparticle distance = 1.7 nm) gave rise to a longer diffusion length of 11.4 nm (34 hops) and a lower diffusivity of 0.003 cm2 s−1. The observed difference in the dynamics of the two film types was explained as due to the charge-tunneling mechanism of the exciton dissociation.
In addition to bulk quenching, other methodologies based on temperature-resolved PL193–196 and optical microscopy183,197 have been developed for probing the exciton dynamics in nanocrystal films. For instance, Bulović and Tisdale have reported direct visualization of the exciton transport in nanocrystal assemblies by using time-resolved fluorescence microscopy.183,197 This demonstrated method was used to obtain a diffraction-limited profile of the energy flow across the solid, which was recorded in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 11a). By supporting the spatial imaging data with kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, the study revealed that the energy disorder of nanocrystal solids resulted in a time-dependent diffusivity, with diffusion proceeding more slowly as excitons move energetically downhill (Fig. 11b).
FRET represents the primary process of energy transfer in a variety of nanocrystal-based systems, including quantum dot solids, dye–nanocrystal conjugates, and metal–nanocrystal assemblies. Experimental measurements of the FRET efficiency in these systems are usually performed by analyzing the changes in the donor emission, according to eqn (2).198–200 The intrinsic error associated with such measurements comes from non-FRET contributions to donor emission changes that arise from the acceptor-induced dissociation of donor excitons, broadly defined as charge transfer (CT).201–204 Consequently, the measured total efficiency of the donor PL quenching, ETOT, in general, may include contributions from both FRET and CT processes. This is particularly problematic for systems featuring a significant driving force for the photoinduced charge transfer, where the donor–acceptor distance can no longer be estimated by assuming FRET-only contribution.
STEP spectroscopy167 was recently introduced as a viable strategy for distinguishing between the energy and charge transfer processes in donor–acceptor systems. This technique correlates the changes in the acceptor emission with the spectral modulation of the donor excitation spectrum, which allows extracting FRET-only efficiencies, independent of the charge transfer contribution. Moreover, by relying on the acceptor emission, the STEP spectroscopy becomes amenable for characterizing systems with non-emissive donor species (e.g. plasmonic nanoparticles).
The details of the STEP technique for measuring the energy transfer efficiency in donor–acceptor assemblies have been provided in the recent literature (see ref. 167, 205–207). The method is based on the assumption that the number of photons emitted by an acceptor fluorophore, NPLA, depends linearly on the number of excited acceptor (A) and donor (D) molecules, NA and ND, respectively: NPLA = QYA(NA + ED→AND)(3)where ED→A is the quantum efficiency for the D → A energy transfer, and QYA is the emission quantum yield of the fluorophore A in the presence of the fluorophore D (as measured in the donor–acceptor assembly). To determine ED→A, a donor–acceptor sample is excited using a broad-band light source and the emission intensity of the acceptor dye, NPLA(E), is recorded. The excitation light is then spectrally shaped using donor-like or acceptor-like filters (Fig. 12a) designed to suppress the excitation of donor or acceptor species in the investigated sample (ND ≪ NA or NA ≪ ND, respectively). If the spectral profile of the excitation light, n(λ), and the optical density (OD) of the excitation filter are known, one can predict the change in the acceptor emission as a function of a single parameter, ED→A. Fig. 12b and c illustrate the procedure for extracting the energy transfer efficiencies from STEP measurements utilizing two types of excitation filters. In Fig. 12c, this strategy is described for a donor-type excitation filter (e.g. a solution of donor molecules), whose spectral profile is suitable for suppressing the excitation of donor molecules in the sample, causing the acceptor emission to change proportionally to ED→A. These changes are best illustrated by plotting a normalized acceptor emission, fD = NPLA/NA, as a function of the donor-type filter optical density. The measured parameters, M1 and M2, are then used to calculate the energy transfer efficiency, as follows: ED→A = (M1/M2) × (N0A/N0D)(4)where N0A/N0D represents the ratio of acceptor to donor excitations in the sample prior to the application of the excitation filter, determined from the relative amplitudes of the excitation and absorption profiles. Alternatively, one can fit the experimental fD with a model parametric curve, ftheor, featuring a single fitting parameter, ED→A. To obtain ftheor(E) = NPLA(E)/NA, NPLA(E) is determined using eqn (3) as a parametric function of the energy transfer efficiency, E. The value of NA is calculated according to ref. 167. When an acceptor-like excitation filter is used (e.g. a solution of acceptor molecules), the energy transfer efficiency, ED→A, is obtained from the acceptor emission scaled by the number of donor excitations, fD = NPLA/ND. Fig. 12b shows the projected evolution of fA with the increasing optical density of the acceptor-type excitation filter. The experimental parameters, M1 and M2, can then be used to determine ED→A either directly from the equation in Fig. 12b or by fitting the experimental fA with a model parametric curve, ftheor(ED→A).
 Fig. 12  (a) An illustration of the STEP spectroscopy setup. (b) STEP measurements utilizing an acceptor-type excitation filter. The energy transfer efficiency, ED→A, is obtained from the acceptor emission by using experimental parameters, M1 and M2 (see the inset). Alternatively, one can fit the experimental data points, fA, with a model parametric curve, ftheor(ED→A), featuring a single fitting parameter, ED→A. (c) STEP measurements utilizing a donor-type filter that preferentially suppresses the excitation of donor molecules in the sample causing the acceptor emission to change proportionally to ED→A (see the inset). (d) STEP measurements of donor (CdSe560)–acceptor (CdSe600) nanocrystal assemblies. The fexp ratio measured versus the D-filter optical density (OD) for acceptor-only (grey circles) and donor–acceptor (blue circles) solids. Experimental data are fitted with a parametric model curve, ftheor(ED→A), resulting in ED→A = 30%. (e) CdSe/ZnS-Cy5 assemblies. The evolution of the scaled acceptor (Cy5) emission fD = NPLA/NDversus the optical density of the donor-type excitation filter (Cy3). The experimental data are best fitted with a ftheor(E = 10.1%) model curve. fD measured for the acceptor-only control sample (Cy5 solution) reveals no dependence on the donor-filter optical density (gray dots), consistent with the absence of ET in this case. (f) STEP measurements of the metal-to-semiconductor ET in assemblies of 21 nm Au and CdSe/CdS NCs. Evolution of the scaled NC emission (f-ratio) versus the optical density of the donor-type excitation filter (Cy3.5) is shown by blue circles. The experimental data for Au–CdSe assemblies were fitted with a set of model parametric curves, indicating that EAu→CdSe = 29–30%. The f-ratio measured for the acceptor-only control sample (CdSe NC film – red circles) is independent of the donor-filter optical density. 
The ability of the STEP approach to distinguish between charge and energy transfer processes has been demonstrated using several donor–acceptor systems. One of these works has utilized a simplified system of nanocrystal solids comprising an assembly of small (d = 3.5 nm) and large (d = 4.5 nm) core CdSe/CdS NCs (Fig. 12d).167 Prior investigations of similar assemblies by means of the bulk quenching approach have concluded that the energy transfer between proximal CdSe/CdS dots competes with the process of interparticle charge transfer, which causes the dissociation of excitons. The corresponding dissociation probability was estimated to be pdiss ≈ 6% for assemblies featuring oxalic acid linkers.68 STEP measurements of similarly prepared solids have confirmed this premise. It was estimated that ≈30% of excitons in donor species (smaller-diameter CdSe/CdS) were transferred to larger-diameter nanocrystals; meanwhile, ≈2% of excitons were dissociated due to the charge transfer involving acceptor dots. In another experiment, the STEP spectroscopy was used to unravel the interplay of charge and energy transfer processes in assemblies of CdSe/ZnS nanocrystals and cyanine dyes (Fig. 12e). By using a combination of STEP and donor PL quenching measurements, we observed that in the case of a QD–Cy5 system, exhibiting a significant donor–acceptor spectral overlap, up to 50% of the donor emission was quenched due to non-FRET processes. Finally, the STEP spectroscopy was applied for estimating the quantum efficiency of the photoinduced energy transfer from the plasmon resonances of metal nanoparticles to semiconductor nanocrystal matrices in assemblies of Au nanoparticles and CdSe nanocrystals, which represent a suitable model system of plasmonic antennas. We showed that in the case of 9.1 nm Au nanoparticles, only 1–2% of the Au absorbed radiation was converted to excitons in the surrounding CdSe nanocrystal matrix. For larger, 21.0 nm Au, the percentage of absorbed photons that were converted to excitons in CdSe NCs increased to 29.5% (Fig. 12f).205
Summary and outlook
The size-dependent properties of semiconductor nanocrystals offer exciting opportunities for controlling the energy transfer dynamics on the nanoscale. Thus far, the employment of band gap engineering has appeared to be the most prominent in the development of nanocrystal–dye biosensors and light-emitting materials. Going beyond these applications, the possibility of manipulating the energy transfer in nanocrystal assemblies is becoming increasingly attractive in the areas of photocatalysis and photovoltaics. Some of the emerging trends in this regard are discussed below.
The realization of triplet states in semiconductor nanocrystals170 can potentially enable light sensitization of photoinduced redox reactions. By engaging in triplet energy transfer with molecular photoredox catalysts, such as [Ru(bpy)3]2+ or Ir(ppy)3 coordination compounds,208 nanocrystal energy could be transformed into a long-lived triplet state (see Fig. 13a). Such energy conversion could be fairly fast, considering that the efficiency of triplet exciton transfer from CdSe to organic acceptors, such as ACA, is greater than 90%.170 Metal polypyridyl complexes represent particularly promising catalysts in this regard (Fig. 13a). Namely, photoexcited [Ru(bpy)3]3+ can oxidize water into O2 and protons via a metal oxide catalyst (Fig. 13a),209 while [Ru(bpy)3]2+* triplet states can be utilized for reducing methyl viologen (via ligands), a recyclable carrier of electrons.
 Fig. 13  (a) A possible scheme for employing semiconductor nanocrystals as triplet sensitizers of organometallic catalysts. In this example, the triplet–triplet energy transfer from semiconductor nanocrystals to catalytically active 3MLCT states of [Ru(bpy)3]3+ is utilized for water oxidation. (b) A possible strategy for concentrating the photoinduced energy in assemblies of semiconductor nanocrystals via diffusion towards the low-energy reaction center. This scheme can potentially benefit multi-electron catalytic processes by increasing the probability of multiple charges to be collected on the same catalytic site. Reproduced from ref. 210. Copyright 2018 Frontiers in Chemistry. 
Employing semiconductor nanocrystals as triplet sensitizers of photoredox coordination compounds would allow avoiding many issues of nanocrystal photocatalytic systems related to photocorrosion, slow hole regeneration, and short excited-state lifetimes. Furthermore, coupling nanocrystal sensitizers to organometallic catalysts will extend the usable portion of the solar spectrum. This is because the excitation of a triplet state in coordination compounds proceeds via a photon absorption into a singlet metal–ligand charge transfer state (1MLCT) followed by a rapid intersystem crossing to a 3MLCT state, which is commonly accompanied by an ∼1 eV energy loss (due to the large splitting of singlet and triplet states). Since such singlet–triplet splitting in semiconductor nanocrystals is usually much smaller (within thermal kT ∼ 30 meV), the associated energy loss will be reduced. Another potential benefit is expected from the fact that the molar absorptivity of semiconductor nanocrystals, such as CdSe, is about 10–20 times greater211 than that of the 1MLCT transition in [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (∼13000 M−1 cm−1 in acetonitrile), which should result in the enhancement of the overall turnover frequency.
Like most excitonic systems, an assembly of semiconductor nanocrystals can allow energy concentration via the transfer of excitons from an excitation site to the acceptor domain associated with the potential energy minimum. Such an energy-concentrating mechanism is utilized by biological systems, where multiple carriers are driven to the reaction center for catalyzing multi-electron processes. A demonstrative example of this process is the oxygenic photosynthesis in plants, where light is absorbed by hundreds of pigments (e.g. chlorophylls) that transfer the photoinduced energy to a small number of special pigments (P680), capable of charge separation.212 P680 will then share a photoinduced hole with a water-oxidizing complex (WOC).213 After four oxidizing equivalents have been stored at the WOC site, it obtains four electrons from water molecules, causing H2O splitting. We expect that nanocrystal assemblies could be employed in a similar manner for driving multielectron catalytic processes, such as water oxidation and hydrogen production.214,215 For instance, the diffusion of excitons in a nanocrystal solid to a nanoparticle with the smallest band gap54,61,216 can be employed for collecting multiple excitons at the same site (Fig. 13b). The accepting dot could be appended with a catalyst to assist the charge separation. The presence of an electron- (or hole-) accepting catalyst would also allow avoiding the multiexciton populations on a single nanocrystal, which are subject to a rapid decay through the Auger recombination. Such nanocrystal assembly could be incorporated into a photoelectrochemical cell or harnessed within an “artificial leaf” platform.217 Zero-dimensional nanocrystals in these assemblies could be substituted with either one- or two-dimensional nanostructures (e.g. nanosheets or nanoshells) in order to increase the energy transfer efficiency and reduce the Auger recombination rates.
Plasmonics represents a rapidly developing area of nanoscience that exploits the ability of metal nanostructures to concentrate electromagnetic radiation. A related challenge concerns an efficient conversion of a plasmon-concentrated field into some form of useful energy. To address this issue, existing strategies based on hot electron transfer and far-field scattering can be supplemented with a relatively novel scheme utilizing plasmon induced resonant energy transfer (PIRET). The ultrafast nature of this process combined with the competition with backward FRET calls for advanced imaging techniques. In this regard, near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) offering deep subwavelength resolution appears to be particularly promising.218,219 When equipped with time resolving capabilities,220 the ultrafast nanoscopy of plasmonic structures can reveal the spatial dynamics of the evanescent field around metal nanostructures. The near-field scanning methods can be combined with the STEP spectroscopy for estimating the net energy flow in plasmon–semiconductor assemblies.
In collusion, colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals have emerged as a key material system for the development of nanoscale energy transfer platforms. The progress in this field is attributed to the unique advantages of colloidal semiconductors that include tunable exciton energies and the ability to interface with a large variety of nanoscale energy-transfer partners, either through chemical conjugation or in solid assemblies. Thus far, the most successful realizations of energy transfer reactions in nanocrystals have involved single-step excitation transfers in molecule–nanoparticle assemblies. Nonetheless, the prospects of harvesting triplet excitons from nanocrystals or funneling the photoinduced energy in nanocrystal solids or plasmonic assemblies are rapidly gaining momentum. These energy-transfer systems hold strong promise for the development of new paradigms for solar energy production, solid state lighting, sensing, and near-field optical imaging applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Award DE-SC0016872 (MZ) funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science. PM was partly supported by NSF Award DMR-1710063. LRR was supported by NSF Award CHE-1465052.
Notes and references
T. Ritz, A. Damjanović and K. Schulten, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 243–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Moroz, N. Kholmicheva, N. Razgoniaeva, D. Burchfield, N. Sharma, A. Acharya and M. Zamkov, Chem. Phys., 2016, 471, 59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hoffman, R. Alam and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 391 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pacchioni, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16005 CrossRef .
F. Piazza and Y. Sanejouand, Phys. Biol., 2009, 6, 046014 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. G. Pfleger and K. A. Eidne, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Somers, P. T. Snee, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 248, 24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, T. A. Klar, J. M. Lupton, A. Meijerink and J. Feldmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1208 RSC .
R. C. Somers, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 579 RSC .
C. S. Yun, A. Javier, T. Jennings, M. Fisher, S. Hira, S. Peterson, B. Hopkins, N. O. Reich and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, A. R. Clapp, H. Mattoussi, E. R. Goldman, B. Fisher and J. M. Mauro, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz, J. M. Mauro, B. R. Fisher, M. G. Bawendi and H. Mattoussi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, A. R. Clapp, F. M. Brunel, T. Tiefenbrunn, H. Tetsuo Uyeda, E. L. Chang, J. R. Deschamps, P. E. Dawson and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Petryayeva, W. Russ Algar and I. L. Medintz, Appl. Spectrosc., 2013, 67, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hildebrandt, C. M. Spillmann, W. Russ Algar, T. Pons, M. H. Stewart, E. Oh, K. Susumu, S. A. Díaz, J. B. Delehanty and I. L. Medintz, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T. K. Ahn, T. Mancal, Y. C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Rowland, J. B. Delehanty, C. L. Dwyer and I. L. Medintz, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 131 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, J. Lee, N. A. Kotov, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, P. Hernandez, J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dyadyusha, H. Yin, S. Jaiswal, T. Brown, J. J. Baumberg, F. P. Booye and T. Melvin, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3201 RSC .
F. Shaik, I. Peer, P. K. Jain and L. Amirav, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4370–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kholmicheva, P. Moroz, U. Rijal, E. Bastola, P. Uprety, G. Liyanage, A. Razgoniaev, A. D. Ostrowski and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Achermann, M. A. Petruska, S. Kos, D. L. Smith, D. D. Koleske and V. I. Klimov, Nature, 2004, 429, 642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Curutchet, A. Franceschetti, A. Zunger and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13336 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nature, 2002, 420, 800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath and F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13 CrossRef CAS .
O. Chen, H. Wei, A. Maurice, M. Bawendi and P. Reiss, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 696 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moroz, G. Liyanage, N. N. Kholmicheva, S. Yakunin, U. Rijal, P. Uprety, E. Bastola, B. Mellott, K. Subedi, L. Sun, M. V. Kovalenko and M. Zamkov, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4256 CrossRef CAS .
E. Khon, S. Lambright, D. Khon, B. Smith, T. O'Connor, P. Moroz, M. Imboden, G. Diederich, C. Perez-Bolivar, P. Anzenbacher and M. Zamkov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3714 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Supran, Y. Shirasaki, K. W. Song, J. Caruge, P. T. Kazlas, S. Coe-Sullivan, T. L. Andrew, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 703 CrossRef .
G. J. Supran, K. W. Song, G. W. Hwang, R. E. Correa, J. Scherer, E. A. Dauler, Y. Shirasaki, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Graetzel, R. A. J. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Rosen, A. M. Sawvel, D. J. Milliron and B. A. Helms, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2214 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Keuleyan, E. Lhuillier, V. Brajuskovic and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 489 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. Pelayo García de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kinder, P. Moroz, G. Diederich, A. Johnson, M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, T. O’Connor, D. Roth and M. Zamkov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lan, O. Voznyy, F. Pelayo García de Arquer, M. Liu, J. Xu, A. H. Proppe, G. Walters, F. Fan, H. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Meulenberg, J. R. I. Lee, A. Wolcott, J. Z. Zhang, L. J. Terminello and T. van Buuren, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Choi, J. Luria, B. Hyun, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, Y. Lim, J. A. Marohn, F. W. Wise and T. Hanrath, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mork, M. C. Weidman, F. Prins and W. A. Tisdale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13920 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. Pelayo García de Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Moroz, N. Kholmicheva, B. Mellott, G. Liyanage, U. Rijal, E. Bastola, K. Huband, E. Khon, K. McBride and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Tolentino, M. Gibbs, R. Ihly, C. L. Perkins, Y. Liu, N. Crawford, J. C. Hemminger and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, S. Hoogland, K. W. Kemp, A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho, B. Hou, J. Lim, S. Lee, S. Pak, J. Hong, P. Giraud, A. R. Jang, Y.-W. Lee, J. Lee, J. E. Jang, H. J. Snaith, S. M. Morris, J. I. Sohn, S. N. Cha and J. M. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 1036 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kholmicheva, P. Moroz, E. Bastola, N. Razgoniaeva, J. Bocanegra, M. Shaughnessy, Z. Porach, D. Khon and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, R. D. Schaller, D. Jarzab, M. A. Loi and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, M. Sytnyk, S. Tollabimazraehno, M. Humer, F. Hackl, T. Fromherz, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, G. Walters, J. Z. Fan, M. Liu, S. Kinge, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 830 CrossRef CAS .
G. Diederich, T. O'Connor, P. Moroz, E. Kinder, E. Kohn, D. Perera, R. Lorek, S. Lambright, M. Imboden and M. Zamkov, J. Visualized Exp., 2012, 66, e4296 Search PubMed .
N. Kholmicheva, N. Razgoniaeva, P. Yadav, A. Lahey, C. Erickson, P. Moroz, D. Gamelin and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1477 CrossRef CAS .
T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, S. Schietinger, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1599 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, X. Ma, C. R. Haughn, J. Benavides, M. F. Doty and S. G. Cloutier, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Weerd, L. Gomez, H. Zhang, W. J. Buma, G. Nedelcu, M. V. Kovalenko and T. Gregorkiewicz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13310 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, V. Adinolfi, B. R. Sutherland, O. Voznyy, S. J. Kwon, T. W. Kim, J. Kim, H. Ihee, K. Kemp, M. Adachi, M. Yuan, I. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7772 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Pelton, I. Fedin, D. V. Talapin and E. Waks, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, R. W. Crisp, J. Gu, B. D. Chernomordik, G. F. Pach, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Turner and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17052 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zamkov, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17072 CrossRef .
J. P. Philbin and E. Rabani, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. García-Santamaría, Y. Chen, J. Vela, R. D. Schaller, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3482 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Park, J. Lim, N. S. Makarov and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Rabouw, P. Lunnemann, R. J. A. van Dijk-Moes, M. Frimmer, F. Pietra, A. F. Koenderink and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cunningham, J. E. Boercker, E. E. Foos, M. P. Lumb, A. R. Smith, J. G. Tischler and J. S. Melinger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, J. T. Stewart, R. L. Sandberg, W. K. Bae, W. Koh, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, F. Tassone, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelton, J. J. Andrews, I. Fedin, D. V. Talapin, H. Leng and S. K. O'Leary, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. She, I. Fedin, D. S. Dolzhnikov, A. Demortière, R. D. Schaller, M. Pelton and D. V. Talapin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Park, W. K. Bae, T. Baker, J. Lim and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10659 CrossRef CAS .
N. Razgoniaeva, P. Moroz, M. Yang, D. S. Budkina, H. Eckard, M. Augspurger, D. Khon, A. N. Tarnovsky and M. Zamkov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Razgoniaeva, M. Yang, C. Colegrove, N. Kholmicheva, P. Moroz, H. Eckard, A. Vore and M. Zamkov, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7852–7858 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Jeong, Y. Park, J. H. Chang, I. Cho, J. K. Kim, H. Kim, K. Char, J. Cho, V. I. Klimov, P. Park, D. C. Lee and W. K. Bae, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schrier and L.-W. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 245332 CrossRef .
C.-L. Weng, I.-C. Chen and Y.-C. Tsai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 195313 CrossRef .
S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aerts, T. Bielewicz, C. Klinke, F. C. Grozema, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3789 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sippel, W. Albrecht, J. C. van der Bok, R. Moes, T. Hannappel, R. Eichberger and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1655–1661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. Huang, H. E. Pudavar, Y. Cui and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, A. Pravitasari, J. E. Raymond, J. D. Batteas and D. H. Son, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. Zhuang, X. Xing, B. Xu, D. Wu, H. Liu, K. Wang, R. Liu and X. W. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11280 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Abadeer, M. R. Brennan, W. L. Wilson and C. J. Murphy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lakowicz, K. Ray, M. Chowdhury, H. Szmacinski, Y. Fu, J. Zhang and K. Nowaczyk, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1308 RSC .
J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2005, 337, 171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khatua, P. Paulo, H. Yuan, A. Gupta, P. P. Zijlstra and M. Orrit, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4440–4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sen and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17307–17317 CrossRef CAS .
E. Heydari, I. Pastoriza-Santos, R. Flehr, L. M. Liz-Marzáan and J. Stumpe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16577 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Demchenko, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2013, 1, 022001 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Malicka, I. Gryczynski, Z. Gryczynski and J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2003, 315, 57–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. G. Tovmachenko, C. Graf, D. J. van den Heuvel, A. van Blaaderen and H. C. Gerritsen, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, K. Nakaya, T. Hayashi and M. Hara, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4403 RSC .
J. Seelig, K. Leslie, A. Renn, S. Kühn, V. Jacobsen, M. van de Corput, C. Wyman and V. Sandoghdar, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Acuna, M. Bucher, I. H. Stein, C. Steinhauer, A. Kuzyk, P. Holzmeister, R. Schreiber, A. Moroz, F. D. Stefani, T. Liedl, F. C. Simmel and P. Tinnefeld, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dulkeith, A. Morteani, T. Niedereichholz, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, S. A. Levi, F. C. van Veggel, D. N. Reinhoudt, M. Moller and D. I. Gittins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 203002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Jennings, M. P. Singh and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, J. Qian, X. Li and S. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063111 CrossRef .
P. Reineck, D. Gómez, S. H. Ng, M. Karg, T. Bell, P. Mulvaney and U. Bach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Abadeer, M. R. Brennan, W. L. Wilson and C. J. Murphy, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bardhan, N. K. Grady, J. R. Cole, A. Joshi and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, J. Zhang and J. R. Lakowicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gandra, C. Portz, L. Tian, R. Tang, B. Xu, S. Achilefu and S. Singamaneni, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Li and R. F. Aroca, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3962 RSC .
M. Wang, B. B. Rajeeva, L. Scarabelli, E. P. Perillo, A. K. Dunn, L. M. Liz-Marzán and Y. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, M. Pelton, M. Liu, P. Guyot-Sionnest and N. F. Scherer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 116 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sönnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 077402 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhao, J. W. Jarrett, J. S. Johnson, K. Park, R. A. Vaia and K. L. Knappenberger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4071 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. D. Wang, W. C. H. Choy, C. Duan, D. D. S. Fung, W. E. I. Sha, F. Xie, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1206 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Zuo, W. Fu, Q. Yan, C. Fan and H. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zarick, O. Hurd, J. A. Webb, C. Hungerford, W. R. Erwin and R. Bardhan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 806 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Arinze, B. Qiu, G. Nyirjesy and S. M. Thon, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 158 CrossRef CAS .
D. Paz-Soldan, A. Lee, S. M. Thon, M. M. Adachi, H. Dong, P. Maraghechi, M. Yuan, A. Labelle, S. Hoogland, K. Liu, E. Kumacheva and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, J. Bright, B. T. Yost, P. Zheng, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, G. Shi, Z. Liu, K. Lu, L. Han, X. Ling, H. Zhang, S. Cheng and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701194 CrossRef .
D. T. Gangadharan, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Izquierdo and D. Ma, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 153 Search PubMed .
Y. He, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Shen, W. Guo and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kholmicheva, L. Royo Romero, J. Cassidy and M. Zamkov, Nanophotonics, 2018 DOI:10.1515/nanoph-2018-0143 .
Y. H. Jang, Y. J. Jang, S. Kim, L. N. Quan, K. Chung and D. H. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14982–15034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nguyen, Y. Ma, T. Luo, R. G. Bristow, D. A. Jaffray and Q. B. Lu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 11778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, T. Oshikiri, Q. Sun, X. Shi and H. Misawa, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2955–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tatsuma, H. Nishi and T. Ishida, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3325 RSC .
S. K. Cushing, A. D. Bristowa and N. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30013 RSC .
K. P. Acharya, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, T. R. Alabi, I. Nemitz, E. Khon, B. Ullrich, P. Anzenbacher and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12496 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, P. Chen, S. J. Moon, F. Sauvage, K. Sivula, T. Bessho, D. R. Gamelin, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. I. Seok, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Haring, M. E. Pomatto, M. R. Thornton and A. J. Morris, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Koole, W. H. Evers, A. J. Houtepen, S. Boehme, C. de Mello Donegá, D. Vanmaekelbergh and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18866 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Selinsky, Q. Ding, M. S. Faber, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2963 RSC .
W. Li and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Poppe, S. G. Hickey and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17123 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3033 RSC .

          R. M. Clegg, Förster Resonance Energy Transfer—FRET: What Is It, Why Do It, and How It's Done, in FRET and FLIM Techniques. Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ed. T. W. J. Gadella, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2009, vol. 33. pp. 1–57 Search PubMed .
A. Periasamy, J. Biomed. Opt., 2001, 6, 287–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, T. Pons, K. Susumu, K. Boeneman, A. Dennis, D. Farrell, J. R. Deschamps, J. S. Melinger, G. Bao and H. Mattoussi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kapur, F. Aldeek, X. Ji, M. Safi, W. Wang, A. D. Cid, O. Steinbock and H. Mattoussi, Bioconjugate Chem., 2017, 28, 678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma and X. Su, Analyst, 2011, 136, 4883 RSC .
L. Stryer and R. P. Haugland, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1967, 58, 719 CrossRef CAS .
L. Stryer, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1978, 47, 819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Preus and L. M. Wilhelmsson, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Stein, V. Schüller, P. Böhm, P. Tinnefeld and T. Liedl, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 689–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Aryal and D. E. Benson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, Z. Huang, D. Wu and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 962 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boulesbaa, A. Issac, D. Stockwell, Z. Huang, J. Huang, J. Guo and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Perera, R. Lorek, R. S. Khnayzer, P. Moroz, T. O’Connor, D. Khon, G. Diederich, E. Kinder, S. Lambright, F. N. Castellano and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22786 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moroz, N. Razgoniaeva, Y. He, G. Jensen, H. Eckard, H. P. Lu and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Thompson, M. W. B. Wilson, D. N. Congreve, P. R. Brown, J. M. Scherer, T. S. Bischof, M. Wu, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. V. Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Gélinas, M. L. Böhm, B. J. Walker, K. P. Musselman, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and A. Rao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. V. Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garakyaraghi and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang and M. L. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, N. Geva, J. J. Shepherd, M. W. B. Wilson, V. Bulović, T. V. Voorhis, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, V. Bulović, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 8509 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Huang, R. Zavala and M. L. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bender, E. K. Raulerson, X. Li, T. Goldzak, P. Xia, T. V. Voorhis, M. L. Tang and S. T. Roberts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, M. Kuno, M. Nirmal, D. J. Norris and M. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 4843 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1157 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kholmicheva, P. Moroz, H. Eckard, G. Jensen and M. Zamkov, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 154 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Reich and B. I. Shklovskii, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Powell and Z. G. Soos, J. Lumin., 1975, 11, 1–45 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Akselrod, P. B. Deotare, N. J. Thompson, J. Lee, W. A. Tisdale, M. A. Baldo, V. M. Menon and V. Bulović, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, Z. Guo, P. C. dos Santos Claro, E. V. Shevchenko and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Gilmore, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, A. P. Willard and W. A. Tisdale, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Azzaro, A. Dodin, D. Y. Zhang, A. P. Willard and S. T. Roberts, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, J. Xu, R. P. Sabatini, J. Z. Fan, B. Sun, S. Hoogland, S. O. Kelley, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Y. Lee and W. A. Tisdale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9005 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kagan, C. B. Murray, M. Nirmal and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Crooker, J. A. Hollingsworth, S. Tretiak and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 186802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, X. Ma, C. R. Haughn, J. Benavides, M. F. Doty and S. G. Cloutier, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Franzl, D. S. Koktysh, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and N. Gaponik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miyazaki and S. Kinoshita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 81, 074708 CrossRef .
J. Miyazaki and S. Kinoshita, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 035303 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Tolentino, E. R. Smith, J. Zhang, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik, M. Law and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16228 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, J. Zhang, J. van de Lagemaat, J. C. Johnson and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Akselrod, F. Prins, L. V. Poulikakos, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, A. J. Mork, A. P. Willard, V. Bulović and W. A. Tisdale, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Hildebrandt, How to Apply FRET: From Experimental Design to Data Analysis, in FRET – Förster Resonance Energy Transfer. From Theory to Applications, ed. I. L. Medintz, and N. Hildebrandt, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2014, pp. 105–156 Search PubMed .
P. T. Snee, R. C. Somers, G. Nair, J. P. Zimmer, M. G. Bawendi and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 11, 17 RSC .
I. Yildiz, M. Tomasulo and F. M. Raymo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, T. Pons, S. A. Trammell, A. F. Grimes, D. S. English, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and H. Mattoussi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sykora, M. A. Petruska, J. Alstrum-Acevedo, I. Bezel, T. J. Meyer and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yildiz, E. Deniz and F. M. Raymo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1859 RSC .
P. Moroz, N. Razgoniaeva, A. Vore, H. Eckard, N. Kholmicheva, A. McDarby, A. O. Razgoniaev, A. D. Ostrowski, D. Khon and M. Zamkov, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2290 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moroz, W. P. Klein, K. Akers, A. Vore, N. Kholmicheva, N. Razgoniaeva, D. Khon, S. A. Díaz, I. L. Medintz and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26226 CrossRef .
P. Moroz, Z. Jin, Y. Sugiyama, D. Lara, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Yang, N. Kholmicheva, D. Khon, H. Mattoussi and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Arias-Rotondo and J. K. McCusker, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5803 RSC .
M. Hara, C. C. Waraksa, J. T. Lean, B. A. Lewis and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5275 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moroz, A. Boddy and M. Zamkov, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 353 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular mechanisms of photosynthesis, Wiley-Blackwell,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. M. Najafpour, S. Heidari, S. E. Balaghi, M. Holynska, M. H. Sadr, B. Soltani, M. Khatamian, A. W. Larkum and S. I. Allakhverdiev, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2017, 1858, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, R.-T. Chen, Y.-X. Xu, F.-T. Fan, P.-W. Du, F.-X. Zhang, X. Zong, T. Chen, Y. Qi, P. Chen, Z. Chen and C. Li, J. Catal., 2016, 338, 168 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, C. Ding, R.-T. Chen, F.-T. Fan, P. Fu, H. Yin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, P.-W. Du and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kodaimati, S. Lian, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8290 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rotenberg and L. Kuipers, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 919 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, B. Bai and J. Wang, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 18644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wagner, Z. Fei, A. S. McLeod, A. S. Rodin, W. Bao, E. G. Iwinski, Z. Zhao, M. Goldflam, M. Liu, G. Dominguez, M. Thiemens, M. M. Fogler, A. H. Castro Neto, C. N. Lau, S. Amarie, F. Keilmann and D. N. Basov, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Pavel Moroz
	Dr Pavel Moroz graduated from Saint-Petersburg State University, Russia, with his master's degree in Chemistry in 2010. He obtained his PhD degree in Photochemistry from the Center for Photochemical Sciences at Bowling Green State University in 2015. Currently, he is a postdoctoral associate under the supervision of Prof. Zamkov at Bowling Green State University. His research is focused on the development of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals and demonstration of functional devices based on these nanoscale materials.

Luis Royo Romero
	Luis Royo Romero is a master's student in the Department of Physics at Bowling Green State University. He received his bachelor's degree in Physics and Mathematics from High Point University in 2017. Also in 2017, he spent a summer at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as a Research Intern, where he was working on the engineering and optical characterization of large area, aligned single-wall carbon nanotubes. He is now working in the laboratory of Prof. Zamkov on the colloidal deposition of semiconductor nanocrystal films and photoconductivity measurements.

Mikhail Zamkov
	Prof. Mikhail Zamkov obtained his bachelor's degree in Physics from Krasnoyarsk State University, Russia, in 1997 and PhD in Physics from Kansas State University in 2003. Upon completion of his doctoral studies, he has worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, under the guidance of Prof. Dana D. Dlott and now is a Full Professor at Bowling Green State University. His current research focuses on the electronic, chemical, and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures (quantum dots) and hybrid nanoscale materials prepared by means of colloidal synthesis (Web: http://physics.bgsu.edu/~zamkovm/).

 	Fig. 1  Possible mechanisms of excitonic energy transfer involving semiconductor nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoinduced energy conversion in nanocrystal solids. The photon absorption results in the formation of localized excitons that diffuse through a film at a rate determined by the strength of the interparticle coupling. Similar to polymer films, a singlet exciton “hops” through the thermally accessible energy landscape towards the potential energy minimum. The subsequent decay of excitons is then driven by their recombination (radiative or non-radiative) or dissociation into a free electron–hole pair. Adapted from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Experimental strategies for tuning the exciton dissociation probability in nanocrystal solids. (a) Long-chain interparticle linkers suppress the exciton dissociation and improve the emission quantum yield of nanoparticle solids. Conversely, short-chain linkers enhance the exciton dissociation rate. (b) The exciton dissociation probability of matrix-encapsulated nanocrystals is inversely proportional to the interparticle distance, which allows tuning the solid properties between light-harvesting (left) and light-emitting (right). (c) The exciton dissociation probability can be controlled via the donor–acceptor spectral overlap, J. Nanocrystal solids featuring a lower J exhibit a lower rate of interparticle energy transfer, which reduces the corresponding exciton diffusion volume. As a result, the probability of an exciton reaching emission-quenching defects decreases, enhancing the emission. An inverse correlation between exciton diffusion rates and the overlap integral J is shown through a comparison of CdSe/CdS and Mn2+-doped Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS NC solids. Owing to the vanishing absorption–emission overlap in Mn2+-doped nanocrystals, the corresponding J integral is 105 times smaller than that of CdSe/CdS films, which was manifested by a much slower exciton diffusion (hopping time ≈ 0.3 ms) and a strongly suppressed exciton dissociation in Mn2+-doped Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS NC solids.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The process of energy funneling in perovskite nanocrystals.72 An assembly of quantum-size-tuned CH3NH3PbI3 grains was used to funnel photoexcitations to the lowest-bandgap light-emitter, enabling an external quantum efficiency of 8.8% in the near infrared (IR) region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature Publishing. (b) An illustration of the exciton funneling strategy, which is designed to concentrate the energy of small-diameter PbS NCs via a transfer to the sublayer of large-diameter PbS NCs. Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the CdS/CdSe nanoshell geometry. The potential energy minima of the CdSe conduction and valence bands promote the shell-localization of both photoinduced charges. In this geometry, the core dimensions are allowed to exceed the exciton Bohr radius, leading to quantum confinement in nanostructures approaching 30 nm in diameter. (b–e) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high angle annular dark field (HAADF)-STEM images of CdS/CdSe nanoshell quantum dots. (f) Schematic representation of excited state energy levels in the fabricated core/barrier/shell NCs. (g) Dark field STEM image of a PbS/CdS/CdSe nanocrystal indicating the presence of the PbS and CdSe domains through a color contrast. A somewhat darker shading around a bright central area is ascribed to be a CdS barrier. (h) Low-resolution TEM image of PbS/CdS/CdSe NCs. Figures adapted with permissions from ref. 91 and 92. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Plasmon–exciton energy exchange. (a) Extinction cross sections of common nanoscale sensitizers divided by the nanoparticle volume. The comparison highlights superior light-harvesting characteristics of metal nanoparticles in comparison to semiconductor quantum dots and organic polymers (e.g. P3HT). Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) The time scale of the surface plasmon evolution in noble metal nanoparticles, including stages of plasmon dephasing (10–20 fs), hot carrier redistribution (200 fs–1 ps) via electron–electron decay, and electron–phonon cooling (1–10 ps). (c) A diagram illustrating possible FL enhancement and quenching mechanisms in a metal–semiconductor system. The near-field energy exchange between the electrical dipoles of the plasmon and semiconductor allows both forward (PIRET) and backward (FRET) directions of the energy transfer. Photoinduced electron transfer (PET) can also contribute to the quenching of the semiconductor emission.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical estimates of the relative plasmon enhancement corresponding to far-field (scattering), near-field (PIRET), and hot electron based plasmon energy conversion processes versus the plasmon's dephasing stage and the semiconductor band gap (the plasmon energy fixed at 1.8 eV). Adapted from ref. 143 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of a plasmonic solar cell absorber comprising a matrix-encapsulated (PbS, Au) film. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of plasmonic (Au, PbS) and control (PbS-only) quantum dot solar cells. The relatively low photovoltage of plasmonic solar cells was believed to be caused by Au-induced Fermi level pinning. (d) Schematic of the depleted heterojunction PV cell doped with Au nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Donor–acceptor assemblies of CdSe/ZnS semiconductor nanocrystals and cyanine dyes (Cy5) exhibiting an interplay of charge and energy transfer processes. (a) The PL lifetimes of donor-only (CdSe/ZnS NCs) and donor–acceptor (CdSe/ZnS–Cy5) samples were used to calculate the total donor PL quenching efficiency, Etot = 21%. (b) Partial contributions from energy (EET = 11%) and charge (ECT = 10%) transfer processes were determined using the STEP spectroscopy.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the triplet energy transfer between a nanocrystal donor and a triplet acceptor (PCA). (b) Ultrafast transient absorption spectra of CdSe–OA nanocrystals in toluene solution upon selective excitation of CdSe, using 500 nm pulsed laser excitation in the presence of surface-anchored 9-anthracenecarboxylic acid (ACA) in toluene. The inset in (b) shows TA kinetics monitored for the growth of 3ACA at 441 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2016 AAAS.	 
E = 1 −τDA/τD and Γ = 1/τDA − 1/τD	(2)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Bulk quenching approach for measuring the energy transfer dynamics in nanocrystal solids. The technique relies on doping the investigated film with randomly distributed acceptors (A). The resulting reduction in the emission of a blended solid due to exciton quenching by acceptor dots, ID/IAD, is proportional to the concentration of the acceptor A, as expressed by the equation in the inset. A linear fit to this equation can then be used to extract the rate of interparticle energy transfer, ΓET(D → A). Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the known mechanisms of energy transfer in nanocrystal solids, including the Förster, Dexter, and tandem ET processes. This portion of the image is reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Experimental time-evolution of the PL spatial cross-section for CdSe/CdS solids. The linear color scale indicates normalized PL intensity. (b) Schematic representation of the three types of quantum dot samples studied. The right panel shows the change in variance, σ2, of the exciton distribution as a function of time for the three samples. The dashed line represents the hypothetical case of normal diffusion in which the variance grows linearly with time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) A cascaded energy transfer (CET) sample consists of subsequent layers comprising green, yellow, orange, red, orange, yellow, and green emitting NCs. Below the CET sample the HOMO and LUMO are sketched, visualizing the cascaded band gaps used to facilitate cascaded energy transfer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (d) TEM image of a mixed (Au + PbS) nanoparticle sample representing a donor (PbS)–acceptor (Au) blend. (e) Schematic illustration of PL lifetime changes in blended films of Au and PbS NCs. By correlating PL changes with a concentration of quenching nanoparticles (Au), we have determined the average number of exciton hops and the corresponding exciton diffusion length. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 
NPLA = QYA(NA + ED→AND)	(3)
ED→A = (M1/M2) × (N0A/N0D)	(4)

 	Fig. 12  (a) An illustration of the STEP spectroscopy setup. (b) STEP measurements utilizing an acceptor-type excitation filter. The energy transfer efficiency, ED→A, is obtained from the acceptor emission by using experimental parameters, M1 and M2 (see the inset). Alternatively, one can fit the experimental data points, fA, with a model parametric curve, ftheor(ED→A), featuring a single fitting parameter, ED→A. (c) STEP measurements utilizing a donor-type filter that preferentially suppresses the excitation of donor molecules in the sample causing the acceptor emission to change proportionally to ED→A (see the inset). (d) STEP measurements of donor (CdSe560)–acceptor (CdSe600) nanocrystal assemblies. The fexp ratio measured versus the D-filter optical density (OD) for acceptor-only (grey circles) and donor–acceptor (blue circles) solids. Experimental data are fitted with a parametric model curve, ftheor(ED→A), resulting in ED→A = 30%. (e) CdSe/ZnS-Cy5 assemblies. The evolution of the scaled acceptor (Cy5) emission fD = NPLA/NDversus the optical density of the donor-type excitation filter (Cy3). The experimental data are best fitted with a ftheor(E = 10.1%) model curve. fD measured for the acceptor-only control sample (Cy5 solution) reveals no dependence on the donor-filter optical density (gray dots), consistent with the absence of ET in this case. (f) STEP measurements of the metal-to-semiconductor ET in assemblies of 21 nm Au and CdSe/CdS NCs. Evolution of the scaled NC emission (f-ratio) versus the optical density of the donor-type excitation filter (Cy3.5) is shown by blue circles. The experimental data for Au–CdSe assemblies were fitted with a set of model parametric curves, indicating that EAu→CdSe = 29–30%. The f-ratio measured for the acceptor-only control sample (CdSe NC film – red circles) is independent of the donor-filter optical density.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A possible scheme for employing semiconductor nanocrystals as triplet sensitizers of organometallic catalysts. In this example, the triplet–triplet energy transfer from semiconductor nanocrystals to catalytically active 3MLCT states of [Ru(bpy)3]3+ is utilized for water oxidation. (b) A possible strategy for concentrating the photoinduced energy in assemblies of semiconductor nanocrystals via diffusion towards the low-energy reaction center. This scheme can potentially benefit multi-electron catalytic processes by increasing the probability of multiple charges to be collected on the same catalytic site. Reproduced from ref. 210. Copyright 2018 Frontiers in Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
