Nanostructured p-type CZTS thin films prepared by a facile solution process for 3D p–n junction solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR02081F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR02081F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11182-11189Nanostructured p-type CZTS thin films prepared by a facile solution process for 3D p–n junction solar cells†

        
          
            Si-Nae 
            Park‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Shi-Joon 
            Sung‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jun-Hyoung 
            Sim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kee-Jeong 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dae-Kue 
            Hwang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            JunHo 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Gee Yeong 
            Kim
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            William 
            Jo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dae-Hwan 
            Kim
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jin-Kyu 
            Kang
          
        
      *a
aConvergence Research Center for Solar Energy, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science & Technology, Daegu 711-873, Korea. E-mail: monolith@dgist.ac.kr; apollon@dgist.ac.kr
bDepartment of Physics, Incheon National University, Incheon 406-772, Korea
cDepartment of Physics, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea
Received 
      1st April 2015
    , Accepted 13th May 2015First published on 22nd May 2015AbstractNanoporous p-type semiconductor thin films prepared by a simple solution-based process with appropriate thermal treatment and three-dimensional (3D) p–n junction solar cells fabricated by depositing n-type semiconductor layers onto the nanoporous p-type thin films show considerable photovoltaic performance compared with conventional thin film p–n junction solar cells. Spin-coated p-type Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films prepared using metal chlorides and thiourea show unique nanoporous thin film morphology, which is composed of a cluster of CZTS nanograins of 50–500 nm, and the obvious 3D p–n junction structure is fabricated by the deposition of n-type CdS on the nanoporous CZTS thin films by chemical bath deposition. The photovoltaic properties of 3D p–n junction CZTS solar cells are predominantly affected by the scale of CZTS nanograins, which is easily controlled by the sulfurization temperature of CZTS precursor films. The scale of CZTS nanograins determines the minority carrier transportation within the 3D p–n junction between CZTS and CdS, which are closely related with the photocurrent of series resistance of 3D p–n junction solar cells. 3D p–n junction CZTS solar cells with nanograins below 100 nm show power conversion efficiency of 5.02%, which is comparable with conventional CZTS thin film solar cells.
Introduction
Solution-based inorganic solar cells have attracted a great deal of interest due to the low cost and high-throughput manufacturing associated with their solution process.1 However, in the case of general solution-based inorganic solar cells, the quality of absorber materials is generally inferior to vacuum-based absorbers due to the use of solvents and many additives, limited grain growth of absorber materials, and so on. Therefore, the photovoltaic performance of solution-processed, inorganic solar cells is not as good as vacuum-based solar cells. In order to overcome this limitation of solution-processed solar cells, various three-dimensional (3D) structures of solar cell devices were widely investigated by many researchers.2,3 The advantage of using nanostructured materials is that light absorption and charge migration no longer occur in one material but are taken care of by two or more different materials, which are interconnected on a nanometer scale. In this way the migration distance of the minority carriers is reduced by several orders of magnitude, which reduces the recombination of electrons and holes.4–7 3D solar cells are normally based on the n-type nanostructured materials, which have various platforms of nanostructure, such as nanoparticles,8 nanorods,9,10 nanowires,11–14 and so on. In general, nanostructured n-type semiconductor materials were first fabricated and p-type semiconductor materials were deposited on the nanostructured n-type materials for the formation of the 3D p–n junction. In this case, the conformal deposition of p-type semiconductors is important and thus the solution-based deposition process is generally used for the deposition of p-type semiconductors. However, conventional n-type semiconductor materials are known to be vulnerable to high temperature and thus the thermal crystallization processes of p-type semiconductors are limited, which leads to the deterioration of the material quality of p-type semiconductors. In addition, the conformal deposition of p-type semiconductors on the nanostructured n-type semiconductors is very difficult due to the large volume change caused by the thermal crystallization process of p-type semiconductors. Therefore, the performance of previously reported 3D solar cells is unsatisfactory considering the complicated fabrication of 3D nanostructured n-type materials. In the case of solution-processed CIGS or CZTS solar cells, various nanostructured n-type materials such as TiO2 nanoparticles,15–17 CdS nanowires,18 and ZnO nanowires19,20 were also used for the formation of the 3D p–n junction with p-type CIGS or CZTS absorbers. However, the best performances of 3D solar cells based on CIGS and CZTS are about 6% and 1%, respectively.
In our work, we have easily fabricated 3D-structured nanoporous p-type Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films by a simple spin-coating process with appropriate thermal treatment. CZTS has recently attracted a great amount of interest as a potential material for fabricating a low-cost, low-environmental-impact absorber layer for solar cells. Absorber layers require a direct band gap energy of about ∼1.5 eV and an optical absorption coefficient of around 105 cm−1 so that they can be used for photovoltaic applications. The elements that constitute CZTS are abundant and CZTS is nontoxic, which makes it an ideal candidate to replace Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) and CdTe in solar cells, because the elements that constitute CIGS and CdTe are scarce and the materials themselves are toxic.21–24 In our previous work, we have found that CZTS thin films prepared by spin coating of the precursor solution containing thiourea showed a unique porous morphology.25 From further study on the thermal treatment of CZTS thin films, it was found that the scale of nanostructure of CZTS thin films was closely related with the sulfurization temperature. By controlling the sulfurization temperature, we have prepared 3D p–n junction CZTS solar cells with different nanostructure scales. We have investigated the photovoltaic properties of the 3D p–n junction solar cells and proposed a new model with p-type nanostructured material-based 3D p–n junction solar cells.
Three samples made from the solution process and a general vacuum process were systematically compared and a very different photocurrent flowing mechanism of our solution processed sample is proposed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first working and successful example where a nanostructured p-type chalcogenide absorber, CZTS, was used as a template for the formation of an inorganic 3D p–n solar cell. Owing to the direct formation of 3D p-type absorbers on a molybdenum coated substrate, the above-mentioned process temperature limit in typical 3D cells could be overcome. Nanoporous p-type CZTS thin films were first deposited on substrates and n-type CdS was uniformly deposited on the nanoporous CZTS thin films. For the preparation of nanoporous CZTS thin films, the precursor solution of CZTS was simply spin-coated on the substrate and thermally treated by a pre-annealing and sulfurization process. By manipulating the temperature of the pre-annealing and sulfurization process, nanoporous CZTS thin films with various nanograin sizes were automatically fabricated without the help of conventional 3D templates. For the formation of 3D p–n junction with CZTS absorbers, a CdS buffer layer was deposited on the nanoporous CZTS absorber by a simple chemical bath deposition (CBD) method, followed by ZnO sputtering. Because the deposition of CdS by the CBD method proceeds under 100 °C and does not require any additional high temperature treatment, conformal deposition of the CdS buffer layer on nanoporous CZTS is possible. In the case of solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells, the size of the CZTS nanograin was a determining factor for the photovoltaic properties of 3D p–n junction CZTS solar cells. The transport of minority carriers in the p–n junction between nanoporous CZTS and the CdS buffer layer is closely related with the size of the CZTS nanograin. Fabricated 3D p–n junction CZTS solar cells with CZTS nanograins below 100 nm showed about 5% power conversion efficiency (PCE), which is comparable with a conventional sputtered CZTS thin film solar cell.
Experimental
Nanoporous CZTS film preparation
The CZTS precursor thin films were spin-coated onto Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates. Copper(II) chloride (CuCl2) dehydrate (0.9 M), zinc chloride (ZnCl2) (0.7 M), tin(II) chloride (SnCl2) (0.5 M), and thiourea (4 M) were used as the source chemicals for the precursor solutions. They were completely dissolved in a mixture of deionized water and ethanol to produce the precursor solutions, which were subsequently spin-coated onto molybdenum-coated soda-lime glass substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s. The spin-coated CZTS precursor thin films were then baked on a hotplate at 350 °C for 5 min to pre-anneal them. The CZTS precursor thin films were spin-coated and pre-annealed twice more to produce suitably thick precursor films, which were then sulfurized at atmospheric pressure in a two-zone tubular furnace. The sulfur evaporated at 300 °C, and the sample zone was heated at 540 °C or 570 °C for 30 min. Ar carrier gas at atmospheric pressure was used in the quartz furnace to facilitate the flow of sulfur vapor, and both heating zones were naturally cooled to room temperature. In order to compare the morphological and photovoltaic properties of the porous CZTS absorber with the thin film CZTS absorber, the metal precursor for CZTS was deposited using 99.99% pure Cu (150 W DC power), SnS (200 W RF power), and ZnS (200 W RF power) sputtering targets with a stacking order of Cu/SnS/ZnS/Mo.26 The sulfurization process for metal precursor for CZTS was the same as the spin-coated CZTS precursor.
Solar cell fabrication
Chemical bath deposition was used to cover the obtained CZTS thin films with a 40 nm thick CdS buffer layer, and RF sputtering was used to sequentially deposit a 50 nm thick intrinsic ZnO layer and a 300 nm thick Al-doped ZnO layer on top of the buffer layer in order to fabricate solar cells. Thermal evaporation was then used to deposit a 500 nm thick Al collection grid on top of the device.
Characterization of nanoporous CZTS solar cells
We analyzed the CZTS thin films with various instruments to determine how the pre-annealing temperature affected the chemical composition and morphology of the films and the photovoltaic properties of the CZTS-based solar cells. The surface morphology and chemical composition of the CZTS thin films were observed using scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (Hitachi, SU8200) and transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM) (Hitachi, HF-3300) with a focused ion beam (FIB) system (Hitachi, NB5000). The crystalline structure of the CZTS thin films was observed using Raman spectroscopy. The photovoltaic properties of the solar cells were characterized using a source meter (Keithley, 2400) unit and a solar simulator (Newport, 94022A) to simulate 1.5 AM solar irradiation. EQE measurement was conducted using an incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement system (McScience, K3100). C-AFM is used for measurement of local currents and their mapping on the surface of the CZTS absorber layer. We used a commercial AFM (Nanofocus Inc., n-Tracer, Korea). The Pt/Ir coated-Si cantilevers (Nano sensor, resonance frequency ∼85 kHz, tip radius: <30 nm) were utilized at the contact mode. The local currents and topographic images were obtained simultaneously by applying an external sample dc bias with an amplitude of ±0.1 V.27,28 The Mo bottom electrode of the CZTS sample was connected to the voltage source in order to form conductive paths while the top surface connected to the Pt of the tip was grounded. The scanning rate was 0.5 Hz to obtain a clear topological signal. A constant force of 1 nN was applied onto a cantilever for the 5 × 5 μm2 scanning area. The wavelength of the AFM laser is 633 nm (Eg = 1.95 eV), which is higher than the band gap of CZTS (1.4 eV).
Results and discussion
In order to compare the morphology between nanoporous and thin film CZTS, SEM was used to examine the surface morphology of the spin-coated precursor thin film, the solution-processed nanoporous CZTS film and the sputtered CZTS thin film (Fig. 1). The spin-coated precursor thin film shows porous and rough surface morphology and contains many nanopores, which is not common for conventional precursor films used for preparing inorganic thin films. The unique nanoporous morphology of solution-processed CZTS is closely related with the removal of thiourea and metal chlorides during the high temperature pre-annealing process.25 The sulfurized CZTS precursor films prepared by spin-coating show nanoporous morphology, which comes from the porous morphology of the precursor film. In addition, during the sulfurization process of CZTS precursor films, the remaining carbon residue and metal chlorides are eliminated by high temperature treatment, which reinforces the porous structure of solution-processed CZTS thin films. However, the size of CZTS nanograins was found to be dependent on the sulfurization temperature of precursor films. In the case of 540 °C sulfurization, the nanoporous CZTS film shows many clusters of tiny CZTS nanograins below 100 nm. On the other hand, the nanoporous CZTS film sulfurized at 570 °C has a cluster structure composed of CZTS nanograins with 300–500 nm. The different sizes of CZTS nanograins of solution-processed CZTS thin films might be attributed to the different degrees of crystallization reaction of the precursor films according to the sulfurization temperature. In the case of high temperature sulfurization, sufficient thermal energy is provided to the precursor film and thus sufficient grain growth of CZTS is possible. Unlike solution-processed CZTS thin films, the sputtered CZTS thin film shows a typical morphology of the thin film absorber. The sputtered CZTS thin film shows a dense thin film structure with large CZTS grains above 1 μm. Compared with the sputtered CZTS thin film, solution-processed CZTS films show unique nanoporous and loose morphology due to the thermal degradation of the components remaining in the precursor films. In order to use CZTS thin films as absorber materials for solar cells, the chemical composition of CZTS thin films is a very important factor.29 In our work, EDS was used to analyze the chemical composition of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS thin films (Table S1†). All of the CZTS thin films show Cu-poor and Zn-rich chemical compositions, which is a well-known requirement for highly efficient CZTS solar cells. Spin-coated nanoporous CZTS films showed a relatively low Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn ratio compared with sputtered CZTS thin films. In order to investigate the distribution of chemical composition inside nanoporous CZTS thin films, auger electron spectroscopy (AES) of S540 was performed (Fig. S1†). In the full range of thickness of nanoporous CZTS thin films, the chemical composition of each element was constant. We also measured the XRD patterns of nanoporous CZTS thin films to confirm the crystalline structure (Fig. S2†). Both S540 and S570 showed peaks at 28.5, 33.0, 47.4, and 56.3°, corresponding to the single-phase kesterite CZTS structure (JCPDS 26-0575).
 Fig. 1  Top and cross-sectional SEM images of solution-processed precursor film, CZTS films sulfurized at 540 and 570 °C, and CZTS films prepared from sputtering process. 
In order to compare the thin film properties of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS, an atomic force microscopy (AFM) instrument was used (Fig. 2). For the comparison of grain structures of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS, an AFM was used to measure the surface roughness of CZTS thin films (Fig. 2(a)). While the sputtered CZTS thin film shows a root mean square (RMS) roughness of 44.52 nm, the solution-processed nanoporous CZTS film sulfurized at 540 and 570 °C shows RMS roughness of 59.12 and 158.21 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Topography and (b) local current map images of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS thin films under the positive voltage bias of 0.1 V. 
The higher surface roughness of solution-processed nanoporous CZTS films is closely related with the unique cluster structure of CZTS nanograins. For both nanoporous CZTS with 540 and 570 °C sulfurization, the surface roughness of nanoporous CZTS films seems to be similar to the size of CZTS nanograins. In order to elucidate the current flow through CZTS thin films, current maps of the nanoporous CZTS films with different nanostructure scales and a sputtered CZTS thin film were investigated by using conductive AFM (C-AFM). Fig. 2(b) shows current map images of the nanoporous CZTS films and sputtered CZTS thin films under positive voltage bias. All of the CZTS films show apparent current flows through grain boundaries in the CZTS films regardless of deposition methods. Kim et al. reported that minority carrier electrons form the current route in the GBs in the CZTSSe thin-films.30 Thus, the conduction channel near GBs can provide a path for the collected minority carriers. In the case of a nanoporous CZTS film with 540 °C sulfurization, it has many grain boundaries inside the CZTS film due to small CZTS nanograins, which can provide a pathway for the transportation of minority carriers. From these results, it was found that solution-processed and sputtered CZTS thin films showed similar current flow behavior under positive bias voltage and thus minority carrier transportation inside CZTS thin films might be closely related with the grain boundaries of the CZTS thin films.
Through pre-annealing and sulfurization process, it was possible to fabricate nanoporous CZTS films with different nanograin structures. In order to fabricate CZTS solar cells, a CdS buffer layer was deposited on the prepared nanoporous CZTS films using the CBD process, followed by sputtering of the ZnO window layer and evaporation of the Al top electrode. For the confirmation of p–n junction formation between nanoporous CZTS and CdS, TEM and EDX analyses of CZTS solar cells were conducted (Fig. 3). Cross-sectional TEM images of CZTS solar cells using solution-processed nanoporous CZTS films show cluster structures of CZTS nanograins and there are many voids inside the CZTS absorber, which was already confirmed by SEM images of Fig. 1. However, solar cells with a sputtered CZTS thin film show large and dense grain structure without any voids inside the CZTS absorber. In order to investigate the distribution of each component in the CZTS solar cell, EDX mapping was conducted for the elements of Cu, Zn, Sn, S, Cd, and Mo. From the EDX mapping images, solar cells prepared using solution-processed nanoporous CZTS films show a very unique distribution of Cd inside the device structure. In the case of conventional thin film CZTS solar cells, the CdS buffer layer was only deposited on the top surface of CZTS absorber uniformly. However, in the case of our nanoporous CZTS absorbers, CdS was uniformly distributed on every surface of CZTS nanograins, which is the inverse structure of the previously reported 3D solar cell, where p-type absorbers were formed on the 3D n-type materials. Regardless of the size of CZTS nanograin, CdS was evenly deposited on every nanograin of CZTS. Due to the highly porous morphology of solution-processed CZTS films, infiltration and formation of CdS on the CZTS surface during the CBD process seem to be possible and thus a 3D structured CZTS–CdS interface is formed. In the case of 540 °C sulfurization, the size of the CZTS nanograin is very tiny and the interfacial area is considerably larger than 570 °C sulfurization, which induces a thinner CdS buffer layer on CZTS nanograins. In addition, the size of the CZTS nanograin is closely related with the topology of the ZnO window layer. In the case of 540 °C sulfurization, the surface roughness of the CZTS absorber layer is not so severe, which was confirmed by AFM analysis. Therefore, the ZnO window layer is uniformly deposited on the CZTS absorber layer. However, the CZTS absorber with 570 °C sulfurization shows a rougher surface than 540 °C sulfurization and therefore the ZnO window layer is not uniform and shows a bumpy structure. The uneven structure of the ZnO window layer of CZTS with 570 °C sulfurization forms a many shunt pass of CZTS solar cells, which might deteriorate the solar cell performance considerably.
 Fig. 3  Cross-sectional TEM & EDS mapping images of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 and 570 °C sulfurization and thin films CZTS solar cells based on sputtering process. Every element is assigned one color (Cd: sky blue, Cu: green, Zn: purple, Sn: red, S: yellow). 
In order to investigate the photovoltaic properties of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells, the J–V curves of solar cells were measured (Table 1, Fig. 4). Solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization show a cell efficiency of 5.02%, which is superior to that of the sputtered CZTS solar cell. In spite of small nanograins and many voids inside nanoporous CZTS absorbers, nanoporous CZTS solar cells show equivalent performance to conventional sputtered CZTS solar cells. Though the open circuit voltage of porous CZTS is inferior to the sputtered CZTS, short circuit current and fill factor are superior to sputtered CZTS. However, solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 570 °C sulfurization show poor photovoltaic properties compared to that of 540 °C sulfurization; short circuit current in particular, is smaller than other samples. The significant difference in short circuit current might be closely related with the minority carrier transfer inside the p–n junction between the CZTS absorber and the CdS buffer layer. In the case of 540 °C sulfurization, the scale of the 3D p–n junction between CZTS and CdS is about 30–100 nm and the interfacial area between CZTS and CdS is extremely larger than a conventional thin film solar cell. Therefore, the minority carrier generated by the photons inside CZTS nanograins just needs to move only 100 nm to reach the CdS buffer layer, and thus efficient transfer of the photo-generated minority carrier is possible. However, in the case of the solution-processed nanoporous CZTS absorber with 570 °C sulfurization, the scale of the 3D p–n junction is about 300–500 nm and the minority carrier must travel to the CdS buffer layer over a much longer distance and thus secure transport of minority carriers between CZTS and CdS is not guaranteed. In addition, the nanoporous CZTS thin film with 570 °C sulfurization has larger porosity than 540 °C sulfurization, which might provide additional shunt paths, and thus the shorting issue could happen. This difference in minority carrier transport and the shorting issue might be closely related with the decreased short circuit current of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 570 °C sulfurization.
 Fig. 4  
J–V curves of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells. 
Table 1 
J–V curves of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells




 

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
sh (Ω)




S540
0.52
18.09
53.54
5.02
17.9
2082.0


S570
0.34
1.33
32.22
0.15
284.0
1913.4


Sputter
0.54
15.45
50.79
4.21
44.4
1222.7





Fig. 5 shows the EQE measurement data of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS solar cells. For all of the solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells, there was evident decrease of EQE below 550 nm compared to the sputtered CZTS solar cell, which might be attributed to the 3D structured CdS buffer layer located inside the nanoporous CZTS absorber. Unlike the conventional thin film CdS buffer layer, the interconnected CdS network is uniformly formed on CZTS nanograins and thus some part of absorbed sunlight with the same wavelength of CdS adsorption is absorbed by the CdS network, which induces the decrease of EQE below 550 nm. This unique detriment in the short wavelength region could be mostly reduced if we use wider band gap buffers like Zn(O,S). Fortunately, solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cell with 540 °C sulfurization shows additional light absorption over longer wavelengths compared with sputtered CZTS solar cells. Due to the 3D p–n junction between CZTS and CdS, easier transport of minority carriers generated in the deep region of CZTS absorbers is possible and thus the recombination of minority carriers at longer wavelengths is prevented. Therefore EQE at longer wavelengths is higher than that of the sputtered CZTS solar cells. In addition, a thick absorber film around 1.8 μm and a naturally formed porous structure could give rise to an enhanced light absorption at longer wavelengths as well. Contrary to nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization, solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 570 °C sulfurization show poor EQE regardless of the wavelength. The size of CZTS nanograins with 570 °C sulfurization is not sufficient to transport minority carriers through the interface between CZTS and CdS smoothly and thus most of the minority carriers might be involved in charge recombination. This charge recombination is well known to be the major cause of EQE deterioration of solar cells.
 Fig. 5  EQE data of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells. 
In the case of solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cells, the 3D structured p–n junction between the CZTS absorber and the CdS buffer layer is an important factor for determining the photovoltaic properties of CZTS solar cells. In order to investigate the diode properties of the 3D structured p–n junction, dark current density–voltage characteristics were measured with a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Fig. S3†). Solution-processed CZTS with 540 °C sulfurization shows a typical current density–voltage curve of the diode. However, solution-processed CZTS with 570 °C sulfurization shows poor diode characteristics. From this result, it was found that the diode characteristics of the p–n junction between CZTS nanograins and CdS buffer layer are significantly affected by the size of CZTS nanograins. In the case of solution-processed nanoporous CZTS, the quality of the CZTS absorber is inferior to vacuum-based CZTS absorbers due to the solvent or additives used for the preparation of the precursor solution. Therefore the diode characteristics of the p–n junction between CZTS nanograins and CdS is closely related with the scale of p–n junction structure and the size of the CZTS nanograin might be a crucial factor for determining the diode characteristics of the 3D p–n junction between CZTS and CdS.
In order to investigate the 3D p–n junction of nanoporous CZTS solar cells in detail, C–V curves of nanoporous CZTS solar cells and sputtered CZTS solar cells were measured (Fig. S4†).31 From the Mott–Schottky plots, the depletion width of p–n junction was calculated. While nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization showed a depletion width of 21.8 nm, sputtered CZTS solar cells showed 97.3 nm. The depletion width of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization corresponds to the size of CZTS nanograins. From this result, we can predict that the fully-depleted p–n junction between CZTS and CdS might be possible for nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization. In the case of sputtered CZTS, the depletion width of 97.3 nm is shorter than the full thickness of the CZTS absorber and thus the transportation of minority carriers generated in the deep region to the CdS layer might be difficult. Therefore photovoltaic properties of sputtered CZTS solar cells are inferior to nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 °C sulfurization. In the case of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 570 °C sulfurization, the measurement of an appropriate Mott–Schottky plot was impossible, which might be attributed to the poor p–n junction between larger CZTS grains and the CdS layer.
From previous data for nanoporous CZTS solar cells, it was found that the photovoltaic properties of 3D structured p–n junction solar cells are different from conventional thin film solar cells. Fig. 6 illustrates the mechanism of carrier transportation inside the CZTS solar cells. In the case of conventional CZTS solar cells, photo-generated minority carriers pass through the bulk CZTS absorber to the CdS buffer layer (Fig. 6(a)). The thickness of the CZTS absorber is about 600 nm and thus a sufficient diffusion length of the CZTS absorber is required to transport minority carriers smoothly. In this case, the high quality CZTS absorber prepared by the vacuum-based process is suitable. However, in the case of 3D structured p–n junction solar cell based on nanoporous CZTS (Fig. 6(b) and (c)), the transport of minority carrier is not determined by bulk CZTS absorber, but determined by the interfacial region between CZTS and CdS. Minority carriers generated from a lot of CZTS nanograins reach the interconnected CdS buffer layer and pass through the CdS buffer layer to the ZnO window layer. In this case, according to the size of CZTS nanograins, the diffusion length of minority carriers is determined. In the case of smaller CZTS nanograins below 100 nm (Fig. 6(b)), photo-generated minority carriers can easily reach the CdS buffer layer and the minority carriers move along the CdS buffer layer to the ZnO TCO layer. However, in the case of larger CZTS nanograins with 300–500 nm (Fig. 6(c)), photo-generated minority carriers must diffuse through CZTS nanograins with a longer distance compared to smaller CZTS nanograins and thus there is a higher possibility of charge recombination during the diffusion within CZTS nanograins. This dependence of diffusion length on the CZTS nanograin size is very similar to the strategy of previously reported 3D solar cells. In a previous study on the nanoscale p–n junction solar cells fabricated by using p- and n-type nanocrystals,31 it was reported that fully-depleted p–n junction solar cells showed improved photo-current compared with thick p–n junction devices. When excitons reach the vicinity of the depletion region from either of the layers, the electrons in the p-type material drift through the junction to the n-type layer; similarly, the holes in the n-type layer also drift to the p-type material due to the electric field at the junction. In the case of solution-processed nanoporous CZTS solar cell with 540 °C sulfurization, it could be possible to form a fully-depleted p–n junction between CZTS and CdS due to 3D p–n junction structures with several tens of nanometer scales. In addition, in the case of solution-processed CZTS, the quality of CZTS absorber is inferior to vacuum-based CZTS absorbers due to the solvent or additives used for the precursor solution preparation. Therefore the transport of minority carriers inside CZTS nanograins is limited and thus the distance to the CdS buffer layer might be a crucial factor for easier transportation of minority carriers. In the case of low quality absorber materials such as solution-processed CZTS, the 3D p–n junction between nanoporous CZTS with smaller nanograins and CdS is advantageous for achieving facile transportation of minority carriers in p–n junctions and high performance solar cells. Unlike what could be expected from a common-sense point of view, extremely small grain structured chalcogenides would be more beneficial than μm-sized chalcogenides in processes involving low quality absorbers.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of carrier transport in (a) conventional thin film CZTS solar cells, and nanoporous CZTS solar cells with (b) small and (c) large nanograins. 
In our work, by using a simple solution process, it was possible to fabricate 3D structured nanoporous p-type CZTS thin films. Our preparation method might be a meaningful guide for the facile fabrication of various nanoporous p-type materials, which would open new possibilities of 3D p–n junction solar cells based on 3D structured p-type materials. If the various previously reported n-type materials are applied to our proposed solution-processed nanoporous p-type materials, it will be possible to develop novel 3D p–n junction solar cell devices with high performance.
Conclusions
In this work, we have prepared unique 3D structured nanoporous p-type CZTS thin films using a simple solution process. The nanograin structure of nanoporous CZTS films was easily controlled by the sulfurization temperature of the CZTS precursor films. By deposition of an n-type CdS buffer layer onto the nanoporous CZTS film using a simple CBD process, it was possible to fabricate a 3D structured p–n junction between CZTS and CdS. Due to the nanoporous structure of the solution-processed CZTS thin film, an interconnected 3D network CdS buffer layer was uniformly formed on the nanoporous CZTS. Photovoltaic properties and diode characteristics p–n junction solar cells based on nanoporous CZTS films show strong dependence on the size of CZTS nanograins, which might be closely related with the diffusion of minority carriers through the interfacial region. In the case of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with CZTS nanograins below 100 nm, 5.02% PCE was achieved in spite of a smaller nanograin and many voids inside the CZTS absorber, which resembles the working mechanism of previously reported 3D p–n junction solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Korea (15-BD-05) and the New & Renewable Energy of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (no. 20123010010130).
Notes and references
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Z. Long, B. Sun and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2783 RSC .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 39, 583 Search PubMed .
E. W. McFarland and J. A. Tang, Nature, 2003, 431, 616 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rath, M. Bernechea, L. Martinez, F. P. G. Arquer, J. Osmond and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Stolle, T. B. Harvery and B. A. Korgel, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 160 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Z. Long, B. Sin and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2783 RSC .
T. Song, F. Zhang, X. Lei, Y. Xu, S. Lee and B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1336 RSC .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Kempa, R. W. Day, S. K. Kim, H. G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 719 CAS .
K. Sato, M. Dutta and N. Fukata, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6092 RSC .
Q. Zhang, S. Yodyingyong, J. Xi, D. Myers and G. Cao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1436 RSC .
M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, M. Kurokawa, K. Moriya and H. Uchiki, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 571, 98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Kwak, S. H. Han, T. G. Kim and Y. M. Sung, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 5297 CAS .
I. O. Acik, A. Katerski, A. Mere, J. Aarik, A. Aidla, T. Dedova and M. Krunks, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2443 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7788 CAS .
J. J. Scragg, P. J. Dale, L. M. Peter, G. Zoppi and I. Forbes, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, T. Nagatomo, D. Kawasaki, M. Nishio, Q. Guo, A. Wakahara, A. Yoshida and H. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1987 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Katagiri, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Park, S. J. Sung, D. H. Son, D. H. Kim, M. Gansukh, H. Cheong and J. K. Kang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9118 RSC .
K. J. Yang, J. H. Sim, B. Jeon, D. H. Son, D. H. Kim, S. J. Sung, D. H. Hwang, S. Song, D. B. Khadka, J. Kim and J. K. Kang, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl. DOI:10.1002/pip.2500 .
R. H. Shin, A. R. Jeong and W. Jo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 1313 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Shin, W. Jo, D. W. Kim, J. H. Yoon and S. Ahn, Appl. Phys. A, 2011, 104, 1189 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, Y. Fukui, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Kim, J. R. Kim, W. Jo, D. H. Son, D. H. Kim and J. K. Kang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Dasgupta, S. K. Saha and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: DETAILS. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02081f‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top and cross-sectional SEM images of solution-processed precursor film, CZTS films sulfurized at 540 and 570 °C, and CZTS films prepared from sputtering process.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Topography and (b) local current map images of solution-processed and sputtered CZTS thin films under the positive voltage bias of 0.1 V.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cross-sectional TEM & EDS mapping images of nanoporous CZTS solar cells with 540 and 570 °C sulfurization and thin films CZTS solar cells based on sputtering process. Every element is assigned one color (Cd: sky blue, Cu: green, Zn: purple, Sn: red, S: yellow).	 

 	Fig. 4  
J–V curves of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells.	 

S540	0.52	18.09	53.54	5.02	17.9	2082.0
S570	0.34	1.33	32.22	0.15	284.0	1913.4
Sputter	0.54	15.45	50.79	4.21	44.4	1222.7

 	Fig. 5  EQE data of nanoporous and thin film CZTS solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of carrier transport in (a) conventional thin film CZTS solar cells, and nanoporous CZTS solar cells with (b) small and (c) large nanograins.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: DETAILS. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02081f
‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
