Photoluminescence, optical gain, and lasing threshold in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 methylammonium lead-halide perovskites obtained by ab initio calculations  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC04717G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC04717G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12758-12768Photoluminescence, optical gain, and lasing threshold in CH3NH3PbI3 methylammonium lead-halide perovskites obtained by ab initio calculations

        
          
            A. 
            Filippetti
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Caddeo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Delugas
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            A. 
            Mattoni
          
        
      b
aDipartimento di Fisica, Università di Cagliari, Cittadella Universitaria, S. P. Monserrato-Sestu Km.0,700, Monserrato 09042-I (CA), Italy. E-mail: alessio.filippetti@dsf.unica.it
bConsiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche CNR-IOM Cagliari, Cittadella Universitaria, S. P. Monserrato-Sestu Km.0,700, Monserrato 09042-I (CA), Italy
cScuola Internazionale di Studi Superiori Avanzati SISSA, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 – Trieste, Italy
Received 
      16th October 2017
    , Accepted 20th November 2017First published on 21st November 2017AbstractUsing ab initio band energy calculations and van Roosbroeck–Shockley recombination theory, we model transient photoluminescence for lead-iodide CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites. We provide clear evidence that the most important features of the photoluminescence process, i.e. strong absorption, low recombination rates, and long lifetimes, can be all coherently derived from the band-to-band recombination process, and the sometimes invoked contradiction between strong absorption and low recombination rate in a direct band-gap material has no reason to exist; optical gain and charge carrier lasing threshold are also reproduced in satisfactory agreement with the observed values, at least within a significant charge-injection range. Our description provides a solid theoretical assessment to the widespread but debated idea that photoluminescence in these materials is predominantly produced by unbound charge recombination.
Introduction
Even though several years have passed since the discovery of hybrid lead-halide perovskites as low-cost, exceptionally efficient materials for photovoltaic solar cells,1–5 the peculiar qualities of these systems are still a matter of amazement and debate. Improvements in growth and processing have pushed the power conversion efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells up to above 20%.6 Furthermore, they are becoming subjects of rapidly growing interest for use in optoelectronic applications. The possibility to achieve amplified spontaneous emission in bulk MAPI was first demonstrated by Xing and coworkers,7 who reported a remarkably low lasing density threshold n ∼ 1.7 × 1018 cm−3. Later on, nanowire lasers of MAPI with extremely low threshold (n ∼ 1.5 × 1016 cm−3) and quantum yield approaching 100% was fabricated.8,9
For what concerns the fundamental understanding of the photoconversion mechanism, there is wide agreement on the fact that, for reasons still on the way to be fully understood, typical strong sources of carrier recombination such as excitons and carrier traps appear to be substantially ineffective at temperature and carrier densities of interest for the photovoltaic performance. In fact, although the excitonic peak is visible in the absorption spectra even at room temperature,10–14 photoluminescence (PL) experiments show that, under equilibrium conditions, the excitons are largely outnumbered by the electron–hole free carrier population10,15–18 and thus play a minor or discardable role in the recombination process. As for deep defect centers, advancements in growth and processing have produced single-crystals with defect densities as low as ∼1010 cm−3 and the corresponding lifetimes of hundred μs order,19,20 by far surpassing those reported for polycrystalline films used in solar cells, for which PL experiments indicate ∼1015–1017 cm−3 trap concentrations,10 depending on grain size21,22 and local microstructures.23,24 In fact, it appears that defects mainly accumulate at the interfaces, and mediate Shockley–Read–Hall recombination.25 On the other hand, the increasingly large VOC ∼ 1.2 eV26,27 almost nearing the intrinsic thermodynamic limit of 1.3 eV produced by free-charge radiative recombination28,29 indicates that defects are not so detrimental to photoconversion, probably because trap-mediated recombination in these systems is relatively slow.29,30 Recently, a suitable ligand passivation treatment was used to achieve PL lifetimes of 8 μs and quantum yields over 30% in polycrystalline films at solar fluency,31 indicating that even in films the ideal photoconversion limit is at hand.
Whatever the reason, the striking conclusion is that, within a wide region of injected carrier densities, MAPI is capable of converting radiation into electric power as a free-carrier, inorganic semiconductor.32 From this key assumption, the most remarkable qualities observed for MAPI can all be derived from each other: strong absorption cross section (α ∼ 105 cm−1, similar to GaAs), low recombination rates,10,12 hundred ns long lifetime,2,3,33 high PL quantum efficiency,34 high electronic mobility,35–41 and diffusion lengths of ∼μm order and beyond.2,3,19,20,33
Evidence of this behavior can be obtained from the ab initio calculated electronic properties, in combination with the van Roosbroeck–Shockley formulation of radiative recombination; this approach is ideally suited to link in sequence, within a unified theoretical framework, structural, electronic, optical, and recombination properties. In this work we present simulations for transient PL spectra, decay rates, optical gain and charge threshold for lasing, calculated within a wide range of injected charge densities for the room-T tetragonal phase of MAPI. A similar approach was previously applied to calculate electronic structures and current–voltage characteristics for a variety of MAPI structures.28 We notice that in the literature a presumed inconsistency between strong absorption and low recombination rate is sometimes stressed,42 which has led to invoke the need for more sophisticated mechanisms to justify the photoconversion performance of MAPI, such as the Rashba-induced indirect band gap43–46 or some kind of ferroelectric47–54 or piezoelectric55 order. While we do not deny that these effects could be eventually in action, our calculations show very clearly that the observed properties are straightforwardly derived for bulk MAPI described as a free-charge direct band-gap semiconductor. Our calculated PL is found in nice agreement with qualitative and even quantitative aspects of the measurements, at least in the density range for which charge trapping and excitons can be discarded. In particular, we quantitatively reproduce the transient photoluminescence as a function of the injected electron–hole population from the bimolecular to the saturation regime due to band filling, the short-time decay rate, the lasing threshold, and the optical gain. On a more conceptual side, our theoretical description of radiative recombination is a useful reference point to disentangle intrinsic and extrinsic contributions, which in the experiments appear to be unavoidably interlaced. In particular, we found that radiative contributions which violate the quadratic dependence on the injected charge (expected from purely parabolic band behavior and Boltzmann approximation) occur already at relatively low injection densities, and must be taken into account in order to be properly distinguished from actual trap-related non-radiative contributions.
Methodology
Theory of radiative recombination
A band-to-band recombination rate under charge injection can be calculated according to the formulation originally proposed by Van Roosbroeck and Shockley,56 and later generalized by Bhattacharya et al.57 to non-equilibrium conditions, thus not based on the detailed balance principle. The radiative recombination rate (i.e. spontaneous plus stimulated emission) from conduction to valence bands can be written as: (1)where ħω is the photon energy, and  and  are spontaneous and stimulated emission spectra, respectively; spontaneous emission, the focus of this work, is given by: (2)where vph(ħω) = c/nr(ħω) is the light velocity in the matter, α(ħω) and nr(ħω) are the absorption cross section and the refractive index, respectively, fc and fv are conduction and valence band occupancies, and  is the photon density of states: (3)
The band occupancies under charge injection are: (4)where μc and μv are electron and hole quasi-equilibrium Fermi energies,57 respectively, determined from the injected carrier density n according to: (5)Here EVBT and ECBB are the valence band top (VBT) and the conduction band bottom (CBB), respectively, and D(ε) is the electronic density of states (DOS). The difference μeh = μc − μv is the chemical potential of the electron–hole plasma, and measures the deviation from equilibrium due to external photoexcitation or electric bias. Finally, εc and εv in eqn (4) are conduction and valence electron energies, respectively; the determination of these energies from ħω = εc − εv is cumbersome, and would require heavy integrations in k-space. To make the calculation feasible, we adopt the following expression: (6)which is adequate to describe single-band transitions for not too different conduction and valence effective masses. It is worth noticing that in the low-injection regime, when both the parabolic band and Boltzmann approximations are valid, the charge density in eqn (5) goes back to the intrinsic expression  thus n becomes proportional to the carrier occupancy; in this limit, the recombination rate in eqn (2) is quadratic in n, and a purely bimolecular regime is reached.
From the spontaneous emission, the stimulated emission can be obtained as (7)where N(ħω) is an appropriate photon thermal occupancy which describes the external excitation. Since absorption and stimulated emission spectra have the same cross section, they can be obtained from one another by simply exchanging the valence and conduction band occupancies: (8)where the last expression to the right is obtained from the equation: (9)
Since for μeh ∼ 0 is fv(1 − fc) ∼ 1, from eqn (9) we see that i.e. in the low-injection regime, spontaneous photoemission grows exponentially with the electron–hole chemical potential; for μeh = 0, assuming N(ħω) as the Bose–Einstein distribution, it is easy to see from eqn (8) that for the cases of interest  thus . Furthermore, since in the limit of low injection fc(1 − fv) becomes independent of individual electron and hole energies, the use of eqn (6) for fc(1 − fv) gives an exact result.
An important property for lasing capabilities is the net photon generation rate, i.e. the difference between stimulation and absorption. From eqn (8) it follows: (10)(in this work  will be calculated taking N(ħω) as the Bose–Einstein occupancy). For μeh = 0 and N(ħω) equal to the Bose–Einstein occupancy, eqn (10) gives , thus recovering the detailed balance principle. Finally, from net emission we obtain the optical gain, i.e. the ratio between the net photon generation rate per unit volume and the photon flow rate per unit area: (11)
Like the absorption cross section, the optical gain has the dimension of an inverse length, and quantifies the fraction of photons generated in the matter in the unit length. A positive optical gain means an excess of stimulated emission with respect to the absorption, i.e. more photons created than absorbed by the photon flow in the unit volume. The optical gain is related to the optical power transmission P = P0eg×l across a sample of thickness l: for positive gain, more power comes out of the sample than that incident on it, while for negative gain, power is absorbed by the system. In eqn (11) we see that, for ħω > μeh,  and g(ħω) are always negative, i.e. absorption is larger than stimulated emission; on the other hand a positive g(ħω) requires ħω < μeh and in turn Egap ≤ μeh (inverse population condition) so that a region exists where Egap ≤ ħω ≤ μeh. In practice, the strict condition Egap ≤ μeh can be relieved if a Urbach tail is included in the absorption onset, as described later on. Note that under equilibrium conditions μeh = 0 and g(ħω) = −α(ħω), i.e. the optical gain is just the absorption cross section with the inverted sign.

Ab initio calculations
For the calculation of the atomic structure and electronic properties of MAPI we have used Density Functional Theory within Local Density Approximation (LDA), as implemented in the ESPRESSO package58 working in plane-wave plus ultrasoft pseudopotential59 basis set, with a cut-off energy of 35 Ry. For tetragonal MAPI at room-T we assume the I4/mcm symmetry given by Baikie et al.,60 with 48-atom unit cell parameters a = 8.851 Å, c = 12.444 Å. The internal atomic structure is fully relaxed, and the molecular orientation selected to correspond to the lowest-energy local minimum. The electronic properties are calculated without the inclusion of spin–orbit coupling and compensating Green-function correlation, described in detail by Umari and coworkers;61,62 in this way we take advantage of the fortuitous agreement between the LDA and the experimental band gap value, which is the key ingredient for the accurate description of the recombination properties. Furthermore, the spin–orbit coupling was revealed to induce the Rashba effect changing the band topology of MAPI into an indirect band gap system.43–46,62 At the LDA level, on the other hand, MAPI is described as a direct band-gap material, an aspect which is instrumental to the scope of this work, as explained in the Introduction. Optical functions (absorption and refraction index) are calculated within random phase approximation, thus neglecting many-body effects, according to the implementation present in the ESPRESSO code. This level of accuracy is adequate for the low charge injection regime (∼1019 cm−3) considered in this work. The same methodology was previously applied to investigate the optical,28 transport,41 and defect properties63 of MAPI. Concerning the calculation of recombination properties, we notice that integrating eqn (5) for injected charge density values as low as those typical of PL experiments is numerically cumbersome, and requires extremely accurate D(ε) near the band edge regions. In order to reach full convergence, we used ultra-dense 30 × 30 × 30 ab initio k-point grids for the DOS calculation, further interpolated using a linear tetrahedron method. Also crucial is the accurate k-space interpolation for the determination of the optical functions, for which a 40 × 40 × 40 ab initio k-point grid was employed, corresponding to the 4200 k-points in the Irreducible Brillouin Zone of the  tetragonal cell of MAPI.
Results and discussion
Electronic properties and quasi-equilibrium Fermi levels
It is well established that the electronic band structure of MAPI near the band edge is determined by extended Pb–I hybridized states. Specifically, for what concerns the room-T tetragonal structure considered in this work, the valence band top is a singlet of the mixed Pb (6s)–I (5p) character, while the conduction bottom is dominated by a single band of the Pb (6p) character. Our standard DFT-LDA calculations64 reproduce quite well the observed room-T band gap (1.615 eV in our calculation, ∼1.64 eV in experiments). The calculated Fermi energies are shown in Fig. 1 as a function of the electron–hole density; for what concerns electrons, μe touches the CBB at n = 6.8 × 1017 cm−3, and increases 106 meV and 220 meV above the CBB for n = 1019 cm−3 and n = 1020 cm−3, respectively. Thus, for a density up to 1019 cm−3 only a single conduction band is populated, while for higher densities, the flatter Pb 6p bands laying 190 meV above the CBB start to contribute as well. For holes, μh crosses the VBT for n = 2.5 × 1018 cm−3, and reaches −182 meV for n = 1020 cm−3. It is clear that only one hole band is populated across the examined charge density range. Thus, for injected densities up to 1019 cm−3 the recombination process essentially involves only two bands. On the other hand, deviations from the perfectly linear μe,h ∝ ln(n) regime appear already at n = 1017 cm−3; correspondingly, above this threshold we may expect deviation from the purely quadratic band-to-band recombination regime, in which conduction and valence bands are progressively filled at an equal rate.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical potential vs. injected charge density for electrons; (b) same quantity for injected holes. (c) Conduction band energies along the Γ–Z direction of the Brillouin zone in a narrow energy interval around the CBB; (d) valence band energies along Γ–Z in an interval around the VBT. The dashed curves juxtaposed to the bands are the Fermi occupancies at room temperature for the quasi-equilibrium electron and hole Fermi energies relative to the injected electron–hole plasma population indicated in the legend. 
Absorption and photoluminescence spectra
In Fig. 2 we show the calculated absorption and refraction index for the MAPI structure which, according to our calculations, are representative of the room-T tetragonal phase reported in the experiments.60 To compare the results with the available experiments, we also report the absorbance across an 800 nm thick film. While there is an overwhelming abundance of PL measurements in the literature, in the following we will mainly refer to the experiments mapping PL across a scansion of laser pulse fluency10,21 since directly comparable to the calculated PL as a function of injected charge density.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated absorption cross section for tetragonal MAPI. Inset: Calculated absorbance across a film of 800 nm thickness. (b) Calculated refraction index. (c) Calculated PL spectra for a range of injected charge densities indicated in the legend, renormalized to their peak values. The dashed black line is the starting PL0 measured by transient PL spectroscopy in ref. 10. Inset: Calculated non-renormalized PL spectra in the logarithmic scale. 
Two crucial aspects concerning the calculated absorption should be considered: first, for energies ε < Egap, we model α(ε) by an exponential Urbach tail, with Urbach energy EU = 15 meV, which is in line with what reported by the absorption measurements for MAPI.65 Second, our calculated absorbance underestimates the experimental value by about a factor two at the onset. This discrepancy is accounted for by the bound excitonic peak,10 which however becomes depopulated at room temperature after thermalization, as shown by fitting the PL decay rate into Saha's equation. The lack of excitonic contribution will not affect our results for transient PL, which is exclusively determined by the unbound electron–hole recombination.
In transient PL spectroscopy an electron–hole population is injected by a laser pulse, and then it quickly thermalizes at the band extremes. The starting PL spectrum (PL0) measured immediately after thermalization, i.e. before that slower non-radiative recombination processes are activated, quantifies the rate of radiative spontaneous emission per unit volume, thus it can be directly compared with the calculated  of eqn (1). The calculated spectra at T = 300 K for a range of representative injected charge densities are shown in Fig. 2c; the PL0 corrected for self-absorption measured in ref. 10 is also reported (dashed line). Apart for the slight blue-shift of the peaks due to the smaller band-gap of the calculations, the main qualitative features observed in the experiments are reproduced. For what concerns the dependence on the injected charge, no relevant changes are visible in the spectrum up to densities n ∼ 1017 cm−3, apart from a slight amplitude increment (see the inset of Fig. 2c). These spectra are all peaked right at the band gap value, and show a rather small width at half-maximum (∼0.07 eV = 32 nm); this implies sharp photoemission of high color purity and quality factor, which makes the system suitable for light emitting devices.7–9 From n ∼ 1018 cm−3 and above, the PL0 spectra become visibly deformed: the peak is up-shifted in energy, and remarkably widened. This change signals the increase of the electron–hole chemical potential to values approaching the band gap: for μeh ≥ Egap the peak position follows the chemical potential, and the width is increased by the spread of Fermi occupancies across larger energy regions. In practice these effects are not visible in the experiments since above n ∼ 1018 cm−3 other non-radiative decays (Auger) or monomolecular excitonic processes become important, and concur to keep μeh well below the band gap.
Integrated recombination rates
The quantitative comparison with the measured PL0 is obtained from the energy-integrated recombination rates as a function of the injected charge, together with the corresponding electron–hole chemical potential, calculated at T = 300 K (Fig. 3). The bimolecular coefficient (recombination rate per electron–hole couple) Brad = Rsp/n2 and the minority carrier lifetime τrad = n/Rsp are also shown. The chemical potential grows almost linearly with ln(n) and crosses the band gap for ninv = 1.41 × 1018 cm−3, which is the inverse population threshold; for higher densities μeh starts increasing faster. This threshold corresponds to a regime change in Rsp from quadratic to linear in n, which is also close to our calculated optical threshold for lasing, as discussed later on. Our calculated Rspvs. n reproduces well the PL0 as a function of laser pulse fluency reported in ref. 10, where the change from the bimolecular to the monomolecular regime is observed for n ∼ 2 × 1018 cm−3.
 Fig. 3  Calculated radiative recombination properties vs. injected charge density at T = 300 K. (a) Chemical potential of the electron–hole plasma; the red-dashed line indicates the band gap; the green-dashed line is the inverse population threshold. (b) Recombination rate; (c) radiative recombination lifetime; (d) bimolecular recombination coefficient. 
In the low-density regime we obtain radiative lifetime τrad ∼ μs, consistent with that reported for single crystals with ultra-low defect concentrations;19,20 with increasing density, τrad displays a linear decrease in the range between n ∼ 1014 cm−3 and n ∼ 1017 cm−3, and finally saturates to ∼ns values beyond n ∼ 1018 cm−3. In the linear regime our calculated τrad is fully consistent with the magnitudes reported in the literature,2,3 ranging from hundreds ns at n ∼ 1015 cm−3 to tens ns around n ∼ 1016 cm−3. Combined with mobility values ∼10–100 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 35–41) these radiative lifetimes lead to diffusion lengths ∼102–103 nm, matching the values extrapolated by PL experiments.2,3,19,20,33
The calculated Brad is roughly constant for n < 1016 cm−3, as expected in the quadratic regime; in this region Brad = 1.5 × 10−9 s−1 cm3 is in the ballpark of values extracted from PL measurements: 0.92 × 10−9 s−1 cm3 for meso-superstructured MAPI,36 0.6 × 10−9 s−1 cm3 and 3.2 × 10−9 s−1 cm3 for large and small crystallites of MAPI thin films21 (remarkably, Brad is about an order of magnitude smaller for Cl-doped MAPI10). Brad visibly falls for densities above n ∼ 1016–1017 cm−3, thus signaling a deviation from the purely parabolic band behavior, and nearly vanishes for n ∼ 1019 cm−3. In particular, in correspondence of ninv = 1.413 × 1018 cm−3 we obtain Brad = 0.55 × 10−9 s−1 cm3, which is about one third of Brad in the low-injection regime. The large variability of Brad with the charge density is remarkable, and can explain the large spread of estimates for Brad extracted from PL experiments. In fact, the charge density actually pumped in the sample is not easily determined, and may vary significantly with the experiment. Furthermore, assuming purely quadratic free-charge recombination above n ∼ 1017 cm−3, as usually done when fitting the PL onto the decay rate equation, can lead to ambiguous results for what concerns the disentanglement of radiative and trapping contributions.
The detailed analysis of recombination vs. charge density is reported in Fig. 4. For densities from 1014 cm−3 to ∼1017 cm−3 the calculated Rsp (black solid line) can be fitted quite well as a purely quadratic function of the carrier density (red dashed line), with the quadratic coefficient k2 matching well the low-density Brad. In the intermediate 1017 cm−3 to ∼5 × 1018 cm−3 region, a linear contribution arises, which becomes progressively more important; now Rsp can be fitted as k1n + k2n2 (green dashed line). In this region the linear term k1 = 2 × 108 s−1 corresponds to the lifetime 1/k1 = 5 ns, thus it is large enough to be compared to those measured in some PL experiments and assigned to non-radiative trapping.
 Fig. 4  Calculated spontaneous recombination (black lines) vs. injected electron–hole density n; each panel refers to a different density range. Red-dashed lines are purely quadratic fits, green-dashed lines fits including both linear and quadratic terms. Coefficients are reported in the corresponding panels. 
This highlights the need to properly include non-quadratic effects in the band-to-band recombination. As the density increases further, the quadratic term becomes smaller and smaller, until, above n ∼ 1019 cm−3 the behavior can be considered purely linear; in this limit, called saturation, we obtain ksat = 1.2 × 109 s−1 which is in perfect agreement with the PL0 extrapolation reported in ref. 10.
Photoluminescence decay rate
From the calculated Rspvs. n we can solve the radiative decay rate equation dn/dt = −Rsp(n(t)), and obtain the time-dependent charge density n(t) and photoluminescence PL(t) = Rrad(n(t)), reported in Fig. 5 for various charge densities at room temperature.
 Fig. 5  Charge carrier density and PL time decay calculated from the ab initio radiative recombination rate equation at room T for a range of injected carrier densities (reported in the legend of panel a). (a) Charge density; (b) photoluminescence; (c) decay rate and (d) lifetimes calculated as single-exponential fitting of n(t). Inset of panel (b): comparison of calculated (lines) and measured10 PL (black dots) in the 2 ns time window. 
We also report the decay rates  which indicate how fast the electron–hole couple recombines, and the radiative lifetime τrad(t) obtained as a single exponential fit to PL(t), i.e. writing PL(t) = PL(0)exp(−t/τrad) so that kPL(t) = 1/τrad(t); at t = 0 this τrad(t) goes back to the τrad = n/Rsp expression, although in practice the time dependence of τrad(t) shows that the single-exponential fitting is generally not sufficient to accurately interpolate PL over the long (200 ns) timescale.
The two regimes discussed for the static photoluminescence appear in the PL decay as well: at low density (n0 ∼ 1015–1016 cm−3) we are in a fully bimolecular regime: in the ns-time region the logarithm of PL(t) falls about linearly with time and can be approximately fit by a single-exponential decay rate (τrad ∼ 300 ns is roughly constant for n0 ∼ 1015). For densities above n0 = 1017 cm−3 a visible change occurs: we enter in a fast-recombination regime where both linear and quadratic dependences on charge density are present in the recombination rate; here the initial electron–hole population is reduced by several orders of magnitude in only a few tens of ns. Finally, above n0 = 1018 cm−3 the saturation region is reached: all the quantities plotted in Fig. 5 approach very quickly the high-charge density limit, in which the whole PL process becomes less and less dependent on the starting density.
In the inset of panel 2(b) we compare our calculated PL with the curves measured10 in the first 2 ns time window at equal nominal charge concentration; to filter out the arbitrariness of the PL intensity, a single parameter is used to rescale all the experimental curves. Striking agreement is visible, as far as early time decay is considered, at any concentration within the 1017–1019 cm−3 density range; some deviations occur at later times for densities of 1018 cm−3 and above, since in the experiment faster n3-order non-radiative Auger effects take place, quickly reducing the electron–hole density and slowing down the radiative recombination.
Finally, in Fig. 6 we display the PL decay rate at t = 0 as a function of the injected charge, which can be directly compared with the experiment. In the range n ∼ 1016–1018 cm−3 our calculated kPL ∼ 0.1 to 1 ns−1 agrees quite well with the measures reported in ref. 10. This is the charge density region with the maximum quantum yield, where recombination can be assumed as entirely determined by the radiative mechanism. For higher densities, on the other hand, the calculated kPL saturates to its maximum, while in the experiment a further exponential increase occurs, due to faster Auger recombinations.
 Fig. 6  Calculated (black squares) photoluminescence decay rate at t = 0 vs. injected charge density. Red stars are measured values from ref. 10. 
Optical gain and lasing threshold
Now we move to analyze in detail how band-to-band recombination behaves across the transition between direct and inverse population regimes. To this aim, in Fig. 7 net photoemission spectra and optical gain, calculated at T = 300 K, are plotted for a range of injected charge densities. Net photoemission  (Fig. 7a), i.e. the spectral difference between stimulated emission and absorption, is essentially the spontaneous photoemission modulated by an exponential factor (see eqn (9));  vanishes everywhere except within a small (∼±0.2 eV) region around the band gap. At low injection (n < 1017 cm−3, thus well within the direct population regime) the exponential factor gives negative sign, so that absorption is larger than emission at any energy; for large injection (n > 1018 cm−3, corresponding to the inverse population regime) the sign is positive, thus emission prevails through the whole energy range.
 Fig. 7  (a) Calculated net photoemission emission spectra of tetragonal MAPI for various injected charge densities indicated in the legend. (b) The corresponding optical gain; (c) the energy-integrated net photoemission as a function of injected charge density. The green vertical line highlights the zero-point net photoemission, corresponding to a charge density lasing threshold nlas = 1.443 × 1018 cm−3. 
For chemical potential close enough to the band gap, the net photoemission changes sign from positive for frequencies ħω < μeh (prevalence of stimulated photoemission) to negative for ħω > μeh (prevalence of absorption). We notice that the presence of a considerable spectral weight below the band gap follows from the inclusion of the Urbach tail in the absorption cross section, further amplified by the Bose thermal occupancy. Just like spontaneous emission, net photoemission has the advantage to be integrable over the frequency range; the integrated emission rate (Fig. 7c) provides a well-defined criterion to establish the carrier density threshold for lasing. The integrated net photoemission vanishes for a lasing threshold nlas = 1.44 × 1018 cm−3 which in practice matches the calculated inverse population threshold. This value is also in good agreement with the lasing threshold nlas ∼ 1.7 × 1018 cm−3 reported in experimental work.7
The calculated optical gain for MAPI is reported in Fig. 7b. We see that it is negative at any frequency for charge injection lower than the lasing threshold; above the threshold, optical gain becomes positive (i.e. emission is larger than absorption) in the frequency range ħω < μeh, for which amplified emission takes place. The major features for MAPI are qualitatively similar to those of other typical semiconductors operating in light amplification. We obtain gain peak values g = 1.24 × 103 cm−1 for n = 2 × 1018 cm−3 in correspondence to a wavelength λ = 768 nm; g = 5.75 × 103 cm−1 for n = 5 × 1018 cm−3 and λ = 756 nm; g = 1.02 × 104 cm−1 for n = 1019 cm−3 and λ = 747 nm. Optical gain peaks ∼103–104 cm−1 are well in the range of values obtained for bulk semiconductors66 and quantum wells.67
Conclusions
Using ab initio electronic properties and a generalized Van Roosbroeck–Shockley approach, we have calculated the photoluminescence-related properties of tetragonal MAPI for a range of injected charge densities, which is significant for photovoltaic and lasing applications. We assumed purely radiative band-to-band recombination, which is tantamount to completely discard excitonic and carrier-trapping monomolecular contributions, and treating MAPI as a free-carrier, direct-band gap semiconductor. The overall scenario depicted by the calculations is fully consistent, at the qualitative and even quantitative levels, with the outcomes of PL measurements, at least for charge densities within n ∼ 1016–1018 cm−3, where non-radiative carrier trapping and Auger effects can be reasonably discarded. In this region PL spectra, decay rates, and lifetimes, specifically for what concerns early time values (i.e. within 0–2 ns interval) are quantitatively reproduced by the calculations; optical gain and lasing threshold are also in satisfactory agreement with the measurements. Our analysis connects in straightforward relation the excellent photoconversion properties of MAPI with its nature of a free-carrier semiconductor, enabled by the surprising ineffectiveness of charge trapping in the recombination process. Furthermore, our results provide an accurate quantitative account of the recombination rate as a function of the injected charge density, thus overcoming the usually assumed parabolic band approximation and properly disentangling linear and quadratic contributions. This analysis may be a useful term of reference for more accurate PL fitting aimed at properly disentangling radiative and non-radiative recombination rates.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from MIUR through Project PON 04A2_0490 M2M NETERGIT and computational support from CINECA through ISCRA (projects MYPALLOY, UNWRAPIT) and PRACE initiatives (project UNWRAP) and from CRS4 Computing Center (Piscina Manna, Pula, Italy).
References
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron–Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron- and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic–Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential Deposition as a Route to High-Performance Perovskite-Sensitized Solar Cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, First-Principles Modeling of Mixed Halide Organometal Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902–13913 CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, High-performance photovoltaic perovskite layers fabricated through intramolecular exchange, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Low-temperature solution-processed wavelength-tunable perovskites for lasing, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X.-Y. Zhu, Lead halide perovskite nanowire lasers with low lasing thresholds and high quality factors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fu and P. Yang, Lower threshold for nanowire lasers, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Correlated electron–hole plasma in organometal perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Direct measurement of the exciton binding energy and effective masses for charge carriers in organic–inorganic tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, H. Su, R. A. Marcus and M. E. Michel-Beyerle, Computed and Experimental Absorption Spectra of the Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Absorption F-Sum Rule for the Exciton Binding Energy in Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, Photocarrier Recombination Dynamics in Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 for Solar Cell Applications, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Recombination Kinetics in Organic–Inorganic Perovskites: Excitons, Free Charge, and Subgap States, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Band filling with free charge carriers in organometal halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Excited State Properties of Hybrid Perovskites, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 166–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger and K. Katsiev, 
            et al., Low Trap-State Density and Long Carrier Diffusion in Organolead Trihalide Perovskite Single Crystals, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Electron–Hole Diffusion Lengths >175 μm in Solution-Grown CH3NH3PbI3 Single Crystals, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, A. R. S. Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, Tuning the light emission properties by band gap engineering in hybrid lead halide perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730–17733 CrossRef PubMed .
M. De Bastiani, V. D’Innocenzo, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Role of the crystallization substrate on the photoluminescence properties of organo-lead mixed halides perovskites, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081509 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, A. R. S. Kandada, J. M. Frost, A. J. Barker, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini, S. Marras, G. Lanzani, A. Walsh and A. Petrozza, Role of microstructure in the electron–hole interaction of hybrid lead halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 695–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Photo-induced halide redistribution in organic–inorganic perovskite films, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Optical determination of Shockley–Read–Hall and interface recombination currents in hybrid perovskites, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, J. Jacobsson, A. R. S. Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Highly efficient planar perovskite solar cells through band alignment engineering, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928 CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. Tress, K. Domanski, E. H. Anaraki, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, B. Roose, P. P. Boix, M. Grätzel, M. Saliba, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Identifying and suppressing interfacial recombination to achieve high open-circuit voltage in perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1207–1212 CAS .
A. Filippetti, P. Delugas and A. Mattoni, Radiative Recombination and Photoconversion of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite by First Principles: Properties of an Inorganic Semiconductor within a Hybrid Body, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24843 CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Carrier trapping and recombination: the role of defect physics in enhancing the open circuit voltage of metal halide perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472 CAS .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics: Charge-Carrier Recombination, Diffusion, and Radiative Efficiencies, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. Koch, S. Burke, R. K. Paranji, A. J. Shropshire, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, Photoluminescence Lifetimes Exceeding 8 μs and Quantum Yields Exceeding 30% in Hybrid Perovskite Thin Films by Ligand Passivation, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bongiovanni and J. L. Staehli, Density dependence of electron–hole plasma lifetime in semiconductor quantum wells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 9861–9864 CrossRef .
Y. Li, W. Yan, Y. Li, S. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Bian, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Direct Observation of Long Electron–Hole Diffusion Distance in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Thin Film, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, High Photoluminescence Efficiency and Optically Pumped Lasing in Solution-Processed Mixed Halide Perovskite Semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Semiconducting tin and lead iodide perovskites with organic cations: phase transitions, high mobilities, and near-infrared photoluminescent properties, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, High Charge Carrier Mobilities and Lifetimes in Organolead Trihalide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Savenije, C. S. Ponseca, Jr., L. Kunneman, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, Y. Tian, Q. Zhu, S. E. Canton, I. G. Scheblykin, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev and V. Sundström, Thermally Activated Exciton Dissociation and Recombination Control the Carrier Dynamics in Organometal Halide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2189–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, Improved Understanding of the Electronic and Energetic Landscapes of Perovskite Solar Cells: High Local Charge Carrier Mobility, Reduced Recombination, and Extremely Shallow Traps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818–13825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites: low-cost semiconductors with intriguing charge-transport properties, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karakus, S. A. Jensen, F. D’Angelo, D. Turchinovich, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, Phonon–Electron Scattering Limits Free Charge Mobility in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4991–4996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, A. Mattoni, C. Caddeo, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, Low Electron-Polar Optical Phonon Scattering as a Fundamental Aspect of Carrier Mobility in Methylammonium Lead Halide CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15352–15362 RSC .
T. Wang, B. Daiber, J. M. Frost, S. A. Mann, E. C. Garnett, A. Walsh and B. Ehrler, Indirect to direct bandgap transition in methylammonium lead halide perovskite, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 509–515 CAS .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Relativistic quasiparticle self-consistent electronic structure of hybrid halide perovskite photovoltaic absorbers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
E. M. Hutter, M. C. Gélvez-Rueda, A. Osherov, V. Bulovic, F. C. Grozema, S. D. Stranks and T. J. Savenije, Direct–indirect character of the bandgap in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 115–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Azarhoosh, S. McKechnie, J. M. Frost, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Research Update: Relativistic origin of slow electron–hole recombination in hybrid halide perovskite solar cells, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 091501 CrossRef .
S. Hu, H. Gao, Y. Qi, Y. Tao, Y. Li, J. R. Reimers, M. Bokdam, C. Franchini, D. Di Sante, A. Stroppa and W. Ren, Dipole Order in Halide Perovskites: Polarization and Rashba Band Splittings, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23045–23054 CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Su, M. Shen, Z. Dai, L. Zhang, X. He, W. Cheng, M. Cao and G. Zou, Enlarging photovoltaic effect: combination of classic photoelectric and ferroelectric photovoltaic effects, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2109 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kutes, L. Ye, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, B. D. Huey and N. P. Padture, Direct observation of ferroelectric domains in solution-processed CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3335–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stroppa, D. Di Sante, P. Barone, M. Bokdam, G. Kresse, C. Franchini, M. H. Whangbo and S. Picozzi, Tunable ferroelectric polarization and its interplay with spin–orbit coupling in tin iodide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Butler, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Ferroelectric materials for solar energy conversion: photoferroics revisited, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 838 CAS .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. Wang and A. M. Rappe, Ferroelectric Domain Wall Induced Band-Gap Reduction and Charge Separation in Organometal Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stroppa, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis and S. Picozzi, Ferroelectric Polarization of CH3NH3PbI3: A Detailed Study Based on Density Functional Theory and Symmetry Mode Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2223–2231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, P. Delugas, M. I. Saba and A. Mattoni, Entropy-Suppressed Ferroelectricity in Hybrid Lead-Iodide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Govinda, B. P. Kore, M. Bokdam, P. Mahale, A. Kumar, S. Pal, B. Bhattacharyya, J. Lahnsteiner, G. Kresse, C. Franchini, A. Pandey and D. D. Sarma, Behavior of Methylammonium Dipoles in MAPbX3 (X = Br and I), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4113–4121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Coll, A. Gomez, E. Mas-Marza, O. Almora, G. Garcia-Belmonte, M. Campoy-Quiles and J. Bisquert, Polarization Switching and Light-Enhanced Piezoelectricity in Lead Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1408–1413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Van Roosbroeck and W. Shockley, Photon-Radiative Recombination of Electrons and Holes in Germanium, Phys. Rev., 1954, 94, 1558–1560 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhattacharya, B. Pal and B. Bansal, On conversion of luminescence into absorption and the van Roosbroeck–Shockley relation, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 222103 CrossRef .
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari and R. M. Wentzcovitch, QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simulations of materials, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Vanderbilt, Soft self-consistent pseudopotentials in a generalized eigenvalue formalism, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 41, 7892 CrossRef .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, Synthesis and crystal chemistry of the hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3)PbI3 for solid-state sensitised solar cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Relativistic GW Calculations on CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3SnI3 Perovskites for Solar Cell Applications, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Mosconi, P. Umari and F. De Angelis, Electronic and optical properties of MAPbX3 perovskites (X = I, Br, Cl): a unified DFT and GW theoretical analysis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27158–27164 RSC .
P. Delugas, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Methylammonium fragmentation in amines as source of localized trap levels and the healing role of Cl in hybrid lead-iodide perovskites, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045301 CrossRef .
A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Hybrid perovskites for photovoltaics: Insights from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125203 CrossRef .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, Organometallic Halide Perovskites: Sharp Optical Absorption Edge and Its Relation to Photovoltaic Performance, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Shaklee, R. E. Nahory and R. F. Leheny, Optical Gain in Semiconductors, J. Lumin., 1973, 7, 284–309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and N. Tansu, Optical Gain and Laser Characteristics of InGaN Quantum Wells on Ternary InGaN Substrates, IEEE Photonics J., 2013, 5, 2600111,  DOI:10.1109/JPHOT.2013.2247587 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical potential vs. injected charge density for electrons; (b) same quantity for injected holes. (c) Conduction band energies along the Γ–Z direction of the Brillouin zone in a narrow energy interval around the CBB; (d) valence band energies along Γ–Z in an interval around the VBT. The dashed curves juxtaposed to the bands are the Fermi occupancies at room temperature for the quasi-equilibrium electron and hole Fermi energies relative to the injected electron–hole plasma population indicated in the legend.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated absorption cross section for tetragonal MAPI. Inset: Calculated absorbance across a film of 800 nm thickness. (b) Calculated refraction index. (c) Calculated PL spectra for a range of injected charge densities indicated in the legend, renormalized to their peak values. The dashed black line is the starting PL0 measured by transient PL spectroscopy in ref. 10. Inset: Calculated non-renormalized PL spectra in the logarithmic scale.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated radiative recombination properties vs. injected charge density at T = 300 K. (a) Chemical potential of the electron–hole plasma; the red-dashed line indicates the band gap; the green-dashed line is the inverse population threshold. (b) Recombination rate; (c) radiative recombination lifetime; (d) bimolecular recombination coefficient.	 

 	Fig. 4  Calculated spontaneous recombination (black lines) vs. injected electron–hole density n; each panel refers to a different density range. Red-dashed lines are purely quadratic fits, green-dashed lines fits including both linear and quadratic terms. Coefficients are reported in the corresponding panels.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge carrier density and PL time decay calculated from the ab initio radiative recombination rate equation at room T for a range of injected carrier densities (reported in the legend of panel a). (a) Charge density; (b) photoluminescence; (c) decay rate and (d) lifetimes calculated as single-exponential fitting of n(t). Inset of panel (b): comparison of calculated (lines) and measured10 PL (black dots) in the 2 ns time window.	 

 	Fig. 6  Calculated (black squares) photoluminescence decay rate at t = 0 vs. injected charge density. Red stars are measured values from ref. 10.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Calculated net photoemission emission spectra of tetragonal MAPI for various injected charge densities indicated in the legend. (b) The corresponding optical gain; (c) the energy-integrated net photoemission as a function of injected charge density. The green vertical line highlights the zero-point net photoemission, corresponding to a charge density lasing threshold nlas = 1.443 × 1018 cm−3.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
