Covalent organic frameworks based on Schiff-base chemistry: synthesis, properties and potential applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00878F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00878F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5635-5671Covalent organic frameworks based on Schiff-base chemistry: synthesis, properties and potential applications

        
          
            José L. 
            Segura
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            María J. 
            Mancheño
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Félix 
            Zamora
          
          
        
      *bc
aDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Avenida Complutense s/n 28040, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: segura@ucm.es
bDepartamento de Química Inorgánica and Condensed Matter Physics Center (IFMAC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain. E-mail: felix.zamora@uam.es
cInstituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados en Nanociencia (IMDEA Nanociencia), Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
Received 
      27th November 2015
    First published on 24th June 2016AbstractCovalent organic-frameworks (COFs) are an emerging class of porous and ordered materials formed by condensation reactions of organic molecules. Recently, the Schiff-base chemistry or dynamic imine-chemistry has been widely explored for the synthesis of COFs. The main reason for this new tendency is based on their high chemical stability, porosity and crystallinity in comparison to previously reported COFs. This critical review article summarizes the current state-of-the-art on the design principles and synthetic strategies toward COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry, collects and rationalizes their physicochemical properties, as well as aims to provide perspectives of potential applications which are at the forefront of research in materials science.
José L. Segura
José L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry at the UCM in Madrid working in Organic materials. After a stay in W. Dailey's group (Univ. Pennsylvania) he performed postdoctoral stays in the groups of M. Hanack (Univ. Tübingen) F. Wudl (UCSB, USA), and P. Bäuerle (Univ. Ulm). In 1995 Prof. Segura joined the faculty at the Complutense University in Madrid where he is leading the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials. Current research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of molecular and macromolecular electroactive systems for optoelectronics. The results have been published in more than 145 scientific contributions.
María J. Mancheño
Ma José Mancheño received her BA degree from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM) in Chemistry. In 1993 she obtained her PhD degree in Organic Chemistry from the same university. After a post-doctoral stay at the University of Maryland, she was appointed as lecturer in Organic Chemistry and after National Habilitation, she earned her actual position as Associate Professor. Her research interest is focused in different areas as organic photochemistry, organometallics and more recently, in materials chemistry.
Félix Zamora
Félix Zamora was born in 1967 in Cuenca (Spain). In 1994 he obtained his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. He moved to the University of Dortmund (Germany) to work with Professor B. Lippert. He is currently “Profesor Titular” at the Inorganic Chemistry Department at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, associate research at IMDEA Nanocience and IFIMAC. He is the author of more than 130 papers on chemistry and material science. From 2004 he focused his research on new low-dimensional nanomaterials with electrical properties based on metal–organic and covalent organic frame works (http://www.nanomater.es). In 2015 he has been awarded with “Excellent in Research by BASF” prize by the Spanish Royal Society.
1. Introduction
Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) comprise an emerging class of materials based on the atomically precise organization of organic subunits into two- or three-dimensional porous crystalline structures connected by strong covalent bonds with predictable control over composition, topology and porosity.1–6,7 Although they have been first explored for applications related to gas adsorption and storage,1,3,5,6,8–12 the suitable incorporation of new functional building blocks has opened up new potential uses as advanced materials including their application in catalysis, as ultrasensitive sensors, in the fabrication of solar energy collectors and optoelectronic devices, and in clean energy applications.2,4,11,13–16
Most of the interesting applications found for COFs are associated with their internal order, which is a rather unusual feature in comparison to that found in classical covalent polymers, in which the linkage between the organic subunits is due to irreversible covalent bonds that tend to form polymeric structures with a short-range structural order.17 Synthesis of COFs relies on reversible covalent-bond-forming reactions, such as condensations that furnish boroxines or imines. It seems that only the reversible reactions are appropriate for the assembly of crystalline COF structures. Therefore, the concept of dynamic covalent chemistry of imine bonds is a useful approach. However, reversibility does not guarantee structural order. In order to avoid the formation of amorphous structures, other general features such as the rigidity in structure and the symmetric multi-connectivity meet the requirement for constructing the regular pores of COF materials. The match of both shapes and angles of the building units should be taken into account for the reversible formation of covalent bonds. Finally, finding suitable synthetic conditions for COF synthesis is by no means a trivial issue.18 Thus, energetic synthetic reaction conditions and/or long reaction times seem to favour the thermodynamic control of COF formation and allow the error correction and crystallization. However, the control of the concentration of the reactants, water and the catalyst is also crucial.
Thus, an important challenge in the production of COFs deals with the selection of suitable reactions that permit the regulation of the thermodynamic equilibrium during bond formation thus allowing self-correction and formation of thermodynamically stable crystalline architectures. The building blocks should contain reactive groups that trigger dynamic covalent bond formation. In addition, the building blocks should be conformationally rigid with the bond formation direction being discrete. Furthermore, special conditions such as, for example, solvothermal reaction conditions (see below) are very often required in order to obtain crystalline materials.
The majority of the COFs synthesized to date are based on condensation reactions.19 Among them, the self-condensation reactions of boronic acids and their condensation with catechols to form boronate esters have been largely explored. Although they are thermally robust, this type of COFs are susceptible to attack and are even hydrolysed under basic and acidic conditions and sometimes even by water vapour in air.20
In general, the number of reactions that fulfils the above mentioned criteria for the formation of thermodynamically stable crystalline architectures is still very limited. Very recently, the use of Schiff-base chemistry or dynamic imine-chemistry has been profusely used for the synthesis of covalent organic-frameworks (COFs). The literature collected in this review article shows that COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry present the following features: (i) they have been prepared in a variety of experimental conditions, including reactions carried out at room temperature; (ii) there are a large variety of molecular precursors that have been successfully used (Fig. 1); (iii) they can be processed and deposited on several substrates; (iv) these materials show enhanced chemical stability among other COFs; and (v) they have already showed a large variety of interesting physico-chemical properties and potential applications.
 Fig. 1  Building blocks used for the synthesis of COFs via Schiff-base chemistry categorized into geometries and reactive groups. 
The aim of this review is to provide an in-depth understanding of the different synthetic strategies successfully used for the production of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry, providing key aspects to improve their crystallinity and porosity, as well as to summarize the different ways to incorporate selected functional groups in their structure, and the studies of their properties and potential used in different areas.
At this stage it is worth pointing out that Fig. 1 will be used to guide the reader throughout the text in which the different COFs reviewed will be related to the constituting building blocks used for their synthesis and collected in this Figure.
2 Synthetic methods
COFs based on Schiff base-type linkages have emerged as a new class of materials with multiple applications, mainly due to their stability in different media.21,22 They are pre-designable in terms of the molecular building blocks employed.
To date, a significant amount of stable two-dimensional (2D) COFs and a few 3D COFs with different topologies have been synthesized. In 2D-COFs the stability originates from two factors: the bonding strength between components of the 2D layers and the interlayer force. Although many building blocks and synthetic methods have been used, finding suitable synthetic conditions for the COF synthesis is not easy. Usually, the solvothermal synthesis is the method most extensively used for the production of stable, crystalline COFs. Nevertheless, other methods have also been recently explored including mechanochemical and microwave-assisted reaction conditions as well as methods for growing COFs onto surfaces. Herein the progress in the synthesis of this specific class of COFs is summarized (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the dynamic chemical reactions used for the preparation of COFs via Schiff-base chemistry. 
2.1 Solvothermal reaction conditions
The vast majority of COFs obtained via Schiff-base Chemistry have been prepared by using solvothermal reactions which involve harsh experimental conditions such as reaction in a sealed Pyrex tube under an inert atmosphere and long reaction times. It often takes several days and requires heating at high temperature (usually 120 °C). Finding the appropriate temperature is one of the key parameters in order to ensure the reversibility of the reaction. Generally, COFs obtained via Schiff-base Chemistry have been prepared at temperatures ranging between 85 and 120 °C. However, the pressure inside the sealed vessel is only indicated in a few cases (autogenous pressure). In addition, solvent combinations and ratios chosen for the condensation reactions seem to be crucial in order to obtain COFs with enhanced crystallinity. Usually, a battery of solvents are initially tested to optimize the reaction conditions. We will summarize below the solvothermal reaction conditions used for the different types of Schiff-base linkages formed so far.

2.1.1 Imine linkages. 
Imine-based COFs constitute the largest amount of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry. In general, they are quite stable in most organic solvents and insensitive to water, acidic and basic conditions. The nitrogen atoms within the framework may be coordinated with a series of metal ions. These features provide the imine-based COFs with high potential in further development, especially for diverse applications, as we will review in the second part of this article. For imine condensation reactions, mixtures of mesytilene/dioxane/AcOH are profusely used as the most suitable combination of solvents. Other mixtures such as dioxane–aqueous acetic acid and n-BuOH/o-DCB/3 M AcOH have also been employed extensively. The catalyst, typically AcOH, plays a central role in the formation process.
In order to enhance the chemical stability and crystallinity in 2D-COFs, some authors protect the inner part of the COF by introducing –OH functionalities adjacent to the Schiff-base centres (CN), creating an intramolecular O–H⋯NC hydrogen bond. Thus, stability, crystallinity and porosity can be tuned by using this modification.23,24
The H-bonding interactions also play an important role in the construction of the layered framework in 2D-COFs. Thus, due to these complementary forces, in the synthesis of [C4 + C2] COFs such as DhaTph (Fig. 2), the torsion of the edge units is suppressed and the tetragonal 2D sheets are locked in a planar conformation, enhancing the interlayer interactions. These intramolecular hydrogen bonds, along with the trans –CN bond, reduce structural defects, and enhance structural rigidity, leading to an improved crystallinity of the COF.25
 Fig. 2  (a) Syntheses of DhaTph by the condensation of square planar TAPP (47) building unit and linear DHTA (3) building DhaTph unit. (b) Graphical view of the porous framework of COF DhaTph in a stacking form. (c) Eclipsed stacking model of COF. (d) ORTEP diagram of the DhaTph linker unit shows the presence of the intramolecular hydrogen bond; all atoms are in one plane. Figure extracted from ref. 25. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Thus, the chemically stable hollow spherical COF (DhaTab) has been synthesized from 2,5-dihydroxy-terephthalaldehyde (DHTA, 3) and 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin (TAPP, 47) via self-templated synthesis, making use of H-bonding interactions too. The high crystallinity of the COF formed is due, again, to the presence of intramolecular hydrogen bonding interactions between the hydroxyl and imine functional groups, which locks the phenyl rings in one plane and improves the stacking interaction between the adjacent COF layers.26
In addition to H-bonding, the integration of other forces, such as π–π or van der Waals interactions might provide control over porosity, stability and crystallinity of COFs, although π–π interactions seem not to be necessary to obtain crystalline materials, as is reported in triptycene based COFs.27 Thus, Jiang and col. described imine-linked porphyrine COFs with fluoro-substituted arenes integrated into the edge units at different molar ratios, as a way of managing interlayer interactions based on self-complementary π-forces.28 The same authors have also developed a strategy to soften the polarization influence of the CN bond on the destabilization of the layered structure in hexagonal 2D-COFs based on imine reactions.29 In imine-linked COFs, the CN bond is polarized to yield partially positively charged carbon and negatively charged nitrogen. Thus, in a hexagonal 2D-COF, each macrocycle consists of 12 polarized CN segments; the aggregation of a large number of charged groups causes electrostatic repulsion and destabilizes the layered structure, as predicted theoretically.30 Therefore, in this case, crystallinity and stability were enhanced by incorporating methoxy groups in the pore walls of COFs. Introducing the two electron donating methoxy groups to each phenyl edge delocalizes the two lone pairs from the oxygen atoms over the central phenyl ring, which reinforces the interlayer interactions and so stabilizes the COF and aids in its crystallization (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of TPB-DMTP-COF through the condensation of DMTA (4, blue) and TPBA (36, black). Inset: the structure of the edge units of the TPB-DMTP-COF and the resonance effect of oxygen lone pairs that weaken the polarization of the CN bonds and soften the interlayer repulsion in the COF. 
On the other hand, the use of macrocyclic host derivatives with a shallow rigid cavity as triformylcyclotrianisylene (f-CTV, 34), a derivative of the well-known cyclotriveratrylene (CTV), seems to stabilize the perfect eclipsed stack model rather than COFs based on planar motifs. The columnar stacking of crown CTV motifs avoids sliding between layers in CTV-COFs.31
Regarding the size and shape of pores in 2D-COFs, it is known that they can be well tailored by changing the structures of monomers.4,5,20,32 In general, COFs with hexagonal and tetragonal topologies are by far the most extensively investigated. However, modifications of these topologies can induce structural changes in the COFs. Hence, COFs with a trigonal topology have been rationally designed by using C6-symmetrical vertices as hexaphenylbenzene (HPB) and hexabenzocoronene (HBC), thus providing small pore sizes and high π-column densities.33
A very challenging task involves the introduction of different kinds of pores into a COF, as it is extremely hard to simultaneously control the formation of two pores bearing different sizes. Furthermore, polymorphism might arise, which usually results in several topological structures at the same time. To address this challenge, the delicate design of monomers is required. In this respect, Zhao et al. have recently synthesized a novel COF which bears two different kinds of ordered pores with controllable sizes: one in the microporous range (7.1 Å) and the other in the mesoporous range (27 Å) via one-step synthesis. The dual-pore 2D-COF has been designed by a combination of D2h symmetric and C2 symmetric monomers, resulting in a single structure due to thermodynamic control (Scheme 3).34
 Scheme 3  Synthesis and structure of a dual-pore 2D-COF. 
Finally, although many examples of 2D imine based COFs have been described, the development of three-dimensional (3D) analogues is still in its infancy. In 2009, Yaghi et al. described the first crystalline permanent porous 3D framework material with a diamond-like structure by condensation reaction between tetra-(4-anilyl)methane (51) and terephthaldehyde (1).10 Interestingly, 3D-COFs obtained by reaction between tetra-(4-anilyl)methane (51) and 4,4′-biphenyldialdehyde (12a) have allowed the determination of their crystal structure by using the rotation electron diffraction (RED) method for data collection.35 More recently, two new 3D microporous based functionalized COFs have been obtained by combining a tetrahedral alkylamine (1,3,5,7-tetraaminoadamantane (TAA, 52)) with triangular aldehyde reaction partners (1,3,5-triformylbenzene, TFB, (27) or triformylphloroglucinol (28)) under solvothermal reaction conditions.36 These contributions pave the way for the development of new 3D-COFs by their rational design with pores and windows of different sizes.
An outstanding 3D COF has been recently reported by Yaghi et al.37 (Fig. 3) consisting of helical organic threads, designed to be mutually weaving at regular intervals. The preparation was carried out by imine condensation reactions of aldehyde functionalized copper(I)-bisphenanthroline tetrafluoroborate, Cu(PDB)2(BF4), and benzidine. The copper centres are topologically independent of the weaving within the COF structure and serve as templates for bringing the threads into a woven pattern, rather than the more commonly observed parallel arrangement. The Cu(I) ions can be reversibly removed, by heating the material in KCN methanol–water solution, and added without loss of the COF structure, for which a tenfold increase in elasticity accompanies its demetallation. Interestingly, the threads in COF-505 have many degrees of freedom for huge deviations to take place between them, throughout the material, without undoing the interlacing of the overall structure.
 Fig. 3  (A) Scheme for the synthesis of COF-505 built from organic threads using copper(I) as a template to make an extended weaving structure, which can be subsequently demetalated and remetalated; (B) illustration of weaving of threads in three dimensions. From Science, 2016, 351, 365–369. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
Very recently, a first study on the mechanism of imine-linked 2D-COF formation has shown that the crystallinity of a simple COF formed by condensation between TAPB (36) and PDA (1) in 4:1 dioxane:mestiylene at 70 °C for 3 days strongly depends on the water and glacial acetic acid concentrations. Thus, the network crystallizes to the 2D-COF under conditions that allow imine exchange, and does not require the presence of additional imine or aldehyde monomers. The ability of imine networks to undergo this transformation highlights the importance of maximizing imine exchange and providing the system with sufficient reaction time. This seminal study points out the importance to gain knowledge in the understanding of COF formation processes.18


2.1.2 Hydrazone linkages. 
In 2011, with the aim of widening the range of possible materials that could be achieved through any kind of linkage, Yaghi et al. reported a pioneering work aimed at the synthesis of COFs with hydrazone groups as strong organic linkages.38 Easily accessible hydrazine (2,5-diethoxyterephthalohydrazide) (15) and functionalized aldehyde building blocks (1,3,5-triformylbenzene, 27 or 1,3,5-tris(4-formylphenyl)benzene, 29) give hydrazone-linked structures, whose crystallinity is controlled by the well-known pH-dependent reversibility of hydrazone linkages.39 Interestingly, Yaghi et al. also reported that nonsubstituted terephthalohydrazides do not yield permanently porous materials, probably due to their poor solubility in organic solvents that leads to blockage of the pore network by unreacted starting material. Thus, it is necessary to increase the solubility of the terephthalohydrazide moiety component in order to facilitate activation and allow the isolation of crystalline and permanently porous structures.
Hydrazones are typically much less prone to hydrolysis than imines and are generally formed by the acetic acid catalysed reversible condensation of the building blocks in dioxane/mesitylene (1:2 v/v) at 120 °C in a sealed pressure vial under an argon atmosphere for 72 h. In fact, acylhydrazones as linkages in 2D-COFs offer improved hydrolytic and oxidative stability. Besides, the incorporation of novel polar and hydrogen-bonding units into the pore surface can lead to new applications of these materials.
It is worth mentioning that hydrazone based COFs such as TFPT (Scheme 4) can also be synthesized by in situ acetal deprotection to generate aldehyde-containing building blocks which condense with 2,5-diethoxy-terephthalohydrazide (15) in a one-pot procedure. This protocol opens the door to a new variety of acetal-protected building blocks and at the same time enhances the solubility of otherwise insoluble building blocks due to the aliphatic protection group.40
 Scheme 4  Scheme showing the one-pot acetal deprotection and subsequent condensation to furnish the TFPT-COF. 


2.1.3 Azine linkages. 
In order to explore a robust linkage for the synthesis of COFs that meet the requirements of crystallinity, porosity, and stability, Jiang et al. reported in 2013 the syntheses of a COF based on the azine linkage by condensation between hydrazine and 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)pyrene, TFPPy (42) (Scheme 5).41
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of the Azine-Linked COF (Py-Azine COF). 
Condensation of hydrazine with aldehydes is a thermodynamically controlled reaction that leads to the formation of azine derivatives and water as by-products. Following this seminal work, the syntheses of several COFs based on the azine linkage have been carried out by condensation between hydrazine and suitable co-monomers containing multiple aldehyde functionalities. These COFs exhibit high crystallinity, high porosity, and robust chemical stability. Solvents such as o-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB), o-DCB/n-BuOH (1.9/0.1 by vol.), mesitylene/dioxane (1/3 by vol.), and o-DCB/dioxane (3/1 by vol.) in the presence of an AcOH catalyst (6 M) have been used to obtain crystalline polymers.41–44
The azine linkage could be widely extended to the large variety of aldehydes included in Fig. 2 and many others which allow not only the structural predesign, but also the functional exploration based on the robust frameworks.
In the last couple of years, this strategy has been a common procedure in order to develop COFs for practical applications, including sensors and catalysts as it will be shown in the second part of this review.
It is also worth mentioning that by template-assisted replication of nanometer sized ZnO-nanorods, hollow and tubular TpPa-COF structures have been synthesized.45 The hollow TpPa structures were synthesized by a two-step protocol. The first step involves the synthesis of hybrid structures with ZnO-nanorods as cores and TpPa COFs as shells (ZnO@TpPa). They were obtained by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) in 1:1 mesitylene–dioxane solvent in the presence of pre-synthesized and well dispersed ZnO-nanorods (Fig. 4), using acetic acid in a catalytic amount.
 Fig. 4  Scheme for the synthesis of highly stable and hollow COF structures via a templating strategy by in situ solvothermal reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) and p-phenylenediamine (Pa, 17a), in the presence of ZnO-nanorods. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.4 β-Ketoenamine or keto–enol linkages. 
Banerjee et al. have introduced a new protocol for the synthesis of highly acid- and base-stable crystalline covalent organic frameworks by a combination of reversible and irreversible organic reactions.46–48 Usually triformylphloroglucinol (C3, 28) and different diamines (C2) are employed in the design of [C3 + C2] COFs. The total reaction can be divided into two steps (Scheme 6): in the first step, a reversible Schiff base reaction leads to the formation of a crystalline framework. The second step is an irreversible enol to-keto tautomerization, which enhances the chemical stability. The irreversible nature of the tautomerism does not affect the crystallinity of the COF, since the transformation involves only shifting of bonds while keeping the atomic positions almost unaltered. Moreover, the COF backbone can be further functionalized suitably due to the presence of new functional groups. For these reactions, mixtures of solvents such as dioxane:mesytilene (1:1) and dimethylacetamide (DMA):o-dichlorobenzene (1:1) have given satisfactory results. This keto-type COFs are highly stable; however, it has only been described the loss of crystallinity under strong alkaline conditions (6 M NaOH,) because of the backward keto-to-enol conversion.49
 Scheme 6  Schematic representation of the synthesis of TpPa-1 and TpPa-2 by the combined reversible and irreversible reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) with p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 2,5-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine (17b), respectively. The total reaction proceeds in two steps: (1) reversible Schiff-base reaction and (2) irreversible enol-to ketotautomerism. 
The second step involves the selective removal of ZnO-templates after treatment with dilute acid solution to yield the hollow nanostructures. The as-synthesized nanostructures composed of microporous TpPa shells have high surface area and are highly stable in aqueous as well as in acidic environments.


2.1.5 Phenazine linkages. 
In the search for new linkages and properties in the synthesis of COFs, Jiang et al. reported a phenazine-linked COF (CS-COF, Scheme 7), using C3-symmetric triphenylene hexamine (TPHA, 56) and C2-symmetric tert-butylpirene tetraone (PT, 44) as building blocks for the topological ring fusion reaction under solvothermal conditions.50 Bulky side groups in the tert-butylpireno tetraone (PT, 44) monomer were employed for enhancing the solubility of the monomer. The topologically designed COF with phenazine linkages allows for generating wire frameworks and open nanochannels, in which the π-conjugation spans into the two-dimensional sheets. This framework permits inborn periodic ordering of conjugated chains in all three dimensions and exhibits a striking combination of properties: chemical stability, extended π-delocalization, ability to host guest molecules and hole mobility.50
 Scheme 7  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the CS-COF. The blue dotted lines at the periphery imply the extension of periodic structures. 


2.1.6 Orthogonal reaction strategy: COFs based on imine group and boroxine ring linkages. 
The vast majority of successful methods for the construction of COFs are limited to reactions based on only one type of covalent bond formation. However, the exploration of new judicious synthetic strategies has revealed as a crucial and emergent task for the development of this field. An interesting approach developed by Zhao et al. in 2015 involves a new orthogonal reaction strategy to construct COFs by the reversible formation of two types of covalent bonds.51 In the reported case, the obtained COFs (NTU-COF-1, NTU-COF-2, Scheme 8) consist of the formation of the imine group and the boroxine ring through multicomponent reactions and are based on the utilization of building blocks containing ditopic groups of boronate and aldehyde such as BFPBA (16) (Scheme 8). Thus, this building block can be readily converted to the boroxine ring under high temperature or easily generate an imine group in the presence of an amino group. For example, NTU-COF-1 can be synthesized by the solvothermal reaction of TAPB (36) and FPBA (16). On the other hand, to evaluate the adaptability of the strategy to complicated reaction systems, the novel three-component COF (NTU-COF-2) could be synthesized also under solvothermal conditions from three building blocks such as FPBA (16), TAPB (36) and HHTP (59) through the formation of the imine group and the C2O2B boronate ring (Scheme 8). To examine the stepwise method to prepare the above mentioned COFs, the same authors attempted to use the boronic acid derivative IM-1 (Scheme 8) to construct NTU-COF-1 as well as IM-1 and IM-2 (Scheme 8) to construct NTU-COF-2. In the latter cases, the formation of amorphous solids was observed mainly. In order to rationalize this behaviour, exploration of the kinetics of COF growth was carried out.
 Scheme 8  Syntheses of (i) NTU-COF-1 and (ii) NTU-COF-2 involving the formation of two types of covalent bonds from orthogonal reactions. 
This study indicates that the relative consumption rates of the building blocks are close to stoichiometric ratios which suggest that the formation of NTU-COF-1 and NTU-COF-2 is a parallel mechanism, instead of a tandem process. Concerning the generation of amorphous solids from IM-1 and IM-2, the parallel formations of imine and boronate/boroxine groups have to be concurrently accompanied by the crystallization of COFs, followed by irreversible aggregations of crystallites. Thus, the proposed mechanism can be used to interpret the unsuccessful constructions of NTU-COF-1 and NTU-COF-2 from intermediate compounds via the step-by-step procedure. However, this strategy can be considered as a general protocol applicable to construct not only binary COFs but also more complicated systems for which regular synthetic methods do not work.

2.2 Microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction conditions
Microwave heating, which allows a considerable reduction of the reaction time, has been used in organic chemistry for several decades.52 As it is shown in Scheme 6, the TpPa-COF-1, with β-ketoenamine-linkage, was synthesized by condensation reaction between p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) under standard solvothermal conditions.46 A long time (2–3 d) and high temperature (120 °C) are required to obtain TpPa-COF-1 with high crystallinity in high yield (60–80%) with the conventional solvothermal method. In 2015, Wei, Zang et al. have synthesized TpPa-COF-1 under microwave heating conditions by preparing a 3:2 molar ratio solution of p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) in a 20 mL glass microwave tube and heated by microwave irradiation at 100 °C with stirring for only 60 min.53 After the work-up, the TpPa-COF-1 is obtained in 83% yield based on the starting materials and exhibits similar characteristics in comparison with the COF obtained through standard solvothermal synthesis.
In order to obtain a COF with good performances, it is important to adjust every synthetic parameter, which should be based on many experiments and a lot of experience. Therefore, the development of the microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction conditions provides a rapid and efficient method for the synthesis of stable COFs thus facilitating the optimization task and opening the way for industrial production.
2.3 Synthetic procedures carried out at room-temperature without solvothermal conditions
Engineering COFs with good morphology and stability via rapid and easy synthetic methods under mild conditions is still challenging, but of great importance for the broad potential applications of COFs. Two different approaches have been developed in this respect. The first one is related to synthetic procedures carried out by mechanochemical (MC) grinding. A second and important approach involves the synthesis of COFs carried out in solution at room temperature and in air.

2.3.1 Synthetic procedures carried out by mechanochemical (MC) grinding. 
Solvent-free mechanochemical synthesis of porous solids has gained importance as an alternative synthetic route compared to conventional solution-based synthesis, as the process is quick, environmentally friendly and potentially scalable.54 So far, this methodology has not been very successful in the synthesis of many COFs based on Schiff reactions. However, triformylphloroglucinol (28) based COFs (Fig. 5) have been obtained by manual grinding in a mortar and pestle at room temperature in a rapid, solvent-free, room-temperature MC synthesis.47
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the MC synthesis of TpPa-1 and TpPa-2 through simple Schiff base reactions performed via MC grinding using a mortar and pestle. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5328–5331. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 


2.3.2 Synthetic procedures carried out at room-temperature in solution. 
We have recently shown that the Schiff reaction between two trigonal building blocks, 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (36) and 1,3,5-benzenetricarbaldehyde (27) (Fig. 6) rapidly occurs at room temperature and in air, leading to the formation of a COF (RT-COF-1) which is crystalline, showing a laminar hexagonal structure, stable up to 450 °C and porous to both N2 and CO2.55RT-COF-1 can be easily synthesized by adding 0.1 mL of acetic acid to 1 mL of 36 and 27 (1:1 molar ratio; 0.028 M) in either m-cresol or DMSO under gentle stirring at room temperature. After 1 min, a characteristic yellow gel is formed, which after the work-up provides crystalline RT-COF-1 as a yellow solid. It is especially remarkable that this approach enables the fabrication and position of low-cost micro- and sub-micropatterns of the RT-COF on several surfaces by using lithographically controlled wetting and conventional ink-jet printing.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the room-temperature polyimine condensation to form RT-COF-1. Instantaneous formation of the gel is shown in the image in the inset of the COF structure. (b) Representative FE-SEM image of RT-COF-1. (c) Representative AFM topographic image of isolated flakes of RT-COF-1 on SiO2 (top) and the corresponding height profile (bottom). Figure extracted from ref. 55. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Yan et al. have also reported a solution-phase approach at room temperature which has been used for the fabrication of spherical COF TpBD (a COF synthesized from 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) and benzidine (BD, 18a, R = H)) with good solvent and thermal stability.56 The synthesis of TpBD can be simply achieved by stirring an ethanolic solution of Tp and BD at room temperature. Although this method for the synthesis of TpBD is faster than the conventional solvothermal method (120 °C for 72 h), yields obtained are poorer and the obtained COF shows moderate crystallinity in comparison to the already mentioned methods. However, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area seems to be superior.
Interestingly, the wet-chemical reaction between hexaaminobenzene (HAB, 57) trihydrochloride and hexaketocyclohexane (HKH, 58) octahydrate leads to layered 2D crystals, named as C2N-h2D (Fig. 7).57 The functional moieties have to be directly included in the designed building units prior to the COF synthesis. The formation of the phenazine linkages takes place by simply mixing HAB and HKH in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone in the presence of a few drops of sulphuric acid or in trifluoromethanesulfonic acid.
 Fig. 7  Preparation and structure. (a) Schematic representation of the reaction between hexaaminobenzene (HAB) trihydrochloride and hexaketocyclohexane (HKH) octahydrate to produce the C2N-h2D crystal. Digital photographs: (b) as-prepared C2N-h2D crystal; (c) solution-cast C2N-h2D crystal on a SiO2 surface after heat-treatment at 700 °C; (d) a C2N-h2D crystal film (thickness: approximately 330 nm) transferred onto a PET substrate. 
The tremendous potential energy gained by aromatization is responsible for the spontaneous polycondensation between the HAB and HKH and leads to the formation of a layered crystalline 2D network structure with uniform holes and nitrogen atoms and a C2N stoichiometry in its basal plane. The resultant dark-black graphite-like solid has a layered and highly crystalline structure, as proved by the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern. Like the XRD pattern of graphite, the pattern of this crystal also shows a sharp 002 diffraction peak at 27.12 Å whose position corresponds to an interlayer distance (d-spacing) of 0.328 nm.
More recently, Nakashima et al.58 have reported on the room-temperature synthesis of a COF obtained by direct reaction between benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde and 1,4-phenylenediamine. The COF has a high surface area and high thermal stability due to its high crystallinity compared to that of the COF synthesized by a conventional solvothermal synthetic method using the same monomer combination.
Although these examples show the feasibility of obtaining COFs under mild conditions, the generalization of these synthetic routes still remains a challenge in order to broaden the potential applications of COFs.

2.4 Towards 2D-polymers based on COFs
2D-polymers (atomic thickness) is an emerging research field of high current interest.59 The past decade has witnessed an extraordinary increase in research progress on ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials in the fields of condensed matter physics, materials science, and chemistry after the exfoliation of graphene from graphite in 2004. This unique class of nanomaterials has shown many unprecedented properties and thus is being explored for numerous promising applications.60 Therefore, the development of facile, feasible, and reliable methods for the preparation of ultrathin 2D nanomaterials is of great importance for the exploration of their properties, function, and applications. There are several approaches aiming to produce purely bidimensional materials (few layer thickness), including the use of covalent and coordination bonds.59,61,62 Layered COFs have been selected as a potential source for the production of 2D-polymers. Indeed, the integration of 2D-COFs on different surfaces is currently receiving a great deal of interest as it provides a unique opportunity of obtaining both atomic thick sheets or thin films, with covalently bonded organic building units with unique properties associated with reduced dimensionality, well-defined in-plane structure, and tuneable functionalities.
A straightforward way to obtain single or few layer COFs involves the exfoliation of bulk COFs.63,64 Thus, in 2013, Bunck and Dichtel reported that 2D hydrazone-linked COFs can be exfoliated into 2D-polymers that assemble organic subunits into covalently linked, high-aspect-ratio networks with long-range order.65
In order to avoid the high energy consuming ultrasonication process and the use of ultrapure and absolutely dry solvents, Banerjee et al. have employed mechanical grinding as a simple, safe, eco-friendly, and energy efficient process for COFs exfoliation.48 With this aim, they use a library of eight crystalline porous COFs. The monomers used for the syntheses of these COFs are depicted in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the formation of covalent organic nanosheets (CONs) from as-synthesized COFs via mechanical grinding. TEM and AFM images of CONs are shown at the right bottom. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853–17861. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The laminar structure of the materials (CONs) obtained by mechanical grinding of as-synthesized COFs was assessed by AFM measurements in order to obtain precise information about the existence of single-/few-layer materials. These CONs show flat nanosheet like structures with lengths and widths of several micrometers and thicknesses ranging from 3 to 10 nm, which correspond to the existence of only ∼10–30 COF layers. As far as the chemical stability is concerned, it has been found that these CONs retain their structural integrity throughout the delamination process and also remain stable in aqueous, acidic (3–9 N HCl) and basic (3 N NaOH) media like the parent COFs, which is confirmed by PXRD and IR analyses.
Considering the scalability and energy efficiency of this method, this “top-down” strategy can be envisaged as a cost-effective and scalable approach for the preparation of a variety of bulk 2D-layered structures. However, due to the tendency of multilayer formation and mechanical damage a lot of effort has been devoted to the development of alternative procedures.
Well-defined surfaces can offer an ideal interface to template polymerization reactions in 2D. We will now review the different approaches followed in this direction.
The area of surface chemistry has been the subject of different review articles66,67 highlighting the significance of this relatively new, but increasingly influential, branch of nanotechnology research. In 2012, Greenwood and Baddeley used scanning tunnelling microscopy to investigate the Schiff-base condensation reaction between melamine (41) and terephthaldehyde (1) on Au/mica following deposition from solution under ambient conditions.68 They could demonstrate that the reaction can proceed at room temperature to produce oligomers containing imine linkages.
Shortly afterwards, Kunitake et al. reported that 2D π-conjugated metal porphyrin covalent organic frameworks can be produced on an iodine-modified Au(111) surface using a soft solution method.69 The self-assembly of the sophisticated covalent nanostructures on well-defined surfaces in aqueous solution can be achieved by reversible equilibrium “on-site” polymerization at the solid–liquid interface, whereby aromatic building blocks spontaneously and selectively form linkages consisting of metal-free porphyrin and bifunctional aromatic linkage molecules. Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) studies confirm the capacity of this strategy to generate solid-supported 2D π-conjugated porphyrine-based COFs.
Tian, Lei et al. have recently reported the in situ reaction of 1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde (C3, 27) with different aromatic diamines (C2) on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surface. The COF is formed at the solid–liquid interface at room temperature or in a low vacuum with moderate heating. 2D honeycomb structures can be obtained with almost complete surface coverage.70 The on-surface coupling at the liquid/HOPG interface represents the simplest preparation procedure, which involves only dissolving the monomers in octanoic acid and then drop-casting onto a HOPG surface at room temperature. An extended surface COF can be obtained at the liquid/HOPG interface spontaneously. On the other hand, the on-surface condensation via mild heating under low vacuum exhibits wider adaptability to a variety of monomers. The higher reaction reversibility and diffusion rate at elevated temperature enable the formation of surface COFs with high uniformity and crystallinity. The single crystalline domain can extend to more than 1 μm2.
A self-limiting solid–vapour interface reaction method has also been reported as a suitable strategy to grow large-scale highly ordered bicomponent 2D-COFs such as SCOF-LZU1 (obtained from 1,3,5-triformyl-benzene (TFB, 27) and p-phenylenediamine (17a)).71 One precursor (A) is first preloaded onto the substrate through drop-casting and then the other one (B) is introduced, and the whole system is thereafter sealed up in a closed reactor in the presence of a thermodynamic regulation agent. By heating the reactor to a specific temperature, precursor B will vaporise and then land on the surface covered with precursor A (Fig. 9). The coupling of the reactive groups separately carried out by precursors A and B results in nucleation for the SCOF. Since the rate at which precursor B reaches the surface and reacts is very low, the freshly vaporized precursor B or the freshly formed small oligomer can diffuse on the surface and attach to the available SCOF nuclei, resulting in the growth of the SCOF. The monomer introduction is determined by the vapour pressure of the precursors. Accordingly, the covalent bond can form at the solid–vapour interface, leading to the growth of high quality COFs. In this way, different large-scale high-quality networks and topologies can be fabricated on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) using imine linkages.
 Fig. 9  (a) Scheme diagram for solid–vapor interface reaction. (b) Large-scale STM image (100 × 100 nm2) of SCOF-LZU1 with the inset depicting the corresponding FFT spectrum of the STM image. (c) High resolution STM image (20 × 20 nm2) of SCOF-LZU1. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10470–10474. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, two isomer based single-layered covalent organic frameworks (sCOFs) with non-aromatic linkages have been prepared on the HOPG surface with 6-fold symmetry, using an autoclave and CuSO4·5H2O as a chemical equilibrium control agent.72 It has been found that compared to systems with rigid aromatic linkages, the use of ditopic monomers without aromatic rings as building blocks (hydrazine (25) or glyoxal (8)) contributes to the formation of more disordered networks.
A method to synthesize a 2D extended aromatic Schiff base surface COF with single atomic thickness on single-layer graphene grown on copper foil (SLG-copper) by CDV has been recently reported, providing information at the molecular-level of the on-surface condensation on graphene.73 An extended adlayer of the π-conjugated surface COFBTA-PDA was observed by STM several minutes after applying one droplet of the mixture of the two precursors (benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde, PDA (27) and p-phenylenediamine (17a)) to the graphene surface. The surface of the COF extends all over the graphene surface and the final structure is unperturbed by steps of the underlying copper foil. The well-developed transfer techniques for graphene make it possible to transfer the G-surface–COF composite to various substrates and to investigate its properties as a true 2D material.
The possibility of generating single-layered covalent organic frameworks (sCOFs) on surfaces paves the way for true bottom-up assembly of a vast array of solid-supported, designed supramolecular nanoarchitectures towards different applications. Furthermore, they can serve as surface templates for subsequent growth of extended 3D architectures. On the other hand, in addition to the synthesis of COFs, there is also an increasing interest towards the development of methods for the preparation of 2D-COF films on the surface.
In this respect, Lei et al. have recently reported a non-covalent way to modify three-dimensional graphene (3DG) with anthraquinone moieties through on-surface synthesis of two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks.74 The typical procedure for the synthesis of the composite material is as follows: 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ, 23) and benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde (BTA, 27) are dissolved in dimethylacetamide. Simultaneously, 6% volume ratio of deionized water is added to the mixture. Then the resulting suspension is directly used to soak the 3DG. The composite was then heated and annealed under an argon atmosphere. This strategy allows the oriented growth of thin films of the COF on 3DG due to van der Waals' epitaxy effect that facilitates the good conductive contact.
In 2015, Dichtel et al. have reported the first oriented thin films of β-ketoenamine-linked 2D-COFs (DAAQ-TFP) on Au substrates (Fig. 10).75 The films can be formed through the slow introduction (over 1 h) of the triformylphluroglucynol (TP, 28) TFP monomer into a DMF solution at 90 °C containing 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ, 23) under solvothermal conditions. Control of the resulting film thickness, from 60 to 560 nm, can be achieved by varying the initial concentrations of the monomers.
 Fig. 10  (A) Structure of the hexagonal subunit of the DAAQ-TFP COF, which forms as a 2D-layered microcrystalline powder. This material was previously prepared as a slurry, mixed with carbon black and a PVDF binder. (B) Solvothermal growth of the DAAQ-TFP COF as an oriented thin film on Au electrodes. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
Bao et al. have recently developed a method to fabricate thin films of a COF-based material compatible with transistor device fabrication. By reacting the monomers in a covered Petri dish for 2 days under ambient conditions, a highly reflective film is formed at the solution/air interface. This film can be picked up from the surface of the solution using tweezers or substrates such as glass or silicon wafers and rinsed by transferring it multiple times to Petri dishes containing fresh DMF; films are held at the DMF/air interface by surface tension. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed that these films are composed of lace web-like structures roughly 50 nm thick.76 The attempts at direct growth of the COF films on the substrates did not yield films good enough for this purpose. The synthesis of COF films onto amino functionalized silicon substrates has been performed as an alternative material for biosensors, by reaction of the substrates with the monomers in the presence of aqueous acetic acid as a catalyst under 120 °C.77 Oriented thin films of tetrathiafulvalene-based COFs were also grown in situ from the liquid phase on Si/SiO2 substrates and ITO-coated glass.78
Finally, we have recently demonstrated that the room-temperature synthesis of RT-COF-1 shown in Fig. 11 can be miniaturized on surfaces by using a soft-lithography technique and ink-jet printing. Both techniques have allowed the fabrication of micro/submicrometer patterns of RT-COF-1 on solid and flexible supports (Fig. 11) that enable future applications.55 Interestingly, the direct deposition allows the isolation of layers with a thickness of ca. 4 nm. Furthermore, the results using ink-jet printing are very interesting for automation and enables patterning with high resolution covering large areas in minutes, thereby being attractive for manufacturing.
 Fig. 11  (a) Bright-field optical image of 1 mm wide RT-COF-1 stripes fabricated by LCW. The inset shows a representative AFM image showing the formation of the characteristic RT-COF-1 flakes. Z scale is 0–50 nm. (b) Corresponding POM image. (c) Representative FE-SEM image of 500 nm wide RT-COF-1 stripes fabricated by LCW. (d) Radial integration of the 2D-GIXRD image collected for the 1 mm wide RT-COF-1 stripes (middle) compared to the one obtained in the synthesis of bulk RT-COF-1 (top) and to the one derived from the theoretical structure (bottom). (e) Representative optical image of a 70 mm-in-diameter dot array of RT-COF-1 on SiO2 generated by an ink-jet printer. (f) Representative FE-SEM image of a 40 mm-in-diameter dot array of RT-COF-1 on flexible acetate paper generated by an ink-jet printer. (g and h) Zoomed FE-SEM images of one of these dots, showing again the formation of the characteristic RT-COF-1 flakes. Figure extracted from ref. 55. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
2.5 Post-synthetic modification of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry
The possibility of post-synthetic modification of porous materials in general and COF systems, in particular, offers an effective route to incorporate functional groups or metallic species in the pores and thus tailor the structural and chemical environment of the pores. We will review now the different strategies developed to date for the post-synthetic modification of COFs.

2.5.1 Functional group interconversion by post-synthetic modification. 
COFs with highly functionalized pore wall structures are difficult to obtain via direct polycondensation reactions. Click reactions constitute an excellent tool for systematic functionalization of COFs with different purposes.79 Therefore, conventional COFs incorporating alkynyl functionalized building blocks are active platforms for post-synthetic channel-wall functionalization. Reaction of 2,5-bis(2-propynyloxy)terephthalaldehyde (BPTA, 7) and 2,5-dimethoxyterephthalaldehyde (DMTA, 4) at different molar ratios with nickel 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4′-tetraphenylamino) porphyrin (NiP, 48) under solvothermal conditions yielded NiPCOF, with ethynyl units on the COF walls (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of the radical [TEMPO]n-NIP-COF. 
The ethynyl groups undergo click reaction with 4-azido-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy in a smooth and clean manner to yield TEMPO functionalized COFs ([TEMPO]100%-NiPCOF) (Scheme 9).29 Similarly, quantitative click reactions between the ethynyl units and azide compounds were performed to anchor a variety of functional groups, including ethyl, acetate, hydroxyl, carboxylic acids, and amino groups;80 these groups ranged from hydrophobic to hydrophilic and from basic to acidic enabling the tailor made covalent docking of the pore walls. Finally, chiral COFs have also been created by anchoring chiral centres ((S)-pyrrolidine) onto the channel walls after azide-ethynyl click reaction.29
Another strategy for channel-wall functionalization is the use of ring opening reaction with succinic anhydride, performed by phenol units on the pore walls of conventional imine-based COFs.80 This method allows the incorporation of carboxylic acid groups, creating new versions of COFs with different properties. Notably, compared with click chemistry this type of reaction is free of metal catalysts and proceeds smoothly and cleanly, representing a promising way of channel-wall tuning.80
Medina, Bein et al. have recently demonstrated for the first time a two-step post-synthetic modification in a COF.81 The novel approach involves the synthesis of a β-ketoenamine COF bearing an amine functional group in the pores through a post-synthetic reduction reaction. For this purpose, they initially synthesized a chemically stable β-ketoenamine COF TpBD(NO2)2 featuring nitro functionalities in the pores that serve as protective groups for the final desired amino groups. The nitro groups were then reduced to afford an amine functionalized COF, TpBD(NH2)2 (Scheme 10).
 Scheme 10  Schematic representation of the synthesis of TpBD(NO2)2 and post-synthetic modification to TpBD(NH2)2 and TpBD(NHCOCH3)2. 
The accessibility of the amino groups in the pores by a sequential post-synthetic modification step was demonstrated through the aminolysis of acetic anhydride which was performed to obtain the amide functionalized COF, TpBD(NHCOCH3)2.
All these methods allow the incorporation of controlled amounts of different functionalities, creating new versions of COFs with different properties.


2.5.2 Metal ions or complexes incorporated into COFs. 
As has been demonstrated in coordination chemistry the imine type ligands are versatile in incorporating a variety of metal ions. As an example palladium(II) coordinated-COF material has been prepared by treatment of an imine based-COF with Pd(OAc)2 at room temperature.15 Otherwise, appropriately designed COFs can be further functionalized by coordination with the appropriate metal.
Thus, COFs designed with open docking sites on the channel walls have been metallated with vanadium(IV)-oxy acetonilacetonate [VO(acac)2].79 Similarly, a molybdenum-doped COF has been synthesized through a hydrazone linked COF, bearing the suitable ligands to coordinate with molybdenyl acetonylacetonate (MoO2(aca)2), via a bottom-up approach.82


2.5.3 Metal nanoparticle hybrid COFs. 
COFs based on β-ketoenamine linkages are attractive support matrices for anchoring active nanoparticles, and therefore improving their catalytic activity. Besides their stability, COFs based on β-ketoenamine linkages exhibit high surface area and porosity, extensive π–π conjugation along the layers, and heteroatoms in the framework to allow further functionalization. Thus, CdS nanoparticles can be deposited on a highly stable 2D-COF matrix, formed using this kind of linkage, producing a hybrid material.83 COF support was observed to improve the photostability of the deposited CdS resulting in a remarkably high activity compared to that of bulk CdS.
Banerjee et al. have recently reported a simple synthetic route to obtain highly stable, porous and crystalline hybrids based on Au nanoparticles supported on a COF. The so called solution infiltration method, that consists of mixing HAuCl4·3H2O with an evacuated COF in methanol under vigorous stirring and further reduction with NaBH4, allows us to obtain the COF-based hybrid catalyst.84

3 Applications of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry
Nanoporous frameworks such as zeolites, aluminophosphates (AlPOs) or metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are attractive due to their well-defined crystalline nature combined with a great structural and compositional variety.
Many organic compounds can be efficiently produced and processed on a large scale and can be easily modified by the versatile tools of organic chemistry.85,86 The ability to design the desired material on a molecular basis permits the fine tuning of different characteristics of the material such as the pore size, suitable functionalization, energy gap, the ionization potential, electron affinity and the light absorbance and emission of the semiconductor. These characteristics, together with the appreciable water, chemical and thermal stability of Schiff-based COF derivatives, have allowed the rapid development of applications for this new family of organic materials.
3.1 COF derivatives for gas storage applications
The so-called advanced porous materials87,88 such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), porous polymer networks, and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks have received attention for their use in gas storage,89,90 and gas separations,91 including CO2 capture92 and hydrocarbon and other liquid separations.93,94 Among this type of porous materials, COFs have recently emerged as realistic alternatives for gas storage applications because they are lightweight, highly thermally stable, crystalline and exhibit permanent porosity.21,22 Much of the interest in these new classes of materials arises from the utilization of reticular chemistry95 in their design, facilitating modular assembly of materials with predictable topology and atomic-scale control over their internal surface chemistry. Thus, several theoretical studies have been carried out in order to rationalize the gas uptake of different COFs in terms of pore volume, pore size or isosteric heat.96–99 One can use these principles to design COFs based on specific underlying topologies suitable to store specific adsorbates.
The first examples of COFs for gas storage applications were based on reversible B–O bonds. Though showing good gas storage ability, COFs based on boronates are very sensitive to the aqueous environment, even humid air, because of the weak B–O bond.15 Thus, the need to find new COFs that allow increasing the hydrolytic stability but maintaining the outstanding gas storage capacity is obvious. In this respect, imine-linked 2D and 3D COFs have appreciable water, chemical and thermal stability46 and display high potential in gas adsorption and storage. The interpenetration have been described in several crystalline 3D-COFs.19 This is a phenomenon that affects the surface area of the material thereby reducing its BET surface area. In principle, this is a structural problem less likely for 2D COFs that are the materials showing the highest surface area reported so far. We will briefly summarize the different COFs based on Shiff-base chemistry which have been designed for the uptake of different gases.
From a gas adsorption perspective, the on-board storage of H2 and CH4 fuels in automotive applications remains a considerable challenge and has to meet volumetric and gravimetric targets to be effective. On the other hand, specific attention has been paid to carbon dioxide capture and sequestration (CCS) as it is essential for a sustainable climate.100 Carbon dioxide is one of the major components of greenhouse gases and its concentration level in the environment has risen with the increasing consumption of fossil fuels.101
Although Table 1 collects a summary of the most relevant adsorption data already reported on COFs based on Shiff-chemistry, in the following we will highlight some remarkable examples devoted to the specific design of the COF structure to improve gas sorption.
Table 1 Structural information and gas adsorption capacity of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry




Type
COF
Bulding units
Average pore size (Å)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (Vp, cm3 g−1)
H2 uptakea (wt%)
CH4 uptakeb (wt%)
CO2 uptakec (wt%)
Ref.





a H2 uptake measured at 1 bar and 77 K.
b CH4 uptake at 1 bar and 273 K.
c CO2 uptake at 1 bar and 273 K unless otherwise stated.
d Measured at 298 K and 50 bar.





Imine
ILCOF-1
42 + 17a
23
2723
1.21
1.3
0.9
6.0

102



Azine
ACOF-1
25 + 27
9.4
1176
0.91
0.99
1.15
17.7

43



Imine
CTV-COF-1
34 + 17a
14.8
1245
0.94
1.3
—
—

31



Imine
CTV-COF-2
34 + 18a
21.6
1170
1.07
0.75
—
49.1d

31



Imine
TAPB-TFPB
36 + 29
40
229
—
0.68
—
4

106



Imine
iPrTAPB-TFPB
37 + 28
50
391
—
0.43
—
3.1

106



Keto-enamine
TAPB-TFP
36 + 28
26
567
—
1.08
—
18

106



Keto-enamine
iPrTAPB-TFP
37 + 28
34
756
—
1.15
—
10.5

106



Imine
N-COF
38a + 27
11
1700
0.84
—
—
120

107



Azine H bonded
COF-JLU2
28 + 27
9.6
415
0.56
1.6
3.8
21.7

42



Keto-enamine
TpPa-COF
17a + 28
1.27
725
0.89
—
—
21.8

53



Imine
[OH]X-H2P-COF
1 + 3 + 47
25
1054–1284
0.78–1.02
—
—
46–63

80



Imine
[HO2C]X-H2P-COF
From [OH]X%-H2P-COF
14–22
364–786
0.43–0.66
—
—
96–174

80



Imine
[CC]X-H2P-COF
47 + 7 + 3
16–25
426–1474
0.28–0.75
—
—
39–72

80



Imine
[Et]X-H2P-COF
From [CC]X-H2P-COF
15–22
187–1326
0.18–0.55
—
—
38–55

80



Imine
[MeOAc]X-H2P-COF
From [CC]X-H2P-COF
11–21
156–1238
0.14–0.51
—
—
65–84

80



Imine
[AcOH]X-H2P-COF
From [CC]X-H2P-COF
13–22
186–1252
0.18–0.52
—
—
94–117

80



Imine
[EtOH]X-H2P-COF
From [CC]X-H2P-COF
14–22
214–1248
0.19–0.56
—
—
84–92

80



Imine
[EtNH2]X-H2P-COF
From [CC]X-H2P-COF
13–22
382–1402
0.21–0.58
—
—
97–116

80





In 2013 El Kaderi et al. reported the first example of an imine-linked COF (ILCOF-1, Fig. 12) for gas storage.102
 Fig. 12  Top: Chemical structure of ILCOF-1. Bottom: Hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane sorption measurements for ILCOF-1. Figure extracted from ref. 102. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
This COF was synthesized by condensation of 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-formylphenyl)pyrene (42) with p-phenylenediamine (17a) under solvothermal conditions. A Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 2723 m2 g−1 was determined for ILCOF-1 with a pore-size distribution of around 23 Å that is very similar to the calculated pore width of the model (24.3 Å) defined by the distance between the phenyl linkers. The total pore volume was found to be 1.21 cm3 g−1. The calculated surface area and major pore-size distribution are considerably higher than those reported for previously reported crystalline imine-linked COFs probably as a consequence of the presence of the expanded pyrene building units. Thus, the pyrene core was used in order to enhance porosity and therefore improve performance in high pressure storage.103 At 1.0 bar, ILCOF-1 stores moderate amounts of hydrogen (13 mg g−1, 77 K), CH4 (9 mg g−1, 273 K), and CO2 (60 mg g−1, 273 K) (Fig. 12).
The US Department of Energy has set a target for on-board methane storage at 180 v/v at room temperature and 35 bar,104 whereas the gravimetric density target for hydrogen is 5.5 wt% (55 mg g−1) for 2015.105 Thus, high pressure (up to 40 bar) gas sorption measurements for H2, CH4 and CO2 were also performed for ILCOF-1. The absolute gravimetric uptake for hydrogen at 77 K and 40 bar is 61 mg g−1 slightly above the target set by the DOE. On the other hand, the absolute adsorbed amount of CH4 in volumetric units was estimated to be 129 L L−1 (92 g L−1) at 298 K and 35 bar which is still lower than the DOE target for 2015. The volumetric CO2 adsorption capacity at 298 K and 35 bar is 587 g L−1 (299 L L−1), which is approximately eight times the density of carbon dioxide at the same temperature and pressure.
Based on previous research on polymers with intrinsic microporosity containing crown-shaped moieties, in 2014 Song et al. reported two new COFs based on cyclotriveratrylene (CTV).31 The maximum hydrogen uptake for these COFs was 1.3 wt% at 1.1 bar and 1.23 wt% at 1 bar which is similar to that observed for ILCOF-1. The maximum uptake for CO2 for these CTV-based COFs was of 49.1 wt%.
In 2015, a novel imine-based nitrogen-rich COF (N-COF) was synthesized via the Schiff base reactions of two triangular building units, namely 2,4,6-tris(4-aminophenyl)-1,3,5-triazine (38a) and 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27) under solvothermal conditions.107 The BET surface area of N-COF was calculated to be 1700 m2 g−1, with a total pore volume of 0.84 cm3 g−1. Its pore size distribution was calculated using the DFT method, revealing a narrow distribution of pore size at 11 Å. The nitrogen-rich structure of the COF provides a volumetric CO2 uptake capability as high as 61.2 cm3 g−1 (1 atm, 273 K) and 32.4 cm3 g−1 (1 atm, 298 K). On the other hand, the CH4 uptake capability is 34.4 (1 atm, 273 K) and 11.4 cm3 g−1 (1 atm, 298 K). Finally, the N2 uptake capability of N-COF is only 3.6 cm3 g−1 (1 atm, 273 K) which indicates its high adsorption selectivity toward CO2 over N2 under the same conditions.
Azine-linked COFs have also been used for gas storage applications. Azine-linked COFs are interesting because they not only possess exceptional chemical and thermal stability, but also can be easily predetermined to make smaller pore sizes originating from the short structural length of the azine unit. Thus, in 2014, Liu et al. reported the synthesis of a new azine-linked covalent organic framework (ACOF-1, Scheme 5) by condensation of hydrazine (25) hydrate and 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27) under solvothermal conditions. The BET surface area determined for this COF was 1176 m2 g−1 with a pore size distribution of 9.4 Å and a total pore volume of 0.91 cm3 g−1. The CO2 isotherms of ACOF-1 were measured at 298 and 273 K, which showed 17.7 wt% CO2 uptake at 273 K and 1 bar. At 77 K and 1 bar, ACOF-1 exhibits 0.99 wt% hydrogen uptake and at 273 K and 1 bar a methane uptake of 1.15 wt% was determined. In this work the selective uptake of CO2, CH4 and N2 is also investigated to evaluate the potential application of this COF in the gas separation field. Adsorption selectivities of CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 are 40 and 37 at 273 K, respectively. Interestingly, the selectivity of CO2/CH4 surpasses imine-linked porous polymer frameworks108 and electron-rich organonitridic frameworks.109 The high selectivity of CO2 over N2 and CH4 can be derived as in the previous N-COF from the abundant nitrogen atoms on the pore wall of the COF interacting more favourably with polarizable CO2 molecules through dipole–quadrupole interactions. In order to increase the uptake capacity of COFs for small gas, a good strategy is used which involves an increase in the surface area and pore volume, adjusting appropriate pore size. In addition, an effective strategy to improve the adsorption capacity for small gas is to introduce special active sites. In this context, Liu et al. have prepared a modification of the above mentioned azine-based ACOF-1 in which hydrazine (25) hydrate was reacted with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucynol (28) instead of 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27). This COF, named COF-JLU2, presents a surface area of 415 m2 g−1 calculated using the BET model, a pore volume of 0.56 cm3 g−1 and a pore size distribution of 9.6 Å. This new crystalline framework not only possesses a relatively small pore size, but also has a large number of heteroatom active sites in the pore wall. These structural features function cooperatively, enhancing the uptake capacity of COF-JLU2 in small gas storage. Thus, COF-JLU2 shows a CO2 uptake value of 21.7 wt% at 273 K and 1 bar. The H2 uptake of COF-JLU2 at 77 K and 1 bar is 1.6 wt%. The CH4 uptake reaches 3.8 wt% at 273 K and 1.0 bar, which is three-fold higher than similar crystalline ACOF-1 (1.15 wt%). Finally, the estimated adsorption selectivity of CO2/N2 is 77. This value surpasses those of carbon-based materials,110ACOF-1 (40)43 or imine-linked porous polymers;108 however, it is lower than the high values of some microporous organic polymers (MOPs).111 Furthermore, the CO2 selectivity over CH4 is 4.1 at 273 K and 3.2 at 298 K, respectively, which are also comparable to reported MOPs.108
Murugavel et al. have prepared a series of imine or β-ketoenamine based COFs comprising less explored [3+3] motifs.106 Reaction of 1,3,5-tris(4′-aminophenyl)benzene (TAPB, 36) and 1,3,5-tris(4′-amino-3′,5′-isopropylphenyl)benzene (iPrTAPB, 37) with 1,3,5-tris(4′-formylphenyl)benzene (TFPB, 29) and 1,3,5-triformylphluroglucinol (TFP, 28) in dry dioxane and acetic acid (cat.) resulted in the formation of crystalline 2-D frameworks, TAPB-TFPB, iPrTAPB-TFPB, TAPB-TFP and iPrTAPB-TFP with pore size distribution of 40 Å, 50 Å, 26 Å and 34 Å respectively.
BET surface areas between 229 and 756 m2 g−1 were determined for these series of COFs. The surface area of the four COFs follows the order: iPrTAPB-TFP > TAPBTFP ≫ iPrTAPB-TFPB > TAPB-TFPB. It is reasonably well understood that upon increasing the size of the building block(s), the chances of network entanglement increase leading to a decrease in the surface area.108TFPB (29) building units are much larger in size than TFP (28), and therefore TFPB based COFs show surface areas which are only about 50% of the TFP based COFs. The difference in the surface areas of COFs constructed from iPrTAPB (37) and TAPB (36) is relatively small and is essentially dictated by the presence of bulky isopropyl groups. Isopropyl groups on the aromatic rings might hinder the process of network entanglement and therefore the surface area of iPrTAPB based COFs is higher than that of the TAPB based COFs.
To evaluate the CO2 uptake capacities, the measurements were performed up to 1 bar at 273 K. The CO2 uptake capacities were calculated to be 4 wt% (TAPBTFPB), 3.1 wt% (iPrTAPB-TFPB), 18 wt% (TAPB-TFP) and 10.5 wt%, (iPrTAPB-TFP) that follows the order iPrTAPB-TFPB < TAPB-TFPB < iPrTAPB-TFP < TAPB-TFP. The large difference in the uptake capacities of TFP COFs could be attributed to the steric hindrance caused by isopropyl groups. The best uptake values observed for the TFP derivatives may be due to the large number of heteroatom active sites in the pore wall due to the use of the 1,3,5-triformylphluroglucinol (28) building block. Furthermore, it is shown that by the virtue of triphenylbenzene as an inherently fluorescent platform, the COFs are endowed with fluorescence and fluorescence chemo-sensing ability for polynitroaromatic analytes. We will see it in detail in the following section dedicated to the sensing ability of COF derivatives.
The CO2 uptake of a two-dimensional enamine-linked COF (TpPa-COF, Scheme 6) synthesized under microwave assisted solvothermal method has been recently reported.53 The COF was obtained by reaction of p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28). The pore size distribution analysis of TpPa-COF results in pore size distributions of 1.1–1.5 nm, with peak maxima at 1.27 nm. The BET surface area of TpPa-COF synthesized under microwave conditions (TpPa-COF (MW)) was found to be 724.6 m2 g−1, which is higher than that found for the COF obtained from the same starting materials under standard solvothermal conditions (TpPa-COF (CE), 152.6 m2 g−1).
The CO2 sorption isotherm of TpPa-COF (MW) was measured at 273 K and 298 K, which shows a 21.8 wt% CO2 uptake at 273 K and 1 bar. The relatively high CO2 uptake capacity and binding by TpPa-COF (MW) can be derived from the combination of factors including porosity, the small pore size, high surface areas and the abundant N–H sites on the pore wall of TpPa-COF (MW).
Very recently, imine-linked COFs have been synthesized to bear content-tuneable, accessible, and reactive groups on the walls of one-dimensional pores.80,112 These COFs have been revealed as ideal platforms for pore-wall surface engineering aimed at anchoring diverse functional groups ranging from hydrophobic to hydrophilic units and from basic to acidic moieties with controllable loading contents. Jian et al. have shown that this approach enables the development of various tailor-made COFs with systematically tuned porosities and functionalities while retaining the crystallinity. This strategy can be used to efficiently screen suitable pore structures for gas adsorbents.
One approach developed by Jiang et al. involved the synthesis of imine-linked COFs (COFs) bearing content-tuneable, accessible, and reactive ethynyl groups on the walls of one-dimensional pores.80 With this aim, a three-component reaction system was developed consisting of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(p-tetraphenylamino)porphyrin (47) and a mixture of 2,5-bis(2-propynyloxy)terephthalaldehyde (BPTA, 7) and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalaldehyde (DHTA, 3) at various molar ratios (X = [BPTA]/([BPTA] + [DHTA]) × 100 = 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100) for the synthesis of four COFs with different ethynyl contents on their edges (Scheme 11, [HCC]X-H2P-COFs, X = 25, 50, 75, and 100).
 Scheme 11  Schematic of pore surface engineering of imine-linked COFs with various functional groups via Click reactions. 
Subsequent quantitative click reactions between the ethynyl units and azide compounds were performed to anchor the desired groups onto the pore walls. By means of this strategy, 20 different COFs were obtained with pores functionalized with a variety of functional groups, including ethyl, acetate, hydroxyl, carboxylic acid, and amino groups; these groups ranged from hydrophobic to hydrophilic and from basic to acidic ([R]X-H2PCOFs, [Et]X-H2P-COFs, [MeOAc]X-H2P-COFs, [EtOH]XH2P-COFs, [AcOH]X-H2P-COFs, [EtNH2]X-H2P-COFs).
The BET surface as well as the pore volume in the [HCC]X-H2PCOFs series decreases when the ethynyl content increases which indicates that the ethynyl groups occupy the pore space. By subsequent click functionalization of the COFs, the pore surface engineering steadily decreased the pore size from mesopores to supermicropores, allowing the systematic tuning of the pore sizes from 2.2 to 1.9, 1.6, and 1.5 nm. Such fine adjustments of the pore size have not been achieved via direct polycondensation. The CO2 uptake in these series of COFs was determined at 1 bar and 273 and 298 K. The best values were obtained for those COFs that can establish specific interactions with CO2. For example, (i) derivatives endowed with polar ester units can interact with CO2via dipole interactions and thus improve the affinity of the COF for CO2; (ii) [AcOH]X-H2P-COFs and [EtOH]X-H2P-COFs can establish dipole and hydrogen bonding interactions of carboxylic and hydroxyl units with CO2 and (iii) the amino groups can form acid–base pairs with CO2. Interestingly, all these COFs ([MeOAc]X-H2P-COFs, [AcOH]X-H2P-COFs, [EtOH]X-H2P-COFs, and [EtNH2]X-H2P-COFs) exhibit maximal capacities at X = 50. Among them, [EtNH2]50-H2P-COFs exhibited an adsorption capacity of 157 mg g−1, which is the highest in the series. The dramatic change in the adsorption of CO2 upon pore surface engineering is the result of a balance between the two contradictory effects of enhanced affinity and decreased porosity on adsorption.
Another approach for the pore-wall surface engineering strategy has also been developed by Jian et al. who synthesized a conventional imine-linked 2D-COF ([HO]100%-H2P-COF) as a scaffold with porphyrin at the vertices and phenol units on the pore walls;112 this 2D-COF exhibits a low capacity for carbon dioxide adsorption. Nevertheless, the phenol groups undergo a quantitative ring opening reaction with succinic anhydride that decorates the channel walls with open carboxylic acid groups ([HO2C]100%-H2PCOF). The content of carboxylic acid units on the channel can be tuned by adjusting the content of phenol groups through a three-component condensation system with a mixture of 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalaldehyde (DHTA, 3) and terephthaldehyde (1) as the wall components ([HO]X%-H2P-COFs, X = [DHTA]/([DHTA] + [PA])). Using this method, it was possible to synthesize a series of [HO2C]X%-H2P-COFs with controlled carboxylic acid density that varied from 25 to 100%.
The BET surface area (SBET) decreased from 786 to 673, 482, and 364 m2 g−1, whereas the pore size decreased from 2.2 to 1.9, 1.7, and 1.4 nm, as the content of carboxylic groups was increased from 25 to 50, 75 and 100%, respectively. The pore volume also decreased from 0.78 to 0.66, 0.54, and 0.43 cm3 g−1, as the content of carboxylic groups was increased. This reduction in porosity is indicative of space filling by the functional units appended to the channel walls.
The CO2 adsorption by [HO]X%-H2P-COFs at pressures up to 1 bar and at temperatures of 273 and 298 K was determined showing low capacities between 46 and 63 mg g−1 at 273 K and between 31 and 35 mg g−1 at 298 K. By contrast, the [HO2C]X%-H2P-COFs exhibited dramatically increased CO2 adsorption capacities. For example, [HO2C]100%-H2P-COF exhibited a capacity of 180 and 76 mg g−1 at 273 K and 298 K, respectively. These capacities are 2.8- and 2.2-fold greater than those of [HO]100%-H2P-COFs. Interestingly, the adsorption capacity of [HO2C]X%-H2P-COFs increased in proportion to their carboxylic acid content which clearly confirms the effectiveness of channel-wall functionalization in enhancing CO2 adsorption.
These contributions above show the benefits of precise pore surface engineering as a key strategy for the selective capturing of gases with COFs.
3.2 COFs for large molecule uptake
Immobilization of enzymes into mesoporous materials is potentially useful for applications such as biosensors and biocatalysts because they can increase the recyclability of the costly enzyme and also improve the stability of enzymes under extreme conditions. However, the application of COFs is still mostly limited to the storage of gas molecules (see above), since most of the COFs synthesized are microporous in nature and their pores are not large enough to hold larger guests, such as enzymes. While examples of mesoporous boronic acid-based COFs have been reported in the literature32,113 their chemical instability prevents the usage of these materials for the storage of large molecules such as drugs and enzymes20,114 Banerjee et al. have synthesized a chemically stable and mesoporous imino-based COF (COF-DhaTab), in order to study the adsorption and storage of the enzyme trypsin in the COF pores.26
Synthesis of COF-DhaTab was carried out by the Schiff base reaction between 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalaldehyde (3) and 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (36) under solvothermal conditions. The synthesized COF-DhaTab is highly crystalline, possesses a high surface area of ∼1500 m2g−1 and has a pore size distribution of 3.7 nm. Since COF-DhaTab is mesoporous in nature and has chemical stability in phosphate buffer and water, it is suitable to perform protein adsorption studies in it. Trypsin is a globular protein having a hydrodynamic size of ∼3.8 nm, which is close to the COF-DhaTab pore size (3.7 Å). This close match in the relative size does not affect the trypsin adsorption in COF pores, since enzymes are soft molecules and can adjust their conformation to fit inside the COF pores. The maximum storage capacity of the trypsin for the COF was found to be 15.5 mmol g−1. TEM images of the trypsin-loaded samples show that the hollow sphere morphology remains intact even after the loading process and retains ∼60% of the activity of the free enzyme which is comparable to other literature-reported values.26 Interestingly, the loading and release study of the anticancer drug doxorubicin (DOX) in the COF hollow system has also been tested. DOX loaded in COF was calculated to be 0.35 mg g−1 and the drug release profile shows a slow release of DOX (42%) after 7 d in phosphate (pH 5) buffer. This result paves the way for the future use of these types of COFs for the reversible binding and release of drug molecules.
As we mentioned in the description of the functionalization by post-polymerization methods, Medina, Bein et al. have recently demonstrated for the first time a two-step post-synthetic modification in a COF and synthesized an amine functionalized COF, TpBD(NH2)2 (Scheme 10).81 They have used this functionalized COF to perform lactic acid adsorption experiments showing that the affinity for lactic acid can be successfully increased by post-synthetic modification of the functional side groups in the COF pores. While the demand for lactic acid is drastically increasing, separation from its sources is the main bottleneck limiting the further upscaling of the production process. Considering that new materials for selective adsorption of lactic acid are in great demand, this strategy for the functionalization of COFs can provide suitable materials for this purpose.
3.3 Sensors based on COFs
In addition to gas capture, chemo-sensing is another area of significant interest that has been explored for COFs. In 2013, Jiang et al. reported the synthesis of an azine-linked COF (Py-Azine COF) which is highly luminescent whereas the azine sites serve as docking sites to lock guest molecules41 (Scheme 5). The synergistic functions of vertices and edges endow the COF with unique chemosensing characteristics. As demonstrated in the vapour detection of the 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) explosive, the COF exhibits high sensitivity and selectivity (Fig. 13). A BET surface area of 1210 m2 g−1, a pore volume of 0.72 cm3 g−1 and pore size distribution centred at 1.76 nm were determined for Py-Azine COF. Upon excitation at 470 nm, the Py-Azine COF emits a yellow luminescence with a red-shifted band centred at 522 nm. When acetonitrile solutions of Py-Azine COF are exposed to the TNP vapour, the characteristic COF fluorescence is quickly quenched. The fluorescence quenching degree reaches 69% when the concentration of TNP is as low as 70 ppm in acetonitrile which indicates that the COF is highly sensitive to TNP molecules. The chemosensing ability of this COF has been tested with a variety of nitrobenzene derivatives, including 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP), 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT), 2-nitrophenol (NP), and 2-nitrotoluene (NT), which are highly soluble in acetonitrile. Interestingly, when other nitrobenzene compounds are utilized under otherwise same conditions, the COF does not show a significant change. For example, the fluorescence quenching degrees are only 13, 5, 3, and 3% for DNP, DNT, NP, and NT, respectively. These remarkable results indicate that the Py-Azine COF offers a selective detection of TNP explosives among the above nitrobenzene compounds.
 Fig. 13  (A) Fluorescence quenching of the Py-Azine COF (Scheme 5) upon addition of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) (0–70 ppm) in acetonitrile. (B) Degree of fluorescence quench upon addition of the nitro compounds (70 ppm). Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17310–17313. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
As we already mentioned in the previous section dedicated to the gas adsorption in COFs, Murugavel et al. have prepared a series of imine or β-ketoenamine based COFs comprising [3+3] motifs TAPB-TFPB, iPrTAPB-TFPB, TAPB-TFP and iPrTAPB-TFP.106 By the virtue of triphenylbenzene as an inherently fluorescent platform, the COFs are also endowed with fluorescence and fluorescence chemo-sensing ability for polynitro-aromatic analytes. Thus, the fluorescence is effectively quenched in the presence of various concentrations of different polynitro-aromatic compounds such as picric acid (PA), dinitrotoluene (DNT), p-dinitrobenzene (p-DNB) and m-dinitrobenzene (m-DNB). Notably, PA is the most efficient quencher among all the polynitro-aromatic compounds which could be because of the proton transfer from PA to the nitrogen atoms of the COFs.
Banerjee et al. have also recently investigated the possibility of using chemical sensing of COFs for the detection of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP), over other nitroaromatic analytes such as 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), DNP, DNT, and NP.115 With this in mind, due to the well-known good photophysical properties of imides,103 they synthesized two imide based COFs (TpBDH and TfpBDH), each possessing a two dimensional layered structure, that exhibit porosity, crystallinity and chemical stability. The new COFs were obtained by reaction between pyrromellitic-N,N′-bisaminoimide (BDH, 26) and either 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) (for TpBDH) or 1,3,5-tris(4-formylphenyl)benzene (TFp, 29) (for TfpBDH) under solvothermal conditions.
In spite of the suitable photophysical characteristics of these COFs, the sensitivity and selectivity were found to be quite low for bulk COFs, due to the extensive aggregation of layers, which reduces the available electrons for analyte–COF interaction. Hence, an innovative strategy was developed that involved the exfoliation of these COFs into 2D covalent organic nanolayers (CONs) to minimize the aggregation and maximize the availability of electron density among the layers. By using one-step liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) undertaken in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) at room temperature it was possible to obtain thin 2D CONs composed of ∼5–15 stacked COF layers. TpBDH and TpBDH-CONs do not show any PL activity, as both TpBDH and TpBDH-CONs exist enol–keto tautomerization which leads to the disturbance in π-conjugation and “switches off” the fluorescence. On the other hand, it was observed that for TfpBDH, with an increase in the sonication time, CONs exhibit a stronger PL peak almost ∼90 times more intense than that observed for the bulk COF samples. Thus, TfpBDH-CONs show good selectivity and prominent, direct visual detection towards different nitroaromatic analytes. Quite interestingly, TfpBDH-CONs exhibit a superior “turn-on” detection capability for TNP in the solid state, but conversely, they also show a “turn-off” detection in the dispersion state. These findings describe a new approach towards developing an efficient, promising fluorescence chemosensor material for both visual and spectroscopic detection of nitroaromatic compounds with very low [10−5 (M)] analyte concentrations.
Triazatruxene based COFs have also been recently synthesized and show a quick-response fluorescence-on and fluorescence-off nature towards electron rich and deficient arene vapours.116 The triazatruxene-based COFs have a weak interaction with electron-rich arenes, so the fluorescence-on sensing of electron rich arenes can be reused conveniently.
Not only chemosensors but also biosensors have been developed based on COFs. Wang, Fang et al. reported in 2014 the use of an imine-linked COF as a biosensor for bovine serum albumin (BSA) adsorption and probe DNA immobilization (Fig. 14).77
 Fig. 14  Construction of imine-linked COF on the surface for bio-molecular adsorption. Taken from ref. 77. Reprinted with permission from Chin. J. Chem. 
In this case, they do not use the bulky synthesis of a COF but the condensation of the building blocks onto an amino functionalized silicon substrate (denoted as Si-AMS). Thus, Si-AMS can be reacted with 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27) in the presence of an acid catalyst to yield Si-AMS-CHO-1 which is subsequently reacted with p-phenylenediamine (17a) to afford Si-AMS-NH2. Triformylbenzene and p-phenylenediamine are reacted with treated silicon wafer by turns another 3 times to afford different materials denoted as Si-AMS-CHO-2, Si-AMS-NH2-2, Si-AMS-CHO-3, Si-AMSNH2-3, Si-AMS-CHO-4, and Si-AMS-NH2-4, respectively. Since a large amount of amino groups were reserved in the functional COF films, it is very helpful for biomolecules to adhere on due to the strong electrostatic interactions. In this study, tentative experiments of biomolecule immobilization on the COF film were tested by electrochemical methods. Electron impedance spectroscopy was used to determine the DNA immobilization or BSA adsorption on the surface of Si-AMS-NH2-4. It was clearly observed that the charge transfer resistance values of the composite electrodes decline, indicating that the adsorption of biomolecules onto COF films can strengthen the electrochemical activity of the functional film. This work represents a first example of how functionalized COFs can find use also as biosensors.
3.4 COF derivatives as catalysts
In comparison with amorphous porous materials, crystalline porous materials have great potential in catalysis because of their structural regularity.117 Indeed, inorganic zeolites have been widely used as catalysts in refining and petrochemical industries.118 Recent research has also demonstrated the possibility of employing MOF materials in catalysis.119 In order to develop COFs for catalysis applications, two basic but important issues had to be addressed. One is that the COF catalyst must show high stability to thermal treatments, water, and most of the organic solvents. Another is that the COF material should either have catalytic active sites or is able to incorporate catalytic species. As we have already seen COFs obtained by Schiff-base chemistry, being highly stable in water and most organic solvents, meet the first requirement as robust catalysts. Moreover, it has been well demonstrated120 in coordination chemistry that the imine type (Schiff base) ligands are versatile in incorporating a variety of metal ions. This motivated different research groups to explore the possibility of using COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry for catalysis. Thus, in the last few years, COFs have been revealed as excellent platforms to be used as catalysts in classical heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.

3.4.1 Heterogeneous catalyst. 
In 2011, Wang et al. reported the first example of a COF based on Schiff-base chemistry for catalysis.15 With this aim, they synthesized an imine-linked COF material (denoted as COF-LZU1) by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) under solvothermal conditions. COF-LZU1 possesses a two-dimensional eclipsed layered-sheet structure, making its incorporation with metal ions feasible. Thus, the palladium(II)-coordinated COF material (Pd/COF-LZU1) was synthesized via a simple treatment of COF-LZU1 with Pd(OAc)2 at room temperature.
The catalytic activity of the Pd/COF-LZU1 catalyst was examined in one of the representative Pd-catalysed reactions, i.e. the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction (Table 2). The Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction has been widely applied in homogeneous media for the facile formation of C–C bonds.121 In this study it is shown that Pd/COF-LZU1 possesses high catalytic activity in catalysing the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction.
Table 2 Reactions catalysed by COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry with an indication of the catalytic system used




Reaction
Catalyst
Ref.







Pd/COF-LZU1

15



H2P-Bph-COF

123






Pd(0)@TpPa-1

124






Pd(0)@TpPa-1

124






Pd(II)@TpPa-1

124






Pd(II)/COF-SDU1

125






BF-COF1

126



BF-COF-2





2,3-DhaTph

24



2,3-DmaTph





[Pyr]X-H2P-COFs

127






Py-An COF

128






PMA@COF-300

129



Mo-COF

82






Au(0)@TpPa-1

84





Catalysed by 0.5 mol% of Pd/COF-LZU1, the substituted aryl iodides with either an electron-donating or an electron-withdrawing group afforded the cross coupling products in excellent yields (96–97%). Less active bromobenzenes also gave excellent yields (96–98%) within 2.5–4 h at 150 °C. Furthermore, when 0.1 mol% catalyst was used, the reaction also worked well but with a longer reaction time (5 h). Interestingly, in comparison with a Pd(II)-containing MOF,122Pd/COF-LZU1 required less catalyst-loading and shorter reaction time and showed higher reaction yield.
The potential application of the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction in industry is still limited due to the difficulty in separating and recycling the expensive Pd-catalysts from the product mixture. Using recyclable palladium catalysts is therefore a promising solution to these problems. Thus, the recyclable use of the Pd/COF-LZU1 catalyst (1.0 mol%) was further examined in the reaction of p-nitrobromobenzene with phenylboronic acid. The results demonstrated that the Pd/COF-LZU1 catalyst could be reused at least four times without loss of catalytic activity and selectivity.
More recently, Zhang et al. have synthesized a metal-free porphyrin-based COF (H2P-Bph-COF) which exhibits remarkable catalytic activity also toward the Suzuki-coupling reaction between bromoarenes and arylboronic acids under mild conditions with high yield of 97.1–98.5%.123 The COF was synthesized by reaction between 5,10,15,20-tetra(p-aminophenyl) porphyrine (47) and 4,4′-biphenyldialdehyde (2) under solvothermal reaction conditions. Due to the abundant and periodically distributed N atoms in this COF, it acts as good support to incorporate Pd ions in a very stable and uniformly disperse manner. Following the seminal approach toward the catalysis of Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions, a variety of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry has been used to catalyse different reactions. Thus, in 2014, Banerjee et al. successfully immobilized not only Pd(II) complexes but also highly dispersed Pd(0) nanoparticles in a stable, crystalline and porous COF TpPa-1, obtained by reaction between p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucynol (28) (Scheme 6).124 The successful incorporation of both Pd(0) nanoparticles and the Pd(II) complex on the porous COF support was carried out at room temperature by a simple infiltration method.47
The most important aspect of these hybrids is their remarkable stability in water and under harsh conditions (e.g. strong basic or acidic conditions), which remains associated with the judicious selection of the TpPa-1 framework enriched with nitrogen and oxygen atoms.
The COF skeleton imparted stability to the active metal centres and the strong interaction of loaded Pd(0) nanoparticles and the Pd(II) complex with the nitrogen and oxygen atoms within the selected COF not only facilitates the catalysis in the absence of additional ligands but also provides extra strength. Thus, the described supported and highly dispersed Pd(0) nanoparticles exhibited excellent catalytic activity towards Cu free Sonogashira and Heck coupling reactions (Table 2) under basic conditions, and superior performance than that observed using commercially available Pd immobilized on activated charcoal. The Pd(0)@TpPa-1 catalyst was also efficient in one-pot sequential Heck/Sonogashira reactions. Moreover, the precursor Pd(II)-doped COF displayed competitive activity for the intramolecular oxidative bis-aryl synthesis under acidic conditions.
Another interesting carbon–carbon cross-coupling reaction which is receiving a lot of interest in recent years is the silicon-based cross-coupling reaction (Table 2).130 In recent years, oxidation of organosilanes to fabricate silicon coupling reagents catalysed by transition metal has been rapidly developed.131 This method was more green and facile over other conventional routes because the oxides in these reactions are water or alcohols and the only by-product is H2. Thus, Zhang et al. have recently synthesized a novel COF material (COF-SDU1), containing both imine and triazine functional groups, by condensation reaction between p-phenylenediamine (17a) and nitrogen-rich triazine building block tri-(4-formacylphenoxy)-1,3,5-triazine (33).132 This material can sturdily stabilize and regularly mono-disperse the palladium species due to the two dimensional eclipsed layer-sheet structure and the nitrogen-rich content of COF-SDU1. The Pd(II)/COF-SDU1, a sustainable and green catalyst, exhibits excellent catalytic activity and selectivity towards the silicon-based one-pot cross-coupling reaction of silanes and aryl iodide. This is the first example of a COF derivative that combines the oxidation of silanes and the next cross-coupling in a single catalytic system. In addition, the catalyst can be reused several times without obvious metal leaching, sintering behaviour and evident loss of catalytic activity.
COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry have also been used as catalysts in other important C–C bond-forming reactions in organic synthesis such as the Knoevenagel condensation reaction or the Michael nucleophilic addition reaction (Table 2). Interestingly, in these cases, additional metallic nanoparticles are not necessary and the COF itself acts as the catalyst. Thus, in 2014 Yan et al. reported the use of new 3D-microporous COFs as catalysts in Knoevenagel condensation reactions.126 The new 3D microporous base functionalized COFs, termed BF-COF1 and BF-COF-2, were designed and synthesized by using a tetrahedral alkyl amine, 1,3,5,7-tetraaminoadamantane (TAA, 52). As the aldehyde reaction partner, 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (TFB, 27) or triformylphloroglucinol (TFP, 28) was used to act as the planar triangular building unit. Condensation reactions between tetrahedral TAA (52) and triangular TFB (27) or TFP (28) give respectively BF-COF1 and BF-COF-2 as novel 3D porous functionalized COFs through imine-bond formation.
The catalytic properties of the BF-COFs were explored in the Knoevenagel condensation reaction, and both BF-COFs were shown to have excellent catalytic activity with high conversion (96% for BF-COF-1 and 98% for BF-COF-2), highly efficient size selectivity, and good recyclability.
Nature’s strategy of employing multistep cascade reaction for the synthesis of complex and bioactive organic molecules in living systems has been a source of inspiration for designing artificial catalysts. Most of the time, a multistep chemical process involves multisite catalysts. However, by performing the consecutive reaction steps in one pot, costly intermediate separations and purification processes will be avoided. Therefore, also from an energy saving point of view, the design of solid catalysts with well-defined multisites is of interest to achieve more-intensive chemical processes.133 With this aim, in 2015, Banerjee et al. have reported the use of a bifunctional COF with 2D organocatalytic micropores as catalysts for a cascade-type reaction that involves the hydrolysis of a dimethylketal followed by the reaction of the formed aldehyde with malononitrile through a Knovenagel reaction (Table 2).24
The bifunctional COF used as the catalyst in cascade-type reactions, 2,3-DhaTph (Fig. 2), was synthesized by reversible Schiff-base reaction using 2,3-dihydroxyterephthalaldehyde (3) and a 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)-21H,23H-porphirine unit (47) under solvothermal conditions. 2,3-DhaTph COF possesses separate antagonist catalytic sites in which catecholic –OH groups act as weak acidic sites, whereas porphyrin units and imine bonds act as basic sites, with high chemical stability in aqueous/acidic media along with high crystallinity and porosity. The catalytic activity of 2,3-DhaTph COF toward acid–base catalysed one-pot cascade reactions133 was analysed using a model reaction, wherein a number of substituted dimethyl acetal reactants reacts with malononitrile showing excellent conversion (80–96%). It is worth mentioning that the same reaction without the catalyst yielded less than 5% of the products.
The pore surface engineering strategy has also been revealed as an efficient tool for the construction of covalently linked and highly active organocatalytic COFs. Thus, Jiang et al. have demonstrated this strategy by highlighting the controlled integration of organocatalytic sites into the pore walls of a functionalized COF to synthesize organocatalytic COFs that exhibit enhanced activity in asymmetric Michael addition reactions (Table 2) while retaining stereoselectivity.127 A Michael addition is a typical organocatalytic reaction, is one of the basic C–C bond formation reactions and provides a powerful synthetic tool for the formation of synthons of many important natural and biologically active products.134 For this purpose, a mesoporous imine-linked porphyrin COF was used as a scaffold in which the porphyrin units are located at the vertices and the phenyl groups occupy the edges of tetragonal polygon frameworks.28 The monomeric building blocks were functionalized such as they allow the synthesis of imine-linked COFs (COFs) bearing content-tuneable, accessible, and reactive ethynyl groups on the walls of one-dimensional pore edges ([HCC]X-H2P-COFs, X = 25, 50, 75, and 100 (X = 0: H2P-COF), Scheme 11).80 As is shown in the previous section, these COFs have been revealed as ideal platforms for pore-wall surface engineering aimed at anchoring diverse functional groups ranging from hydrophobic to hydrophilic units and from basic to acidic moieties with controllable loading contents. In this study, Jiang et al. used the further click reaction of [HCC]X-H2P-COFs with pyrrolidine azide to quantitatively yield the corresponding [Pyr]X-H2P-COFs (Fig. 15). Pyrrolidine moieties were incorporated into the COFs as they are well-known organocatalysts for Michael addition reactions.135 In comparison with the use of a small pyrrolidine derivative used as a control, it is shown that the organocatalytic COFs have significantly higher catalytic activity than the monomeric catalyst, while retaining the stereoselectivity. It is worth mentioning that the catalytic activity depends upon the density of the active sites on the pore walls. Highly dense pyrrolidine units in the pores cause a steric congestion and impede the mass transport through the channels.
 Fig. 15  Top: Schematic structure of pyrrolidine containing COFs [Pyr]X-H2P-COFs. Bottom: Representative chart for the flow reaction system based on the organocatalytic COF column fabricated with [Pyr]25-H2P-COF. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The possibility of a continuous flow reaction using a columnar setup has also been tested by using a column consisting of a vertically mounted Teflon pipe loaded with silica gel at the bottom and [Pyr]25-H2P-COF atop the silica gel. It was found that the set up worked well at room temperature and yielded an optimal conversion when a solution of trans-4-chloro-β-nitrostyrene and propionaldehyde in a mixture of water–EtOH (1/1 v/v) was passed through at a flow rate of 18 μL min−1. The column maintained 100% conversion and its stereoselectivities (44% ee, 65/35 dr) for more than 48 h under flow conditions.127
In 2015, Jiang et al. converted achiral COF derivatives into chiral organocatalysts, with the high crystallinity and porosity retained, by appending chiral centres and catalytically active sites on its channel walls. The COFs thus prepared combine catalytic activity, enantioselectivity and recyclability and were shown to promote asymmetric C–C bond formation in water under ambient conditions.29 For the synthesis of the novel structure developed, [HCC]X-TPB-DMTP-COF, a three component condensation system with 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene (TPB, 36), 2,5-bis(2-propynyloxy)terephthalaldehyde (BPTA, 7) and 2,5-dimethoxyterephthalaldehyde (DMTA, 4) as edge units was used. The [HCC]X-TPB-DMTP-COFs were converted into chiral organocatalytic [(S)-Py]X-TPB-DMTP-COFs ((S)-Py, (S)-pyrrolidine) in which chiral and catalytic (S)-Py sites were anchored onto the channel walls through triazole rings formed quantitatively via click reaction in a random manner.
Typically, Michael reactions are conducted in organic solvents or in mixed organic–aqueous solutions; the use of neat water as a solvent is particularly attractive from the environmental and economic points of view. The high catalytic activity of [(S)-Py]X-TPB-DMTP-COFs allows Michael reactions to be conducted in neat water at 25 °C and 1 bar. The insolubility of the [(S)-Py]X-TPB-DMTP-COFs gives rise to heterogeneous systems that have outstanding catalytic activities.
The Michael reaction of cyclohexanone and β-nitrostyrene proceeds cleanly and smoothly and achieves 100% conversion in 12 h with enantioselectivity (ee) and diastereoselectivity (dr) values of 92% and 90/10, respectively. When a molecular catalyst (S)-Py with the same catalytic structure is used as a control, a much longer reaction time of 22 h is required. Remarkably, [(S)-Py]X-TPB-DMTP-COFs can be easily separated from the reaction mixture, and subsequently reused. Thus [(S)-Py]0.17-TPB-DMTP-COF retained its activity, enantioselectivity and diastereoselectivity after five cycles.
Another important reaction which has been catalysed by COFs based on Schiff base chemistry is the Diels–Alder reaction (Table 2). The [4+2] cycloaddition reactions, known as Diels–Alder reactions, are some of the cornerstone transformations in modern organic chemistry and have been frequently used for the synthesis of biologically active compounds and natural products.136 The COF used as a catalytic bead for Diels–Alder reaction under ambient conditions was synthesized via condensation of 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-formylphenyl)pyrene (42) with 2,6-diaminoanthracene (22) under solvothermal conditions.128 The π-electron rich COF (Py-An COF) is suited to create interactions between the pore walls and reagents suitable to form C–H⋯π interactions137 thus promoting an accumulation of reactants within the pore walls reducing the entropy loss and activation energy of the reaction. Thus, to investigate the ability of Py-An COF to act as a catalyst in Diels–Alder reaction, a variety of maleimide derivatives with different N-substituents were used for the reaction with 9-hydroxymethylanthracene in neat water and under ambient conditions. In all cases, the Py-An COF catalysts significantly enhance the yields, compared to the controls without the COF catalyst, and provide the highest catalytic activities among the heterogeneous catalysts reported to date, which work at elevated temperatures.136
COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry have also been used as catalysts in oxidation and reduction reactions. Thus, Jia et al. have reported an approach to obtain a COF-based catalyst for epoxidation reactions.129 In this contribution a 3D structured COF material, named COF-30010 was used as support to immobilize 12-phosphomolybdic acid (PMA) for getting novel hybrid PMA-based solid catalysts (PMA@COF-300). COF-300 was obtained by reaction between terephthaldehyde (1) and tetra-(4-anilyl)-methane (51) under solvothermal conditions and the supported PMA@COF-300 composites were prepared by the wetness impregnation method. Different composites were prepared by changing the contents of PMA and the preparation temperatures. The catalytic properties of the PMA@COF-300 composites were investigated in the epoxidation of cyclooctene, 1-octene and cyclododecene with t-BuOOH as the oxidant. The studies show that the PMA@COF-300 composites are all active and selective catalysts for the epoxidation of olefins. However, the catalytic activity is slightly lower than that of homogeneous PMA used for comparison purposes.
Jiang et al. have developed an alternative and more efficient approach for the preparation of COF-based catalysts for the epoxidation of olefins (Table 2). They have developed a bottom-up approach to engineer a molybdenum-doped covalent organic framework, henceforth denoted as Mo-COF, the catalyst for selective oxidation reaction.82 The synthetic strategy can be divided into two steps starting with the synthesis of the crystalline COF by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) and 1,4-dicarbonyl-phenyl-dihydrazide (14) under solvothermal conditions. The second step involves the introduction of a Mo resource into the porous network by treatment of a methanolic mixture of the COF with MoO2(acac)2 under reflux (Scheme 12). By means of this strategy, an efficient π-connected organomolybdenum catalyst with a high active site density (2.0 mmol g−1) was successfully constructed. XPS studies indicate the strong coordination of Mo with the benzoyl salicylal hydrazine groups of COFs; this group further withdrew electrons from Mo, which made the Mo species more electron-deficient.
 Scheme 12  Formation of the molecular building blocks of the Mo-COF. 
To show that the Mo-COF was catalytically active, the performance of the Mo-COF as a nanochannel-reactor was evaluated in the context of the epoxidation of different olefin substrates of various molecular sizes using tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) as an oxidant. As a representative example, cyclohexane gave 99% conversion and 71% selectivity after 6 h which significantly improves the result of the same reaction when using homogeneous Mo(HSY)2 as a catalyst with 29% conversion and 68% epoxidized selectivity. Upon the completion of the reaction, the catalyst could be easily recovered in almost quantitative yield by simple filtration and could be used repeatedly without significant degradation of the catalytic performance after four cycles.
Concerning reduction reactions, COFs with gold[Au(0)] nanoparticles immobilized (Au(0)@TpPa-1) have shown superior catalytic activity for 4-nitrophenol (4-NPh) reduction to afford 4-aminophenol (4-APh).84 Since 4-aminophenol is important due to its usage as a developer in black and white films and as an intermediate in the synthesis of the drug paracetamol, for its synthesis a catalytic system with high associated product yield, selectivity and recyclability is desirable. TpPa-1 (Scheme 6) was obtained by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) and the Au(0)@TpPa-1 catalyst was synthesized by mixing HAuCl4·3H2O with evacuated TpPa-1 in methanol under vigorous stirring. An uniform loading of 5 ± 3 nm sized Au nanoparticles on the TpPa-1 matrix was observed under these conditions. The as-synthesised Au(0)@TpPa-1 was tested for the catalytic reduction of 4-NPh in the presence of excess NaBH4 in water as the solvent. The best performance was obtained when 1.2 wt% of Au loaded Au(0)@TpPa-1 catalyst was used as the catalyst, for which conversion of 4-NPh to 4-APh was completed within 13 min. The reaction did not occur when using only TpPa-1 as the catalyst and proceeded comparatively slower with HAuCl4·3H2O (conversion time: 20 min).
The probable reason for the momentous activity shown by Au(0)@TpPa-1 may be the fine distribution of very tiny nanoparticles on the TpPa-1 matrix, which leads to a very large surface area of the nanoparticles and high particle number per unit mass of the catalyst. The increased fraction of the atoms at the surface in Au(0)@TpPa-1 leads to a significantly higher catalytic activity. Furthermore, the overall recyclability with almost unchanged reactivity for more than 6 cycles shown by the reported catalyst is promising towards the heterogenization of Au catalysts for commercially important transformation reactions.


3.4.2 Photocatalyst. 
Currently, a number of photocatalysts based on highly porous materials, such as MOFs,138 carbon nitride sheets,139 and polymers, are employed as photosensitizers and support for the loading of active nanoparticles resulting in improved catalytic activity. However, most of these materials show limited performance owing to the poor water stability, as in the case of MOFs and carbon nitride sheets, and poor crystallinity as in the case of polymers, which affects their photocatalytic activity.
As we have already seen, the remarkable stability in both acidic and basic media along with high surface area and porosity of several COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry together with their crystalline nature with high surface area and porosity makes them an attractive support matrix for the loading of nanoparticles. Moreover, the 2D crystalline nature of some of these COFs is reported to enhance the charge mobility on its surface owing to the presence of π arrays in comparison to the 1D or 3D polymers.140 Thus, Kurungot, Banerjee et al. have employed a highly stable COF (TpPa-2, Scheme 6) as a support matrix for anchoring CdS nanoparticles and used these CdS@COF hybrids for photocatalytic H2 production.83TpPa-2 can be obtained by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) and 2,5-dimethylbenzene-1,4-diamine (17b) under solvothermal conditions. The CdS@COF hybrid was subsequently obtained by hydrothermal synthesis of CdS nanoparticles on the COF matrix (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  TEM images of the COF (left) and the CdS-COF (90:10) hybrid (right); inset: lattice fringes of CdS nanoparticles in the CdS-COF (90:10) hybrid. Taken from ref. 83. Reprinted with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
To examine the photocatalytic behaviour of the CdS@COF hybrids, visible-light-driven H2 evolution experiments were carried out using 0.5 wt% Pt as a co-catalyst, lactic acid as the sacrificial agent, and a 400 W xenon arc lamp with a UV cut-off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm) as a visible light source. Under visible-light illumination, the as-synthesized bulk CdS showed a photocatalytic hydrogen production of 128 μmol h−1 g−1. Remarkably, upon addition of just 1 wt% of COF, a dramatic increase in the H2 production with 1320 μmol h−1 g−1 was observed, which is about ten times higher than that of the bulk CdS. Furthermore, CdS@COF (90:10) was found to display the photocatalytic activity with 3678 μmol h−1 g−1 of H2 production. The control experiments under dark conditions showed negligible H2 production, which unambiguously confirmed that the catalytic activity of the hybrid materials is triggered by light. The presence of a π-conjugated backbone, high surface area, and occurrence of abundant 2D hetero-interfaces highlight the usage of this COF as an effective support for stabilizing the generated photoelectrons, thereby resulting in an efficient and high photocatalytic activity. In addition, the TEM study confirmed that the CdS@COF hybrid is stable up to three consecutive cycles with CdS nanoparticles still dispersed on the COF matrix.
Lotsch et al. have recently shown that a triphenylarene platform can readily be tuned for photocatalytic water reduction as a direct consequence of molecular engineering. Thus, they have reported triazine-based COF photocatalysts active for visible light induced hydrogen evolution.40,44 Triazine-based molecules offer high electron mobilities, an electron withdrawing character and are hence widely used in synthetic chemistry and optoelectronics.141 A progressive substitution of alternate carbons in the central aryl ring of the triphenylaryl platform (Fig. 17, green dots) by nitrogen atoms leads to a change in the electronic and steric properties of the central ring, that is, N = 0 (phenyl), N = 1 (pyridyl), N = 2 (pyrimidyl) and N = 3 (triazine). The substitution of the C–H moiety with nitrogen atoms produces a change in the dihedral angle between the central aryl ring and the peripheral phenyl rings, which in turn leads to varied degrees of planarity in the platform. In addition, this results in a progressive decrease in electron density in the central aryl ring of the COF platform as the number of nitrogen atoms increases from 0 to 3. Thus, the synthesis of Nx-COFs (x = 0, 1, 2 and 3) was carried out by an azine formation reaction of suitable aldehydes with hydrazine and the consequent influence on photocatalytic hydrogen production was explored.
 Fig. 17  A tunable triphenylarene platform for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Replacement of ‘C–H’ by ‘nitrogen atoms’ at the green dots changes the angle between central aryl and peripheral phenyl rings, which leads to varied planarity in the platform. 
The hydrogen evolution experiments were performed by taking a suspension of the COFs in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 7 and irradiating with visible light (≥420 nm) at 25 °C. Hexachloroplatinic acid was added for the in situ formation of the platinum (Pt) co-catalyst142 to reduce the over-potential for hydrogen evolution, and triethanolamine (TEoA) was used as a sacrificial electron donor.98 All COFs evolve hydrogen in the test period of 8 h. Interestingly, though the Nx-COFs show about a fourfold increase in hydrogen evolution with each substitution of C–H by N in the central aryl ring of the COF platform. Thus, at the end of 8 h the average amount of hydrogen produced by N0, N1, N2 and N3-COF was 23, 90, 438 and 1703 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively.
Theoretical calculations indicate an increase in the stabilization of the radical anions in the most nitrogen-rich COFs which nicely correlates with the observed trend in hydrogen production. The stabilization of the anion radical likely enhances the charge separation, thereby increasing the probability of successful electron migration to a nearby Pt co-catalyst. The relevance of the anion radical for hydrogen evolution likewise shifts the focus to the sacrificial electron donor, whose interaction with the COF likely determines how quickly the hole can be quenched. Therefore, these results suggest that tuning the interfacial interactions between the COF and the electron donor may be a promising route to optimize the hydrogen evolution efficiencies further in such systems.
The amount of hydrogen evolved from the most active N3-COF is competitive with carbon nitride photocatalysts and outperforms benchmark systems such as Pt-modified amorphous melon (720 μmol h−1 g−1),139 g-C3N4 (840 μmol h−1 g−1)143 or crystalline poly(triazine imide) (864 μmol h−1 g−1).139 This work demonstrates the potential of organic materials in solar energy conversion where a vast array of organic building blocks and bond-forming reactions provide an extensive toolbox for the systematic fine-tuning of their structural and physical properties thus making way for the application of COFs in photocatalytic water splitting.
The study of singlet molecular oxygen production and reactivity has emerged as a rich and diverse area with implications in fields ranging from polymer science to cancer therapy.144 In this respect, Jiang et al. have investigated the photocatalytic activity of COF derivatives for singlet oxygen generation.23 With this aim, they synthesized a family of porphyrine-based 2D-COFs locked with intralayer hydrogen-bonding (H-bonding) interactions. The H-bonding interaction sites were located on the edge units of the imine-linked tetragonal copper porphyrin COF. For comparison purposes, analogous polymers were synthesized without H-bonding sites exhibiting an amorphous structure. The copper porphyrine based 2D-COF (CuP-DHPh COF, Fig. 18) with H-bonds was synthesized by reaction between dihydroxyterephthalaldehyde (DHTA, 3) and the 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4′-tetraphenylamino) porphyrin derivative (CuP, 48, M = Cu). On the other hand, the amorphous polymer analogue (CuP-Ph, Fig. 18) was obtained by reaction between terephthaladehyde (1) and the 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4′-tetraphenylamino) porphyrin derivative (CuP, 48, M = Cu). The intralayer H-bonding interactions suppress the torsion of the edge units and lock the tetragonal sheets in a planar conformation. This planarization enhances the interlayer interactions and triggers extended π-cloud delocalization over the 2D sheets. Upon AA stacking, the resulting COFs with layered 2D sheets amplify these effects and strongly affect the physical properties of the material, including improving their crystallinity, enhancing their porosity, increasing their light-harvesting capability, reducing their band gap, and enhancing their photocatalytic activity toward the generation of singlet oxygen.
 Fig. 18  Top: Chemical structure of the H-bonded CuP-DHPh COF and the non H-bonded amorphous CuP-Ph. Bottom: Absorption spectral changes of DPBF in the presence of (A) the CuP-DHPh COF and (B) the amorphous CuP-Ph Polymer, in an oxygen saturated DMF solution upon irradiation at 500 nm. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3241–3247. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
Thus, the photocatalytic activity of the COFs was examined by using 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF) as a label for the singlet oxygen generation monitored by time-dependent electronic absorption spectroscopy.145 Indeed, the visible light irradiation of an oxygen-saturated DMF solution of DPBF in the presence of the CuP-DHPh COF triggered a steady conversion of molecular oxygen into singlet oxygen, as evidenced by the spectral change of DPBF, with clear isosbestic points. The CuP-DHPh COF is exceptionally active as a photocatalyst exhibiting a 10–20-fold enhancement in activity compared with those of other CuP derivatives. Control experiments carried out with the monomeric CuTPP as well as with the amorphous CuP-Ph polymer without H-bonding sites on the edges exhibited a low rate of reaction, thus demonstrating the remarkable effect of the supramolecular interactions on the structure of the material as well as on their physical properties.


3.4.3 Electrocatalyst. 
Mao et al. have recently reported an approach to involve COF based materials in electrocatalysis.146 They have demonstrated that cobalt-porphyrine-based COFs can be used as a new kind of Co, N-containing precursor to produce Co/N/C catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). After the formation of the cobalt–porphyrine-based COFs, it is subsequently pyrolyzed under a nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C, resulting in the formation of a nanomaterial that exhibits an excellent electrocatalytic performance toward ORR in alkaline media, which is much comparable to the commercial 20% Pt/C catalyst. After pyrolysis at 900 °C, the characteristic diffraction peaks of the COF disappear with the generation of several new peaks in the PXRD pattern. Analysis of the new peaks suggests the formation of graphitic carbons upon pyrolysis. And the mechanism for the ORR catalysis remains unclear.
More interestingly, COF derivatives have been recently reported to act as catalysts for electrochemical reduction of CO2. The sustainable reductive transformation of CO2 into a value-added carbon product such as carbon monoxide (CO) receives currently broad interest as a consequence of the global energy demands and climate change. In this respect, electrolytic approaches benefit from using water as the reaction medium, as it is a cheap, abundant, and environmentally benign solvent that facilitates proton and electron transfer.147 The charge carrier mobility of some COF derivatives (see below) derived from π-conjugation and π–π stacking, combined with their good thermal and chemical stability have prompted Yaghi, Chang et al. to consider COF derivatives as suitable tuneable materials to be used as heterogeneous catalysts for electrochemical reduction.125 They have shown that incorporation of catalytic cobalt porphyrin units into COFs gives highly active, stable, and selective catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide in water. The model framework (COF-366-Co) was synthesized by the imine condensation of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)porphinato cobalt [Co(TAP), 48, M = Co] with terephthaldehyde (1). For electrochemical experiments, the activated microcrystalline COF powders were deposited on porous, conductive carbon fabric. In controlled potential electrolyses performed in carbon dioxide-saturated aqueous bicarbonate buffer (pH = 7.3) under applied potentials between −0.57 and −0.97 V (vs. RHE), carbon monoxide was the major reduction product. Thus, at −0.67 V, COF-366-Co promoted carbon monoxide evolution at an initial current density of 5 mA per milligram of catalyst (ca. 80 mA per milligram of cobalt), with high selectivity over competing proton reduction [Faradaic efficiency for carbon monoxide (FECO) = 90%]. The catalytic activity of the COF could be preserved for 24 h, accumulating more than 36 mL of carbon monoxide. To enhance this type of carbon dioxide catalyst platform, the synthesis of expanded derivatives with large pore size and the introduction of building block heterogeneity through a multivariate strategy148 have been addressed providing different heterogeneous systems that promote carbon dioxide reduction to carbon monoxide with remarkably high activity and selectivity.125
The contributions reviewed in this section show that in comparison with other crystalline porous materials, the unique structures of these COFs provide efficient access to the catalytic sites and fast mass-transport of the reactant/products, thus providing good catalytic activities. It can be expected that the approaches outlined above will boost the research on employing COF materials for catalysis.

3.5 Electrical conductivity and charge carrier mobility in COFs
Many organic compounds can efficiently be produced and processed on a large scale and can be easily modified by the versatile tools of organic chemistry.85,86 The ability to design the desired material on a molecular basis permits the fine-tuning of the energy gap and HOMO/LUMO levels of the semiconductor. However, important issues still need to be addressed for the fabrication of competitive electronic devices. For example, the devices often exhibit low stability and efficiencies that are lower than expected. The latter is often caused by low charge carrier mobilities and recombination, due to inefficient stacking of the conducting polymers or due to insufficient and disordered donor–acceptor interfaces.149 Therefore it would be desirable to have synthetic access to conducting materials with total control over their nanoscale structure and orientation.
By virtue of their three-dimensional orderings at the atomic scale, 2D-COFs have shown a great potential to perform core functions in organic electronics such as light emission,2 charge transfer and separation,103,150 and semiconduction.151,152 However, typical COFs lack intra-sheet π-conjugation and chemical stability, which significantly limit their practical utility. To address this shortcoming, a chemically stable yet fully π-conjugated COF is highly desirable. Such a framework with three-dimensionally ordered chain alignment may provide a solution for the long-standing daunting challenges in semiconducting polymer technology.153,154 A conjugated polymer that combines permanent porosity and structural 3D ordering such as 2D-COFs is a suitable material to address these challenges.
While boronic acid condensation has been extensively used for the synthesis of COFs, such COFs do not possess in-plane conjugation. For incorporation into standard back-gate geometry field-effect transistors (FETs, the cornerstone device of organic-based electronics, commonly used to probe the electronic characteristics of new semiconducting materials),155,156 charge transport must occur in the plane of the film. Hence, while boronate ester-type COFs can possess out-of-plane charge transport properties,2,157 they would still have to assume an edge-on orientation with respect to the substrate to yield operational FETs, a configuration presenting considerable practical difficulty. Thus, a processable 2D material capable of in-plane charge transport could contribute both to the fabrication of nanoscale devices for practical applications and to furthering our understanding of the fundamental physics of 2D semiconducting materials. In this respect, COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry offer the possibility of developing fully conjugated 2D crystalline networks.
With this aim, in 2011, Yaghi et al. reported the first charge carrier mobility study on imino-based 2D-COFs.152 This COF (COF-366) was synthesized by reaction between tetra(p-aminophenyl)porphyrine (47) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) under solvothermal conditions. It has a BET surface area of 735 m2 g−1, a pore volume of 0.32 cm3 g−1 and a pore size distribution of 17.6 Å. The electrical conductivity of COF-366 across a gap of 2 μm between two Au electrodes was determined. It displayed almost linear I–V profiles in air at 25 °C and, for example, at 0.2 V bias voltage, the electric current of COF-366 is 0.75 nA which proves that this COF is in fact conductive. In addition, the time-of-flight (TOF) transient current integration measurements performed on 1.5 μm thick COF-366/poly(methylmethacrylate) films (60/40 in wt%) between Al and indium tin oxide electrodes reveal hole conduction. It transpires that COF-366 is a p-type semiconductor with one-dimensional hole mobility (Σμ) of 8.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. This mobility is extraordinarily high with the value being greater than that of inorganic amorphous silicon (∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1), and much higher than those of common conjugated polymers and highly ordered crystalline organic semiconductors.15
Different research groups have used the important electroactive TTF building block158 as a basic unit for the synthesis of semiconducting COFs. Thus, in 2014 Zhang, Liu et al. synthesized the so-called TTF-COF by reaction between tetrathiafulvalene-tetrabenzaldehyde (43) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) under solvothermal conditions (Fig. 19). Thin films of TTF-COFs with nominal thickness around 150 nm can be grown in situ from the liquid phase on Si/SiO2 substrates and transparent ITO-coated glass.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of the TTF-COF. (b) Illustration of the mixed-valence state in the TTF-COF. The “” indicates inter-TTF-layer interactions. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) of the thin films indicates their polycrystalline nature with preferential orientation of the columns normal to the substrate. A conductivity of 1.2 × 10−6 S cm−1 was determined for these films. Exposure of the thin film to I2 vapour in a closed chamber results in a significant increase of electrical conductivity which reaches a maximum of 2.8 × 10−3 S cm−1. This is due to the ability of TTF to form highly conductive charge-transfer salts with electron acceptors such as I2 or tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and the presence of open nanochannels within the 2D-COF that allow the incorporation of molecular dopants as a charge transfer partner (Fig. 19).159 The conductivity changes are correlated with diagnostic signatures in UV-vis-NIR and EPR spectra,160 pointing to effective radical delocalization within mixed-valence TTF stacks. Thus, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies of the solid compounds further confirmed the effectiveness of chemical doping. A weak signal in the EPR spectrum of the pristine TTF-COF indicates the presence of very small amounts of paramagnetic TTF+, which corresponds to weakly doped TTF in as synthesized COFs.
In 2014, Wang, Zhang et al. reported the synthesis of a TTF-COF by using the same starting materials.161 In this work, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to investigate the electrochemical behaviour of the TTF-COF. As the TTF-COF is insoluble in common organic solvents, the working electrode for CV measurements has to be modified. With this purpose, the TTF-COF and carbon black were ground in an agate mortar and pestle, and the ground powder is then sonicated in CH2Cl2. Then the electrode was prepared by drop-casting the CH2Cl2 suspension onto the tip of the Pt working electrode. With this setup it is possible to obtain a typical surface confined voltammetric profile with two reversible redox processes at 0.69 and 1.07 V, indicating the electron-donating character of the TTF-COF. In this case, a maximum conductivity of 1.8 × 10−6 S cm−1 was obtained for the TTF-COF after doping with iodine. Furthermore, the temperature dependence of the resistance in the range of 0 to 40 °C reveals the semiconductor-like behaviour of the TTF-COF after doping with iodine.
Jiang et al. also reported the synthesis of TTF-COF from the same starting materials and, additionally, synthesized a new TTF-based COF (TTF-Py-COF) by reacting tetrathiafulvalene-tetrabenzaldehyde (43) and 2,3,6,7-tetra(4-aminophenyl)pyrene (49) under solvothermal conditions.162
Both TTF-based COFs constitute periodic TTF columns and ordered porous channels.The TTF-COF has an interlayer distance of 3.71 Å for a slipped AA stacking mode, whereas the TTF-Py-COF adopts a longer distance of 3.87 Å. Meanwhile, the TTF-COF assumes an almost planar sheet conformation, whereas the TTF-Py-COF displays a distorted conformation. These differences in layered structures originate from the difference of linkers between TTF units in the COFs. The phenyl linker in the TTF-COF has a planar conformation, while the paddle shaped tetraphenylpyrene linker distorts the layer from a planar conformation and expands the interlayer distance. Interestingly, the charge carrier mobility of the COFs with periodically aligned TTF columns was determined by using the electrodeless flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC) method providing values of 0.2 and 0.08 cm2 V−1 s−1 for TTF-COF and TTF-Py-COF, respectively. The high carrier mobility observed for the TTF-COF is likely related to its tighter stacking layer structure, as was revealed by the crystalline structure. The mobilities of these TTF-based COFs are rather high, in comparison with the crystals of TTF derivatives that have mobilities of 10−5 to 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 with a majority under 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.163
On the other hand, conductivity measurements were also performed for doped films of these TTF-based COFs showing values of 10−5 and 10−6 S cm−1 for the TTF-COF and the TTF-Py-COF, respectively. This study allows us to conclude that the linker unit plays an important role in perturbing the layered lattice and thus the conductivity. These results provide a step towards organic metals with pre-designable lattice architectures.
In 2015, Bao et al. demonstrated the synthesis and device incorporation of a processable, in-plane conjugated 2D polymer (polyTB) that can be formed as a thin film over large areas.76 Reacting triamine tapa (39) and dialdehyde bdta (11) in a covered petri dish for 2 days under ambient conditions yields a highly reflective red film at the solution/air interface (Fig. 20) which can be picked up from the surface of the solution. Film thickness can be controlled by isolating films at different stages of growth; longer incubation times led to thicker films. This simple method for forming nanometer-thin, large area films enabled the use of this material as a semiconductor active layer in thin-film FETs with average mobilities of 3.0 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 20  Chemical structure of PolyTB and the picture of the highly reflective red film formed at the solution/air interface which can be used as the semiconductor active layer in thin-film FETs. Adapted from ref. 76. 
The relatively low mobility of these COF-based transistors may be attributable to defects in the thin film, suggesting that improvements in both chemistry and film preparation are needed to yield higher mobility devices. The use of more planar branching monomers in place of tapa (39) will probably lead to larger crystalline domains with fewer electronic defects.
In 2013, Jiang et al. reported the synthesis and study of a conjugated organic framework with three-dimensionally ordered stable structure and delocalized π-clouds (CS-COF, Scheme 7).50 The pyrazine system consists of a six-membered D2h ring with two nitrogen atoms facing each other. The tert-butyl side groups in PT (44) were employed for enhancing the solubility of monomers. The crystalline structure determined for the CS-COF corresponds to a slipped AA-stacking mode and remained intact in organic solvents, such as methanol, benzene, CHCl3 and hexane, irrespective of their polarity, in addition to aqueous HCl and NaOH solutions (1 M). The preference for this AA-stacking mode is reasonable because the eclipsed stacking structure would cause the clash of tert-butyl groups between neighbouring layers.
In order to evaluate the potential electronic applications of this COF the energies of the HOMO and LUMO orbitals were calculated using the self-consistent charge DFTB method showing the following values −5.70 and −3.69 eV, respectively. On the other hand, the inherent charge carrier mobility of the CS-COF was determined using the flash photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity method showing that the CS-COF is a high-rate hole-conducting framework with an exceptional mobility of 4.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is ranked among the top-class hole transporting organic semiconductors.152,164 Interestingly, the CS-COF allows for complementary functionalization using the microporous space to crystallize counterpart fullerene molecules that can merge extended π conjugation with a bi-continuous order into a donor–acceptor system (CS-COF⊃C60, Fig. 21).50 Because of the slipped AA stacking and the presence of bulky tert-butyl groups on the walls, the nanochannels accommodate only one C60 molecule in the cross-section. The presence of C60 in the pores of the CS-COF is revealed by the drastic decrease in nitrogen gas sorption. Strong diffraction peaks in the XRD pattern assignable to C60 indicate that the C60 molecules are crystallized in the CS-COF. The C60 content in CS-COF⊃C60 is ca. 25 wt% as revealed by both elemental and thermal gravimetric analyses, suggesting a peapod-like encapsulation of C60 molecules in the pores (Fig. 21). The possibility of using CS-COF⊃C60 as an active layer for photoenergy conversion was also investigated. The organic semiconductor [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was used as a glue to fabricate 1 × 1 cm2 indium tin oxide (ITO)/active layer/Al cells using spin-coated CS-COF⊃C60 films. The thickness of the active layer was adjusted to ca. 100 nm. Upon illumination under air mass 1.5 conditions, the thin film cells showed a power conversion efficiency of 0.9%. The large open-circuit voltage of 0.98 V is remarkable and originates from the low HOMO level of the CS-COF. Considering that the COF platelets are not unidirectionally oriented in the cell, resulting in boundaries between grains, which interfere with the carrier transport to the electrodes, there is still room for a significant improvement in the photoenergy conversion once these types of COFs can be obtained as large-area-oriented thin films.165
 Fig. 21  Scheme of the synthesis of CS-COF⊃C60 by sublimed crystallization of fullerenes in open one-dimensional channels (white: carbon; red: nitrogen; purple: fullerene). A side view of CS-COF⊃C60 is also shown. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2736, copyright (2013). 
More recently, Oh et al. have also used pyrazine linkers to obtain a layered network structure that possesses evenly distributed holes and nitrogen atoms and a C2N stoichiometry in its basal plane (C2N-h2D, Fig. 7).57 This COF has uniform periodic holes in a fused aromatic network structure and resembles what can be called a “holey graphene” in which the benzene rings are bridged by pyrazine rings. The unique N-containing holey 2D crystal was simply synthesized by the reaction between hexaaminobenzene (HAB, 57) trihydrochloride and hexaketocyclohexane (HKH, 58) octahydrate in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) in the presence of a few drops of acid which are the classical conditions for the synthesis of the versatile hexaazatriphenylene (HAT) moiety.166 The remarkable potential energy gain by aromatization (ca. 89.7 kcal U mol−1, calculated using DFT) is responsible for the spontaneous polycondensation between the HAB and HKH and leads to the formation of a layered crystalline 2D network structure. First-principles DFT calculations were used to investigate the electronic structure of C2N-h2D. The magnitude of the bandgap and the existence of flat bands near the Fermi levels suggest that the C2N-h2D is completely different compared with other more widely studied 2D materials. Therefore, this material can offer complementary features to graphene, which has a vanishing bandgap (that is a conductor) and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), which has a wide bandgap (that is an insulator). To illustrate its electrical properties, FETs were fabricated using C2N-h2D as the active layer showing ambipolar charge transport with an electron mobility of 13.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a hole mobility of 20.6 cm2 V−1 s−1. The semimetallic behaviour is attributed to the unintentional doping effects by the trapped impurities and/or adsorbed gases in the holey C2N-h2D crystal structure, thereby suggesting that the electronic properties of the C2N-h2D crystal are tuneable.
Thus, it is worth pointing out that, in comparison with the many known difficulties involved in the synthesis of graphene and h-BN, the synthesis of C2N-h2D provides a simple and highly efficient method for the formation of a fused aromatic 2D network structure. The combination of the successful synthesis using a simple and powerful conceptual wet-chemistry-based bottom-up strategy together with the versatility of organic synthesis may open a new chapter in the cost-effective generation of other 2D materials with tuneable properties, which will be a flourishing new area of research.
3.6 COFs for energy storage
The development of clean and renewable energy storage materials as well as their devices is a field of research of enormous current interest.167 Among various energy storage devices, rechargeable batteries and electrochemical capacitors (ECs) are regarded typically as a suitable choice to store energy by transforming chemical energy into electrical energy. Electrochemical capacitors, also called supercapacitors, are promising candidates for alternative electrical energy storage devices due to their high power density, exceptional cycle life, and low maintenance cost.168
The unique ability of COFs to offer uniform nanometer scale pores and predictive design criteria to organize functional building blocks have been also used to access microporous electrodes for energy storage and conversion devices including electrochemical capacitors. For many years, the use of COFs in electrochemical devices was hampered by the poor hydrolytic and oxidative stability of boronate ester-linked frameworks that dominated the early COF literature. In 2013, Dichtel et al. reported for the first time the use of a COF based on Schiff-base chemistry for pseudocapacitive energy storage.169 With this aim, they incorporate redox-active 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ, 23) moieties into a 2D-COF linked by β-ketoenamines, which we have already mentioned that confer outstanding hydrolytic stability. Thus, DAAQ-TFP COF was synthesized by reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglycinol (28, TFP) and 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (23, DAAQ) under solvothermal conditions (Fig. 10).
The anthraquinone moieties within the DAAQ-TFP COF exhibit a well-defined electrochemical response with two reversible redox processes. It exhibits a reversible Faradaic process with an E° of −0.058 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The peak separation (ΔEp) between the oxidative and reductive waves is quite small (4 mV), indicative of rapid electron transfer between the glassy carbon electrode and the COF anthraquinones.
The high surface area (BET of up to 1800 m2 g−1) and reversible redox processes of the DAAQ-TFP COF are of interest for pseudocapacitive energy storage devices, in which charge is stored both in the electrochemical double layer and through surface-bound Faradaic (pseudocapacitive) processes. The DAAQ-TFP COF exhibits enhanced capacitance relative to diaminoanthraquinone, and carbon black, as determined by galvanostatic charge–discharge experiments. Thus, DAAQ-TFP COF modified electrodes initially provided a capacitance of 48 ± 10 F g−1, which stabilized at 40 ± 9 F g−1 after 10 charge/discharge cycles, after which no further significant decrease was observed after 5000 cycles. In principle, this low performance is due, at least in part, to poor electrical contact to the insoluble COF powder samples, so that only a small fraction (ca. 3%) of the redox-active groups is electrochemically accessible. Thus, in 2015 Dichtel et al. have described the first oriented thin films of β-ketoenamine-linked 2D-COFs, which were formed through the slow introduction of the TFP monomer into a solution of DAAQ in the presence of Au substrates.75 With this strategy, DAAQ-TFP COF thin films provide near-quantitative addressability of the anthraquinone moieties at thicknesses up to ca. 200 nm, with areal capacitances of 3.0 mF cm−2 (as compared to 0.40 mF cm−2 for powder-modified electrodes). These findings demonstrate a means to incorporate 2D-COFs into supercapacitors, particularly as lightweight thin-film electrodes on flexible substrates and show the potential of COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry for electrochemical energy storage devices, thus paving the way for the incorporation of other redox-active groups.
Accordingly, Jiang et al. has recently used a general strategy for converting conventional COFs into an outstanding platform for energy storage through post-synthetic functionalization with organic radicals.29 Reaction of 2,5-bis(2-propynyloxy)terephthalaldehyde (BPTA, 7) and 2,5-dimethoxyterephthalaldehyde (DMTA, 4) at different molar ratios with nickel 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4′-tetraphenylamino) porphyrin (NiP, 48, M = Ni) under solvothermal conditions yielded NiPCOF, [HCC]50%-NiP-COF, and [HCC]100%-NiPCOF with 0, 50 and 100% ethynyl units on the COF walls. The ethynyl groups undergo click reaction with 4-azido-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy in a smooth and clean manner to yield [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF quantitatively (Scheme 9). TEMPO is a typical organic radical that not only holds all the unique properties of radicals but also features redox ability for energy storage by reversibly switching between the oxidation states of the neutral radical and the oxoammonium cation. Thus, the radical frameworks with openly accessible polyradicals immobilized on the pore walls undergo rapid and reversible redox reactions, leading to capacitive energy storage with high capacitance, high-rate kinetics, and robust cycle stability. For example, at a current density of 100 mA g−1, [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF exhibit a capacitance of 167 and 124 F g−1, respectively. The results suggest that channel-wall functional engineering with redox-active species will be a facile and versatile strategy to explore COFs for energy storage.
A different approach has been used by Wang, Sun et al. who reported a simple method to fabricate COFs/graphene composites through the reaction of the aldehyde group in 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (27) and the amine group in amine modified reduced graphene oxide (NH2-rGO) and p-phenylenediamine (17a) in one step on the surface of amino functionalized graphene (Fig. 22).170 The layered NH2-rGO and the spherical COFs can be observed in the SEM images of synthesized COFs/NH2-rGO. The spherical COFs were anchored tightly on the graphene sheets, which is ascribed to the reaction of the aldehyde group in 1,3,5-triformylbenzene and the amine group in NH2-rGO. The anchored spherical COFs hinder the stacking or aggregation between graphene sheets, thus increasing the effective electrode surface area.
 Fig. 22  Synthesis of the COF and COFs/NH2-rGO. Adapted from ref. 170 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It was found that COFs/NH2-rGO possesses a specific capacitance of 533 F g−1 at current density of 0.2 A g−1 which is higher than that of the pristine COF (226 F g−1) and NH2-rGO (190 F g−1). After 1000 consecutive cycles, the discharge capacitance remains at 79% of its initial value which highlights the excellent high-rate capability and long cycle lifetime of the COFs/NH2-rGO electrode material.
3.7 Miscellaneous applications of COFs

3.7.1 Proton conduction. 
The search for a high-performance proton-conducting material for use in fuel cells is central to the development of efficient methods to convert energy from chemicals – such as hydrogen, methanol or small hydrocarbons – into electricity. In a hydrogen-fuelled cell, hydrogen is catalytically split at the anode into electrons and protons. Through an external circuit, the electrons are transferred to a cathode and produce direct current. On the other hand, the protons are transported across a proton-conducting membrane to the cathode, where they react with oxygen to produce water as a by-product. This proton-conducting membrane is key to the operation of the fuel cell.171 With this aim, in 2014 Banerjee et al. synthesized an azo (–NN–)-functionalized COF (Tp-Azo COF) using the reversible Schiff base reaction between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) and 4,4′-azodianiline (Azo, 21).49 Stability towards acidic conditions is the first precondition for using such materials for proton conduction; however, as the Tp-Azo COF exhibits almost zero conductivity alone, the second precondition is the loading of a proton-conductive compound. To this end, a simple impregnation process loaded phosphoric acid inside the framework up to 5.4 wt%. The azo units of the Tp-Azo COF were protonated and formed hydrogen-bonding interactions with the H2PO4− anion, which further interacted with free phosphoric acid molecules to form a hydrogen-bonding network in the one-dimensional channels. Proton conduction in both the hydrous (σ = 9.9 × 10−4 S cm−1) and anhydrous states (σ = 6.7 × 10−5 S cm−1) was determined. These contributions represented the first emergence of COFs as proton conducting materials thus offering an appealing platform for the construction of proton-conducting systems for applications in fuel cells, sensors and electronic devices.


3.7.2 Stationary phase for high resolution gas chromatography. 
Yan et al. have recently reported an approach for the fabrication of a spherical COF TpBD (a COF synthesized from 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) and benzidine (BD, 18a)) with good solvent and thermal stability for its application in high-resolution chromatographic application.56 The spherical COF has a large surface area, good solvent stability and high thermostability which make it a good candidate to be used for high resolution gas chromatography (GC). It is worth mentioning that only 0.3 mg of TpBD is enough to fabricate a 20 m long TpBD coated capillary column via a dynamic coating method.172 Diverse important industrial analytes including alkanes, cyclohexane and benzene, α-pinene and β-pinene, and alcohols are baseline separated on the TpBD coated column with high column efficiency and good precision. The separation of these important industrial analytes not only relies on the van der Waals interaction, but also on the π–π interaction and the hydrogen bond between analytes and the TpBD frameworks. This contribution highlights the great potential of COFs for chromatographic separation thus opening a new field for the application of COFs in chromatography.


3.7.3 Colorimetric humidity-responsive behaviour. 
In 2013, Liu et al. reported the synthesis of novel COF-based crystalline nanofibers which can epitaxially grow on the aramide microfiber surface thus providing a nanocomposite with interesting colourimetric humidity-responsive behaviour (Fig. 23).173 This COF (DHNDA-TAPP-COF) can be obtained by reaction between 2,6-dihydroxynaphthalene-1,5-dicarbaldehyde (DHNDA, 10) and 2,4,6-tris(4-aminophenyl)pyridine (TAPP, 38b) under solvothermal conditions. A morphological transformation can be observed when tracing the morphology evolution process. The reaction between DHDNA (10) and TAPP (38b) quickly forms precipitates of irregular nanoparticles with a diameter of about 40 nm. These nanoparticles gradually fused to microspheres with a diameter of about 350 nm, and some short nanofibers can be found on the surface of microspheres. Unexpectedly, with increasing the solvothermal reaction time, the nanofibers grew longer and longer; meanwhile, the microspheres became smaller and smaller. After 24 h, the microspheres can be scarcely observed, only uniform nanofibers can be found. The formation of COF nanofibers can be rationalized in terms of an interesting dissolution recrystallization process174 due to the reversible nature of dynamic imine bonds. Due to the good nucleation ability of aramid fabric for many kinds of polymers, the formation of COF hybrid structures was obtained through adding some aramic fabric as foreign nucleate agents during COF formation.
 Fig. 23  Top: Formation of COF nanofibers through dynamic imine chemistry enabled by dissolution–recrystallization process. Bottom: Digital photographs of the reversible humidity-responsive color-changes of COF/aramid fabrics under different relative humidities. Adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces., 2013, 5, 8845–8849. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The transformation of isomers between the enol form and the keto form promoted by moisture175 provides humidity-responsive colour-changing properties to the COF/aramid nanohybrid material obtained by this procedure. In a dry atmosphere (relative humidity (RH) 20%), the fabric is light yellow, the colour of the fabric gradually changed from light red to dark red with increasing RH from 20 to 100%. The colour-changing process (Fig. 23) is reversible and repeatable, which provides a simple naked-eye detection for the environmental humidity. Such a low-cost and scalable method for the fabrication of colorimetric moisture-sensitive fabrics will have great advantage for its further applications.

4. Conclusions and perspectives
The promising features of COFs have stimulated the inventiveness of chemists in order to develop synthetic strategies for the preparation of novel COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry. The most extensively used synthetic reactions for the preparation of these COFs are the solvothermal conditions in a variety of solvent mixtures, using different reaction times and temperatures. However the use of microwave-assisted solvothermal reaction conditions has also been reported, thus decreasing significantly the reaction times. One important synthetic challenge at the moment is the development of novel synthetic procedures to be carried out at room temperature without solvothermal conditions. In this respect, the use of mechanochemical grinding and direct formation of COFs at room temperature represent some seminal steps in that direction. In the next coming year, we believe that novel synthetic methods will be implemented for the synthesis of COFs in order to enable their large-scale production and their incorporation into other systems.176 For instance, the use of techniques that have already demonstrated to be useful for MOF preparation, such as chemical vapour deposition176 and spray-drying,177 will be tested.
Another important subject to consider for the COF design is the study of the suitable modifications carried out in the monomers in order to finetune the final structure of these COFs. Thus, the chemical stability and crystallinity in 2D-COFs enhance by introducing –OH functionalities adjacent to the Schiff-base centres (CN) to form an intramolecular O–H⋯NC hydrogen bond.23,24 On the other hand, the use of an irreversible enol to-keto tautomerization following the Schiff-base reaction is also an effective strategy toward the enhancement of chemical stability of the crystalline framework.49 Research in these directions are required to enhance COF performances. Additionally, chemical functionalization of pores is relevant from many perspectives. In this respect, an essential aspect that will deserve attention is the development of COFs with highly functionalized pore wall structures which are difficult to obtain via direct polycondensation reactions. The post-synthetic modification constitutes an excellent tool for systematic functionalization of COFs with different purposes.79 Although several studies have used different strategies for this purpose, the use of the azide–alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition reaction, known as “click” reaction, has been demonstrated to be very efficient for pore-wall surface engineering, allowing the incorporation of organic radicals and chiral moieties for catalysis.80 Another simple post-synthetic modification includes the preparation of metal doped COFs and of hybrids based on COFs and metal nanoparticles that provide new properties to the materials.
COFs have recently emerged as realistic alternative porous materials for gas adsorption, separation and storage applications. Although this is a relatively new research topic, imine-based COFs with efficient adsorption uptake of H2, CH4, CO2 or N2 have already been obtained. In addition, high selectivity in the separation of CO2 over N2 and CH4 has also been achieved. Furthermore, COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry have shown to be able to immobilize large molecules such as enzymes or lactic acid.
The use of COFs in catalysis is still in its infancy but we believe that novel post-synthetic transformations at the pore will provide opportunities for molecular recognition as well as incorporation of more specific active sites for catalysis. Imine-based COFs are especially suited for this application given that they are highly stable in water and most organic solvents, and the imine type (Schiff base) ligands are versatile in incorporating a variety of metal ions. Thus, in the last few years, COFs have been revealed as excellent platforms to be used as catalysts, photocatalysts and electrocatalysts.
Other applications of COFs such as Chemo and Bio-sensing agents based on luminescent COFs in which nitrogen sites serve as docking sites to lock guest molecules have been reported and will be for sure subject to development in the upcoming years.
The possibility of having synthetic access to conducting organic materials with total control over their nanoscale structure and orientation is another important challenge in the area of organic (opto)electronics. By virtue of their three-dimensional orderings at the atomic scale, 2D-COFs have shown great potential to perform core functions in organic electronics such as light emission, charge transfer and separation, and semiconduction. In this respect, COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry offer the possibility of developing fully conjugated 2D crystalline networks capable of in-plane charge transport. The possibility of using donor–acceptor COF derivatives as active layers for photoenergy conversion has also been investigated although the efficiencies obtained are still low. The current challenge in this area is to obtain these types of COFs as large-area-oriented thin films. The unique ability of COFs to offer uniform nanometer scale pores and predictive design criteria to organize functional building blocks has also been used to access microporous electrodes for energy storage and conversion devices including electrochemical capacitors. Other less explored applications already investigated for this type of COFs are their ability for proton conduction, their potential use as stationary phases for high resolution gas chromatography, their colorimetric humidity-responsive behaviour and their use as precursors for 2D-sheet nanomaterials. Indeed the production of single/few layer COFs integrated on different surfaces is currently receiving a great deal of interest given that it provides a unique opportunity of obtaining both atomic thick sheets or thin-films with covalently bonded organic building units with unique properties associated with reduced dimensionality, well-defined in-plane structure, and tuneable functionalities. In general the confinement of the building blocks at the solid–liquid interface, known as on-surface synthesis, has been used to produce layers of COFs but typically with small areas (nanometer range), leading to small coverage of the substrate. However, the opportunity to generate COFs at the liquid–liquid or liquid–air interfaces is still not well developed. Indeed the synthesis of a disordered ultra-large (millimetre range) two-dimensional covalent organic monolayer has been recently reported through dynamic imine chemistry at the air–water interface, highlighting its great potential.178 Therefore, we consider that these strategies will be further developed in the near future.
Although this general landscape foresees a broad number of future applications, the development of methods that enable their procesability will be required in order to accomplish the integration of COFs as useful materials. Therefore, we envision that novel techniques, such as ink-jet printing, wet-lithography or roll-to-roll, will be implemented. Additionally, we consider that aspects dealing with the morphology and size-reduction of the materials will be developed bringing new properties and opportunities for COF's applications.
Finally, in addition to potential applications of this family of COFs in energy and catalysis, we believe that COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry will find opportunities for water decontamination.37
In summary, COFs based on Schiff-base chemistry are a class of materials whose interesting properties have challenged the creativity and inventiveness of chemists in areas such as organic, polymer, and materials chemistry as well as in nanoscience. The knowledge accumulated during recent years of research based on these systems will certainly lead to novel applications of these unique materials.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from Spanish Government (Project MAT2014-52305-P and MAT2013-46753-C2-1-P) and a UCM-BSCH joint project (GR3/14) is acknowledged. The authors wish to give credit to the scientists who have participated in the development of this research field whose names are cited in the references.
References
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, J. Guo, J. Kim, H. Ihee and D. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8826–8830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Tilford, W. R. Gemmill, H. C. zur Loye and J. J. Lavigne, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5296–5301 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Spitler and W. R. Dichtel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 672–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Tilford, S. J. Mugavero, P. J. Pellechia and J. J. Lavigne, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2741–2743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. El-Kaderi, J. R. Hunt, J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, A. P. Cote, R. E. Taylor, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2007, 316, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Jiang and A. I. Cooper, Top. Curr. Chem., 2010, 293, 1–33 CAS .
A. P. Cote, H. M. El-Kaderi, H. Furukawa, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12914–12915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, H. Niu, J. T. A. Jones, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7710–7720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Uribe-Romo, J. R. Hunt, H. Furukawa, C. Klock, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4570–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8875–8883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Doonan, D. J. Tranchemontagne, T. G. Glover, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 235–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Spitler, M. R. Giovino, S. L. White and W. R. Dichtel, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1588–1593 RSC .
S. Y. Ding, J. Gao, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. G. Song, C. Y. Su and W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19816–19822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. A. Feng, L. Chen, Y. P. Dong and D. L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1979–1981 RSC .
R. Dawson, A. I. Cooper and D. J. Adams, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 530–563 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Smith, A. C. Overholts, N. Hwang and W. R. Dichtel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3690–3693 RSC .
P. J. Waller, F. Gandara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Lanni, R. W. Tilford, M. Bharathy and J. J. Lavigne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13975–13983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
X. Feng, X. S. Ding and D. L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6010–6022 RSC .
X. Chen, M. Addicoat, E. Jin, L. Zhai, H. Xu, N. Huang, Z. Guo, L. Liu, S. Irle and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Shinde, S. Kandambeth, P. Pachfule, R. R. Kumar and R. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 310–313 RSC .
S. Kandambeth, D. B. Shinde, M. K. Panda, B. Lukose, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13052–13056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, V. Venkatesh, D. B. Shinde, S. Kumari, A. Halder, S. Verma and R. Banerjee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, ArtNum. 6786 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Kahveci, T. Islamoglu, G. A. Shar, R. Ding and H. M. El-Kaderi, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1524–1527 RSC .
X. Chen, M. Addicoat, S. Irle, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 546–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Gao and D. L. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 905–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lukose, A. Kuc and T. Heine, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2388–2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Song, J. Sun, J. Liu, Z. T. Huang and Q. Y. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 788–791 RSC .
E. L. Spitler, B. T. Koo, J. L. Novotney, J. W. Colson, F. J. Uribe-Romo, G. D. Gutierrez, P. Clancy and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19416–19421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dalapati, M. Addicoat, S. Jin, T. Sakurai, J. Gao, H. Xu, S. Irle, S. Seki and D. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Zhou, S. Q. Xu, Q. Wen, Z. F. Pang and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15885–15888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhang, J. Su, H. Furukawa, Y. Yun, F. Gandara, A. Duong, X. Zou and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16336–16339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fang, Z. Zhuang, S. Gu, R. B. Kaspar, J. Zheng, J. Wang, S. Qiu and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, . 4503 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Liu, Y. H. Ma, Y. B. Zhao, X. X. Sun, F. Gandara, H. Furukawa, Z. Liu, H. Y. Zhu, C. H. Zhu, K. Suenaga, P. Oleynikov, A. S. Alshammari, X. Zhang, O. Terasaki and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2016, 351, 365–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Uribe-Romo, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, K. Oisaki and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11478–11481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Rowan, S. J. Cantrill, G. R. L. Cousins, J. K. M. Sanders and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 898–952 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Stegbauer, K. Schwinghammer and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2789–2793 RSC .
S. Dalapati, S. Jin, J. Gao, Y. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17310–17313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhi, X. Feng, X. Ding, Y. Zou, X. Liu and Y. Mu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 12079–12084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Feng, Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, H. Xia, X. Liu and Y. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13825–13828 RSC .
V. S. Vyas, F. Haase, L. Stegbauer, G. Savasci, F. Podjaski, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pachfule, S. Kandmabeth, A. Mallick and R. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11717–11720 RSC .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. Lukose, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5328–5331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, B. Lukose, S. M. Kunjir, M. Chaudhary, R. Babarao, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853–17861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, T. Kundu, S. Kandambeth, R. Babarao, Y. Marathe, S. M. Kunjir and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6570–6573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Xu, S. Jin, L. Chen, T. Kaji, Y. Honsho, M. A. Addicoat, J. Kim, A. Saeki, H. Ihee, S. Seki, S. Irle, M. Hiramoto, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2736 Search PubMed .
Y. Zeng, R. Zou, Z. Luo, H. Zhang, X. Yao, X. Ma, R. Zou and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1020–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. de la Hoz, A. Diaz-Ortiz and A. Moreno, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 164–178 RSC .
H. Wei, S. Chai, N. Hu, Z. Yang, L. Wei and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12178–12181 RSC .
T. Friščić, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3493–3510 RSC .
A. de la Peña Ruigómez, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, K. C. Stylianou, M. Cavallini, D. Gentili, F. Liscio, S. Milita, O. M. Roscioni, M. L. Ruiz-González, C. Carbonell, D. Maspoch, R. Mas-Ballesté, J. L. Segura and F. Zamora, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10666–10670 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Yang, C. Liu, Y. M. Cao and X. P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12254–12257 RSC .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shiraki, G. Kim and N. Nakashima, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1488–1490 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mas-Balleste, C. Gomez-Navarro, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 20–30 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Payamyar, B. T. King, H. C. Ottinger and A. D. Schluter, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 18–34 RSC .
D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, P. Amo-Ochoa and F. Zamora, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4113–4127 RSC .
I. Berlanga, M. L. Ruiz-Gonzalez, J. M. Gonzalez-Calbet, J. L. G. Fierro, R. Mas-Balleste and F. Zamora, Small, 2011, 7, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Berlanga, R. Mas-Balleste and F. Zamora, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7976–7978 RSC .
D. N. Bunck and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14952–14955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gourdon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6950–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, Y. He, Y. Ye, X. Xu, F. Cheng, W. Sun, X. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Li and K. Wu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2959–2979 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greenwood and C. J. Baddeley, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 653–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tanoue, R. Higuchi, K. Ikebe, S. Uemura, N. Kimizuka, A. Z. Stieg, J. K. Gimzewski and M. Kunitake, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 2211–2216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Xu, X. Zhou, Y. X. Yu, W. Q. Tian, J. Ma and S. B. Lei, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8066–8073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, C. Z. Guan, S. Y. Ding, W. Wang, H. J. Yan, D. Wang and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10470–10474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Yue, X. H. Liu, B. Sun and D. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14318–14321 RSC .
L. Xu, X. Zhou, W. Q. Tian, T. Gao, Y. F. Zhang, S. Lei and Z. F. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9564–9568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zha, L. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Li, Q. Pan, P. Hu and S. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17837–17843 Search PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. Hernandez-Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodriguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Feldblyum, C. H. McCreery, S. C. Andrews, T. Kurosawa, E. J. Santos, V. Duong, L. Fang, A. L. Ayzner and Z. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13894–13897 RSC .
P. Wang, M. Kang, S. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang and S. Fang, Chin. J. Chem., 2014, 32, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Cai, Y. B. Zhang, A. B. Pun, B. He, J. H. Yang, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, O. M. Yaghi, J. Fan, S. R. Zheng, W. G. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4693–4700 RSC .
X. Chen, N. Huang, J. Gao, H. Xu, F. Xu and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6161–6163 RSC .
N. Huang, R. Krishna and D. L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7079–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lohse, T. Stassin, G. Naudin, S. Wuttke, R. Ameloot, D. De Vos, D. D. Medina and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 626–631 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, P. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Gao and P. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51544–51547 RSC .
J. Thote, H. B. Aiyappa, A. Deshpande, D. Diaz Diaz, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 15961–15965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pachfule, S. Kandambeth, D. Diaz Diaz and R. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3169–3172 RSC .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Makal, J.-R. Li, W. Lu and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7761–7779 RSC .
A. G. Slater and A. I. Cooper, Science, 2015, 348, 988–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, H. J. Park, T. K. Prasad and D.-W. Lim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 782–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Getman, Y.-S. Bae, C. E. Wilmer and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 703–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T. H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Herm, B. M. Wiers, J. A. Mason, J. M. van Baten, M. R. Hudson, P. Zajdel, C. M. Brown, N. Masciocchi, R. Krishna and J. R. Long, Science, 2013, 340, 960–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Cychosz, R. Ahmad and A. J. Matzger, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 293–302 RSC .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, S. S. Han and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 1621–1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Babarao, R. Custelcean, B. P. Hay and D. E. Jiang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 5349–5356 Search PubMed .
D. J. Martin, K. Qiu, S. A. Shevlin, A. D. Handoko, X. Chen, Z. Guo and J. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9240–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Pang and J. Zhang, J. Mol. Model., 2014, 20, 2346 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ashourirad, A. K. Sekizkardes, S. Altarawneh and H. M. El-Kaderi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1349–1358 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Patel, S. Hyun Je, J. Park, D. P. Chen, Y. Jung, C. T. Yavuz and A. Coskun, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1357 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Rabbani, A. K. Sekizkardes, Z. Kahveci, T. E. Reich, R. S. Ding and H. M. El-Kaderi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 3324–3328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jin, Y. L. Zhu and W. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1484–1499 RSC .
T. Burchell and M. Rogers, SAE, 2000, 2001 Search PubMed .
S. Amirjalayer, R. Q. Snurr and R. Schmid, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4921–4929 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaleeswaran, P. Vishnoi and R. Murugavel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7159–7171 RSC .
Q. Gao, L. Bai, X. Zhang, P. Wang, P. Li, Y. Zeng, R. Zou and Y. Zhao, Chin. J. Chem., 2015, 33, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H. Long and W. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mohanty, L. D. Kull and K. Landskron, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cavenati, C. A. Grande and A. E. Rodrigues, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2004, 49, 1095–1101 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, H. Yu and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11238–11241 RSC .
N. Huang, X. Chen, R. Krishna and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2986–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, K. Furukawa, M. Addicoat, L. Chen, S. Takahashi, S. Irle, T. Nakamura and D. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4505–4511 RSC .
Y. Du, K. M. Mao, P. Kamakoti, P. Ravikovitch, C. Paur, S. Cundy, Q. C. Li and D. Calabro, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4606–4608 RSC .
G. Das, B. P. Biswal, S. Kandambeth, V. Venkatesh, G. Kaur, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, S. Verma and R. Banerjee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3931–3939 RSC .
Y.-F. Xie, S.-Y. Ding, J.-M. Liu, W. Wang and Q.-Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10066–10069 RSC .
A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8328–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 2373–2420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corma, H. García and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, P. A. Singh, A. K. Sen, K. Singha, S. N. Dubeya, R. N. Handa and J. Choi, Synth. React. Inorg. Met.-Org. Chem., 2002, 32, 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457–2483 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, A. Abad, A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2007, 250, 294–298 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, X. Zhang, J. Sun, S. Lin, D. Qi, R. Hong, D. Li, X. Xiao and J. Jiang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 214, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pachfule, M. K. Panda, S. Kandambeth, S. M. Shivaprasad, D. D. Diaz and R. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7944–7952 RSC .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y.-B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fang, S. Gu, J. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, S. Qiu and Y. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2878–2882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Chen, J. Gao, J. Lin, M. Addicoat, S. Irle and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1292–1294 RSC .
Y. Wu, H. Xu, X. Chen, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10096–10098 RSC .
W. Gao, X. Sun, H. Niu, X. Song, K. Li, H. Gao, W. Zhang, J. Yu and M. Jia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 213, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakao and T. Hiyama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4893–4901 RSC .
R. Ishimoto, K. Kamata and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8900–8904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, Y. Hou, X. Deng, H. Wang, S. Sun and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41017–41024 RSC .
E. Merino, E. Verde-Sesto, E. M. Maya, M. Iglesias, F. Sánchez and A. Corma, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 981–988 CrossRef CAS .
W. Notz, F. Tanaka and C. F. Barbas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 580–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. C. MacMillan, Nature, 2008, 455, 304–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Juhl and D. Tanner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2983–2992 RSC .
C. Janiak, Dalton Trans., 2000, 3885–3896 RSC .
A. Fateeva, P. A. Chater, C. P. Ireland, A. A. Tahir, Y. Z. Khimyak, P. V. Wiper, J. R. Darwent and M. J. Rosseinsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7440–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schwinghammer, B. Tuffy, M. B. Mesch, E. Wirnhier, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, W. Schnick, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2435–2439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nagai, X. Chen, X. Feng, X. Ding, Z. Guo and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3770–3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, H. Lai and Q. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2423–2427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1979, 281, 657–658 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. DeRosa and R. J. Crutchley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 233–234, 351–371 CrossRef CAS .
W. Spiller, H. Kliesch, D. Wöhrle, S. Hackbarth, B. Röder and G. Schnurpfeil, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1998, 2, 145–158 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, P. Yu, T. Ohsaka and L. Mao, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 52, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
H. Deng, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, R. B. Ferreira, J. Towne, C. B. Knobler, B. Wang and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 327, 846–850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dogru and T. Bein, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5531–5546 RSC .
J. L. Segura, F. Giacalone, R. Gomez, N. Martin, D. M. Guldi, C. P. Luo, A. Swartz, I. Riedel, D. Chirvase, J. Parisi, V. Dyakonov, N. S. Sariciftci and F. Padinger, Mater. Sci. Eng., C: Biomimetic Supramol. Syst., 2005, 25, 835–842 CrossRef .
M. Dogru, M. Handloser, F. Auras, T. Kunz, D. Medina, A. Hartschuh, P. Knochel and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2920–2924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, F. Gándara, A. Asano, H. Furukawa, A. Saeki, S. K. Dey, L. Liao, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. Y. Botros, X. Duan, S. Seki, J. F. Stoddart and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4094–4097 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Braga and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1473–1486 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Ortiz, H. Herrera, R. Blanco, H. Huang, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks, Y. Zheng and J. L. Segura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8440–8452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. Furukawa, J. Gao, A. Nagai, T. Nakamura, Y. Dong and D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9806–9809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Segura and N. Martin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1372–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Cai, Y.-B. Zhang, A. B. Pun, B. He, J. Yang, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, O. M. Yaghi, J. Fan, S.-R. Zheng, W.-G. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4693–4700 RSC .
G. H. V. Bertrand, V. K. Michaelis, T.-C. Ong, R. G. Griffin and M. Dincă, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, Y. Li, H. Hu, Y. Sun, J. Wang, C. Wang, C. Wang, G. Zhang, B. Wang, W. Xu and D. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14614–14618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Jin, T. Sakurai, T. Kowalczyk, S. Dalapati, F. Xu, H. Wei, X. Chen, J. Gao, S. Seki, S. Irle and D. L. Jiang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 14608–14613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva Filho, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, L. L. Liu, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Irle, Y. P. Dong, A. Nagai and D. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2618–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Levendorf, E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Segura, R. Juarez, M. Ramos and C. Seoane, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6850–6885 RSC .
L. Mai, X. Tian, X. Xu, L. Chang and L. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11828–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Beguin and E. Frackowiak, Supercapacitors: Materials, Systems and Applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T. T. Truong, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Han, S. Wang, S. Fang, Z. Zhang and S. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 27290–27294 RSC .
H. Xu and D. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 564–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Gu and X.-P. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1477–1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, Y. Jiang, X. Li, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. Wu and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8845–8849 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Liu, X. Chen, J. Wan and Y. Qian, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 160–163 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ziółek, J. Kubicki, A. Maciejewski, R. Naskrȩcki and A. Grabowska, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 124518 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Stassen, M. Styles, G. Grenci, H. V. Gorp, W. Vanderlinden, S. Feyter, P. Falcaro, D. Vos, P. Vereecken and R. Ameloot, Nat. Mater., 2015, 304–310 Search PubMed .
A. Carne-Sanchez, I. Imaz, M. Cano-Sarabia and D. Maspoch, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 203–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Dai, F. Shao, J. Szczerbinski, R. McCaffrey, R. Zenobi, Y. H. Jin, A. D. Schluter and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 213–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

José L. Segura
	José L. Segura obtained his PhD in Organic Chemistry at the UCM in Madrid working in Organic materials. After a stay in W. Dailey's group (Univ. Pennsylvania) he performed postdoctoral stays in the groups of M. Hanack (Univ. Tübingen) F. Wudl (UCSB, USA), and P. Bäuerle (Univ. Ulm). In 1995 Prof. Segura joined the faculty at the Complutense University in Madrid where he is leading the Group of Macromolecular and Heterocyclic Organic Materials. Current research interests involve the synthesis, electrochemical and photophysical characterization of molecular and macromolecular electroactive systems for optoelectronics. The results have been published in more than 145 scientific contributions.

María J. Mancheño
	Ma José Mancheño received her BA degree from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM) in Chemistry. In 1993 she obtained her PhD degree in Organic Chemistry from the same university. After a post-doctoral stay at the University of Maryland, she was appointed as lecturer in Organic Chemistry and after National Habilitation, she earned her actual position as Associate Professor. Her research interest is focused in different areas as organic photochemistry, organometallics and more recently, in materials chemistry.

Félix Zamora
	Félix Zamora was born in 1967 in Cuenca (Spain). In 1994 he obtained his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. He moved to the University of Dortmund (Germany) to work with Professor B. Lippert. He is currently “Profesor Titular” at the Inorganic Chemistry Department at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, associate research at IMDEA Nanocience and IFIMAC. He is the author of more than 130 papers on chemistry and material science. From 2004 he focused his research on new low-dimensional nanomaterials with electrical properties based on metal–organic and covalent organic frame works (http://www.nanomater.es). In 2015 he has been awarded with “Excellent in Research by BASF” prize by the Spanish Royal Society.

 	Fig. 1  Building blocks used for the synthesis of COFs via Schiff-base chemistry categorized into geometries and reactive groups.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic representation of the dynamic chemical reactions used for the preparation of COFs via Schiff-base chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Syntheses of DhaTph by the condensation of square planar TAPP (47) building unit and linear DHTA (3) building DhaTph unit. (b) Graphical view of the porous framework of COF DhaTph in a stacking form. (c) Eclipsed stacking model of COF. (d) ORTEP diagram of the DhaTph linker unit shows the presence of the intramolecular hydrogen bond; all atoms are in one plane. Figure extracted from ref. 25. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of TPB-DMTP-COF through the condensation of DMTA (4, blue) and TPBA (36, black). Inset: the structure of the edge units of the TPB-DMTP-COF and the resonance effect of oxygen lone pairs that weaken the polarization of the CN bonds and soften the interlayer repulsion in the COF.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis and structure of a dual-pore 2D-COF.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Scheme for the synthesis of COF-505 built from organic threads using copper(I) as a template to make an extended weaving structure, which can be subsequently demetalated and remetalated; (B) illustration of weaving of threads in three dimensions. From Science, 2016, 351, 365–369. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Scheme 4  Scheme showing the one-pot acetal deprotection and subsequent condensation to furnish the TFPT-COF.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of the Azine-Linked COF (Py-Azine COF).	 

 	Fig. 4  Scheme for the synthesis of highly stable and hollow COF structures via a templating strategy by in situ solvothermal reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp, 28) and p-phenylenediamine (Pa, 17a), in the presence of ZnO-nanorods. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 6  Schematic representation of the synthesis of TpPa-1 and TpPa-2 by the combined reversible and irreversible reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (28) with p-phenylenediamine (17a) and 2,5-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine (17b), respectively. The total reaction proceeds in two steps: (1) reversible Schiff-base reaction and (2) irreversible enol-to ketotautomerism.	 

 	Scheme 7  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the CS-COF. The blue dotted lines at the periphery imply the extension of periodic structures.	 

 	Scheme 8  Syntheses of (i) NTU-COF-1 and (ii) NTU-COF-2 involving the formation of two types of covalent bonds from orthogonal reactions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the MC synthesis of TpPa-1 and TpPa-2 through simple Schiff base reactions performed via MC grinding using a mortar and pestle. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5328–5331. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the room-temperature polyimine condensation to form RT-COF-1. Instantaneous formation of the gel is shown in the image in the inset of the COF structure. (b) Representative FE-SEM image of RT-COF-1. (c) Representative AFM topographic image of isolated flakes of RT-COF-1 on SiO2 (top) and the corresponding height profile (bottom). Figure extracted from ref. 55. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Preparation and structure. (a) Schematic representation of the reaction between hexaaminobenzene (HAB) trihydrochloride and hexaketocyclohexane (HKH) octahydrate to produce the C2N-h2D crystal. Digital photographs: (b) as-prepared C2N-h2D crystal; (c) solution-cast C2N-h2D crystal on a SiO2 surface after heat-treatment at 700 °C; (d) a C2N-h2D crystal film (thickness: approximately 330 nm) transferred onto a PET substrate.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the formation of covalent organic nanosheets (CONs) from as-synthesized COFs via mechanical grinding. TEM and AFM images of CONs are shown at the right bottom. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853–17861. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Scheme diagram for solid–vapor interface reaction. (b) Large-scale STM image (100 × 100 nm2) of SCOF-LZU1 with the inset depicting the corresponding FFT spectrum of the STM image. (c) High resolution STM image (20 × 20 nm2) of SCOF-LZU1. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10470–10474. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Structure of the hexagonal subunit of the DAAQ-TFP COF, which forms as a 2D-layered microcrystalline powder. This material was previously prepared as a slurry, mixed with carbon black and a PVDF binder. (B) Solvothermal growth of the DAAQ-TFP COF as an oriented thin film on Au electrodes. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Bright-field optical image of 1 mm wide RT-COF-1 stripes fabricated by LCW. The inset shows a representative AFM image showing the formation of the characteristic RT-COF-1 flakes. Z scale is 0–50 nm. (b) Corresponding POM image. (c) Representative FE-SEM image of 500 nm wide RT-COF-1 stripes fabricated by LCW. (d) Radial integration of the 2D-GIXRD image collected for the 1 mm wide RT-COF-1 stripes (middle) compared to the one obtained in the synthesis of bulk RT-COF-1 (top) and to the one derived from the theoretical structure (bottom). (e) Representative optical image of a 70 mm-in-diameter dot array of RT-COF-1 on SiO2 generated by an ink-jet printer. (f) Representative FE-SEM image of a 40 mm-in-diameter dot array of RT-COF-1 on flexible acetate paper generated by an ink-jet printer. (g and h) Zoomed FE-SEM images of one of these dots, showing again the formation of the characteristic RT-COF-1 flakes. Figure extracted from ref. 55. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of the radical [TEMPO]n-NIP-COF.	 

 	Scheme 10  Schematic representation of the synthesis of TpBD(NO2)2 and post-synthetic modification to TpBD(NH2)2 and TpBD(NHCOCH3)2.	 


Imine	ILCOF-1	42 + 17a	23	2723	1.21	1.3	0.9	6.0	
102

Azine	ACOF-1	25 + 27	9.4	1176	0.91	0.99	1.15	17.7	
43

Imine	CTV-COF-1	34 + 17a	14.8	1245	0.94	1.3	—	—	
31

Imine	CTV-COF-2	34 + 18a	21.6	1170	1.07	0.75	—	49.1d	
31

Imine	TAPB-TFPB	36 + 29	40	229	—	0.68	—	4	
106

Imine	iPrTAPB-TFPB	37 + 28	50	391	—	0.43	—	3.1	
106

Keto-enamine	TAPB-TFP	36 + 28	26	567	—	1.08	—	18	
106

Keto-enamine	iPrTAPB-TFP	37 + 28	34	756	—	1.15	—	10.5	
106

Imine	N-COF	38a + 27	11	1700	0.84	—	—	120	
107

Azine H bonded	COF-JLU2	28 + 27	9.6	415	0.56	1.6	3.8	21.7	
42

Keto-enamine	TpPa-COF	17a + 28	1.27	725	0.89	—	—	21.8	
53

Imine	[OH]X-H2P-COF	1 + 3 + 47	25	1054–1284	0.78–1.02	—	—	46–63	
80

Imine	[HO2C]X-H2P-COF	From [OH]X%-H2P-COF	14–22	364–786	0.43–0.66	—	—	96–174	
80

Imine	[CC]X-H2P-COF	47 + 7 + 3	16–25	426–1474	0.28–0.75	—	—	39–72	
80

Imine	[Et]X-H2P-COF	From [CC]X-H2P-COF	15–22	187–1326	0.18–0.55	—	—	38–55	
80

Imine	[MeOAc]X-H2P-COF	From [CC]X-H2P-COF	11–21	156–1238	0.14–0.51	—	—	65–84	
80

Imine	[AcOH]X-H2P-COF	From [CC]X-H2P-COF	13–22	186–1252	0.18–0.52	—	—	94–117	
80

Imine	[EtOH]X-H2P-COF	From [CC]X-H2P-COF	14–22	214–1248	0.19–0.56	—	—	84–92	
80

Imine	[EtNH2]X-H2P-COF	From [CC]X-H2P-COF	13–22	382–1402	0.21–0.58	—	—	97–116	
80


 	Fig. 12  Top: Chemical structure of ILCOF-1. Bottom: Hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane sorption measurements for ILCOF-1. Figure extracted from ref. 102. Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 11  Schematic of pore surface engineering of imine-linked COFs with various functional groups via Click reactions.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Fluorescence quenching of the Py-Azine COF (Scheme 5) upon addition of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) (0–70 ppm) in acetonitrile. (B) Degree of fluorescence quench upon addition of the nitro compounds (70 ppm). Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17310–17313. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Construction of imine-linked COF on the surface for bio-molecular adsorption. Taken from ref. 77. Reprinted with permission from Chin. J. Chem.	 



	Pd/COF-LZU1	
15

H2P-Bph-COF	
123



	Pd(0)@TpPa-1	
124



	Pd(0)@TpPa-1	
124



	Pd(II)@TpPa-1	
124



	Pd(II)/COF-SDU1	
125



	BF-COF1	
126

BF-COF-2


	2,3-DhaTph	
24

2,3-DmaTph


	[Pyr]X-H2P-COFs	
127



	Py-An COF	
128



	PMA@COF-300	
129

Mo-COF	
82



	Au(0)@TpPa-1	
84


 	Fig. 15  Top: Schematic structure of pyrrolidine containing COFs [Pyr]X-H2P-COFs. Bottom: Representative chart for the flow reaction system based on the organocatalytic COF column fabricated with [Pyr]25-H2P-COF. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 12  Formation of the molecular building blocks of the Mo-COF.	 

 	Fig. 16  TEM images of the COF (left) and the CdS-COF (90:10) hybrid (right); inset: lattice fringes of CdS nanoparticles in the CdS-COF (90:10) hybrid. Taken from ref. 83. Reprinted with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  A tunable triphenylarene platform for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Replacement of ‘C–H’ by ‘nitrogen atoms’ at the green dots changes the angle between central aryl and peripheral phenyl rings, which leads to varied planarity in the platform.	 

 	Fig. 18  Top: Chemical structure of the H-bonded CuP-DHPh COF and the non H-bonded amorphous CuP-Ph. Bottom: Absorption spectral changes of DPBF in the presence of (A) the CuP-DHPh COF and (B) the amorphous CuP-Ph Polymer, in an oxygen saturated DMF solution upon irradiation at 500 nm. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3241–3247. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of the TTF-COF. (b) Illustration of the mixed-valence state in the TTF-COF. The “” indicates inter-TTF-layer interactions. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical structure of PolyTB and the picture of the highly reflective red film formed at the solution/air interface which can be used as the semiconductor active layer in thin-film FETs. Adapted from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 21  Scheme of the synthesis of CS-COF⊃C60 by sublimed crystallization of fullerenes in open one-dimensional channels (white: carbon; red: nitrogen; purple: fullerene). A side view of CS-COF⊃C60 is also shown. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2736, copyright (2013).	 

 	Fig. 22  Synthesis of the COF and COFs/NH2-rGO. Adapted from ref. 170 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Top: Formation of COF nanofibers through dynamic imine chemistry enabled by dissolution–recrystallization process. Bottom: Digital photographs of the reversible humidity-responsive color-changes of COF/aramid fabrics under different relative humidities. Adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces., 2013, 5, 8845–8849. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
