Luminescent perovskite quantum dots: synthesis, microstructures, optical properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC05545A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05545A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1413-1446Luminescent perovskite quantum dots: synthesis, microstructures, optical properties and applications

        
          
            Daqin 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *abcd and 

        
          
            Xiao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      b
aFujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Manipulation and New Energy Materials, College of Physics and Energy, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, 350117, China. E-mail: dqchen@fjnu.edu.cn
bCollege of Materials & Environmental Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310018, China
cFujian Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center of Solar Energy Conversion and Energy Storage, Fuzhou, 350117, China
dFujian Provincial Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Semiconductors and Efficient Devices, Xiamen, 361005, China
Received 
      5th November 2018
    , Accepted 7th January 2019First published on 9th January 2019AbstractIn the past few years, metal halide perovskite quantum dots and nanocrystals have been extensively explored due to their unique optoelectronic properties and extensive application prospects. In this review article, we provide an overview of the synthesis, microstructure variation, luminescence properties and potential applications of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites and all-inorganic perovskites. Firstly, several widely used wet chemical methods for synthesizing perovskite quantum dots are summarized, and then the related structures and morphologies of different perovskites as well as the relationship between the microstructure and optical properties are given. Additionally, correlative metal halides with B-site ion replacement or doping and some strategies to improve the stability of perovskite materials are highlighted. Subsequently, a brief introduction about their potential applications in light-emitting diodes, photodetectors and lasing is presented. Finally, some conclusions and outlooks will be introduced. It is expected that this review article will provide valuable insights into the current status of perovskite luminescent materials and stimulate new ideas and further research on their practical applications.
Daqin Chen
Daqin Chen is a full professor at College of Physics and Energy in Fujian Normal University. He received his PhD degree (2008) in Condensed Matter Physics from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He joined Fujian Normal University in 2018. His recent research interests are focused on developing advanced optical materials and designing the related optoelectronic devices for applications in lighting and display.
Xiao Chen
Xiao Chen is a Master's degree candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Hangzhou Dianzi University. He received his Bachelor's degree from Hangzhou Dianzi University in 2016. Currently, he is involved in research on the synthesis and application of perovskite quantum dots.
1. Introduction
Luminescent materials, widely applied in optoelectronic fields, play an important role in the development of our society and directly impact on our daily lives. One aspect, the quality of the luminescent materials, is particularly significant and relies on some crucial factors including quantum yield (QY), optical purity and spectral stability. Currently, the research of quantum dots (QDs) in the field of displays is in full swing to solve the global energy crisis.1–13 Perovskite QDs or nanocrystals (NCs) are the hall of fame among them and have been studied intensively over the past five years.14–19 The word “perovskite” was created to name the mineral CaTiO3, which was discovered in the Ural Mountains by the German mineralogist Gustav Rose and named in honor of the Russian Count, Lev A. Perovski.20 But now, the term perovskite always refers to a large category of materials that have the same type of structure as CaTiO3.21 At present, hundreds of such minerals have been recognized and their family members are widely distributed from conductors to insulators.22 The general formula of perovskites can be represented as ABX3, where A is a monovalent cation that is usually larger than the B-site cations and B is an inorganic-metal cation in an octahedral coordination with six X-site ions.22–24 In the perovskite crystal structure, these octahedrons are corner-shared to form a three-dimensional (3D) framework, in which the A-site cations are located in the framework cavities to balance the negative charge.24–28 Unexpectedly, the perovskite QD materials exhibit excellent luminescence and photoelectric performance in some significant optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells,14–19,29–34 light-emitting diodes (LEDs)35–43 and lasers.44–48
For hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites (HOIPs), monovalent organic cations or long chain organic amines always take the place of the A-site.49,50 Importantly, whether the perovskite structure can be retained depends on the size restrictions of the ions, which must meet the relationship of the Goldschmidt tolerance factor for the A-site ions.51,52 Smaller cations, for example, methylammonium (MA or CH3NH3+) or formamidinium (FA or (NH2)2CH+), on the A-site can form ABX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite structures naturally.53 Weber and co-workers first investigated the fundamental optoelectronic properties of HOIPs in 1987.54 HOIPs and the related layered structures were explored for use in optoelectronic devices by Mitzi and co-workers in pioneering work starting more than 20 years ago.55 Since then, solar cells based on HOIP perovskite materials have sprung to the forefront of photovoltaic research. Due to remarkable improvements occurring after 2012, the power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells has increased from about 3% to over 20% (these values were independently certified).29–33,56–58 Moreover, several device architectures have been tested, and the material has proven to be remarkably versatile to manufacturing methods.
All-inorganic perovskites (AIPs), in which cesium replaces the organic cation, could yield improved stability in comparison to HOIPs, as well as extend the range of materials which can be investigated.59–61 The CsPbX3 perovskite was discovered accidentally in 1958. As significant progress in the past few years, Protesescu and co-workers for the first time synthesized inorganic colloidal AIPs, which exhibited monodisperse, a cubic perovskite crystal structure and quantum confinement effect, through a method that has been widely applied today named hot-injection.61 Interestingly, the CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) QDs show not only compositional bandgap engineering, but also size-tunability of their bandgap energies within the entire visible spectral region owing to an exciton Bohr diameter up to 12 nm.63,64 Photoluminescence (PL) of CsPbX3 QDs is characterized by narrow emission line widths of 12–42 nm, high QYs of 50–90%, and short radiative lifetimes of 1–29 ns. These unique optical properties enable them to be applied not only in solar cells17,19 but also for LEDs36,65–67 and low-threshold lasers.46,47,68–70
Undoubtedly, some researchers have recently made summaries on the perovskite QDs, but these reviews paid more attention to perovskite films and their application in perovskite solar cells.29–34,56–58 Therefore, summarizing the optical properties and analyzing the luminescent mechanisms of perovskite QDs in detail are valuable work to advance their development. In this review article, we focus on the latest research about the synthesis, microstructure transformation, optical performance and potential applications of HOIPs and AIPs in optoelectronic devices, as illustrated in Fig. 1.62,71–82 We first summarize experimental synthesis methods, and then review the influence of different microstructures on the optical properties, which is significant to understand their emissive mechanisms and apply them in fundamental photoelectric devices. Subsequently, we make a brief introduction about the applications of these interesting perovskite materials in optoelectronic devices benefitting from their excellent optical properties. In the final section, we give a perspective for HOIPs and AIPs, including improved stability, potential applications and possible development trends.
 Fig. 1  Timeline showing recent progress and future outlooks on the synthesis, optical properties and applications of AIPs and HOIPs. 
2. Synthesis of HOIP and AIP luminescent materials
Recently, a series of monodispersed HOIP and AIP luminescent materials were synthesized via solution reaction processes, which exhibit high crystallinity and quantum confinement effects.62,74–77,83–86 Generally, two types of wet chemical methods were reported for the preparation of the HOIPs and AIPs: one is ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP) or emulsion synthesis without providing any extra energy, and the other is hot-injection, ultrasonication or solvothermal synthesis which needs external energy such as heating or high energy wave. Pérez-Prieto and coworkers71 reported a facile colloidal strategy for the preparation of the MAPbBr3 NCs with a cubic perovskite crystal structure, an absorption peak at 527 nm and an emission peak at 530 nm for the first time. The detailed experimental procedure is provided in Fig. 2a. MABr N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution and PbBr2–DMF solution were introduced into a mixture solution of octadecene (ODE), oleic acid (OA) and octadecylammonium bromide. Subsequently, this strategy was evolved into the LARP method and emulsion synthesis. As shown in the Fig. 2b, the LARP reaction can be realized via simply pouring two precursor solutions into a vessel to induce supersaturate precipitation at room temperature. In particular, for the typical synthesis of MAPbBr3 QDs, a mixture of PbBr2, MABr, n-octylamine (OM), and OA was dissolved into DMF to get a clear precursor solution. Then, a fixed amount of precursor solution was dropped into toluene under vigorous stirring. After that, a yellow-green colloidal solution was formed, indicating the aggregation process of the precursors into nanoparticles. This method was firstly reported by Zhong and coworkers74 and can be extended to prepare MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Cl/Br, Br, Br/I, I) NCs which can yield tunable emissions from 407 to 734 nm by varying halogen composition. Subsequently, Gao and co-workers80 synthesized the colloidal MAPbBr3 nanoplatelets (NPLs) via a modified LARP process, which did not require the preparation of amine halide salts and the usage of extra organic solvents, such as OA and ODE. Furthermore, the strategy was appropriately modified by Zeng et al. and Levchuk et al. to fabricate CsPbX3 and FAPbX3 (Fig. 2b).75,87 Notably, excessive organic compounds can be problematic for charge transport if they remain in devices during fabrication. In addition, the prepared MAPbBr3 NPLs have a longer recombination lifetime, which can be attributed to the surface passivation by the octylammonium bromide capping ligand and the reduced defect density in the nanoscale single crystals.88 Meanwhile, the long-chain capping ligands also make the MAPbBr3 NPLs resistant to moisture to some extent, which attenuates the probability of water induced degradation.89,90
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures for (a and b) the ligand-assisted reprecipitation method and (c) the emulsion strategy. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 71. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The emulsion synthesis mainly makes use of the liliquoid to separate the two solutions in a microscopic scale. It was performed in two steps, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2c: emulsion formation and demulsification.83 Namely, immiscible polar and nonpolar solvents as well as surfactant were mixed to produce an emulsion, and the addition of demulsifier (such as tert-butanol or acetone) can initialize solvent mixing and induce the crystallization of QDs. Taking HOIPs as a typical sample, the reactant MABr and PbBr2 disperse in DMF and hexane, respectively, which can act as the immiscible solvent to form the emulsion system. Then, the QD solution can be formed via adding the demulsifier. After that, the QDs can be reprecipitated from the mixed solution by adding a fixed amount of tert-butanol. Notably, the LARP process is realized by introducing a good solution into a bad solvent. The solutions are clear and the ions crystallize in a supersaturated environment. For the emulsion method, the precursor solution is prepared by adding dropwise ABr–DMF solution and PbBr2–DMF solution into a mixed solution of hexane, OA, and n-octylamine. Interestingly, DMF solution containing A, Pb and Br ions is encapsulated by surfactants to produce emulsion and then the demulsifier is added to promote growth of QDs. The crystallization principles are similar, but the procedures to achieve supersaturated environments are different. It is concluded that solubility change induced by solvent mixing is an essential process to drive nucleation/growth of QDs for the LARP method, while microreactors produced by solvent mixing are a prerequisite to induce crystallization of QDs for the emulsion method.
The LARP technique is simple and practicable, leading to the production QDs with bright luminescence and high QYs at room temperature (RT).74,75,87 However, the as-prepared QDs are difficult to seperate from the reaction solution owing to the instability in many polar solvents such as DMF, methanol, and ethanol, which has hindered their applications in high performance photoelectric devices. Interestingly, researchers have demonstrated that the QYs of the QDs prepared by the emulsion synthesis are generally in the range of 80–92% for all colloidal solutions from different batches, which are higher than those for the samples fabricated via the LARP technique.83
Hot-injection, which has been widely used in the synthesis of traditional semiconductor NCs, was also adopted to prepare HOIPs and AIPs by Protesescu et al.62 for the first time. As presented in Fig. 3a, the Cs-oleate precursor solution was injected into PbX2 solution under a certain temperature and inert gas protection, which takes advantage of the ionic nature of chemical bonding in the solution phase and fast nucleation/growth rates. After a few seconds, the colloidal CsPbX3 AIP solution could be formed via rapidly cooling in an ice-water bath. The size of the QDs and the emissive color can be tuned via controlling the reaction temperature and halide elements. Importantly, the synthesized AIP QDs exhibit high PLQYs up to 50–90%. Later, this method was extended to prepare FAPbX3 HOIPs by modifying the related experimental steps, and the obtained FAPbI3 QDs through hot-injection can overcome the “perovskite red wall”, which is a big challenge in achieving stable iodine-containing perovskite NCs and efficent emissions in the red and near-IR spectral ranges.91,92
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures for (a) hot-injection, (b and c) ultrasonication, (d) microfluidic reaction and (e) the solvothermal method. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 93. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 84. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (d) ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The ultrasonication method,93–95 shown in Fig. 3b, starts with the simple mixture of octadecene, oleic acid, oleylamine, cesium carbonate and lead halide precursor powders, and then involves tip-sonication for several minutes. During the reaction process, the colour change of the mixing solution can be distinctly discerned and intense luminescence under UV-light excitation can be easily observed by the naked eye, indicating the formation of perovskite QDs. The as-prepared QDs were purified through centrifugation at a speed of 9000 rpm for 10 min to eliminate unreacted precursors, and then the precipitates were redispersed in hexane and further centrifuged at 2000 rpm to remove large particles. The obtained QDs exhibited bright PL with QYs of 75–92% for CsPbBrxI3−x and superior long-term stability. For the hot-injection experiment, the complete dissolution of Cs2CO3 and PbX2 in mixtures of ODE, OA and OM via heating is generally required. However, for the ultrasonic synthesis, Cs2CO3 and PbX2 are simply mixed in the ODE, OA and OM solution and cannot be totally dissolved at room temperature. Upon the role of ultrasonic driving energy, part of the raw materials can react and convert into perovskite phase. As reported by Hintermayr et al.84 (Fig. 3c), bulk MAPbX3 could be produced through grinding the mixture of MABr and PbBr2 powders, then was dispersed in toluene together with OM and finally subjected to tip-sonication to obtain quasi-2D NPLs. This gives evidence that ultrasonication is an efficient method for the exfoliation of bulk crystals into 2D NPLs and is known as a top-down process.
Lignos et al.86 designed a microfluidic reactor to synthesize AIP QDs along with online absorption/emission and PLQY measurements. As shown in Fig. 3d, during a microfluidic reaction, Cs-oleate and PbX2 precursor were loaded into precision syringe pumps, the precursors were transferred through fluorinated ethylene propylene tubing and mixed in a polyether ether ketone cross-junction, and finally the mixture was heated to a pre-designed reaction temperature. The key parameters, such as precursor types/concentrations, flow rate of fluid and temperature/time, were precisely controlled by microfluidic reactors. Importantly, this system can be easily scaled-up for production.95–98
Solvothermal reaction was recently demonstrated to enable the synthesis of AIP QDs.76,99 As presented in Fig. 3e, cesium acetate or cesium carbonate, PbX2, ODE, OA and OM were loaded into a Teflon-lined autoclave and then reacted at a desired temperature in a rolling oven for 30 min. The crude solution was naturally cooled down to room temperature and the final products were collected by centrifugation. As a widely used method to prepare various NCs, it has several advantages, such as simple setup, precise control over the composition and morphology, high uniformity, and high crystallinity of the products.
In conclusion, LARP and emulsion synthesizing routes operating at room temperature show advantages of facile synthesis procedure and short reaction time. Moreover, it is universal to synthesize almost all known three-dimensional perovskite QDs and relatively easy to expand mass production. However, the disadvantage of low temperature preparation is relatively low crystallinity and stability. For comparison, the perovskite QDs synthesized by the hot-injection method have high crystallinity due to high-temperature growth as well as uniform particle sizes. Even if the synthesis steps of hot-injection are complex, it cannot change the status of this method as the most successful, most typical, most delicate one to obtain the highest quality of QDs. The ultrasonication method and solvothermal reaction always accompany long reaction time, which is the main factor to control the size of QDs. Therefore, in order to achieve homogeneous QDs, the obtained particles need to be separated and purified to remove large ones, resulting in a large amount of waste. The microfluidic method is a new one that is improved from the hot-injection method. The advantages, that emission and absorption tests can be measured immediately after reaction and flow can be well controlled by feedback, show that this method is probably suitable for commercialization.
3. Microstructures and optical properties
3.1 Microstructures of ABX3 perovskite materials
Generally, bulk APbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites can crystallize in orthorhombic, tetragonal, and cubic polymorphs.100–102 The crystal structure of APbX3 is strongly dependent on reaction temperature, leading to phase transition with alteration of temperature (Fig. 4a).103 CsPbBr3 QDs show a typical orthorhombic structure when prepared via a low-temperature LARP (Fig. 4b),75 while they exhibit a cubic one when fabricated via a high-temperature hot-injection (Fig. 4c).62 Interestingly, the partial substitution of Br by Cl or I can retain the products in a cubic structure. Notably, the appearance color of APbX3 could undergo changes accompanied by phase transition. For CsPbBr3 (Fig. 4d), the conversion from orthorhombic to tetragonal (88 °C) and finally to cubic (130 °C) will not induce any apparent color change (orange);25,104–106 however, for CsPbI3 (Fig. 4e), phase transition from an orthorhombic structure to a cubic one (315 °C) results in a remarkable color change from dark to yellow.107–109 Furthermore, total energy calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) evidence that the internal energies of bulk cubic CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 phases are about 7 and 17 kJ mol−1 higher than those of the corresponding orthorhombic polymorphs, respectively. Generally, the as-prepared perovskite QDs using different techniques (hot-injection, ion exchange and emulsion) dominantly show a cubic structure with high crystallinity, which may be attributed to the combined effects of relatively high synthesizing temperature and surface ligands.62 Interestingly, all CsPbX3 NCs crystallized in the cubic phase through hot-injection, but for cubic CsPbI3 NCs, the structure remained metastable at RT and eventually converted to the orthorhombic phase after months of storage. Recently, monoclinic structured CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) NCs were successfully prepared and their optical properties were demonstrated to be comparable to those of cubic counterparts.75 Namely, the phase change from cubic to monoclinic does not significantly affect their optical performance. For the MAPbI3, it has a reversible cubic to tetragonal phase transition that occurs in a temperature range between 54 and 57 °C. It is not favourable for MAPbI3 solar cells to work in the summer. Moreover, this phase transition is expected to affect the electronic band structure of this material and therefore influence photovoltaic properties.110,111 The substitution of the organic cation MA by FA can induce the formation of a trigonal structure (black color, α-phase) or a hexagonal one (yellow color, δ-phase) of the perovskite, and phase transition from δ-phase to α-phase takes place at about 125 °C.107,112–114 In the airtight container, the perovskite QDs could preserve the cubic structure and be stable over a long period of time. However, they could be destroyed on exposure to moisture/thermal environments.
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD pattern of orthorhombic CsPbBr3 QDs, inset is the DSC trace of a CsPbBr3 sample. XRD patterns of CsPb(Cl/Br)3, CsPbBr3 and CsPb(Br/I)3 QDs prepared via (b) LARP (room temperature) and (c) hot-injection (high temperature; right), respectively. Schematic illustration of phase transition from orthorhombic to cubic for the (d) CsPbBr3 and (e) CsPbI3 products. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 103. Copyright 2015, Wiley; (b and c) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (d and e) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Microstructures of other perovskite-related materials
Until now, extensive studies related to APbX3 perovskite structures have been reported, but the perovskite-related materials, such as A4PbX6, A2PbX5 and APb2X5, remain elusive.115–119 Herein, we mainly concern structural dimensionality of perovskites. It is worth noting that the dimensionality discussed here is related to the connectivity of corner-sharing PbX64− octahedrons in the crystal structure, and lower-dimensional perovskites are originated from separation of the PbX64− octahedra from a three-dimensional (3-D) perovskite structure (Fig. 5a). The common formula of lead-based perovskites could be presented as AmPbX2+m, where A is Cs, Rb, FA or a monovalent cation, and X is the halogen anion. When m = 1, it is the 3-D APbX3 perovskite structure, where PbX64− octahedra are corner-shared by X ions and A ions locate in the voids of the PbX64− network.120,121 Considering compact stacking with the Goldschmidt's tolerance factor concept, that is , where RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radius for the corresponding ions, the tolerance factors for the 3-D perovskites should be close to 1 (0.8–1).122–124 If t > 1, this indicates that the A site cation is too large and generally precludes formation of a perovskite, and if t < 0.8, the A cation is too small, again often leading to alternative structures. Recently, Travis et al. made an adjustment to the traditional tolerance factor for use with halide perovskites in general and hybrid iodide perovskites in particular by introducing a revised set of anion-dependent cationic radii,125 which may be conducive to the search for novel hybrid and inorganic perovskites. Notably, the tolerance factor is not applicable to lower dimensional systems (2D, 1D and 0D). The change to 2D perovskite lattice can see the incorporation of A site cations of any arbitrary size as the 2D sheets are simply separated to accommodate cations of increased size, and the same logic holds with dimensionality less than 2. When m = 2, the 3-D reticular structure is isolated into a two-dimensional (2-D) layered structure, which usually occurs for HOIPs.126,127 Exceptionally, MAPbX3 and FAPbX3 are expected to fit into the 3-D structure due to small organic cations.53 Generally, a large organic group in position A will lead to a value of tolerance factor beyond 1, and it is difficult for PbX64− octahedra to form a dense 3-D network structure. Alternatively, the 2-D inorganic layer consists of each PbX64− octahedron by sharing the halide ions at a horizontal plane and large organic groups distribute among the layered inorganic perovskites. Meanwhile, the formula of perovskite changes to (R–NH3)2PbX4 or (H3N–R–NH3)PbX4 distinguished by the number of ammonium heads, which bind to the halogen atoms of the inorganic layer by hydrogen bonding.128 In addition, the R–NH3 organic groups will self-assemble to form organic layers via π–π interactions (when the organic group contains aromatic groups) or van der Waals forces (when the organic group contains alkyl chains).119,129,130 Furthermore, 2-D structure perovskite can be chopped into a 1-D chain structure, and the formula of perovskite correspondingly converts to (R–NH3)3PbX5 (m = 3).131,132 It should be noted that large cross-section of an organic cation or a geometry that provides steric hindrance is indispensable for obtaining 1-D products. In a similar way, when the PbX64− octahedra are isolated into clusters, it can be described as an assembly of loosely coupled 0-D structure perovskites (m = 4).133–135 In fact, these four types of HOIPs, such as MAPbX3, FAPbX3, (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4, (C5H9NH3)2PbBr4, (C7H13NH3)3PbBr5, and (C6H10N2)2PbBr6, have been discovered and fabricated.74,87,126–135 Such dimensional tunability will provide a meaningful idea for the preparation of interesting perovskite structures with variable physical properties. However, the high angulation of an inorganic framework for these HOIPs makes it hard to reduce the size to the nanoscale.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of structural evolution of (a) HOIPs and (b) AIPs from 3-D to 0-D. The variation of structure and optical properties after phase conversion from (c) CsPbBr3 (3-D) to CsPb2Br5 (2-D) and (d) CsPbBr3 (3-D) to Cs4PbBr6 (0-D). Adapted with permission from (c) ref. 138. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) ref. 141. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, similar phenomena also occur in AIPs (Fig. 5b), which have been extensively explored in recent years. Different from HOIPs, without hydrogen bonds sustaining PbX64− octahedra in a low dimensional structure, the corner-shared PbX64− octahedra produce distortion and become edge-shared. This phenomenon is especially evidenced in 1-D perovskite materials.62 Yu and co-workers136 synthesized tetragonal CsPb2Br5 NPLs with bright green luminescence. Wang et al.137 developed a dual-phase all-inorganic CsPbBr3–CsPb2Br5 compound, which was applied as the luminescent layer in LEDs. It is worth pointing out that CsPb2Br5 NPLs were adhered to cubic CsPbBr3 NCs like a parasite. Interestingly, this parasitic structure could reduce the barrier against the electronic and ionic transport and decrease non-radiative energy transfer to trap states, leading to the increase of ionic conductivity and fluorescent lifetime. However, CsPb2Br5 has a bandgap of 2.98 eV, which will not yield green emission theoretically. Jiang and co-workers138 proved that tetragonal CsPb2Br5 was an indirect bandgap semiconductor and the CsPb2Br5 nano-sheets were actually germinated from the CsPbBr3 nanocubes via reacting with excessive PbBr2 precursor, as illustrated in Fig. 5c. The phase evolution from orthorhombic CsPbBr3 to tetragonal CsPb2Br5 depends on a solution-phase method and accompanies the modification of the dimensionality and optical properties. With elongation of reaction time, PL from CsPbBr3 nanocubes gradually weakens, indicating that tetragonal CsPb2Br5 nanosheets are PL-inactive.
At present, the opinions on the PL behaviors of 0-D all-inorganic perovskite Cs4PbBr6 are highly controversial. Several researchers believe that Cs4PbBr6 exhibits green emission. For example, Mohammed and co-workers139 have revealed that Cs4PbBr6 powders show green emission (520 nm) with PLQY of 45%. The investigation on a Cs4PbBr6 single crystal also evidenced their emissive feature with PLQY of 42%.140 Nevertheless, the origin of its luminescence is still unclear. On the other hand, Manna and co-workers141 concluded that Cs4PbBr6 NCs (9–37 nm) did not produce any emission within the visible spectral region owing to their large band gap (>3.4 eV) but showed strong absorption in the ultraviolet (UV) region. The conversion of Cs4PbBr6 NCs into CsPbBr3 ones with the addition of PbBr2 resulted in the shift of the absorption band from 314 nm to 510 nm and yielded intense green luminescence (Fig. 5d). Interestingly, a recent report assumed that the PL of 0-D perovskite-related Cs4PbBr6 single crystals was attributed to the existence of defect states within the bandgap such as bromide vacancies acting as radiative recombination centers to capture excitons.140 Subsequently, Samanta and co-workers142 developed a surfactant mediated anti-solvent precipitation method to synthesize Cs4PbBr6 microdisks and proved their intrinsic green emissive nature via single-particle spectroscopic analyses. There are two different standpoints of 0-D perovskite-related Cs4PbBr6 materials, but two views focused on different sizes. Green emission can be observed for Cs4PbBr6 particles with micron-/milli-meter sizes but cannot be detected for the products with nanoscale size.143–146 Further theoretical calculations and experiments should be carried out to discover the exact mechanisms.
3.3 Different morphologies of ABX3 perovskite materials
Transmission electron microscope (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) observations can be used to understand the variation of microstructure and morphology of HOIPs and AIPs, as shown in the Fig. 6. Generally, solution-phase synthesized CsPbX3 and MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) are nanocubes and nanospheres with a low aspect ratio (Fig. 6a and b). Protesescu et al. and Li et al. reported on the synthesis of CsPbX3 NCs by hot-injection and room temperature supersaturated recrystallization, respectively.62,75 Other researchers demonstrated that other morphologies of AIPs and HOIPs with high aspect ratios, including nanowires (NWs), nanorods (NRs), and NPLs, could be obtained via controlling the reaction temperature/time, surfactant, and precursor concentration147,148 Generally, temperature and ligand length play an important role in controlling the morphology of perovskite nanomaterials. Pan et al. conducted a large amount of contrast experiments to understand its intrinsic principles.148 The results showed that a lower temperature favored the formation of NPLs and a higher temperature led to the formation of nanocubes. On the other hand, the usage of short-chain amines was beneficial for producing thinner NPLs, and the employment of short-chain carboxylic acids was conducive to yielding larger size nanocubes via a high-temperature reaction. Zhu et al.149 have added a large amount of an n-octylammoniumcation precursor such as CH3(CH2)7NH3I and acetonitrile/toluene as solvents to synthesize HOIPs with different shapes. Importantly, CH3NH3PbX3 NWs and NRs capped with octylammonium halides exhibited relatively high PLQYs and long decay lifetimes. Meanwhile, CH3NH3PbI3 NWs had a shape-correlated PL across a whole particle without remarkable photo-bleaching. In addition, Yang and co-workers150 concluded that the reaction temperature and time play a critical role in determining the morphology of AIP QDs. For example, they developed a catalyst-free, solution-phase synthetic method to obtain CsPbX3 NCs with uniform growth direction by simply controlling reaction temperature/time (Fig. 6c). Compared to bulk crystals, these CsPbX3 NWs showed weak quantum confinement. A more recent work reported a solvothermal synthesis of CsPbBr3 AIPs from nano-cubes to ultrathin NWs with a diameter of ∼2.6 nm (Fig. 6d).76 These ultrathin NWs exhibited a significant blue-shift of absorption and emission relative to NCs (from 520 nm to 452 nm). To achieve micro-scale MAPbX3 NWs, an antisolvent-vapor-diffusion induced crystallization method was developed by Fu and co-workers (Fig. 6e).151 The band gaps for MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 NWs are 2.91, 2.25 and 1.53 eV, yielding the emissions located at 425, 542 and 775 nm respectively. Similarly, Zhou et al.152 reported a vapor-phase growth method to grow CsPbX3 AIPs NRs with tunable visible full-spectrum emission (Fig. 6f). These NRs exhibited a triangular cross-section and a uniformly high-Q factor in a wide spectral range, enabling them to find promising applications in tunable lasers. Notably, the reported NR arrays are usually based on the high temperature growth techniques so far. To address this challenge, Wong et al.153 developed a room temperature growth of MAPbBr3 NR arrays (Fig. 6g) and applied them in LEDs. Simultaneously, anisotropic colloidal quasi-2-D NPLs were also synthesized via finely modifying the reaction temperature (90–130 °C) (Fig. 6h).154 Interestingly, the thicknesses of NPLs are directly related to reaction temperature and can be correspondingly accommodated by altering the reaction temperature. In fact, reaction temperature was not the only factor that regulates the thickness of NPLs. Akkerman et al.155 developed a solution synthetic approach at room temperature to obtain CsPbBr3 NPLs, and their thicknesses were precisely controlled by the amount of added HBr. Levchuk et al.156 performed a controllable precipitation synthesis at room temperature for colloidal MAPbX3 NPLs, and the modification of their thicknesses was achieved via adjusting the ratio of oleic acid to oleylamine (Fig. 6i).
 Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM characterization of perovskite materials with various morphologies. (a) CsPbBr3 nanocubes, (b) MAPbBr3 nanospheres, (c and d) CsPbBr3 NWs, (e) MAPbBr3 NWs, (f) CsPbBr3 NRs, (g) MAPbBr3 NRs, (h) CsPbBr3 NPLs and (i) MAPbBr3 NPLs. Insets are the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (b) ref. 74. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 150. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 76. Copyright 2017, Wiley; (e) ref. 151. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) ref. 152. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 153. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 154. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (i) ref. 156. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Notably, FAPbBr3 belongs to the same organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite as MAPbBr3, and the control of its morphology is similar to the case of MAPbBr3. Levchuk et al.,157 who successfully prepared the MAPbBr3 NPLs via a modified LARP process, have also fabricated the FAPbBr3 QDs and FAPbBr3 NPLs through a similar strategy with little modification. The morphology of both FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 can be regulated from QDs to NPLs by changing the proportion of surfactants (OA/OM) in the precursor solution. On the other hand, Fu et al. developed a low-temperature solution growth of FAPbX3 single-crystal NWs and explored their applications in the laser field.158
3.4 Optical properties of ABX3 perovskite materials
As we all know, metal halide perovskites with cube structure are direct gap semiconductors, where the related valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) are located at the same point in reciprocal space. A simplified schematic representation of a molecular orbital diagram of formation of the valence band and conduction band is shown in Fig. 7a. It has been almost unanimous in different reports that the electronic structure near the band edge of metal halide perovskites is mainly dominated by the PbX64− octahedron. The core point is that the VBM consists of Pb 6s and X np anti-bonding orbitals, and the CBM is mainly constituted by Pb 6p anti-bonding orbitals.158–161 This theoretical model is also confirmed by energy band calculations.162 The calculated energy bands of MAPbI3 and the electronic density of states are presented in Fig. 7b.163 It is noted that A-site atoms do not contribute directly to these band structures. The calculated electronic band structures of CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 exhibit a cubic phase as shown in Fig. 7c (the top of valence band is set to 0 eV in each case).62 Apparently, tunable full spectral emissions are originated from the changes in the band gap primarily driven by a halogen ion. In fact, the energy of the halogen p orbital increases from Cl (3p) to Br (4p) to I (5p), while the Pb 6p orbitals that form the CB remain relatively unfluctuated. Ravi et al.161 determined band edge energies of CsPbX3 NCs through cyclic voltammetry (CV), as shown in Fig. 7d. When the component changes from CsPbCl3 to CsPbI3, the VBM shows a systematic shift of 0.80 eV from −6.24 eV to −5.44 eV, whereas the CBM exhibits a smaller shift of 0.19 eV from −3.26 eV to −3.45 eV.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of bonding/antibonding orbitals of APbX3, showing the formation of the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB). (b) The theoretically calculated band structure and density of states (DOS) of MAPbI3. (c) Electronic band structures for three typical cubic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites. (d) The variation of band edge energies of CsPbX3 with modification of halogen. Adapted with permission from (b) ref. 163. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 161. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
From the accidental discovery of luminescent perovskite materials, optical properties are the most frequently concerned issues. In general, the remarkably bright luminescence of HOIP and AIP QDs is characterized by color-tunable emission bands, narrow emission line widths and high QYs, which are partially ascribed to their quantum confinement effects. In fact, these optical features have been previously achieved for chalcogenide-based QDs such as CdSe.164 However, traditional CdSe-based QDs exhibited intense PL only when the size of the NCs (ca. 5 nm) was comparable to the Bohr excitonic diameter, where strong quantum confinement can enhance the radiative transition probability of charge carriers. Unfortunately, this stringent requirement of quantum confinement can result in spectral broadening from the size-distribution, and a high density of trap states because of large surface to volume ratio.165 On the one hand, traditional QDs show disadvantages of self-absorption and Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET).166 As a consequence, PL of QD films (such as CdSe/CdS–ZnS core/hybrid-shell NCs) could exhibit a red-shift and decline of emissive intensity compared to their dilute dispersion in toluene (Fig. 8a). The emitted photons from smaller QDs with larger optical bandgap could be absorbed by the larger ones with smaller optical bandgap or the excited smaller QDs could non-radiatively (FRET) transfer energy to larger ones, leading to the change of color chromaticity and QYs with variation of QD concentration. Similarly, emission-wavelength-dependent decay and temperature-sensitive emission position were usually observed (Fig. 8c and e). Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 8b, different from traditional QDs, the peak position and relative intensity of CsPbBr3 QDs remained almost identical for both the close-packed film (at high concentrations) and dilute dispersion. The decay behavior of CsPbBr3 QDs was independent of detection wavelength (Fig. 8d) and their emission position was independent of temperature (Fig. 8f). The main reason leading to improved PL behavior of CsPbBr3 QDs is probably attributed to their strong excitonic PL, where the charge carriers are only weakly confined, and the excitonic transition energy is less sensitive to QD size.103
 Fig. 8  Comparison of optical properties between CdSe/CdS–ZnS core/hybrid-shell NCs and CsPbBr3 NCs in the forms of a film and dispersion solution: (a and b) PL spectra, (c and d) PL decay profiles and (e and f) temperature-dependent PL spectra. Insets of (c and d) show the indicated emission wavelengths for recording the corresponding decay curves. Adapted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
Importantly, the energy gap of perovskite QDs can be adjusted by a facile but valid anion-exchange reaction, which can tune the emission color within the visible full-spectral region. The as-prepared mixed QDs do not affect the cationic sub-lattice and the cubic perovskite crystal structure is retained. For CsPbBr3 QDs, adding different Cl or I precursors will result in fast anion-exchange (Fig. 9a and b) and can easily tune the chemical composition and exciton emission wavelength (Fig. 9c and d).167 Similarly, for MAPbBr3 QDs, a series of colloidal MAPb(Cl1−xIx)3 (x = 0–1) can also be fabricated via mixing of the PbX2 salts in the precursors. It was reported that anion-exchange did not induce any lattice/surface defects that would lead to deterioration of the optical properties of the QDs. Different from other halide precursors (PbX2, ODAX, OAmX, MeMgX), anion exchange using TBAX as halide sources worked only for Br → Cl and I → Br, but not for the reverse cases (Cl → Br and Br → I). This is understandable in terms of hard/soft acid/base interactions.168 On the other hand, cation exchange in the traditional metal NCs (typical metal chalcogenides) has been extensively observed.169–171 For example, some metal chalcogenide NCs, such as Ag2Se,172 can be easily synthesized from CdSe precursors via Cd → Ag cation exchange. This difference between traditional QDs and perovskite QDs may be ascribed to the different strictness of the cationic sub-lattice and high mobility of singly charged halide ions.74,167,173
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Anion exchange reactions on CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) NCs via different halide precursors. (c) PL spectra of the exchanged NCs obtained from CsPbBr3 by adding different Cl or I precursors. (d) PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs obtained by starting from CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 NCs using different Br precursors. (e) Schematic illustration of direct anion exchange reaction by mixing CsPbBr3 NCs with either CsPbCl3 or CsPbI3 ones and (f) the corresponding PL spectra after anion exchange. (g) In situ PL observation of direct anion exchange between CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NCs in toluene. Adapted with permission from (a, c and e) ref. 73. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b, f and g) ref. 167. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In fact, mixing solutions containing perovskite NCs with different halide compositions can also induce anion exchange (Fig. 9e) and yield emissions in the intermediate of the parent particles (Fig. 9f). For example, CsPb(I/Br)3 solid solutions can be formed by mixing colloidal CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 solution to trigger anion exchange at room temperature. Consequently, only one narrow PL peak between the emission position of CsPbI3 and that of CsPbBr3 was detected after completing the reaction. Notably, the required time to reach full homogeneity was ten or more minutes, which is much longer than direct anion exchange (a few seconds). Based on in situ PL spectra (Fig. 9g), Nedelcu and coworkers167 studied the intermediate stages of ionic exchange and indicated that anion exchange occurred simultaneously in both kinds of particles, i.e. CsPbBr3 PL shifted to longer wavelengths and CsPbI3 PL moved to shorter wavelengths. However, compared to direct anion exchange, the extension of the time in the exchange among NCs is still inconclusive. Akkerman and coworkers73 considered that the long time required for anion exchange between NCs may be due to the necessity of shuttling of halide ions from NC to NC through the solution phase.
In addition to halogen atoms, the effect of atoms in the A-site on optical properties have also received wide attention. Normally, CsPbBr3 NCs showed typical green luminescence locating at 510–515 nm and FAPbBr3 NCs were recently found to exhibit bright green emission in the range of 530–535 nm with FWHM of 22 nm and PLQY of 85% (Fig. 10a).91 The different emission peaks between CsPbBr3 NCs and FAPbBr3 NCs provide the possibility of cation substitution in perovskites. Jang et al. developed ultrasound-induced synthesis of APbX3 (A = Cs, MA, FA) NCs and compared their optical properties, as shown in Fig. 10b.85 Obviously, the smaller the band gap, the greater the impact of A-site cations on the emissive position. To further understand this phenomenon, Protesescu et al.92 reported a hot-injection method to fabricate FAPbI3 and FA-doped CsPbI3 (FA0.1Cs0.9PbI3) NCs, and the corresponding emission peaks appear at 775 nm and 685 nm, respectively (Fig. 10c). It is amazing that the QY of FA0.1Cs0.9PbI3 NCs exceeded 70%, and did not show significant decline compared to those of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 NCs. Different from anion exchange, where the PLQYs quickly decreased even when only a small amount of different halogen atoms entered into the lattice, cation exchange showed the probability of achieving polychromatic luminescence with high QYs retained. Then, Chen et al.174 demonstrated that the designed Cs1−mFAmPbBr3 (m = 0–1) QDs enabled elaborate tunability of emission wavelength within 1–2 nm in the green region and showed high PLQYs (55–85%) by simply adjusting the Cs/FA ratio. Moreover, with the assistance of both cation substitution and anion exchange, the as-prepared colloidal Cs1−mFAmPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I and their mixture) NCs exhibited fine-tuning emissions in the visible full-spectral region (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of colloidal FAPbBr3 NCs in toluene under UV lamp irradiation (λ = 365 nm), and absorption/PL spectra of ∼12 nm FAPbBr3 NCs with a PL maximum at 530 nm, FWHM of 22 nm and QY of 85%. (b) PL spectra of composition-tuned APbX3 (A = Cs, MA, FA) perovskite NCs and the corresponding luminescent photographs. (c) PL spectra before and after cation exchange within FAPbI3 NCs (or CsPbI3 NCs) using Cs-oleate (or FA-oleate). (d) Full-spectral fine-tuning visible emissions from hybrid Cs1−mFAmPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I, 0 < m < 1) QDs with the help of concurrent cation and anion substitution. Insets (top) show the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 91. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 85. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) ref. 92. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 174. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Correlative metal halides with B-site ion replacement or doping
Although lead halide perovskite QDs have excellent luminescence characteristics and wide application prospects, the toxicity of lead still cannot be ignored. Recently, more and more researches have focused on replacing lead with other ions to reduce the toxicity of perovskites. The easiest attempt is the usage of tin (Sn), which is in the same main group as lead (Pb) and shows low toxicity compared to Pb. Böhm and coworkers175 synthesized CsSnX3 perovskite NCs by the hot-injection method (Fig. 11a). By changing the halogen composition, the emissive range can be adjusted between 500 nm and 940 nm. However, the intrinsic easy oxidation of Sn(II) into Sn(IV) made the CsSnX3 perovskite NCs unstable accompanied by a significant decrease in PLQY to a non-detectable value. In this case, there is an idea here, why not directly replace Pb(II) with Sn(IV)? Deng et al.176 reported a strategy to synthesize stable Cs2SnI6 perovskite NCs to prove this idea. With prolongation of reaction time, the morphology of Cs2SnI6 can be assembled from nanocubes to nanoplatelets with three intermediate states of nanorods, nanowires and nanobelts (Fig. 11b). Nevertheless, in contrast to their lead analogues, the PLQYs are still low, for example, 0.48% for quantum dots, 0.11% for nanorods, 0.08% for nanowires, 0.054% for nanobelts, and 0.046% for nanoplatelets. On the other hand, Zhang et al.177 utilized a modified ligand-assisted reprecipitation strategy to synthesize stable and brightly luminescent Cs3Sb2Br9 QDs (Fig. 11c). The Cs3Sb2Br9 QDs with an average size of 3 nm yielded violet emission at 410 nm with PLQY of 46%, which is far higher than those of other perovskite materials with the same emission. The Br-rich surface and large exciton binding energy (530 meV) for the Cs3Sb2Br9 QDs were believed to enable efficient exciton recombination. Structural and spectroscopic characterization proved that Cs3Sb2Br9 was a trigonal phase with a direct band gap of 2.36 eV. In addition, Cs3Sb2X9 QDs can also be fabricated via anion exchange reaction and their emissions can be tuned from 370 nm to 560 nm. Furthermore, Pradhan et al.178 successfully synthesized Cs3Sb2Cl9 NWs with a length of several microns and NRs with controllable aspect ratios by tuning the precursors and ligands (Fig. 11d). These lead-free Cs3Sb2X9 with high PLQYs and stable luminescence are expected to find promising applications in the optoelectronic field.
 Fig. 11  (a) PL and absorption spectra of CsSnX3 NCs. (b) Different morphologies of Cs2SnI6 NCs. (c) Optical properties, crystal structure and TEM image of Cs3Sb2Br9 NCs. (d) TEM image of Cs3Sb2Cl9 nanowires and nanorods. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 175. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 176. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 177. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 178. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, it is also feasible to dope other divalent metal cations, such as Zn2+, Ni2+ and Mn2+, and tri-valent Bi3+ and rare earth ions, into CsPbX3 hosts. Donega and coworkers179 presented a cation exchange reaction in CsPbBr3 NCs, in which Pb2+ cations were partially replaced by divalent cations, yielding doped CsPb1−mMmBr3 NCs (M = Sn2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+) (Fig. 12a). The doping of smaller divalent cations into CsPbBr3 leads to contraction of the crystalline lattice and a blue-shift in emission spectrum. The blue emission of CsPbCl3 NCs usually showed low PLQY (<15%); by comparison, CsPb1−mMmBr3 NCs can produce blue luminescence with high PLQY (>50%), which opens a new possibility for highly efficient full-color QLEDs in the future. Recently, Sun et al.180 fabricated all-inorganic violet-emitting and blue-emitting perovskite NCs with near-unity PLQYs through nickel ion doping in the B-site. As shown in Fig. 12b, there are no new absorption peaks showing up and the exciton absorption peak of the NCs shifts irregularly within a narrow range with the increase of Ni concentration. The possible source for the spectral shift may be related to both size change and doping, proving the weak effect of Ni doping on the electronic structure of the host. However, the doping of Ni ions essentially promoted the PLQYs from 2.4% for the undoped NCs to 96.5% for Ni-11.9% doping. The same evolution was observed in CsPbCl2.4Br0.6 (PLQY = 1.2%) and CsPbCl2Br NCs (PLQY = 4.8%). As shown in Fig. 12c, the PLQYs unbelievably increased to 92.0% (with 2.8% Ni doping) and 93.1% (with 2.2% Ni doping) respectively. X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra at the Pb LIII-edge were implemented for undoped and 11.9% Ni2+ doped samples (Fig. 12d). The fitting results of EXAFS spectra indicated that Ni doping is beneficial for increased defect formation energy and propitious to restrain structural defects of CsPbCl3 NCs, leading to improved order of the perovskite lattice.
 Fig. 12  (a) Luminescent variation of CsPb1−mMmBr3 NCs (M = Sn2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+). (b) CsPbCl3 and (c) CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NCs. (d) k3-weighted Pb LIII-edge EXAFS of undoped and Ni-11.9% doped NCs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 179. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (c, d and e) ref. 180. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
It is worth noting that doping Mn2+ ions into CsPbX3 NCs can yield extra orange-red emission originated from parity-forbidden d → d transition of Mn2+.181–183 CsPb1−mMnmCl3 NCs were firstly synthesized using the hot-injection method by Liu et al.184 and CsPb1−mMnmX3 NCs (m ≈ 0.1) can be obtained by anion exchange reaction from CsPb1−mMnmCl3 precursors. The CsPb1−mMnmCl3 NCs showed two emission peaks at 402 nm and 586 nm assigned to exciton recombination and Mn2+ radiative transition, respectively. Efficient energy transfer from excitons to Mn2+ was evidenced (Fig. 13a) and Mn2+ doping can significantly improve the QY of exciton emission. However, no Mn2+ emission was detected in the CsPb1−mMnmBr3 NCs and CsPb1−mMnmI3 ones due to the mismatch between the CB of the QDs and the 4T1 excited state of Mn2+ and thus the infeasibility of exciton-to-Mn2+ energy transfer. Later, Liu et al.185 demonstrated that the substitution ratio of Mn in CsPb1−mMnmX3 NCs can be up to 46% and greatly enhance the PLQY of CsPbCl3 from 5% to 54%. Notably, cation exchange of Pb is a great challenge due to the rigid structure of the Pb sublattice. Interestingly, Huang et al. developed a halide exchange-driven cation exchange (HEDCE) strategy to produce Mn-doped CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NCs and proved that MnCl2 molecules rather than a mixture of Mn2+ and Cl− ions were capable of doping into perovskite NCs.182 Furthermore, Chen et al.186 evidenced that Mn2+ doping can fundamentally stabilize perovskite lattices of CsPbX3 QDs even at a high temperature up to 200 °C under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 13  (a) Energy transfer processes between Mn2+ and CsPbX3 NCs prepared by forward and reverse anion exchange. Absorption and PL spectra of undoped/Ni-doped. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of Bi doped and undoped CsPbI3 NCs. (c) NIR PL spectra and PLQYs of Bi-doped CsPbI3 NCs with different nominal Bi concentrations, and schematic illustration of electronic transitions in Bi doped NCs. (d) Optical properties of CsPbCl3 NCs doped with different RE ions. (e) Energy level diagrams of Yb3+ and Eu3+ ion doped CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs and the possible downconversion and downshifting emission mechanisms. (f) Absorption and PL spectra in the visible-NIR region for various perovskite NCs co-doped with Yb3+ and other RE ions. (g) Schematic diagram of the energy transfer mechanism in the Yb3+, Ce3+ co-doped CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 NCs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 184. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b and c) ref. 191. Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America; (d and e) ref. 195. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f and g) ref. 196. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, bismuth is one of the most deeply studied main elements for doping, with easy involvement of its p orbital electrons in chemical combinations. Actually, Bi3+ doping in lead-halide perovskites is a feasible approach, which has been proved in perovskite films and single crystals.187–189 The near-infrared PL in Bi3+ ion doped halide perovskites was observed and its origin was from the structural defects induced by Bi.190 Recently, Zhu et al.191 reported on the synthesis of Bi-doped CsPbI3 NCs with a cubic crystal structure via hot-injection. The absorption spectra (Fig. 13b) exhibit a slight red shift with the increase of Bi concentration, proving that the doping of Bi ions could affect the electronic structure of the host. Moreover, the wide emission band from 800 nm to 1600 nm peaking at 1145 nm from Bi-doped CsPbI3 NCs could be detected and the PLQY could be promoted to 7.17% by optimizing the dopant concentration, as shown in Fig. 13c. Meanwhile, the local structure distortion of the [PbI6] octahedron and the radiative transition from the in-gap state to the valence band resulted in the production of the NIR emission.
Rare earth (RE) ions not only play an important role in RE luminescent nanomaterials which exhibit high stability, narrow emission band, long fluorescence lifetime, high chemical stability and low potential bio-toxicity, but also have been extensively applied as dopants in oxides and II–VI semiconductors to control their optical and electronic properties.192–194 Pan et al.195 developed the doping of various RE ions (Ce3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+, Er3+ and Yb3+) into the lattices of CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs using a hot-injection method. Lattice contraction is observed since Pb2+ ions are replaced by smaller RE ones, which enhances the binding energy of CsPbCl3 and thus induces blue-shift of the absorption band (Fig. 13d). It is coincident with the band gap engineering of the semiconductor, which could be described as the increase of the band gap in the semiconductor with the decrease of the lattice constant. Meanwhile, the emissions from intrinsic electronic transitions of RE ions could be easily detected. It is worth noting that the intrinsic transitions of Yb3+ ions show a high PLQY of 143%, which may come from the quantum cutting of excitonic transition of CsPbCl3 NCs (Fig. 13e). For the other RE-doped perovskite NCs, normally, the exciton energy was transferred to the higher energy levels of RE ions, and then non-radiatively returned to the emitting levels (Fig. 13f). Zhou et al.196 further give insight into the quantum cutting of excitonic transition in RE-doped perovskite NCs. Yb3+ doped CsPbBr3 NCs showed very weak NIR emission, however, the PL intensity significantly enhanced with partial substitution of Br by Cl and increase of Yb3+ doping content (Fig. 13f). Meanwhile, the PLQY of 7.2% Yb3+ doped CsPbBr1.5Cl1.5 NCs reached as high as 94%. Furthermore, Yb3+, Er3+ co-doped CsPbBr1.5Cl1.5 NCs can yield 1540 nm emission assigned to Er3+:4I13/2–4I15/2 transition at the expense of the emission from Yb3+. Interestingly, Yb3+, Ce3+ co-doped CsPbBr1.5Cl1.5 NCs can produce 988 nm emission of Yb3+via quantum cutting mechanisms, where perovskite NCs can directly transfer energy to Yb3+ as well as transfer to Ce3+ bridge centers and further transfer to Yb3+ activators (Fig. 13g).
3.6 Improving stability of perovskite materials
The stability issue of metal halide perovskites remains a great challenge for future applications due to their ionic crystal feature and easy decomposition on exposure to an external environment. In fact, it was found that the quantities of polar solvent and the times of centrifugation had a significant effect on the optical properties of perovskite materials. Adding polar solvents and exerting centrifugation to remove remnant precursors could undermine the colloidal stability of QDs, which may be owing to damage to the attached hydrophobic ligands. As shown in Fig. 14a and b, the amount of polar solvent must be rigorously calibrated and controlled when purifying CsPbX3 QDs via centrifugation. Otherwise, it could result in the dissolution of the particles. In fact, it was evidenced that the surface groups, such as aliphatic hydrocarbon chains, amine (–NH2), and carboxylic acid (–COOH) moieties, coming from precursors (i.e., OLA, OA, and ODE), played a key role to stabilize perovskite QDs in the solvents (Fig. 14c–f). After purification two or more times, the signals of the surface groups gradually disappeared (Fig. 14c), the PL band gradually red-shifted (Fig. 14d) and the QDs tended to aggregate (Fig. 14e and f), leading to the loss of the quantum confinement effect.197
 Fig. 14  (a) The impact of the amount of added antisolvent on the luminescence of CsPbBr3 QDs. (b) Schematic illustration of the centrifugal casting process. (c) FTIR spectra and (d) PL spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs subjected to purification for different times. TEM images of (e) 2-purified and (f) 3-purified CsPbBr3 samples. Insets are the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The simplest and most effective way to enhance the stability of perovskite NCs is surface coating. Protesescu et al.62 embedded CsPbX3 NCs into poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) polymer by a photo-polymerization reaction (Fig. 15a) and cast a variety of shapes of polymer, which is the first step for a wide-color gamut display. Zhou et al.198 utilized a common solvent DMF to dissolve polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), MAX and PbX2, and then the DMF solvent was removed rapidly in a low-pressure environment and MAPbX3 NCs finally self-crystallized in PVDF film (Fig. 15b). Brightly luminescent and color-tunable composite films with emissions ranging from 440 to 730 nm were obtained by varying the halide composition. Other kinds of organic polymers, such as polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), acting as hosts to embed perovskite NCs are also feasible.199,200 Another route to protect perovskite NCs is metal–organic framework (MOF) coating. Zhang et al.201 developed an approach to realize luminescent perovskite NCs inlaid in Pb-based MOFs (Fig. 15c). The Pb-based MOFs reacted with MAX, and MAPbX3 NCs can be rapidly produced in the MOF matrix. In addition, Wang et al.202 simply mixed green CsPbBr3 AIP QD solution with mesoporous silica powder (whose pore sizes are approximately 12–15 nm) in hexane solution to obtain CsPbBr3-mesoporous silica composites (Fig. 15d). Such treatment can prevent anion exchange and increase the stability of QDs, which is significant for LED packaging. Dirin et al.203 (Fig. 15e) used a similar approach to infiltrate perovskite precursor solutions into mesoporous silica, where perovskite NCs can be crystallized within the pores of mesoporous silica. Amazingly, the as-prepared nanocomposites can yield bright luminescence and their QYs exceed 50%. This simple methodology can be applied to a large variety of perovskite compounds. Interestingly, the sizes of perovskite NCs may be controlled by the pore sizes of mesoporous silica, and the homogeneity of perovskite NCs will be significantly improved. Recently, Huang et al.204 developed a simple SiO2 growth route to stabilize perovskite NCs based on the high hydrolysis rate of tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) in toluene (Fig. 15f), which avoids the usage of water and catalyst. Consequently, SiO2 coated MAPbBr3 NCs (MAPbBr3–SiO2) were obtained without decreasing the PLQYs and were more stable than non-coated MAPbBr3 NCs. Sun et al.205 used silicon (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES) to realize silica coating. In their work, APTES was mixed with PbX2 precursor under the protection of inert gas, and after crystallization of NCs, the flask should be opened to air and stirred for 3 h for a hydrolytic reaction. As a result, the luminescence of NC embedded silica did not show obvious decline after exposure in air for 90 days (Fig. 15g). Yang et al.206 selected NaNO3 as the matrix for perovskite NCs due to its high transparency, non-toxicity, low refractive index and most importantly dissolvability in DMF. Therefore, common reprecipitation procedures can be adopted to directly synthesize MAPbBr3/NaNO3 nanocomposites (Fig. 15h). In the test of thermal stability, the PL intensity of MAPbBr3 colloidal NCs decreased to 1% within 50 min, while that of the MAPbBr3/NaNO3 nanocomposite remained at 90% of the original intensity; for the photostability, the PL intensity of the MAPbBr3 NCs decreased to 10% under continuous irradiation of UV light, while that of the MAPbBr3/NaNO3 nanocomposite retained 80% of the original intensity. More recently, our team developed an in situ nanocrystallization strategy to realize nucleation/growth of CsPbBr3 QDs among a specially designed TeO2-based glass matrix (Fig. 15i).207 In particular, the QDs@glass composites exhibited superior moisture resistance benefitting from the effective protecting role of the dense inorganic oxide glass. The way to test moisture resistance is to immerse QDs@glass directly into aqueous solution. The PL intensity of QDs@glass remained at 90% of the initial value after immersing in water for 120 h and 60% after 45 days. As a comparison, the luminescence of CsPbBr3 colloidal QDs completely disappeared after immersing in water for 2 hours.
 Fig. 15  Different strategies to improve long-term stability of perovskite NCs. (a) Image of CsPbX3 NCs in PMMA polymer. (b) Image of MAPbX3 perovskite NCs in PVDF films. (c) Image of MOF–MAPbBr3 nanocomposites. (d and e) Schematic images of mesoporous silica and (f) SiO2 coated perovskite NCs. (g) Comparison of air stability for perovskite NCs coated with/without SiO2. (h) Image of MAPbBr3/NaNO3 composites. (i) Image of CsPbBr3 QDs@glass. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 198. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 201. Copyright 2017, Nature; (d) ref. 202. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (e) ref. 203. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 204. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 205. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (h) ref. 206. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) ref. 207. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The main cause of instability for perovskite film is its degradation upon the influence of extrinsic factors such as oxygen, light, moisture and temperature as well as intrinsic ones such as thermal and electric fields. The current reported approaches to improve film stability mainly include chemical engineering modification of active materials and surface passivation of perovskite films.208–212 Appropriate chemical composition engineering is an essential approach to stabilize perovskite materials by the chemical modification of the “X” site anions and the “A” site cation.208,209 On the other hand, the passivation of perovskite films can be achieved via the encapsulation of polymer, aluminum oxide, or mesoporous TiO2.210–212
4. Applications
4.1 Light-emitting diodes
Phosphor-converted white light-emitting diodes (pc-wLEDs) have become the most widely used illumination source because of their advantages of high brightness, high efficiency, energy savings, easy production, and long lifetime. For comfortable indoor white lighting, the light sources are demanded to have tunable correlated color temperature (CCT) and high color rendering index (CRI).213,214 Currently, the major pc-wLEDs are constructed by coupling the InGaN blue-emitting chip with Ce3+:Y3Al5O12 (Ce3+:YAG) yellow phosphors and other red phosphors such as Eu2+ or Ce3+ doped nitrides and Mn4+ doped fluorides.215,216 Perovskite QDs exhibit high PLQYs and narrow emission bandwidth, enabling them to act as color converters in pc-wLEDs. Zhang et al.74 designed wide-color gamut prototype wLEDs by combining green emissive MAPbBr3 NCs and red emissive Mn4+:K2SiF6 phosphors with a blue chip (Fig. 16a), producing white-lighting luminescence with color coordinates of (0.33, 0.27) and CCT of 5772 K. Zhou et al.217 introduced red CsPb(Br/I)3 QDs in a YAG-based wLED, leading to improved optoelectronic parameters with chromaticity coordinates of (0.32, 0.32), CCT of 5907 K and CRI of 90 (Fig. 16b). In comparison with YAG-only based wLEDs (Fig. 16c), the designed device emitted a much warmer white light (Fig. 16d). Li et al.218 fabricated wLEDs by blending CsPbBr3 NCs with red phosphors on a blue chip that exhibited unchanged spectral profile with increase of operating current and a high CRI of 93.2, color temperature of 5447 K, and color coordinates of (0.33, 0.36) (Fig. 16e and f). However, investigations mostly concentrated on the cooperation of perovskite QDs and traditional phosphors, and less presented pure perovskite QD pc-wLEDs owing to the easy occurrence of anion exchange among blue/green/red QDs with different halogen compositions. Recently, Zhang et al.205 synthesized stable and multicolor CsPbX3 QDs@SiO2 composites and constructed a blue chip/green/red QDs@SiO2 pc-wLED, where anion exchange between the red and green QDs was effectively eliminated. Chen et al.174 developed a multi-layer structured pc-wLED with pure blue/green/red emissions, which was constructed by coupling a blue chip with a green Cs0.1FA0.9Br3/PMMA film and a red Cs0.1FA0.9Br1.5I1.5/PMMA one (Fig. 16g). The design of double layer thin films solves the problem that perovskite QDs can easily exchange anions when they are in contact with each other. With further study of Mn2+ doped perovskite, it was found that the emission from Mn2+ 4T1 to 6A1 transition was suitable to apply in wLEDs as a red component. In this case, Chen et al.182 prepared high-content Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 QDs, which can yield blue-excitable orange Mn2+ emission benefitting from both Cl-to-Br anion exchange and exciton-to-Mn energy transfer. Silica-coating was found to have advantages of improving the air stability of the QDs, suppressing Mn2+ loss and avoiding anion-exchange between different QDs. Adopting green CsPbBr3@SiO2 and orange Mn:CsPb(Cl/Br)3@SiO2 composites as color converters, a pc-wLED with excellent optical performance and superior light stability was obtained (Fig. 16h).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram and EL spectrum of wLEDs using green emissive MAPbBr3 QDs and red emissive Mn4+: K2SiF6 (KSF). (b) EL spectra and (c and d) photographs of wLEDs in operation with/without the addition of CsPbBrI2 QD film. (e) EL spectra of a wLED operated with different currents and (f) the corresponding color coordinates in a CIE diagram. (g) EL spectra of a commercial blue InGaN chip and wLED constructed by combining a blue chip with green Cs0.1FA0.9Br3 and red Cs0.1FA0.9Br1.5I1.5 polymer films as color converters. Insets are the schematic structure of the wLED. (h) EL spectra of the wLED constructed by coupling green CsPbBr3@SiO2 and orange Mn2+-doped CsPb(Cl0.5Br0.5)3@SiO2 phosphors with a blue chip. Inset is the corresponding wLED in operation. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 74. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b–d) ref. 217. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (e and f) ref. 218. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (g) ref. 174. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 99. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, QD-based LEDs (QLEDs), exhibiting high purity and real color, have been believed to be a promising candidate for next-generation lighting and displays. In the past 20 years, the dominant materials for LEDs have been limited to wurtzite or zinc blende Cd-based QDs. Unfortunately, the fabrication of Cd-based QDs requires harsh experimental conditions including a complex core–shell structure design and high reaction temperature. As an alternative, HOIP and AIP QDs were recently demonstrated to be applicable in high-performance QLEDs due to their facile synthesis procedure and superior optical performance. The first breakthrough was a MAPbBr3 HOIP based green LED reported in 2014, which exhibited a bright electroluminescence (EL) with luminance of 364 cd m−2 and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.1% at room temperature.219 The designed LED structure was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/F8/Ca/Ag, where PEDOT:PSS and calcium were adopted as the hole injection layer (HIL) and electron injection one (EIL), respectively, and F8 polymer acted as a spacer layer for electron transport to prevent emission quenching near the contact interface. Jin and Huang et al. further improved the luminance up to 417 cd m−2 by using a self-organized buffer HIL (Buf-HIL) composed of PEDOT:PSS and a copolymer of PFI,220 which can effectively facilitate hole injection into the HOIP emission layer (EML) by reducing the hole-injection energy barrier, prevent exciton quenching at the interface between HIL and EML, and block electron flow into the anode. Only within a year, the MAPbBr3-based LEDs have demonstrated a 20-fold increase in luminous efficiency (4.0 lm W−1) and remarkable improvement of luminance and EQE (20000 cd m−2, 3.5%) over the first report, benefitting from elaborate interfacial engineering techniques.221 Until now, the maxima EQE for a MAPbBr3 thin-film LED has reached the stirring value of 8.5% (42.9 cd A−1).222 As an alternative, colloidal organometal halide perovskite MAPbBr3 QDs were also explored to apply in electroluminescence displays and a typical HOIP QLED was fabricated with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/TPBi/Cs2CO3/Al, which exhibited a maximum current efficiency (CE) and EQE of 11.49 cd A−1 and 3.8%, respectively.223 In 2017, Kim et al.64 constructed efficient MAPbBr3 NC-LEDs with CE of 15.5 cd A−1 and EQE of 5.1% without any complex post-treatments and multi-layers. In this device, perovskite NC emitters with a dimension ≥DB (exciton Borh diameter) were fabricated to provide size-insensitive high color purity and high efficiency by inhibiting both exciton thermal ionization and charge trapping by defects or traps. Additionally, Buf-HIL, consisting of PEDOT:PSS and PFI, tetrafluoroethylene-perfluoro-3,6-dioxa-4-methyl-7-octenesulfonic acid copolymer, was used to efficiently prevent exciton quenching at the interface between PEDOT:PSS and perovskite NC film.
In 2015, Song et al.224 fabricated all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite QD based QLEDs with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/TPBi/LiF/Al for the first time (Fig. 17a and b). Importantly, the color of QLEDs can be tuned from blue to green and finally to orange by changing the content and the category of anions in QDs (Fig. 17c), and the corresponding luminance and EQE are 742 cd m−2, 946 cd m−2, 528 cd m−2 and 0.07%, 0.12%, and 0.09%, respectively. However, the turn-on voltages (Von), have a higher value (Von = 4.2 V for CsPbBr3 NCs) than the band-gap energy of the NCs used, suggesting that carrier injection from charge-transporting layers into QDs is inefficient. Decreasing non-radiative recombination is an effective way to improve the performance of LED devices. Zhang et al.137 discovered that the stick of CsPb2Br5 NPLs on the surface of CsPbBr3 NCs could enhance the current efficiency and decrease non-radiative energy transfer to the trap states. As a result, a maximum luminance of 3853 cd m−2 was realized, the maximum EQE reached up to 2.21% and the maximum CE boosted to 8.98 cd A−1 when the composite was used as the emitting layer. As a comparison, the maximum luminance, EQE and CE are only 1689 cd m−2, 1.47% and 0.06 cd A−1 respectively, for the CsPbBr3 QD-only device. Li et al.67 developed a trimethylaluminum (TMA) vapor-based cross-linking method to render a QD emissive layer. The introduced TMA reacted with ligands and was adjacent to perovskite QDs, leading to the formation of a network of alumina and aluminum hydroxide that covalently bonded to the ligands. This will be beneficial for passivating the surface defects and enhancing the performance of CsPbX3-based QLEDs, especially with respect to optical performance and thermal stability. In particular, CsPbI3 based LEDs showed an improved EQE of 5.7% that was far higher than previous reports.
 Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the multilayer perovskite QLED device structure based on all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite QDs. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the QLED device. (c) Blue/green/orange multi-color electroluminescence of QLEDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2015, Wiley. 
Actually, the previous reports less focused on the surface passivation depending on ligand density. Excessive ligand may result in poor charge injection efficiency in QD films, while insufficient ligand can lead to low PLQYs of QDs. Recently, Zeng et al.225 used hexane/ethyl acetate mixed solvent to control the density of surface ligands in a suitable range (Fig. 18a) to remarkably enhance the optoelectronic performance of a QLED device. Generally, appropriate surface ligand density was required to establish a balance between surface passivation and carrier injection efficiency. In the first three washing cycles, significant enhancement in electron injection efficiency and hole injection efficiency can be observed (Fig. 18b). Such improvement of charge injection was also demonstrated in the full QLED. As a consequence, the luminance of 15185 cd m−2 (Fig. 18e), CE of 13.3 cd A−1 (Fig. 18d) and EQE of 6.27% (Fig. 18e) were achieved. Similarly, Chiba et al.226 used butanol, ethyl acetate and butyl acetate to wash QDs to remove excess ligands from surfaces. Impressively, not only did the PLQY (42%) remain at a high level, but also the EQE reached up to 8.73% with a very low turn-on voltage of 2.60 V. It can be concluded that a suitable surface ligand density and appropriate washing solvent are key points to achieve high PLQY, high ink stability in the coating solvent, and low driving voltage of the device with high EQE.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the control of ligand density on CsPbBr3 QD surfaces. (b) Schematic illustration of energy levels and current density–voltage characteristics of electron-only, hole-only, and QLED devices with different purifying cycles. (c) Luminance of the devices based on CsPbBr3 QDs with different purifying cycles. (d) Current efficiency of these devices as a function of current density. (e) EQE of devices as a function of luminance. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
Notably, most reports of AIP QLED devices are based on QDs prepared by the hot-injection method. However, high temperature synthesis and the necessity of inert gas may lead to high-cost that limits their commercial production. Hence, it is an urgent desire to develop a low-cost synthetic method to obtain high-quality all-inorganic perovskite QDs. Recently, Song et al.227 developed a triple-ligand surface engineering strategy at room temperature accompanied by introducing a small amount of FA+ dopant to produce CsPbBr3 QDs with high PLQY (>90%), unity radiative decay in its intrinsic channel and stable ink characteristics. The three ligands are tetraoctylammonium bromide, didodecyldimethylammonium bromide and octanoic acid. Importantly, the introduction of short ligands reduced the distance among the particles in the QD film and contributed to effective charge injection and transportation. Furthermore, the CsPbBr3 QD films with less nonradiative recombination centers exhibited enhanced PL properties with a PLQY of 61% through FA dopant engineering in the A-site. As a consequence, FA-doped CsPbBr3 QLEDs exhibited a larger peak value of 45.4 cd A−1 and a peak EQE as high as 11.6%, which is the highest value of AIP QLEDs for the moment. Moreover, due to the simple operation at room temperature, it was easily scaled up to the order of grams for future QD displays. Impressively, even if the production is expanded, the performance of the device is not affected. Only slight reduction was found in the 100-fold synthesis of QDs for QLEDs, which exhibit EQE of 11.4% and CE of 42.6 cd A−1.
Besides optimizing the emissive layers, the innovation of the device structure is an alternative and even more critical route to improve the performance of all-inorganic CsPbX3 LEDs. Zhang et al.228 have introduced a perfluorinated ionomer (PFI) interlayer between the hole-transporting layer and the perovskite emissive layer (Fig. 19a), which enables charge carriers to be easily injected and ensures efficient radiative recombination of excitons in the emitting layer (Fig. 19b). By this design of the LED devices, Von was as low as 2.5 V and the luminance reached as high as 1377 cd m−2 (Fig. 19c). Liu et al.229 reported a novel strategy to enhance the device engineering of QLEDs using tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3) into TPBi to form a new TPBi/Alq3/TPBi ETL, which enables charge balance and charge confinement simultaneously. The EQE and CE of green CsPbBr3 QLEDs with the designed TPBi/Alq3/TPBi are 191%, 192%, and 211% higher than those of the corresponding QLED with the traditional TPBi ETL, and the FWHM of EL emission is as narrow as 16 nm. Subramanian et al.230 constructed a CsPbBr3-based QLED with an inverted structure employing Li-doped TiO2 NCs as the ETL. The appropriate Li dopants balance the injection of charge carriers between hole transporting layer (HTL) and ETL, which results in the improvement of the QLED performance. Compared to that for undoped TiO2-based QLEDs, a 7-fold increase in device efficiency was achieved for the Li-doped TiO2-base QLED, and more importantly, only a low turn-on voltage of 2.3 V was required, which is one of the lowest values among the reported CsPbBr3-based QLEDs.
 Fig. 19  (a) Device structure and SEM image for the PFI modified QLED. (b) Overall energy band diagram of the QLED. (c) Current density and luminance versus driving voltage for QLEDs with or without the addition of a PFI interface. (d) ETL modified QLED: device structure, chemical structure of the ETLs and the proposed energy levels. Adapted with permission from (a–c) ref. 228. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 229. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
Most recently, Xing et al.231 demonstrated the realization of a color-stable sky-blue 2D perovskite-based QLED with a maximum luminance of 2480 cd m−2 at 490 nm. The strategy of cation combination was adopted to modulate the crystallization and layer thickness distribution of the domains, leading to a record PLQY of 88% in the blue emission region. Chiba et al.232 prepared red emissive QDs with high PLQYs (69–80%) via anion exchange from pristine CsPbBr3 employing I-containing alkyl ammonium and aryl ammonium salts. These QD-based LED devices with the alkyl ammonium iodine salt exhibited an EQE of 21.3% and that with the aryl ammonium iodine salt showed an EQE of 14.1%. Benefitting from lower surface ligand density of the corresponding QDs, the operational stability of the latter QLED was 36 times higher than that of the former one. Wei, Xiong and Sargent et al.38 designed CsPbBr3/MABr quasi-core/shell structure film based QLEDs, which exhibited reduced defect traps in the CsPbBr3 crystals, boosted PLQYs and balanced charge injection. The EQE (20.3%) of the fabricated green QLEDs surpassed the milestone of 20 percent, representing an important breakthrough for their practical application in displays and lighting. Huang and Wang et al.39 prepared FAPbI3 perovskites by extra introduction of amino-acid additives into precursor solutions, which can effectively passivate surface defects of perovskites and inhibit nonradiative quenching. Impressively, these solution-processed perovskites can spontaneously form submicrometre-scale structures to efficiently extract light from the device and retain wavelength- and viewing-angle-independent near-infrared EL, leading to an amazing peak EQE of 20.7% at a current density of 18 mA cm−2.
4.2 Photodetectors
Photodetectors are devices for detecting and measuring the properties of light via the photoelectric effect. Perovskites with effective absorption in the broadband range, high quantum yield and charge carrier mobility provide promising potential for exploiting sensitive and fast photodetectors. Earlier, most of the research on photodetectors focused on the perovskite thin films and single crystals. Typically, MAPbI3,233–235 MAPbBr3,236 MAPbCl3,237 MAPbI3−xClx,238 MAPbBr3−xClx,239 and MAPbBr3−xIx240 have been extensively studied in the field of photodetectors. Currently, photodetectors based on perovskite NCs have also been developed. However, a large number of grain boundaries, which are derived from the intrinsic properties of small particle size, unavoidably formed. These grain boundaries contained a large density of charge traps that made low carrier mobility for the fabricated NCs films. Thus, preparation of dense NC films is particularly important, and the optimization strategy for the preparation of high-quality perovskite films with less defects can follow the reported techniques for QLEDs.222,225,226 To expand the potential application of these perovskite NCs in optoelectronics, Ramasamy et al.241 prepared a photodector device with CsPbI3 NC films for the first time, as shown in Fig. 20a. Two-probe I–V was measured in the dark and under illumination as a function of incident light intensity using a laser diode at 405 nm, showing that the ratio of photo-current to dark-current reaches 105 (Fig. 20b). The quality of perovskite film has always been considered as an important factor affecting photodetectors. Dong et al.242 investigated different solution processes (drop-coating and centrifugal-casting) for high-performance inorganic perovskite NC photodetectors. It was found that the centrifugal-casting film presented higher ordered, denser and more uniform morphology than the drop-coating one (Fig. 20c). Moreover, current–voltage (I–V) logarithm curves of devices with different film fabrication show an increase in photocurrent (Fig. 20d), proving that dense and smooth films are beneficial for transporting carriers. In addition, the responsivity of CsPbBr3 NC devices after introducing extra Au NCs exhibited an evident improvement from 4.71 mA W−1 to 10.04 mA W−1 at 2 V bias, as shown in Fig. 20e. Importantly, the photocurrent Ip of Au-plasma enhanced photodetectors increased from 245.6 to 831.1 μA and the on/off ratio showed a much larger value of 106 (Fig. 20f).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 NC photodetector. (b) I–V characteristics of close-packed CsPbI3 NC films as a function of incident light intensity. (c) SEM image of CsPbBr3 NCs film prepared by drop-coating and centrifugal-casting. (d) I–V curves of photodetectors with different film fabrication under 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). (e) Relative responsivity of devices with and without Au NCs under 2 V bias from front illumination. (f) Measured I–V characteristics of the two devices under a 532 nm laser (4.65 mW cm−2). Adapted with permission from (a and b) ref. 241. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–f) ref. 242. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
To further improve the performance of perovskite NC photodetectors, Zhou et al. gave insight into the effect of ligand-exchange on colloidal CsPbBr3 perovskite NC based photodetectors. They selected 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) to replace the alkylammonium ligand in the process of NC synthesis and fabricated photodetectors using NCs–MPA–TiO2 composites, as shown in Fig. 21a.243 Consequently, the high on/off ratio of 105 was two orders of magnitude higher than that of the device without MPA (Fig. 21b). Moreover, the responsivity increased from ∼2.2 A W−1 to ∼24.5 A W−1 and the detectivity increased from 3.5 × 1012 Jones to 8.9 × 1013 Jones. As shown in Fig. 21c, the electron transfer from QDs to MPA and then from MPA to TiO2 was demonstrated by transient absorption measurement and fluorescence lifetime. Importantly, the electron transfer time of QDs–MPA–TiO2 (41 ns) is much shorter than that directly from QDs to TiO2 particles (∼280 ns). Actually, photodetectors based on traditional solution assembled films exhibited low carrier extraction and transport efficiency. To solve this issue, Li et al.244 introduced carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as conductive nanonets to provide fast carrier tracks. The perovskite/CNT composite photodetector is schematically illustrated in Fig. 21d, showing the advantage that the photo-generated electrons can be quickly transferred because of the matched energy levels between the QDs and CNTs (Fig. 21e). Specifically, the CsPbBr3 nanosheet/CNT composite films exhibited high conductivity and the constructed photodetector has the highest EQE of 7488% (Fig. 21f) and responsivity of 31.1 A W−1 (Fig. 21g) under a bias of 10 V, which were almost 125 fold over previously reported results.
 Fig. 21  (a) A schematic 3D view of a CsPbBr3 QDs–MPA–TiO2 hybrid photodetector. (b) Logarithmic I–V curves of the fabricated photodetectors in the dark and under irradiation. (c) Kinetic scheme describing the excited-state process in the QDs–MPA–TiO2 system upon QD excitation. (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible photodetector consisting of CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs. (e) Energy level of CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs. (f) EQE and (g) responsivity versus incident light wavelength under different biases. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 243. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) ref. 244. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Lasing
Generally, low-threshold optical gain (LTOG) is highly desired in the lasing devices. Importantly, the PLQY, absorption coefficient (AC) and optical oscillator strength are related to the magnitude of the laser threshold. Optical materials with high PLQY could reduce loss by nonradiative carrier trapping, which will contribute to decreasing the pumping threshold and obtaining optical gain. On the other hand, AC, which is characterized by absorption cross-section, also has a great impact on the capability of the LTOG. Recently, lead halide perovskites have been demonstrated to have potential applications in lasers as optical gain materials. In particular, AIP and HOIP materials usually possess high PLQY, large AC and slow Auger recombination, which are beneficial for achieving low-threshold, ultra-stable RT stimulated emission under an atmospheric environment. Representatively, Zeng et al.245 applied colloidal all-inorganic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) QDs in the laser field as gain media for the first time. The as-prepared QDs exhibited a lower pump threshold of 22 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 22a and b), which is nearly one order of magnitude lower than those of CdSe based QDs (∼1.5 mJ cm−2). The gain coefficient of the CsPbBr3 thin film was estimated to be 98 cm−1via the variable stripe length (VSL) method under a pump intensity of 57.0 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 22c), which is comparable to or even better than the traditional QDs.246,247 As well, the HOIP materials also have a crucial application in the laser. Previously, layered perovskite material (C6H13NH3)2PbI4 has been demonstrated to show the characteristic of bi-excitonic lasing for the first time, but should be used at ultra-low temperature (below 40 K).248 Recently, Zhu et al.249 prepared hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite MAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) nanowires via low-temperature solution processing, which exhibited a near-unity PLQY (approaching 100%), low lasing threshold (∼220 nJ cm−2), high quality factor (∼3600) and broad tunability covering the near-infrared to visible region. The threshold of these high-quality single-crystal NWs is nearly two orders of magnitude lower than those reported recently for near-infrared lasing from lead halide perovskites in polycrystalline thin films or nanoplates.
 Fig. 22  (a) Pumping-intensity-dependent PL spectra from CsPbBr3 OD film. (b) FWHM (solid circles) and integrated PL intensity of the sharp peak (solid squares) versus pump intensity. (c) Plot of stimulated emission peak intensity as a function of laser shot. (d) Wavelength-tunable lasing from single-crystal (FA/MA)PbX3 hybrid perovskite NWs. (e) Schematic configuration of VCSEL based on CsPbBr3 NCs. (f) Multimode lasing from the CsPbBr3 NCs. Inset is the integrated PL intensity of the sharp peak versus pump intensity. (g) Blue and (h) red lasing spectra from CsPb(Br/Cl)3 and CsPb(I/Br)3 NCs under pump intensity of 38.2 and 30.5 μJ cm−2, respectively. The corresponding photograph of the device in operation is given inside the plot. Adapted with permission from (a–c) ref. 252. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (d) Ref. 238. Copyright 2015, Nature; (e–h) ref. 253. Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
Although outstanding performance has been achieved in MAPbX3 for optically pumped lasers, it is undeniable that its instability that stems from poor thermal stability and high moisture sensitivity becomes the major obstruction for practical applications.250 The caused thermal heating by prolonged continuous-wave pumping or high current injection may result in the degradation of perovskite materials.251 However, FAPBX3 perovskites as the same class of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites exhibit a better temperature and moisture stability accompanied by a small change in bandgap. Recently, Fu et al.252 developed a low-temperature solution growth of FAPbX3 single crystal NWs and explored their applications in the laser field. An optically pumped RT near-infrared (∼820 nm) laser from FAPbI3 NWs with low threshold of 6.2 μJ cm−2 and high-quality factor of 1500–2300 was achieved. Furthermore, the emissive laser wavelength from 490 to 824 nm can be easily tuned through both cation and anion exchange (Fig. 22d). FA-based perovskite NWs exhibited better stability than MA-based ones, which makes them more promising and stable candidates for future laser applications. On the other hand, Wang et al.253 developed a vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL) based on CsPbX3 perovskite NCs (Fig. 22e), which is an important laser type that has the ability to form 2D arrays, surface normal emission characteristics, and high beam quality output. An obvious improvement is the achievement of spectral narrowing, nonlinear increase of PL intensity, drastic reduction of PL lifetime, and remarkable decrease of output beam divergence. Furthermore, multimode lasing operation can be produced by increasing the effective cavity length or film thickness. Due to the longer cavity path and larger round-trip gain, the lasing threshold can be reduced to 9.0 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 22f). Importantly, VCSELs across the visible full-spectral range could be achieved by composition control of CsPbX3 NCs (Fig. 22g and h).
5. Conclusions and outlook
To date, more and more research has demonstrated that lead halide perovskite materials, i.e., the AIP and HOIP QDs, are attractive for potential future large-scale production because of their low-cost fabrication and unique optical performance. Extensive studies into the synthesis of perovskite QDs and applications in the optoelectronic fields have only recently begun, yet unprecedented progress has been achieved. There has been an explosion of diversity in developing synthesis methods, controlling the microstructures and optical properties and exploring potential applications. Besides the continued development in performance of optical devices, further progress of perovskites will be helped by more fundamental investigations including various photophysical characterizations and theoretical calculations to understand the basic luminescence properties and dynamic processes related to perovskite QDs. Importantly, it is highly desirable to further improve the chemical/thermal stability and moisture stability of perovskite materials, which could be the most major obstacle for their actual future large-scale application in optoelectronic devices. Therefore, how to ascertain the microstructures and the luminescent mechanisms and to develop a suitable method to solve the instability issue is still a harsh challenge. In addition, searching for new perovskite families may be an alternative route to address the intrinsic shortage of ABX3 perovskites owing to their ionic crystal feature. On the other hand, the toxicity of the heavy metal Pb component in current perovskite-based devices limits their large-scale commercial prospects, as it will be released into the environment by dissolving in water. As a consequence, seeking for an appropriate element (for instance tin, bismuth, and germanium) to replace Pb is believed to be a hot research issue in the near future. Finally, overall optimization of the synthesis, microstructure, and optical performance of perovskite QDs and the related device structure is expected to be an effective route to prompt their practical applications. In other words, the fundamental research of perovskite QDs should be further deepened and the device architecture should be further developed, enabling perovskite QD-based optoelectronic devices to become relevant alternative products and not just ‘‘perovskite fever.’’
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFB0406704), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51572065) and Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LR15E020001).
References
R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, H. Y. Akiyama, Y. Ohtsuka, T. Torimoto and S. Kuwabata, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 88 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. B. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, I. Mora-Sero, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Y. Feng, G. Yang, X. H. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, Z. L. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. X. Pan, Q. Shen, J. K. Sun, D. H. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. H. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, Y. X. Wang, J. Sun, Z. S. Yang and Q. F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 187, 199 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088 RSC .
M. Y. Cha, P. M. Da, J. Wang, W. Y. Wang, Z. H. Chen, F. X. Xiu, G. F. Zheng and Z. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. S. Zhang, Z. W. Jin, J. R. Zhang, Z. F. Gao, Y. F. Li and S. Z. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Hoffman, G. Zaiats, I. Wappes and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9767 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Wheeler, E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, P. Schulz, M. Suri, N. C. Anderson, J. A. Christians, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. Kroll, S. Harvey, J. J. Berry, L. Y. Lin and J. M. Luther, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ghosh, M. Y. Ali, D. K. Chaudhary and S. Bhattacharyya, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 28 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Rose, De novis quibusdam fossilibus quae in montibus Uraliis inveniuntur 3–5, AG Schade,  1839 Search PubMed .

          H. Wenk and A. Bulakh, Minerals: Their Constitution and Origin, Cambridge University Press,  2004 Search PubMed .
C. H. Li, X. G. Lu, W. Z. Ding, L. M. Feng, Y. H. Gao and Z. M. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., 2008, 64, 702 CAS .
C. Y. Yi, J. S. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656 RSC .
M. A. Carpentera and C. J. Howard, Acta Crystallogr., 2009, 65, 134 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081801 CrossRef .
H. S. Jung and N. G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Li, Z.-K. Tan, D. W. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H.-W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, L. F. Zhao, N. L. Tran, K. M. Lee, T.-W. Koh, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. D. Arquer, X. W. Gong, J. X. Lu, L. Q. Xie, W. J. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Z. Yan, W. Q. Li, X. Y. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. H. Xiong and Z. H. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. N. Wang, H. Tian, J. S. Guo, Y. Q. Wei, H. Chen, Y. F. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. R. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. W. Fu, D. C. Kong, D. X. Dai, Y. Z. Jin, G. Q. Li, H. Li, Q. M. Peng, J. P. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Song, T. Fang, J. H. Li, L. M. Xu, F. J. Zhang, B. N. Han, Q. S. Shan and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805409 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Han, B. Cai, Q. Shan, J. Song, J. Li, F. Zhang, J. Chen, T. Fang, Q. Ji, X. Xu and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804285 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, J. Song, B. Han, T. Fang, J. Li and H. Zeng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700382 CrossRef .
Q. Shan, J. Song, Y. Zou, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Han, J. Chen and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701770 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. F. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. H. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Park, J. W. Lee, J. D. Kim, N. S. Han, D. M. Jang, S. Jeong, J. Park and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wu, X. M. Li, F. Cao, Y. Gu, K. Liu, X. H. Liu, Y. H. Dong, J. P. Ji and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700132 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Huang, C. Zou, C. Y. Mao, K. L. Corp, Y.-C. Yao, Y.-J. Lee, C. W. Schlenker, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Y. Lin, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2281 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Liu, J. Yang, J. Du, Z. P. Hu, T. C. Shi, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Liu, X. S. Tang, Y. X. Leng and R. X. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. M. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284 CrossRef .
Z. Li, M. J. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Malgras, S. Tominaka, J. W. Ryan, J. Henzie, T. Takei, K. Ohara and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., 1978, B33, 1443 Search PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 6107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. H. Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzela, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989 RSC .
N. S. Makarov, S. J. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Y. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lei, F. Gao, H. X. Wang, J. Li, J. X. Jiang, X. Wu, R. R. Gao, Z. Yang and S. Z. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 187, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Fan, H. H. Xing, Q. F. Zhai, D. Q. Fan, J. Li and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 11651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Castañeda, G. Nagamine, E. Yassitepe, L. G. Bonato, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, A. F. Nogueira, E. H. Sargent, C. H. B. Cruz and L. A. Padilha, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, Y.-T. Kim, H. Cho, W. Kwon, S. Do, A. Sadhanala, C. G. Park, S. W. Rhee, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Song, S.-Y. Park, J. S. Yoo, W. K. Park, H. S. Kim, S. H. Choi, S. B. Kwon, B. K. Kang, J. P. Kim, H. S. Jung, D. H. Yoond, W. S. Yang and Y.-S. Seo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 957 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Song, J. H. Li, X. M. Li, L. M. Xu, Y. H. Dong and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. L. K. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. D. L. Peña, S. C. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham and Z.-K. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. M. Li, J. Z. Song, L. Xiao, H. B. Zeng and H. D. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Li, Y. Wang, H. D. Sun and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701185 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. M. Li, V. Nalla, H. B. Zeng and H. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605088 CrossRef .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. Gonzalez-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. M. Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Perez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Niu, F. Zhang, Z. L. Bai, Y. P. Dong, J. Yang, R. B. Liu, B. S. Zou, J. B. Li and H. Z. Zhong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 3, 112 CrossRef .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Z. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-G. Wu, X. M. Hu, H. L. Huang, J. B. Han, B. S. Zou and Y. P. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Li, Y. Wu, S. L. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Z. Song and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. T. Zou, L. Z. Wu, Q. Pan, D. Yang, H. C. Hu, Y. S. Tan, Q. X. Zhong, Y. Xu, H. Y. Liu, B. Q. Sun and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701121 CrossRef .
H. Huang, A. S. Susha, S. V. Kershaw, T. F. Hung and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500194 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Xu, A. F. Wang and Z. T. Deng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aharon and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. W. Ma and H. W. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Li, L. M. Xu, T. Wang, J. Z. Song, J. W. Chen, J. Xue, Y. H. Dong, B. Cai, Q. S. Shan, B. N. Han and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Li, K. Zhang, J. H. Li, J. Chen, Y. Wu, K. Liu, J. Z. Song and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800010 CrossRef .
H. L. Huang, F. C. Zhao, L. G. Liu, F. Zhang, X.-G. Wu, L. J. Shi, B. S. Zou, Q. B. Pei and H. Z. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Hintermayr, A. F. Richter, F. Ehrat, M. Döblinger, W. Vanderlinden, J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, L. Polavarapu, J. Feldmann and A. S. Urban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Jang, D. H. Kim, K. Park, J. Park, J. W. Lee and J. Kyu Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10625 RSC .
I. Lignos, S. Stavrakis, G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, A. J. deMello and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levchuk, A. Osvet, X. F. Tang, M. Brandl, J. D. Perea, F. Hoegl, G. J. Matt, R. Hock, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. Parrott, V. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, S. Kumar, J. Bär, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi, M. Grotevent, I. Shorubalko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, C.-J. Shih and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, E. Bladt, M. F. Aygüler, A. Manzi, K. Z. Milowska, V. A. Hintermayr, P. Docampo, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, Q. Xue, B. K. Chen, Y. Xiong, J. Schneider, C. Y. Zhi, H. Z. Zhong and A. L. Rogach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, E.-P. Yao, A. Manzi, E. Bladt, K. Wang, M. Döblinger, S. Bals, P. Müller-Buschbaum, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801117 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Lignos, V. Morad, Y. Shynkarenko, C. Bernasconi, R. M. Maceiczyk, L. Protesescu, F. Bertolotti, S. Kumar, S. T. Ochsenbein, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi, C.-J. Shih, M. I. Bodnarchuk, A. J. deMello and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Rao, Y. Tang, C. M. Yan, J. S. Li, G. S. Zhong, K. R. Tang, B. H. Yu, Z. T. Li and J. Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5375 RSC .
R. W. Epps, K. C. Felton, C. W. Coley and M. Abolhasani, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 4040 RSC .
D. Q. Chen, G. L. Fang, X. Chen, L. Lei, J. S. Zhong, Q. N. Mao, S. Zhou and J. N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8990 RSC .
F. Brivio, J. M. Frost, J. M. Skelton, A. J. Jackson, O. J. Weber, M. T. Weller, A. R. Goñi, A. M. A. Leguy, P. R. F. Barnes and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev., 2015, B92, 144308 CrossRef .
D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe and L. Kronik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Chen, B. J. Foley, B. Ipek, M. Tyagi, J. R. D. Copley, C. M. Brown, J. J. Choi and S.-H. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31278 RSC .
A. Swarnkar, R. Chulliyil, V. K. Ravi, M. Irfanullah, A. Chowdhury and A. Nag, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rodová, J. Brožek, K. Knížek and K. Nitsch, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2003, 71, 667 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. F. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cottingham and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5246 RSC .
D. M. Trots and S. V. Myagkota, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi, J. M. Ball, V. D’Innocenzo, C. Tao, S. Pathak, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. D. Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 155 RSC .
P. S. Whitfield, N. Herron, W. E. Guise, K. Page, Y. Q. Cheng, I. Milas and M. K. Crawford, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kawamura, H. Mashiyama and K. Hasebe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 71, 1694 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, N. S. Barrow, Y. N. Fang, P. J. Keenan, P. R. Slater, R. O. Piltz, M. Gutmann, S. G. Mhaisalkara and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9298 RSC .
M. Sakata, T. Nishiwaki and J. Harada, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1979, 47, 232 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Moeller, Nature, 1958, 182, 1436 CrossRef .
Y. Fujii, S. Hoshino, Y. Yamada and G. Shirane, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1974, 9, 4549 CrossRef CAS .
U. Thumu, L. Houben, H. Cohen, M. Menahem, I. Pinkas, L. Avram, T. Wolf, A. Teitelboim, M. Leskes, O. Yaffe, D. Oron and M. Kazes, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 84 CrossRef .
C. D. Weerd1, J. H. Lin, L. Gomez, Y. Fujiwara, K. Suenaga and T. Gregorkiewicz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19490 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Ruan, W. Shen, A. F. Wang, A. S. Xiang and Z. T. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. L. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. D. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lanty, K. Jemli, Y. Wei, J. Leymarie, J. Even, J. S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Almutlaq, S. Sarmah, I. Dursun, A. A. Zhumekenov, R. Begum, J. Pan, N. Cho, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 840 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kieslich, S. J. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712 RSC .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548 RSC .
Z. Tang, J. Guan and A. M. Guloy, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 479 RSC .
O. J. Weber, K. L. Marshall, L. M. Dyson and M. T. Weller, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2015, 71, 668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans. 1, 2001, 1 RSC .
D. B. Mitzi, K. Chondoudris and C. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 29 CAS .
T. Dammak, N. Fourati, H. Boughzala, A. Mlayah and Y. Abid, J. Lumin., 2007, 127, 404 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Billing and A. Lemmerer, CrystEngComm, 2007, 9, 236 RSC .
D. G. Billing and A. Lemmerer, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 1549 RSC .
M. Szafrański, Thermochim. Acta, 1997, 307, 177 CrossRef .
M. Szafrański and A. Katrusiak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 1026 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Li, C. K. Lin, G. L. Zheng, Z. Y. Cheng, H. You, W. D. Wang and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3463 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Wang, L. Wu, L. Li, H.-B. Yao, H.-S. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1 CrossRef .
X. L. Zhang, B. Xu, J. B. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. J. Zheng, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4595 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Li, H. Wang, Z. F. Zhu, Y. J. Chang, T. Zhang, Z. H. Song and Y. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11296 RSC .
Y. H. Zhang, M. I. Saidaminov, I. Dursun, H. Z. Yang, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, E. Yenge, B. A. Alshankiti, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Bastiani, I. Dursun, Y. H. Zhang, B. A. Alshankiti, X.-H. Miao, J. Yin, E. Yengel, E. Alarousu, B. Turedi, J. M. Almutlaq, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Mitra, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, Y. H. Zhu, Y. Han, I. S. Roqan, J.-L. Bredas, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7108 CrossRef .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. Park, E. Radicchi, F. Nunzi, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis, R. Brescia, P. Rastogi, M. Prato and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seth and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Bastiani, I. Dursun, Y. H. Zhang, B. A. Alshankiti, X.-H. Miao, J. Yin, E. Yengel, E. Alarousu, B. Turedi, J. M. Almutlaq, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Mitra, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, Y. H. Zhu, Y. Han, I. S. Roqan, J.-L. Bredas, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7108 CrossRef .
J.-H. Cha, J. H. Han, W. P. Yin, C. Park, Y. M. Park, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Cho and D.-Y. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Wu, H. C. Hu, Y. Xu, S. Jiang, M. Chen, Q. X. Zhong, D. Yang, Q. P. Liu, Y. Zhao, B. Q. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Liu, Y. Bekenstein, X. C. Ye, S. C. Nguyen, J. Swabeck, D. D. Zhang, S.-T. Lee, P. D. Yang, W. L. Ma and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, R. G. Cortadella, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521–6527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Pan, B. He, X. Y. Fan, Z. K. Liu, J. J. Urban, A. P. Alivisatos, L. He and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhu, L. Men, Y. J. Guo, Q. C. Zhu, U. Bhattacharjee, P. M. Goodwin, J. W. Petrich, E. A. Smith and J. Vela, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. T. Dou and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. He, P. Liu, S. N. Wu, Q. Liao, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12707 RSC .
H. Zhou, S. P. Yuan, X. X. Wang, T. Xu, X. Wang, H. L. Li, W. H. Zheng, P. Fan, Y. Y. Li, L. T. Sun and A. L. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Wong, M. L. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. T. Dou, A. Fu and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. D. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. G. Motti, A. R. S. Kandada, E. Mosconi, V. D’Innocenzo, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, B. A. Kamino, Lc. Miranda, F. D. Angelis, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levchuk, P. Herre, M. Brandl, A. Osvet, R. Hock, W. Peukert, P. Schweizer, E. Spiecker, M. Batentschuka and C. J. Brabecabf, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 244 RSC .
I. Levchuk, A. Oset, X. Tang, M. Brandl, J. D. Perea, F. Hoeg, G. J. Matt, R. Hock, M. Batenschuk and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, H. M. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mittal, A. Jana, S. Sarkar, P. Mahadevan and S. Sapra, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. Buonassisi, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Ravi, G. B. Markad and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 665 CrossRef CAS .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
R. A. Jishi, O. B. Ta and A. A. Sharif, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28344 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Z. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Qu and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, C. B. Murray, M. Nirmal and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 3043 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Pearson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 3533 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Li, M. Zanella, A. Genovese, M. Povia, A. Falqui, C. Giannini and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Rivesta and P. K. Jain, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 89 RSC .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. D. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 306, 1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Rivest, S. L. Swisher, L.-K. Fong, H. M. Zheng and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Y. Wan and G. L. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. F. J. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, D. Credgington, N. C. Greenham and M. L. Böhm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Wang, X. X. Yan, M. Zhang, S. B. Sun, M. Yang, W. Shen, X. Q. Pan, P. Wang and Z. T. Deng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Deng, U. Farooq, X. K. Yang, J. Khan, J. Tang and H. S. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pradhan, G. S. Kumar, S. Sain, A. Dalui, U. K. Ghorai, S. K. Pradhan and S. Acharya, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
W. V. D. Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. W. V. D. Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. V. Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. D. M. Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. J. Yong, S. Q. Guo, J. P. Ma, J. Y. Zhang, Z. Y. Li, Y. M. Chen, B. B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Shu, J. L. Gu, L. R. Zheng, O. M. Bakr and H. T. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Huang, C. L. Wang, S. H. Xu, S. F. Zong, J. Lu, Z. Y. Wang, C. G. Lu and Y. P. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700095 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, G. L. Fang and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Liu, Q. L. Lin, H. B. Li, K. F. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liu, Z. N. Wu, J. R. Shao, D. Yao, H. Gao, Y. Liu, W. L. Yu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, F. M. Li, F. Y. Lin, Y. Chen, Z. X. Cai, Y. R. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700520 CrossRef .
R. Begum, M. R. Parida, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, N. M. Alyami, G. H. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. Katsiev, E. Alarousu, R. Comin, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, E. H. Sargent, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. J. Yong, W. Zhang, J. P. Ma, A. Sadhanala, Y. M. Chen, B. M. Liu, Y. Zhou, B. Song and H. T. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2591 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Z.-J. Yong, K. C. Zhang, B.-M. Liu, Z.-W. Wang, J. S. Hou, Y. Z. Fang, Y. Zhou, H. T. Sun and B. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Zhu, Z. J. Yong, B. M. Liu, Y. M. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. P. Ma, H. T. Sun and Y. Z. Fang, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 33283 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, R. R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Han, H. M. Zhu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, E. Ma, D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu and Y. S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, W. D. Xiang, X. J. Liang, J. S. Zhong, H. Yua, M. Y. Ding, H. W. Lu and Z. G. Ji, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 859 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Pan, X. Bai, D. W. Yang, X. Chen, P. T. Jing, S. N. Qu, L. J. Zhang, D. L. Zhou, J. Y. Zhu, W. Xu, B. Dong and H. W. Song, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Zhou, D. L. Liu, G. C. Pan, X. Chen, D. Y. Li, W. Xu, X. Bai and H. W. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704149 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, E. Yassitepe, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, G. Walters, X. W. Gong, P. Kanjanaboos, A. F. Nogueira and E. H. Sargent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. C. Zhou, Z. L. Bai, W.-G. Lu, Y. T. Wang, B. S. Zou and H. Z. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Liao, Z. Z. Xu, H. Y. Li, L. M. Zheng and H. B. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604382 CrossRef .
Y. L. Guo, K. Shoyama, W. Sato and E. Nakamura, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502317 CrossRef .
C. Y. Zhang, B. Wang, W. B. Li, S. Q. Huang, L. Kong, Z. C. Li and L. Li, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1138 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-C. Wang, S.-Y. Lin, A.-C. Tang, B. P. Singh, H.-C. Tong, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Lee, T.-L. Tsai and R.-S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1 CrossRef .
D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, D. Trummer, I. V. Kochetygov, S. Yakunin, F. Krumeich, N. P. Stadie and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Huang, Z. C. Li, L. Kong, N. W. Zhu, A. D. Shan and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, C. Ruan, C. Y. Yin, X. Y. Wang, Y. D. Wang and W. W. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Yang, Q. S. Fan, B. K. Chen, Q. C. Zhou and H. Z. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11387 RSC .
S. Yuan, D. Q. Chen, X. Y. Li, J. S. Zhong and X. H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baek, S. Kim, J. Y. Noh, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, K. H. Hong and S. W. Kim, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800295 CrossRef .
W. Li, H. Rao, B. Chen, X. Wang and D. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19431 RSC .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705 RSC .
F. T. F. O'Mahony, Y. H. Lee, C. Jellett, S. Dmitrov, D. T. J. Bryant, J. R. Durrant, B. C. O'Regan, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddinb and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7219 RSC .
B. McKenna, J. R. Troughton, T. M. Watson and R. C. Evans, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32942 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, T. Song, J. C. Yu, Y. Yang, Z. Y. Wang and G. D. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4796 CrossRef CAS .
B. . W. D'Andrade and S. . R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585 CrossRef .
C. C. Lin and R. S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, H. Lin, J. Xu, H. Chen and Y. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhou, F. Huang, H. Lin, Z. B. Lin, J. Xu and Y. S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7601 RSC .
G. P. Li, H. Wang, T. Zhang, L. F. Mi, Y. G. Zhang, Z. P. Zhang, W. J. Zhang and Y. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8478 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Wang, N. N. Wang, Y. Z. Jin, J. J. Si, Z. K. Tan, H. Du, L. Cheng, X. L. Dai, S. Bai, H. P. He, Z. Z. Ye, M. L. Lai, R. H. Friend and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, F. Yan, Y. W. Zhao, S. Chen, H. K. Yu, Q. Zhang, R. G. Zeng, H. V. Demir, X. W. Sun, A. Huan and Q. H. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Song, J. H. Li, X. M. Li, L. M. Xu, Y. H. Dong and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Li, L. M. Xu, T. Wang, J. Z. Song, J. W. Chen, J. Xue, Y. H. Dong, B. Cai, Q. S. Shan, B. N. Han and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chiba, K. Hoshi, Y. J. Pu, Y. Takeda, Y. Hayashi, S. Ohisa, S. Kawata and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8054 Search PubMed .
J. Z. Song, J. H. Li, L. M. Xu, J. H. Li, F. J. Zhang, B. N. Han, Q. S. Shan and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800764 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, H. Lin, H. Huang, C. Reckmeier, Y. Zhang, W. C. H. Choy and A. L. Rogach, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Q. Liu, L. Wang, H. S. Gu, H. D. Sun and H. V. Demir, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800220 CrossRef .
A. Subramanian, Z. H. Pan, Z. B. Zhang, I. Ahmad, J. Chen, M. N. Liu, C. Shuang, Y. J. Xu, J. Wu, W. Lei, K. Qasim and Y. G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, Y. B. Zhao, M. Askerka, L. N. Quan, X. W. Gong, W. J. Zhao, J. X. Zhao, H. R. Tan, G. K. Long, L. Gao, Z. Y. Yang, O. Voznyy, J. Tang, Z.-H. Lu, Q. H. Xiong and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3541 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chiba, Y. Hayashi, H. Ebe, K. Hoshi, J. Sato, S. Sato, Y.-J. Pu, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 681 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. D. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. J. Hu, W. L. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Deng, X. K. Yang, D. D. Dong, B. Li, D. Yang, S. J. Yuan, K. K. Qiao, Y. B. Cheng, J. Tang and H. S. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. J. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1 Search PubMed .
G. Maculan, A. D. Sheikh, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, M. Banavoth, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Guo, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Fang, Q. F. Dong, Y. C. Shao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. D. Yuan, R. F. Duan, F. Huang, T. B. Wei, Z. Q. Liu, J. X. Wang and J. M. Li, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 045115 CrossRef .
P. Ramasamy, D.-H. Lim, B. Kim, S.-H. Lee, M.-S. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2067 RSC .
Y. H. Dong, Y. Gu, Y. S. Zou, J. Z. Song, L. M. Xu, J. H. Li, J. Xue, X. M. Li and H. B. Zeng, Small, 2016, 12, 5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, K. Yu, F. Yang, H. Cong, N. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. H. Zuo, C. B. Li, B. W. Cheng and Q. M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6224 RSC .
X. M. Li, D. J. Yu, J. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. G. Sun, J. P. Ji, Y. L. Shen, H. D. Sun and H. B. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. M. Li, J. Z. Song, L. Xiao, H. B. Zeng and H. D. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H.-J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Malko, A. A. Mikhailovsky, M. A. Petruska, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, M. G. Bawendi and V. I. Klimov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, T. Azuma, T. Yuasa and R. Ito, Solid State Commun., 1998, 105, 253 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Zhu, Y. P. Fu, F. Meng, X. X. Wu, Z. Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Sum, S. Chen, G. C. Xing, X. F. Liu and B. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 342001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, Ni. Sestu, D. Marongiu, F. P. Chen, R. Piras, R. Corpino, C. M. Carbonaro, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1557 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fu, H. M. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, V. Nalla, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605088 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Daqin Chen
	Daqin Chen is a full professor at College of Physics and Energy in Fujian Normal University. He received his PhD degree (2008) in Condensed Matter Physics from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He joined Fujian Normal University in 2018. His recent research interests are focused on developing advanced optical materials and designing the related optoelectronic devices for applications in lighting and display.

Xiao Chen
	Xiao Chen is a Master's degree candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Hangzhou Dianzi University. He received his Bachelor's degree from Hangzhou Dianzi University in 2016. Currently, he is involved in research on the synthesis and application of perovskite quantum dots.

 	Fig. 1  Timeline showing recent progress and future outlooks on the synthesis, optical properties and applications of AIPs and HOIPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures for (a and b) the ligand-assisted reprecipitation method and (c) the emulsion strategy. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 71. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 83. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures for (a) hot-injection, (b and c) ultrasonication, (d) microfluidic reaction and (e) the solvothermal method. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 93. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 84. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (d) ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD pattern of orthorhombic CsPbBr3 QDs, inset is the DSC trace of a CsPbBr3 sample. XRD patterns of CsPb(Cl/Br)3, CsPbBr3 and CsPb(Br/I)3 QDs prepared via (b) LARP (room temperature) and (c) hot-injection (high temperature; right), respectively. Schematic illustration of phase transition from orthorhombic to cubic for the (d) CsPbBr3 and (e) CsPbI3 products. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 103. Copyright 2015, Wiley; (b and c) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (d and e) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of structural evolution of (a) HOIPs and (b) AIPs from 3-D to 0-D. The variation of structure and optical properties after phase conversion from (c) CsPbBr3 (3-D) to CsPb2Br5 (2-D) and (d) CsPbBr3 (3-D) to Cs4PbBr6 (0-D). Adapted with permission from (c) ref. 138. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) ref. 141. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM and HRTEM characterization of perovskite materials with various morphologies. (a) CsPbBr3 nanocubes, (b) MAPbBr3 nanospheres, (c and d) CsPbBr3 NWs, (e) MAPbBr3 NWs, (f) CsPbBr3 NRs, (g) MAPbBr3 NRs, (h) CsPbBr3 NPLs and (i) MAPbBr3 NPLs. Insets are the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 75. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (b) ref. 74. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 150. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 76. Copyright 2017, Wiley; (e) ref. 151. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) ref. 152. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 153. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 154. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (i) ref. 156. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of bonding/antibonding orbitals of APbX3, showing the formation of the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB). (b) The theoretically calculated band structure and density of states (DOS) of MAPbI3. (c) Electronic band structures for three typical cubic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites. (d) The variation of band edge energies of CsPbX3 with modification of halogen. Adapted with permission from (b) ref. 163. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 161. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of optical properties between CdSe/CdS–ZnS core/hybrid-shell NCs and CsPbBr3 NCs in the forms of a film and dispersion solution: (a and b) PL spectra, (c and d) PL decay profiles and (e and f) temperature-dependent PL spectra. Insets of (c and d) show the indicated emission wavelengths for recording the corresponding decay curves. Adapted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Anion exchange reactions on CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) NCs via different halide precursors. (c) PL spectra of the exchanged NCs obtained from CsPbBr3 by adding different Cl or I precursors. (d) PL spectra of the CsPbBr3 NCs obtained by starting from CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 NCs using different Br precursors. (e) Schematic illustration of direct anion exchange reaction by mixing CsPbBr3 NCs with either CsPbCl3 or CsPbI3 ones and (f) the corresponding PL spectra after anion exchange. (g) In situ PL observation of direct anion exchange between CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 NCs in toluene. Adapted with permission from (a, c and e) ref. 73. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b, f and g) ref. 167. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of colloidal FAPbBr3 NCs in toluene under UV lamp irradiation (λ = 365 nm), and absorption/PL spectra of ∼12 nm FAPbBr3 NCs with a PL maximum at 530 nm, FWHM of 22 nm and QY of 85%. (b) PL spectra of composition-tuned APbX3 (A = Cs, MA, FA) perovskite NCs and the corresponding luminescent photographs. (c) PL spectra before and after cation exchange within FAPbI3 NCs (or CsPbI3 NCs) using Cs-oleate (or FA-oleate). (d) Full-spectral fine-tuning visible emissions from hybrid Cs1−mFAmPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I, 0 < m < 1) QDs with the help of concurrent cation and anion substitution. Insets (top) show the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 91. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 85. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) ref. 92. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 174. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PL and absorption spectra of CsSnX3 NCs. (b) Different morphologies of Cs2SnI6 NCs. (c) Optical properties, crystal structure and TEM image of Cs3Sb2Br9 NCs. (d) TEM image of Cs3Sb2Cl9 nanowires and nanorods. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 175. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 176. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) ref. 177. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 178. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Luminescent variation of CsPb1−mMmBr3 NCs (M = Sn2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+). (b) CsPbCl3 and (c) CsPb(Cl/Br)3 NCs. (d) k3-weighted Pb LIII-edge EXAFS of undoped and Ni-11.9% doped NCs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 179. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (c, d and e) ref. 180. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Energy transfer processes between Mn2+ and CsPbX3 NCs prepared by forward and reverse anion exchange. Absorption and PL spectra of undoped/Ni-doped. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of Bi doped and undoped CsPbI3 NCs. (c) NIR PL spectra and PLQYs of Bi-doped CsPbI3 NCs with different nominal Bi concentrations, and schematic illustration of electronic transitions in Bi doped NCs. (d) Optical properties of CsPbCl3 NCs doped with different RE ions. (e) Energy level diagrams of Yb3+ and Eu3+ ion doped CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs and the possible downconversion and downshifting emission mechanisms. (f) Absorption and PL spectra in the visible-NIR region for various perovskite NCs co-doped with Yb3+ and other RE ions. (g) Schematic diagram of the energy transfer mechanism in the Yb3+, Ce3+ co-doped CsPbCl1.5Br1.5 NCs. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 184. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (b and c) ref. 191. Copyright 2017, Optical Society of America; (d and e) ref. 195. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f and g) ref. 196. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The impact of the amount of added antisolvent on the luminescence of CsPbBr3 QDs. (b) Schematic illustration of the centrifugal casting process. (c) FTIR spectra and (d) PL spectra of CsPbBr3 QDs subjected to purification for different times. TEM images of (e) 2-purified and (f) 3-purified CsPbBr3 samples. Insets are the corresponding luminescent photographs. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Different strategies to improve long-term stability of perovskite NCs. (a) Image of CsPbX3 NCs in PMMA polymer. (b) Image of MAPbX3 perovskite NCs in PVDF films. (c) Image of MOF–MAPbBr3 nanocomposites. (d and e) Schematic images of mesoporous silica and (f) SiO2 coated perovskite NCs. (g) Comparison of air stability for perovskite NCs coated with/without SiO2. (h) Image of MAPbBr3/NaNO3 composites. (i) Image of CsPbBr3 QDs@glass. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 62. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 198. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (c) ref. 201. Copyright 2017, Nature; (d) ref. 202. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (e) ref. 203. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (f) ref. 204. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (g) ref. 205. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (h) ref. 206. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) ref. 207. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram and EL spectrum of wLEDs using green emissive MAPbBr3 QDs and red emissive Mn4+: K2SiF6 (KSF). (b) EL spectra and (c and d) photographs of wLEDs in operation with/without the addition of CsPbBrI2 QD film. (e) EL spectra of a wLED operated with different currents and (f) the corresponding color coordinates in a CIE diagram. (g) EL spectra of a commercial blue InGaN chip and wLED constructed by combining a blue chip with green Cs0.1FA0.9Br3 and red Cs0.1FA0.9Br1.5I1.5 polymer films as color converters. Insets are the schematic structure of the wLED. (h) EL spectra of the wLED constructed by coupling green CsPbBr3@SiO2 and orange Mn2+-doped CsPb(Cl0.5Br0.5)3@SiO2 phosphors with a blue chip. Inset is the corresponding wLED in operation. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 74. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society; (b–d) ref. 217. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (e and f) ref. 218. Copyright 2016, Wiley; (g) ref. 174. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (h) ref. 99. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the multilayer perovskite QLED device structure based on all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite QDs. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the QLED device. (c) Blue/green/orange multi-color electroluminescence of QLEDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2015, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the control of ligand density on CsPbBr3 QD surfaces. (b) Schematic illustration of energy levels and current density–voltage characteristics of electron-only, hole-only, and QLED devices with different purifying cycles. (c) Luminance of the devices based on CsPbBr3 QDs with different purifying cycles. (d) Current efficiency of these devices as a function of current density. (e) EQE of devices as a function of luminance. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Device structure and SEM image for the PFI modified QLED. (b) Overall energy band diagram of the QLED. (c) Current density and luminance versus driving voltage for QLEDs with or without the addition of a PFI interface. (d) ETL modified QLED: device structure, chemical structure of the ETLs and the proposed energy levels. Adapted with permission from (a–c) ref. 228. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 229. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 NC photodetector. (b) I–V characteristics of close-packed CsPbI3 NC films as a function of incident light intensity. (c) SEM image of CsPbBr3 NCs film prepared by drop-coating and centrifugal-casting. (d) I–V curves of photodetectors with different film fabrication under 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). (e) Relative responsivity of devices with and without Au NCs under 2 V bias from front illumination. (f) Measured I–V characteristics of the two devices under a 532 nm laser (4.65 mW cm−2). Adapted with permission from (a and b) ref. 241. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c–f) ref. 242. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A schematic 3D view of a CsPbBr3 QDs–MPA–TiO2 hybrid photodetector. (b) Logarithmic I–V curves of the fabricated photodetectors in the dark and under irradiation. (c) Kinetic scheme describing the excited-state process in the QDs–MPA–TiO2 system upon QD excitation. (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible photodetector consisting of CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs. (e) Energy level of CsPbBr3 nanosheets and CNTs. (f) EQE and (g) responsivity versus incident light wavelength under different biases. Adapted with permission from (a) ref. 243. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) ref. 244. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Pumping-intensity-dependent PL spectra from CsPbBr3 OD film. (b) FWHM (solid circles) and integrated PL intensity of the sharp peak (solid squares) versus pump intensity. (c) Plot of stimulated emission peak intensity as a function of laser shot. (d) Wavelength-tunable lasing from single-crystal (FA/MA)PbX3 hybrid perovskite NWs. (e) Schematic configuration of VCSEL based on CsPbBr3 NCs. (f) Multimode lasing from the CsPbBr3 NCs. Inset is the integrated PL intensity of the sharp peak versus pump intensity. (g) Blue and (h) red lasing spectra from CsPb(Br/Cl)3 and CsPb(I/Br)3 NCs under pump intensity of 38.2 and 30.5 μJ cm−2, respectively. The corresponding photograph of the device in operation is given inside the plot. Adapted with permission from (a–c) ref. 252. Copyright 2015, Wiley. (d) Ref. 238. Copyright 2015, Nature; (e–h) ref. 253. Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
