Integrated power fiber for energy conversion and storage   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE23970E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE23970E
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805-812Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsIntegrated power fiber for energy conversion and storage†

        
          
            Yongping 
            Fu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Wu‡
, 
      
        
          
            Shuyang 
            Ye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Cai
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Yu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shaocong 
            Hou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hanny 
            Kafafy
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dechun 
            Zou
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      19th September 2012
    , Accepted 8th January 2013First published on 8th January 2013AbstractA new type of integrated power fiber that incorporates a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) and a supercapacitor (SC), which can be used for energy conversation and storage, was introduced for the first time. A stainless steel wire coated with polyaniline via anodic deposition is jointly used as the electrode of the fiber DSSC and fiber SC. The overall energy conversion efficiency of the integrated power fiber is as high as 2.1%. Compared with traditional integrated power systems, our integrated power fiber is lightweight, flexible, inexpensive, suitable for special applications, and capable of integrating with cloth.

Broader context
Fiber/weavable electronic power devices have been a hot research field in the development of flexible, portable devices for energy conversion and storage. Recently, fiber solar cells and fiber supercapacitors, which are typical representatives of flexible energy conversion and storage devices, respectively, have been under most extensive research. Here we propose a new type of integrated power fiber that incorporates a dye-sensitized solar cell and a supercapacitor, which can be simultaneously used for energy conversation and storage. The overall energy conversion efficiency of the integrated power fiber is as high as 2.1%. Compared with traditional integrated power systems, our integrated power fiber is lightweight, flexible, inexpensive, suitable for special applications, and capable of integrating with clothes.

I Introduction
Intensifying issues on energy and environmental conservation have increased the importance of efficient and sustainable green energy conversion and storage. Among the numerous energy conversion technologies available, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are the most effective in converting solar energy into electricity and have tremendous advantages such as being lightweight, cheap, highly efficient, and flexible. DSSCs are considered to be the next-generation photovoltaic cells for commercial applications.1,2 Moreover, supercapacitors are a potential energy-storage technology. These devices store electricity in the form of chemical energy and have rapid charge–discharge rates, ultrahigh power densities, and considerable lifecycles. Supercapacitors show promise as standby electrical sources, automobile electrical systems, and so on.3,4 Generally, energy conversion and storage are two independent units. An integrated energy system can convert and store energy in a single unit,5–8 thus allowing the idle energy captured from the environment to be stored. The stored energy can then be released at an appropriate time or place. This system not only avoids energy wastage but also maintains system stability. For example, when integrating a solar cell with a chemical battery, the former can drive an external load under solar exposure and the latter can work as a backup power system when sunlight is absent. This setup allows the system to work continuously regardless of the availability of sunlight. A traditional, integrated energy package consists of a silicon solar cell and a battery or a supercapacitor. However, these traditional systems are cumbersome, rigid, and large, limiting their applications in daily use. Thus, developing a highly efficient, lightweight, flexible, and portable energy package is extremely important.
Fiber/weavable electronic power devices have recently gained considerable interest in the research and development of flexible, portable devices for energy conversion and storage.9 Compared with traditional two-dimensional energy devices, fiber electronic devices with one-dimensional wire structures have micro-scale diameters. Fiber electronic devices demonstrate fine bending properties that meet the requirements of flexible electronic devices. Furthermore, these devices can be applied in certain special fields. For example, fiber/weavable electronic power devices offer unparalleled advantages in the construction of wearable energy devices. Nowadays, fiber energy-conversion devices include fiber nanogenerators (convert mechanical energy to electricity),10–12 fiber solar cells (converts photons to electricity),13–15 and fiber thermoelectricity generators (convert thermal energy to electricity).16 Fiber solar cells have the highest power output and are under the most extensive research. For energy storage, fiber energy storage devices include fiber supercapacitors (FSCs)17,18 and cable-shaped lithium ion batteries,19 which are emerging research fields in the development of flexible energy storage.
In this study, we propose a novel integrated power-fiber device based on two fiber electrodes. This power fiber can convert solar energy into electricity and store electricity in the form of chemical energy. Compared with previously reported single-fiber hybrid energy devices,20 our proposed device not only achieves higher energy-conversion efficiency and energy storage density but is also inexpensive and easily manufactured. This integrated power-fiber device is significant for the further development of self-driven fiber systems.
II Experimental
A Preparation and characterization of the PANi-SS electrode
All chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. Electrolytic deposition was conducted with an Autolab Potentiostat/Galvanostat. Stainless steel (SS; φ = 0.250 mm, density 3.0 mg cm−1) was used as the working electrode, and a platinum (Pt) sheet was used as the counter electrode. The polyaniline (PANi) film was synthesized by oxidizing a 0.3 M aniline monomer in a 1 M H2SO4 solution through the one-step method on a two-electrode system with a constant current density of 0.27 mA cm2 (or 20 μA cm−1). The mass of the PANi was controlled by electrolysis. The surface morphology of the PANi-SS was characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S-4800).
B Preparation of the photoanode (TiO2–Ti wire)
The preparation of the photoanode was recorded in our previous work.24 The photoanode was fabricated by coating a TiO2 nanoparticle film on the surface of a Ti wire (φ = 250 μm, 99.7%, Alfa Aesar). TiO2 colloids were prepared from 1 g of commercialized TiO2 paste (DHS-TPP3, Dalian Heptachroma, China) and 4 mL of ethanol. The preparation procedures are as follows: (1) the Ti wire is polished by abrasive paper and ultrasonicated in deionized water for 10 min; (2) the Ti wire is immersed in TiO2 colloids via the dip-coating method to form a layer of TiO2 nanoparticles on the substrates; (3) the TiO2-coated wire is sintered at 400 °C for approximately 5 min to remove the solvent in the colloids; (4) the thickness of the TiO2 layer is determined by repeating steps 2 and 3; (5) the TiO2-coated electrode is sintered at 450 °C in air for 30 min and then cooled down to 100 °C; (5) the prepared electrode is immersed into 50 mM N719 (RuL2[NCS]2:2TBA; L = 2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic-acid, TBA = tetrabutyl ammonium; Dalian Heptachroma, China) ethanol solution and sensitized for 24 h; (6) the dye-sensitized electrode is rinsed with anhydrous ethanol and dried to form the photoanode.
C Fabrication and characterization of the fiber dye-sensitized solar cell
A thin Pt film was deposited onto the SS wire via magnetron sputtering (JCP-200) to prepare the Pt-SS electrode. The Pt-SS and PANi-SS electrodes were used as the counter electrodes of the fiber DSSC (FDSSC). The counter electrode and photoanode were placed close together and parallel to each other, and inserted into a plastic tube filled with electrolytes. The distance between the two electrodes was approximately 0 μm to 100 μm. The electrolyte consisted of 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.025 M iodine, 0.3 M 4-tert-butylpyridine, 0.05 M lithium perchlorate, and 0.05 M guanidine thiocyanate in acetonitrile solution.
All current–voltage (J–V) tests were conducted on a Keithley Model 2000 under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell) through a solar simulator (Yamashita Denso, Japan). The aperture area of the fiber solar cell was equal to the diameter of the photoanode multiplied by the length of the device. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using PGSTAT302N (Autolab Corp., Switzerland) under 1.0 sun and forward bias VOC with a 10 mV AC amplitude and frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests were performed with a three-electrode setup using Pt as the counter electrode, AgCl/Ag as the reference electrode, and Pt-SS, PANi-SS, or SS wire as the working electrode at a potential scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The electrolyte used was an acetonitrile solution containing 10 mM 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 1 M iodine, and 0.01 M lithium perchlorate as the supporting electrolyte.
D Fabrication and characterization of the fiber supercapacitor
An insulated enameled wire (φ = 0.080 mm) was evenly twisted onto a PANi-SS electrode. The resulting electrode was placed parallel and close to another PANi-SS electrode. The distance between the two electrodes was about 80 μm. Two electrodes were fixed with glue and then inserted into a flexible plastic tube filled with 1 M H2SO4 to fabricate the FSC. The insulated wire played the role of a separator, which prevents two electrodes from coming in direct contact. Electrochemical CV and galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements were conducted with an Autolab Potentiostat/Galvanostat. EIS was performed using PGSTAT302N with a 10 mV AC amplitude and frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz.
E Fabrication and characterization of the integrated power fiber
A single PANi-SS wire was used as the counter electrode of the FDSSC and the electrode of the FSC (Fig. S1†). A switch exists between the photoanode of the FDSSC and the electrode of the FSC. A workstation was used to monitor the voltage of the FSC when the FDSSC was under sunlight. After the FSC was fully charged, we manually disconnected the switch and discharged the FSC through the workstation at a certain constant current.
III Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows the structural schematic and photograph of an integrated power fiber, which consists of the FDSSC and FSC; the diagrams are based on a dual-electrode structure. We used one PANi-SS wire both as the counter electrode of the FDSSC and the electrodes of the FSC. The PANi film was deposited on an SS wire through anodic deposition. The anodic deposition was controlled by Autolab with a constant current mode, in which an SS wire was used as the working electrode, a Pt sheet was used as the counter electrode, and the electrolyte consisted of 0.5 M aniline monomer in 1 M sulfuric acid solution. The constant current density of the electrolysis was 0.27 mA cm−2 (or 20 μA cm−1) and the electrolysis time was 40 min.21,22 The mass load of the PANi was about 0.30 mg cm−2 (or 0.024 mg cm−1). Fig. 1(b) shows the sectional schematic of the FSC. As shown in this figure, the FSC consists of two parallel working electrodes (PANi-SS wire) and a helical space wire. The space wire was wound evenly around the surface of one working electrode at a certain pitch to prevent a short circuit from occurring between the two electrodes. The electrolyte used in the FSC was a 1 M sulfuric acid solution (Electrolyte II). Fig. 1(c) shows the sectional schematic of the FDSSC. Fig. 1(a) and (c) show that the FDSSC consists of a photoanode (TiO2–Ti wire) and a counter electrode (PANi-SS wire). The two fiber electrodes were placed in parallel in a packaged tube filled with electrolytes containing 0.6 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.025 M iodine, 0.3 M 4-tert-butylpyridine, 0.05 M lithium perchlorate, and 0.05 M guanidinium thiocyanate in acetonitrile solution (Electrolyte I). Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of a PANi film at different magnifications. The PANi is grain-shaped and has a porous structure, which might play an important role in the mass transportation of the device.
 Fig. 1  (a) Structural schematic and photograph of an integrated power fiber consisting of a FDSSC and a FSC; (b) sectional schematic of the FSC; (c) sectional schematic of the FDSSC. 
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the PANi-SS wire at different magnifications; the electrolysis time is 40 min. 
The noble metal Pt is the typical catalytic material for the counter electrode of the FDSSC. Pt exerts an important role in the photochemical reaction of the FDSSC. However, Pt is very expensive, thus making the large-scale application of these cells impractical. Researchers have attempted to use carbon fibers or carbon nanofibers as substitutes for Pt wire but were met with several issues. The poor conductivity of carbon fibers is unsuitable for fabricating large-scale FDSSCs. Furthermore, the cost of preparing carbon nanofibers is high.23–28 In traditional flat DSSC, PANi has been proven as a possible replacement for Pt.29,30 In our study, we adopted PANi-SS wire as the counter electrode for the FDSSC and it demonstrated excellent performance. Fig. 3(a) shows the J–V curves of the FDSSCs using PANi-SS wire (D PANi-SS) or sputtered Pt (D Pt-SS) as the counter electrodes. The length of the FDSSC is 5.0 cm and the test area is equal to the diameter of the photoanode multiplied by its length (0.143 cm2). The photovoltaic parameters of D Pt-SS are as follows: the open-circuit voltage (VOC) is 664 mV, short-circuit current density (JSC) is 11.0 mA cm−2, filled factor (FF) is 0.773, and the photoelectric conversion efficiency (η) is 5.66%. The VOC, JSC, FF, and η of D PANi-SS are 659 mV, 11.2 mA cm−2, 0.736, and 5.41%, respectively. The results show that the performance of PANi-based devices can match the performance of Pt-based ones. In addition, CV was performed to characterize the catalytic activity of the PANi-SS and Pt-SS wire over the I3−/I− redox couple in the electrolyte using a three-electrode system. Fig. 3(b) shows the CV curves of the PANi-SS wire, Pt-SS wire, and bare SS wire. Bare SS wire basically has no catalytic activity over the I3−/I− redox couple, whereas the PANi-SS and Pt-SS wire display typical CV curves. The peaks in the curve indicate the oxidization–reduction reaction of the I3−/I− redox couple. The catalytic activity of the PANi-SS wire was found to be almost equivalent to that of the Pt-SS wire when the shapes and peak currents of the curves were compared. This result might be attributed to the porous characteristic and larger surface area of the PANi film than the sputtered Pt, thus promoting high catalytic activity. EIS of D Pt-SS and D PANi-SS was also conducted. Fig. 3(c) shows the EIS of D Pt-SS and D PANi-SS with a forward bias (−VOC) under 1.0 sun. This result indicates that D Pt-SS and D PANi-SS have a closed electron transfer resistance (RCT), thus signifying that PANi-SS and Pt-SS wire have similar levels of catalytic activity.
However, the liquid state electrolyte has a risk of leaking. Thus, a polyethylene oxide-based gel electrolyte, which consists of 1.0 g PEO (Mr = 10000) and 1 mL Electrolyte I, was explored. The J–V curve of the FDSSC with the gel electrolyte is shown in Fig. S2.† The gel-based FDSSC has efficiency as high as 1.21%, which is far lower than that of the liquid-based FDSSC. Nevertheless, we believe there is still much room for improvement. Fig. S3† shows the performance trend of FDSSCs under different bent radii, indicating that FDSSC has high flexibility. Compared with other fiber substrate-based counter electrodes, SS wire is inexpensive, resistant to corrosion, and has good conductivity. Furthermore, anodic deposition is also a cheap and simple method to prepare PANi on SS wire on a large scale.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of FDSSCs using PANi-coated SS wire (DPANi-SS) and sputtered Pt-coated SS wire (DPt-SS) as the counter electrodes. (b) CV curves of bare SS wire, PANi-SS wire and Pt-SS wire in an electrolyte containing 1 mM I2, 10 mM DMII, and 10 mM LiClO4 in acetonitrile solution using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. (c) Nyquist plots of FDSSCs with PANi-SS wire (DPt-SS) and Pt-SS wire (DPANi-SS) as the counter electrodes under 100 mW cm−2 and forward bias (−VOC). 
Supercapacitors can store energy by the reversible adsorption–desorption of ions or a reversible redox reaction, in which an electrode-active material is the key component. Electrochemical materials are typically carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, or transition metal oxides. Conductive polymers, such as PANi, polypyrrole, and polythiophene, and their corresponding derivatives are highly emphasized because of their high storage capacity, ease of production, softness, environmentally friendliness, and low cost. Thus, conductive polymers illustrate great application potential as active materials for supercapacitors.22,31,32 In this study, we applied PANi-SS to fabricate a FSC and obtained satisfactory results. CV and charge–discharge tests were conducted to demonstrate the performance of the FSC. Fig. 4(a) shows the typical CV curves using a two-electrode system in a window from 0 V to 0.6 V. All curves are nearly rectangular in shape when the scan rate increases from 0.05 V s−1 to 1.00 V s−1, indicating that the FSC has good electrochemical performance. The bare SS makes a minor contribution to the overall capacitance (Fig. S4†), signifying that the capacitance mainly originates from the PANi. Fig. S5† presents the plot between the discharging current and the scan rate. This figure shows that the relationships are mostly linear up to 0.5 V s−1, indicating high-density power output capabilities. Fig. 4(b) shows the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves with different current densities. The typical symmetrical triangle curve with little voltage drop confirms that the FSC has good capacitive performance. The area-specific capacitance (C) of the FSC can be obtained from the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (eqn (1)). (1)
 Fig. 4  (a) CV curves of FSCs under different scan rates in a two-electrode system. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the FSC at different charge–discharge current densities. (c) Plot of the area-specific capacitance and discharge current density. (d) Change trend of capacitance as the cycle number is increased at a scan rate of 1.00 V s−1. The inset picture shows the CV curves at the 1st, 5000th, and 10000th time. (e) CV curves of FSCs with different lengths. (f) Impedance spectroscopy of FSCs with different lengths. 
The variable I is the discharging current, tdischarge is the discharging time, V is the highest voltage, IRdropis the voltage drop at the beginning of the discharge, and A is the surface area of the fiber electrode equal to π × D × l (where D is the diameter of the fiber electrode and l is the length of the FSC). Fig. 4(c) shows that the area-specific capacitance is calculated by eqn (1)versus discharging current densities. When the discharging current density is increased from 0.32 mA cm2 to 12.8 mA cm2, the area-specific capacitance remains at 19 mF cm−2, which is bigger than some micro-supercapacitors (0.1 mF cm−2 to 10 mF cm−2) and other fiber-type supercapacitors.33–35 Fig. S6† shows the energy density (E) and power density (P) obtained from the following equations: (2) (3)where V is the working voltage and tdischarge is the discharging time. During discharge, the current density increases from 0.32 mA cm−2 to 12.8 mA cm−2, energy density E is maintained at approximately 9.5 × 10−7 W h cm−2, and power density P increases from 0.1 mW cm−2 to 4.2 mW cm−2; these values are far greater than those previously reported for FSCs.
The stability of the FSC is another important parameter to evaluate. The galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the FSC with different operational voltage windows are also provided in Fig. S7.†Fig. 4(d) shows the change trend of the capacitance at a scan rate of 1.00 V s−1. When the number of cycles reached 10000, the capacitance mostly remained unchanged; thus, the PANi we prepared has good electrochemical stability. Finally, the effect of electrolysis time on the performance of FSCs was also investigated. Fig. S8† shows the CV curves of FSCs using PANi-SS wire with electrolysis times of 10, 20, 40, 80, and 120 min. Fig. S9† shows the relationship between electrolysis time and area-specific capacitance obtained from Fig. S8.† An increasing electrolysis time increased the area-specific capacitance from 3 mF cm−2 to 41 mF cm−2.
To avoid electrolyte leakage, the gel electrolyte PVA/H2SO4 was investigated in the FSC. Fig. S10† shows the CV curves of the FSC with H2SO4 solution and PVA/H2SO4 gel as the electrolytes. The performances of the H2SO4 solution and PVA/H2SO4 gel were considerably close, which means that gel electrolyte is a promising choice for FSC. Fig. S11† shows the CV curves of gel-based FSC under different bent radii and bending cycles. This figure demonstrates the good flexibility of gel-based FSC. Fig. 4(e) shows the CV curves of FSCs with different lengths. An increase in length of the FSC from 3.2 cm to 15 cm does not affect the area-specific capacitance. This reason might be explained by Fig. 4(f), which shows the impedance spectroscopy of FSCs in different lengths. The inception at the real axis is equal to the equivalent series resistance (ESR). The semi-arc at high frequencies illustrates the pseudo-capacitance results from the reversible electrochemical doping–dedoping (RCT) in PANi. The ESR only increased slightly from 0.5 Ω cm2 to 1.8 Ω cm2, and the RCT is almost unchanged when the length of the FSC increases (Fig. 4(f)). The shape memory of SS wire is a key issue in e-textile applications. We have been actively looking for alternative materials to solve this problem. For example, we successfully found an SS wire made from several strands of finer SS wires. This wire has the ability to avoid shape memory. Relevant experiment data is supplied in Fig. S12–S14.†
Integrated power fibers can be used to establish large-area modules by weaving technologies. Simple wire connections allow two power fibers to be realized in series or in parallel. Thus, the output voltage and the output current of the device can be adjusted for specific applications to minimize energy loss. Fig. 5(a) shows the J–V curves of two independent FDSSCs; these J–V curves are combined in series or in parallel. For FDSSC 1, the VOC and ISC are 652 mV and 1.41 mA, respectively. For FDSSC 2, the VOC and ISC are 664 mV and 1.57 mA, respectively. When the FDSSCs are in parallel, the ISC is 2.91 mA, which is almost equal to the sum of the ISC of the two FDSSCs (2.96 mA). When the FDSSCs are in series, the VOC is 1.26 V, which is near the total VOC of the two FDSSCs (1.32 V). The J–V curves of FDSSCs in series maintain a high fill factor, indicating that FDSSCs have relatively small ESR. Fig. 5(b) shows the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of two independent FSCs and the curves at the same current when the FSCs are in series or in parallel. When two FSCs are connected in series, the working voltage can reach up to 1.2 V at nearly the same charging time, which is double that of a single FSC. When two FSC are connected in parallel, the total discharging time is approximately the combination of that of two FSCs discharging separately. The galvanostatic charge–discharge curve in series is also a typical triangle shape with small IR drops; thus, the FSCs prepared in this study have relatively small ESR.36
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of two independent FDSSCs that are combined in series or in parallel; the length of the FDSSC is 5.0 cm. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of two independent FSCs, and the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at a same current when the FSCs are in series or in parallel; the charge–discharge current is 0.5 mA, and the length of the FSC is 5.0 cm. (c) Working principle diagram of the FDSSC-charged FSC. (d) Charging curve of the FDSCC-charged FSC, and the discharging curve at a constant current. 
As an integrated power fiber, FDSSC and FSC can be fabricated jointly on a PANi-SS wire to form a self-powered system. Fig. 5(c) displays the proposed working principle diagram of an integrated power fiber. Fig. 5(d) shows the solar-charge and galvanostatic discharge process of the integrated power fiber. When the integrated power fiber is exposed to the irradiation of 1.0 sun, the voltage of the FSC is significantly increased at the beginning of the period. However, when the power fiber is further kept under illumination, the voltage of the FSC only slightly increases to a stable value of 0.621 V. The energy (EFSC) stored in the FSC during the photocharging process is calculated according to eqn (4) EFSC = 0.5CFSCV2(4)where, CFSC is the capacitance of FSC, V is the voltage of the FSC part. The value of CFSC (26.46 mF) is obtained from the galvanostatic discharge curve, according to eqn (2). The maximum voltage of the FSC could be charged to the value of VOC if it is an ideal mode. Therefore, the maximum energy stored in the FSC part (Emax) is equal to 0.5CFSCVOC. The energy storage proportion of the FSC (χ) during the charging process is defined through the following eqn (5) χ = EFSC/Emax(5)

Fig. 6 shows the trend of the energy storage proportion of the FSC part (EFSC/Emax) during the solar-charging process. After about 15 s solar-charging time, the value of χ reaches up to 97%. However, when the photocharging keeps going, the χ only increases a little. This is because the photo-generated current of the FDSSC obviously decreases as the voltage of the FSC is almost approaching the Voc of the FDSSC. As for the solar cell part, the FDSSC has a length of 6.70 cm (with an effective area of 0.190 cm2). The VOC, JSC, FF, and ηFDSSC of the FDSSC are 622 mV, 9.89 mA cm−2, 0.740, and 4.56%, respectively. Therefore, the overall conversion efficiency of the integrated power fiber (ηoverall) can be obtained from eqn (6). ηoverall = EFSC/(Pin × AFDSSC × tFDSSC) = 0.5CFSCV2/(Pin × AFDSSC × tFDSSC)(6)in which Pin is the illuminated light density (100 mW cm−2), AFDSSC is the effective area of FDSSC, tFDSSC is the solar-charging time. According to the eqn (6), ηoverall is a function of solar-charging time. The trend of ηoverall during the solar-charging process is also shown in the Fig. 6. As the charging goes, the ηoverall gradually increases at the initial time and then decrease. A maximum ηoverall of 2.12% can be achieved, when the voltage of the FSC is charged up to 0.566 V. More information about the calculation of ηoverall is provided in Table S2.† Thus, the maximum energy storage efficiency of the FSC (ηFSC) is up to about 46% based on eqn (7). ηoverall = ηFDSSC × ηFSC(7)
 Fig. 6  The energy storage proportion of the FSC part (EFSC/Emax) and overall energy conversion (ηoverall) of the integrated power fiber versus the solar-charging time. 
The integrated power fiber can convert solar energy to electricity to drive a load or store solar energy in the FSC when sunlight is available and release the energy stored in the FSC when sunlight is absent. Herein, four FDSSCs and four FSCs were firstly connected in series, and then integrated into one unit. The performance of the four FDSSCs connected in series is shown in Fig. 7(a), a VOC of 2.34 V and an ISC of 1.04 mA could be obtained when the integrated device was irradiated under 1.0 sun. Fig. 7(b) shows the solar-charging curve of the integrated device. The voltage of the FSC was charged up to 2.27 V in about 50 s, which is only a little lower than VOC. Subsequently, the stored energy of the integrated device was successfully used to drive a red LED (shown in Fig. 7), when the solar irradiation was unavailable. This process demonstrates an example of a self-powered system.
 Fig. 7  (a) The I–V curve of four FDSSCs connected in series, (b) solar-charging curve of integrated device; and inset, the energy stored in the integrated device was used to drive a red LED. 
IV Conclusion
We proposed a new type of integrated power fiber that incorporates DSSCs and supercapacitors, which can be used for energy conversation and storage. A stainless steel wire coated with PANi via anodic deposition can be jointly used as the electrode of the FDSSC and FSC. The photoelectric conversion efficiency of the PANi-based FDSSC can reach up to 5.41%, rivalling that of sputtered Pt-based FDSSCs. For energy storage, the proposed FSCs have an area-specific capacitance of 3 mF cm−2 to 41 mF cm−2. This value shows the noticeably superior performance than other reported FSCs. Furthermore, the energy and power density of the proposed FSCs are almost two orders of magnitude higher than previous reports about FSCs and are close to those of micro-supercapacitors. Our FSCs also show good electrochemical stability. More importantly, we successfully used the FDSSC to charge the FSC in an integrated power fiber under solar exposure. The overall energy conversion of the integrated power fiber is up to 2.1%. Compared with traditional integrated power systems, our integrated power fiber is lightweight, flexible, inexpensive, suitable for special applications, and capable of integrating with cloth. We believe that our integrated power system shows a significant step toward the development self-driven fiber systems.37
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 50833001), the Ministry of Science and Technology (no. 2011CB933300), the Ministry of Education of China (no. 20120001140010) and the fund from Beijing city (no. Z121100001312009).
References
B. Oregan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells with cobalt(II/III) – based redox electrolyte exceed 12 percent efficiency, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Flexible energy storage devices based on nanocomposite paper, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Printable thin film supercapacitors using single-walled carbon nanotubes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Guo, X. Y. Xue, S. H. Wang, C. J. Lin and Z. L. Wang, An integrated power pack of dye-sensitized solar cell and Li battery based on double-sided TiO2 nanotube arrays, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520–2523 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xue, S. H. Wang, W. X. Guo, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Hybridizing energy conversion and storage in a mechanical-to-electrochemical process for self-charging power cell, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(9), 5048–5054 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, The photocapacitor: an efficient self-charging capacitor for direct storage of solar energy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3935 CrossRef CAS .

          P. A. Mini; S. V. Nair; K. R. V. Subramanian, Design and development of an integrated device consisting of an independent solar cell with electrical storage capacity, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl.,  DOI:10.1002/pip.2187.
D. C. Zou, Z. B. Lv, X. Cai and S. C. Hou, Macro/microfiber-shaped electronic devices, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 273–281 CrossRef .
Y. Qin, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Microfibre–nanowire hybrid structure for energy scavenging, Nature, 2008, 451, 809–813 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, C. Y. Chen, S. H. Wang, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, A hybrid piezoelectric structure for wearable nanogenerators, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1759–1764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. T. Li and Z. L. Wang, Air/liquid-pressure and heartbeat-driven flexible fiber nanogenerators as a micro/nano-power source or diagnostic sensor, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Wire-shaped flexible dye-sensitized solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592–595 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Lv, Y. P. Fu, S. C. Hou, D. Wang, H. W. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, Large size, high efficiency fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10076 RSC .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Conjunction of fiber solar cells with groovy micro-reflectors as highly efficient energy harvesters, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379–3383 CAS .
A. Yadav, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Fiber-based flexible thermoelectric power generator, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Fiber supercapacitors made of nanowire-fiber hybrid structures for wearable/flexible energy storage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fu, X. Cai, H. W. Wu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. C. Zou, Fiber supercapacitors utilizing pen ink for flexible/wearable energy storage, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kwon, S.-W. Woo, H.-R. Jung, H. K. Yu, K. Kim, B. H. Oh, S. Ahn, S.-Y. Lee, S.-W. Song, J. Cho, H.-C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Cable-type flexible lithium ion battery based on hollow multi-helix electrodes, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5192–5197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Single-fiber-based hybridization of energy converters and storage units using graphene as electrodes, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yu, Y. X. Li, N. F. Zhu, Q. B. Yang and K. Kalantar-zadeh, A polyaniline nanofiber electrode and its application in a self-powered photoelectrochromic cell, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Yuan, X. Xiao, T. Ding, J. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Hu, Y. Huang, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Paper-based supercapacitors for self-powered nanosystems, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4934–4938 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Hou, X. Cai, Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, D. Wang, H. W. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, Transparent conductive oxide-less, flexible, and highly efficient dye-sensitized solar cells with commercialized carbon fiber as the counter electrode, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13776–13779 RSC .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang and D. C. Zou, Tco-free, flexible, and bifacial dye-sensitized solar cell based on low-cost metal wires, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2(1), 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Cai, F. Gong, Z. Yang, Z. Wang and H. Peng, Intertwined aligned carbon nanotube fiber based dye-sensitized solar cells, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568–2572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Y. Ji, Z. Q. Bian, R. H. Liu, X. Y. Xia, D. Q. Yun, L. H. Zhang, C. H. Huang and A. Y. Cao, Single-wire dye-sensitized solar cells wrapped by carbon nanotube film electrodes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383–3387 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, H. G. Kia, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Designing aligned inorganic nanotubes at the electrode interface: towards highly efficient photovoltaic wires, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4623–4628 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Y. Ji, Z. Q. Bian, P. R. Yu, L. H. Zhang, D. Y. Liu, E. Z. Shi, Y. Y. Shang, H. T. Peng, Q. Cheng, D. Wang, C. H. Huang and A. Y. Cao, Porous, platinum nanoparticle-adsorbed carbon nanotube yarns for efficient fiber solar cells, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(8), 7191–7198 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Tai, B. L. Chen, F. Guo, S. Xu, H. Hu, B. Sebo and X. Z. Zhao, 
            In situ prepared transparent polyaniline electrode and its application in bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3795–3799 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Li, J. H. Wu, Q. W. Tang, Z. Lan, P. J. Li, J. M. Lin and L. Q. Fan, Facile preparation of nanofibrous polyaniline thin film as counter electrodes for dye sensitized solar cells, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1299–1302 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ryu, K. M. Kim, N.-G. Park, Y. J. Park and S. H. Chang, Symmetric redox supercapacitor with conducting polyaniline electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2002, 103, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laforgue, P. Simon, C. Sarrazin and J.-F. Fauvarque, Polythiophene-based supercapacitors, J. Power Sources, 1999, 80, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. H. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Ultrahigh-power micrometre-sized supercapacitors based on onion-like carbon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. In, S. Kumar, Y. Shao-Horn and G. Barbastathis, Origami fabrication of nanostructured, three-dimensional devices: electrochemical capacitors with carbon electrodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 0831041 CrossRef .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, N. Fabre, F. Mesnilgrente, V. Conedera and H. Durou, Elaboration of a microstructured inkjet-printed carbon electrochemical capacitor, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1266–1269 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Laser scribing of high-performance and flexible graphene-based electrochemical capacitors, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Toward self-powered sensor networks, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 512–514 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23970e‡ These authors contributed equally to the paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Fiber/weavable electronic power devices have been a hot research field in the development of flexible, portable devices for energy conversion and storage. Recently, fiber solar cells and fiber supercapacitors, which are typical representatives of flexible energy conversion and storage devices, respectively, have been under most extensive research. Here we propose a new type of integrated power fiber that incorporates a dye-sensitized solar cell and a supercapacitor, which can be simultaneously used for energy conversation and storage. The overall energy conversion efficiency of the integrated power fiber is as high as 2.1%. Compared with traditional integrated power systems, our integrated power fiber is lightweight, flexible, inexpensive, suitable for special applications, and capable of integrating with clothes.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Structural schematic and photograph of an integrated power fiber consisting of a FDSSC and a FSC; (b) sectional schematic of the FSC; (c) sectional schematic of the FDSSC.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the PANi-SS wire at different magnifications; the electrolysis time is 40 min.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves of FDSSCs using PANi-coated SS wire (DPANi-SS) and sputtered Pt-coated SS wire (DPt-SS) as the counter electrodes. (b) CV curves of bare SS wire, PANi-SS wire and Pt-SS wire in an electrolyte containing 1 mM I2, 10 mM DMII, and 10 mM LiClO4 in acetonitrile solution using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. (c) Nyquist plots of FDSSCs with PANi-SS wire (DPt-SS) and Pt-SS wire (DPANi-SS) as the counter electrodes under 100 mW cm−2 and forward bias (−VOC).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) CV curves of FSCs under different scan rates in a two-electrode system. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the FSC at different charge–discharge current densities. (c) Plot of the area-specific capacitance and discharge current density. (d) Change trend of capacitance as the cycle number is increased at a scan rate of 1.00 V s−1. The inset picture shows the CV curves at the 1st, 5000th, and 10000th time. (e) CV curves of FSCs with different lengths. (f) Impedance spectroscopy of FSCs with different lengths.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of two independent FDSSCs that are combined in series or in parallel; the length of the FDSSC is 5.0 cm. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of two independent FSCs, and the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at a same current when the FSCs are in series or in parallel; the charge–discharge current is 0.5 mA, and the length of the FSC is 5.0 cm. (c) Working principle diagram of the FDSSC-charged FSC. (d) Charging curve of the FDSCC-charged FSC, and the discharging curve at a constant current.	 
EFSC = 0.5CFSCV2	(4)
χ = EFSC/Emax	(5)
ηoverall = EFSC/(Pin × AFDSSC × tFDSSC) = 0.5CFSCV2/(Pin × AFDSSC × tFDSSC)	(6)
ηoverall = ηFDSSC × ηFSC	(7)

 	Fig. 6  The energy storage proportion of the FSC part (EFSC/Emax) and overall energy conversion (ηoverall) of the integrated power fiber versus the solar-charging time.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The I–V curve of four FDSSCs connected in series, (b) solar-charging curve of integrated device; and inset, the energy stored in the integrated device was used to drive a red LED.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23970e
‡ These authors contributed equally to the paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
