Efficient stable graphene-based perovskite solar cells with high flexibility in device assembling via modular architecture design   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE02391G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE02391G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3585-3594Efficient stable graphene-based perovskite solar cells with high flexibility in device assembling via modular architecture design†

        
          
            Chunyang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yulin 
            Feng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wenming 
            Tian
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Yan
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jiming 
            Bian
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Yuchen 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengye 
            Jin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Shaik Mohammed 
            Zakeeruddin
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yantao 
            Shi
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Department of Chemistry, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China. E-mail: shiyantao@dlut.edu.cn
bLaboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: shaik.zakeer@epfl.ch
cKey Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams (Ministry of Education), School of Physics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: jmbian@dlut.edu.cn
dState Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, 116023, China
eSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, China
Received 
      26th July 2019
    , Accepted 29th October 2019First published on 30th October 2019AbstractCarbon-based perovskite solar cells (C-PSCs) are emerging as low-cost stable photovoltaics. However, their power conversion efficiency (PCE) still lags behind that of devices based on Au or Ag as the current collector. Here, we introduced an innovative modular PSC design using a carbon back electrode, whose sheet resistance and thickness were greatly reduced by covering it with another carbon-coated FTO glass that was applied under pressure. We showed that these two individual elements could be assembled and separated repeatedly. Moreover, among the various commercial carbon sources (carbon black, graphite sheet, and graphene), graphene exhibited the best overall performance, showing the crucial importance of graphene as a charge collector. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.65% was achieved for graphene-based PSCs (G-PSCs), which was among the highest efficiency reported so far for C-PSCs. Moreover, the optimized devices without encapsulation retained 90% of their initial PCE after aging at an elevated temperature of 85 °C for 1000 h. Remarkably, G-PSCs showed significant structural flexibility; there was negligible degradation in PCE after repeated disassembling and assembling for more than 500 cycles. Our system provides a promising prospect for the facile repair and maintenance of PSCs via modular interconnections; related strategies may be extended to other devices.

Broader context
Long-term durability is the main limitation hindering the practical applications of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). It has been seen that the utilization of carbon materials to replace metal electrodes is an effective strategy to simultaneously improve the stability and reduce the cost of PSCs. Carbon-based PSCs (C-PSCs) have outstanding stability in ambient air or under full sunlight. However, in the past few years, the improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) for C-PSCs has progressed very slowly due to the serious energy loss stemming from carbon electrodes in a chain of charge transfer dynamics. The PCEs of most C-PSCs reported so far are in the range of 10–16%. Therefore, it is highly desired to improve the performance of C-PSCs through conducting great innovation to the cell architecture.

Introduction
In the past few years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced a stunning growth in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), and the best-certified PCE of 24.2% was achieved very recently.1,2 However, the long-term operational stability of the new photovoltaic devices has not yet been ascertained so far, which has become the main limitation hindering their practical applications.3,4 One potential source of instability is the Au- or Ag-based metal back contact, which is prone to react with halogen ions from the perovskite, leading to performance degradation.4,5 Importantly, moisture- and heat-resistant carbon materials show great promise as alternative charge collectors due to their superior stability as well as appropriate work functions (about 5 eV).6–9 Carbon-based PSCs (C-PSCs) with over 1000 hour stability in ambient air under full sunlight were reported by Han as early as 2014.6 However, the PCE performance of C-PSCs is still far from satisfactory, as summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). Currently, the reported PCEs of C-PSCs are in the range of 10–16%, which are much lower than that of noble metal electrode-based PSCs.
Undoubtedly, the inferior efficiency of C-PSCs stems from the carbon back electrode inducing substantial energy losses during carrier extraction, transport, and collection.8,10,11 Carbon materials generally have inferior ability to block the back transfer of photo-generated electrons from the perovskite layer to the cathode. Serious charge recombination at the perovskite/carbon interface will lead to substantial energy loss.12,13 Thus, the hole transporting layers (HTLs, e.g., spiro-OMeTAD or NiO) have been introduced between the perovskite and carbon electrode for efficient charge separation.10,13–20 In addition, the intimate interfacial contact between HTL and carbon electrode is necessary to minimize energy loss.7,21,22 The carbon electrodes applied in C-PSCs are commonly porous and contain quite a large number of gaps and boundaries.11 As a structural shortcoming, it hinders the effective charge transport along the vertical direction and final charge collection along the lateral direction within the carbon layer. Recently, great efforts have been devoted to decrease the sheet resistance of the carbon collectors in C-PSCs, such as heat-pressing and modulating the properties of carbon electrodes (such as elasticity, adhesion, and conductivity).7,22–24 However, the enhancement in PCE and stability is limited and the overall performance of C-PSCs is still far from satisfactory. Valid strategies to simultaneously realize efficient lateral and vertical transport ability of the carbon electrode are highly required.
Herein, we proposed an innovative modular architecture design, i.e., modular C-PSCs were assembled by a semi-cell A and charge collector B; the individual semi-cell A or charge collector B could be disassembled and replaced repeatedly with ease (as illustrated in Fig. 1). Among the three commercial carbon source materials (carbon black, graphite sheet, and graphene), graphene was proven to be the candidate for C-PSCs with the best performance. Using this design, the PCE of 18.65% was achieved for G-PSCs, corresponding to the highest efficiency reported so far for C-PSCs prepared at low temperatures (≤85 °C). Moreover, the excellent stability (against humidity and heating) of G-PSCs was demonstrated. Remarkably, G-PSCs showed wonderful structural flexibility with negligible degradation in PCE even after repeated disassembling and assembling for more than 500 times. The novel stacked architecture opens new avenues for modular interconnections in advanced photovoltaic architectures.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the fabrication process for the modular C-PSCs; the insets display the microstructure diagrams of the three carbon source materials (CB, GS and G). 
Results and discussion
The overview of the fabrication process of modular C-PSCs is illustrated in Fig. 1. The semi-cell A was fabricated at a low temperature (≤85 °C) by sequentially depositing an SnO2 electron transfer layer (ETL), mixed-cation perovskite layer, spiro-OMeTAD HTL, and carbon layer, while the charge collector B was obtained by directly depositing a carbon layer on an FTO/glass substrate at a low temperature. After this, modular C-PSCs were achieved by stacking the charge collector B and semi-cell A under a rather small pressure. This was favorable for large-scale fabrication (compatible with the roll-to-roll technique). Three carbon source materials were chosen as counter electrode materials and were deposited with the same spraying process for modular C-PSCs; these were carbon black, graphite sheet, and graphene, and they were labelled as CB, GS and G, respectively. The carbon source materials were dispersed in an isopropanol solvent and sprayed on the surface of the adjacent functional layer. With the rapid evaporation of the low-boiling-point and perovskite-friendly isopropanol solvent, the surface tension of the solvent draws the carbon materials closer to the underlying functional layer and welds them together firmly through the van der Waals force.25,26
To determine the best carbon source for C-PSCs, the morphology, electromechanical contact properties, and the interfacial charge transport performance of diverse carbon materials were systematically studied. The striking difference in the morphologies of the carbon films obtained from diverse carbon sources is shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Some small cracks and massive nanoparticle boundaries could be clearly seen in the CB film obtained from carbon black nanoparticles, which resulted in substantial energy loss in the charge transport process (Fig. S1a and d, ESI†). For the GS film obtained from graphite sheets, parallel micron-scale GSs were tiled on the substrate surface in disorder (Fig. S1b and e, ESI†) due to the rigidity of GS. GS is difficult to tightly bind with other materials such as the adjacent functional layer or other GSs through the van der Waals force. This insufficient contact at GS adjacent interfaces will induce substantial energy loss in the charge extraction and transport processes. On the contrary, from some folds and interconnections of the G film surface shown in Fig. S1c and S2 (ESI†), it can be inferred that G has excellent flexibility and scalability; thus, sufficient interfacial contact with other materials can be formed through deformation to fit the surface fluctuation of the adjacent functional layers (Fig. S1f, ESI†).
Generally, heat pressing with a very large pressure (0.4–20 MPa) is often used to strengthen the interfacial contact between carbon and adjacent layers.7,23,27 In contrast, for our architecture, it was proved that a good electric contact between semi-cell A and charge collector B could be easily formed even under a very small pressure (less than 0.025 MPa). The electromechanical properties (such as conductivity, elasticity, plasticity, and adhesion) of carbon films are crucial in the formation of this ohmic contact between semi-cell A and charge collector B. Here, a simplified architecture was designed to evaluate the ohmic contact between semi-cell A and charge collector B, as shown in Fig. 2a; two symmetrical charge collectors B were pressed together and the corresponding resistance under different pressures was measured via a digital multimeter. Nearly the same thickness of the carbon layers from the three sources was employed for comparison. From the resistance–pressure curves in Fig. 2b, we infer that a steady-state resistance can be attained for all the samples under pressures lower than 0.025 MPa, indicating that a good ohmic contact has already been formed between the two charge collectors under such a small pressure. In particular, a steady-state resistance lower than 9 Ω was observed for the samples with CB and G sources. Moreover, the pressure–resistance curves of the symmetrical cell consisted of two charge collectors B during the approaching and retracting processes, which were also measured to characterize the elasticity and plasticity properties of various carbon sources (Fig. S3, ESI†).28–30 Since the variation in resistance is in close relationship with the relative displacement of carbon particles within a film,28 the pressure–resistance curves can be approximatively considered as pressure–displacement curves. For comparison, the pressure–resistance curves for perfect elastic and plastic materials are also illustrated in Fig. S3a and b (ESI†). The result indicated that all the carbon sources showed a certain degree of elastoplasticity; in particular, the G source showed the best plasticity, which facilitated physical contact similar to that for plasticine.
 Fig. 2  (a) Testing diagram of electromechanical contact properties for stacked symmetrical cell (by stacking two charge collectors B together, i.e., FTO/carbon film/carbon film/FTO). (b) The resistance–pressure curves of stacked symmetrical cells based on diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). (c) TRPL spectra of perovskite films based on perovskite, perovskite/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G), perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. (d) TRPL spectra of perovskite films based on perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). 
In addition to the good ohmic contact between semi-cell A and charge collector B as discussed above, the energy level alignment between the carbon electrode and the adjacent functional layer in semi-cell A is crucial for efficient charge extraction.31 The work functions of the carbon electrodes with various carbon sources were calculated, which were 5.11 eV (CB), 5.21 eV (GS), and 5.06 eV (G); the UPS spectra are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). Accordingly, the schematic band energy alignment of C-PSCs (semi-cell A) with different carbon sources is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†).32–34 Obviously, the energy levels of the carbon electrode with the G source provide the largest band offset and facilitate hole extraction. As illustrated in Fig. 2c, the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay of the perovskite/carbon sample with the G source is much faster than that with other carbon sources, and the PL decay parameters by double-exponential function fitting are summarized in Table S3 (ESI†). Hence, it could be concluded that the photoinduced charges in perovskites could be more efficiently extracted by the carbon electrode with the G source, and C-PSCs with a superior performance could be expected for the G-based electrode. To confirm this speculation, modular C-PSCs without the spiro-OMeTAD layer were prepared; the corresponding J–V curves are shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†) and the detailed photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S4 (ESI†). PCEs of only 7.57% and 2.63% were obtained for modular C-PSCs with the CB and GS sources, respectively. It was encouraging that for the G-based device, we obtained PCE of 13.34% even when HTL was not used, and it was higher than that of previous C-PSCs using graphene as the cathode (Table S2, ESI†). Fig. 2c indicates the crucial importance of the spiro-OMeTAD layer for efficient extraction since all the curves are far above that with spiro-OMeTAD due to insufficient interfacial coupling at the molecular level. Meanwhile, after the spiro-OMeTAD layer was introduced, all three perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/C (CB, GS, and G) showed faster PL decay rates (Fig. 2d and Table S5, ESI†), which implied that the energy loss of charge extraction can be minimized further.
The above-mentioned PL decay results confirm that HTL is quite indispensable in C-PSCs so as to promote charge extraction, suppress charge recombination and reduce energy loss. To further make it clear why graphene as a cathode material is the best candidate in modular C-PSCs, photoluminescence (PL) intensity mapping images were obtained to intuitively investigate the interfacial effect between the three types of carbon sources and adjacent functional layers (HTL or perovskite). Rather than achieving full coverage in a real C-PSC device, here, only a small amount of a carbon material was sprayed upon spiro-OMeTAD or perovskite to form discrete distribution of microscopic carbon aggregation on the surface. As shown in Fig. 3, the optical images (left part) and the corresponding PL intensity mapping images (right part, with an identical magnification versus left part image) of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/C are obtained. The optical image in Fig. 3a shows that some micro-scale agglomerated CB particles and some smaller discontinuous CB particles are attached to the surface of the underlayer. Some typical domains coated by the carbon materials were then marked with a dashed line. In the case of the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/C (CB) samples, the results show that the PL attenuation area is evidently larger than the actual area coated with CB aggregates (by referencing to the same circle enclosed by the dashed line). Meanwhile, the discontinuous nano-scale CB particles resulted in a continuous and larger PL attenuation area, which indicated that CB could form good interfacial coupling with spiro-OMeTAD. The micro-scale GSs and their fragments can be seen on the surface of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/C (GS) (Fig. 3b). However, due to the rigidity of GSs, clearly, the expanded scope of PL attenuation can hardly be observed in the PL mapping image, implying that GSs cannot form good interface coupling with the adjacent functional layer and cannot extract photo-generated charges effectively. However, the interfacial effect of these fragments was different from that of GSs. These fragments may be graphene, which is mechanically stripped from GSs during the ball-milling process. As for G, some micro-scale aggregation can be seen in the optical images in Fig. 3c and Fig. S7 (ESI†). The PL attenuation range of G was notably enlarged in the mapping image and the attenuation strength was also stronger when compared to that of CB or GS. This result validates that graphene is capable of forming robust interfacial coupling with the adjacent functional layer, by which the energy loss in the charge extraction process can be effectively reduced. Furthermore, due to the interconnection and fewer boundaries between Gs (Fig. S1c, f, and S2, ESI†), G also has an obvious advantage in the charge transport process. In a typical Nyquist plot of PSCs, the medium-high frequency region (102–106 Hz) mainly reflects charge transport impedance Rtr, while the low frequency (100–102) response is associated with interfacial charge recombination (this resistance is usually termed as Rrec). Fig. S8 (ESI†) shows that G-PSCs have the smallest Rs value (the intercept of the horizontal axis) and the largest Rrec value. The above results jointly prove that graphene is an ideal cathode material in modular C-PSCs and it is capable of forming excellent interfacial contact and inhibiting charge recombination effectively. Hereafter, the performance of modular G-PSCs was systematically investigated.
 Fig. 3  (a–c) Optical images (left part) and PL mappings of intensity (right part) based on the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). The red part of the optical image is perovskite and the black part is carbon material. The white circles indicate the outline of carbon material. The color scale bar indicates the fluorescence intensity emitted from the sample. 

Fig. 4a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the G-based semi-cell A with a spiro-OMeTAD layer, in which the graphene layer is about 2 μm in thickness; it is much thinner than those used in previous C-PSCs. The reduction of the thickness of the carbon film implied that the energy loss of the charge transport along the vertical direction could be minimized. In our new architecture, the conductive substrate in the charge collector B is crucial since it can well offset the shortcoming of carbon materials in the lateral transport of carriers and reduce energy loss in the charge collection process. The modular C-PSCs were believed to have significant structural advantages in minimizing energy loss caused in charge transfer dynamics, by which the potential of carbon materials could be fully exploited. To confirm this, modular C-PSCs with the spiro-OMeTAD layer were prepared. The J–V curves of the champion modular C-PSCs based on CB, GS, and G are shown in Fig. 4b, with detailed photovoltaic parameters and their average performance summarized in Table 1. It was inspiring that all three groups of modular C-PSCs achieved high PCEs. As shown in Table S2 (ESI†), there are a few reports of high-efficiency C-PSCs through one carbon source alone. Mixed carbon sources are often adopted like carbon black and graphite or a commercial carbon paste. In particular, both the literature and our previous research indicate that due to the large gaps in a graphite film, it is difficult to obtain high-efficiency C-PSCs using pure micro-scale graphite sheets. Benefiting from the structural advantages, the modular GS-PSC exhibited PCE of about 10% in this work. Similarly, the modular CB-PSC displayed PCE of 14.05%, which approached and even exceeded the performance of previous C-PSCs using a carbon black/graphite mixture or a commercial carbon paste. Encouragingly, modular G-PSCs gave high PCE of 18.65%, which was comparable to that of a device based on the Ag electrode (19.42%, Fig. S9, ESI†). Meanwhile, no hysteresis was observed when measured under a reverse scan and a forward scan (Fig. S10, ESI†). Remarkably, the modular G-PSCs could achieve PCE of more than 18% even under an ultra-low pressure (0.0025 MPa, Fig. S11 and Table S6, ESI†). Therefore, they are significantly different from the conventional hot-pressing C-PSCs strongly dependent on additional high-pressure compression.35 Meanwhile, the thickness of the interconnecting layer is a crucial factor in the performance. As aforementioned, the vertical path with regard to the carbon layer in previous reports is the main source of energy loss during charge transport.36,37 Graphene as the interconnecting layer has an optimal thickness of about 4 μm (Fig. S12 and Table S7, ESI†). The increase in thickness will lead to additional energy loss, while a very thin interconnecting layer is unfavorable to form effective physical and electrical contact between the semi-cell A and charge collector B. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 22.78 mA cm−2 was consistent with the integrated current density (21.98 mA cm−2) in the incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement (Fig. 4c). In addition, the fill factor (FF) of 0.78 for the G-based modular C-PSC was evidently higher than that of most previous C-PSCs (Table S2, ESI†). Fig. 4d shows the steady-state output photocurrent and PCE of the modular G-PSCs, with a photocurrent of 20.59 mA cm−2 under a bias of 0.884 V and finally yielding steady-state PCE of 18.21%. When the charge collector B was removed, the PCE of semi-cell A was only 0.18% (Fig. S13, ESI†). Increasing the thickness of the carbon layer in the semi-cell A slightly improved its PCE up to 0.77% (Fig. S13a, ESI†), and compressing the carbon layer further improved its PCE up to 1.61% (Fig. S13b, ESI†), which was still very low. When the carbon layer thickness continued to increase, the carbon film without a binder became very easy to peel off, which led to device failure. This further confirmed the advantage of our stacked architecture.
 Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of graphene-based semi-cell A. (b) J–V curves measured under solar simulator AM 1.5 for modular C-PSCs based on different carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). (c) IPCE spectrum and the integrated photocurrent density Jsc for the modular G-PSC. (d) The steady-state output current and calculated PCE of the modular G-PSC at maximum power point (0.884 V). 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of modular C-PSCs based on different carbon sources (CB, GS, and G)




CE

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]

R
s [Ohm cm2]

R
sh [Ohm cm2]




CB
Champion
1.04
21.11
64
14.05
7.6
2586


Average
1.03 ± 0.01
21.14 ± 0.11
63 ± 1
13.69 ± 0.28










GS
Champion
0.84
21.52
55
9.94
14.8
1351


Average
0.81 ± 0.03
19.25 ± 1.92
51 ± 4
7.95 ± 1.67










G
Champion
1.05
22.78
78
18.65
4.9
3293


Average
1.04 ± 0.01
22.69 ± 0.09
77 ± 1
18.25 ± 0.27








As a new type of photovoltaic device, the stability of modular C-PSCs against humidity and heat is a major concern. The thermal and humidity stability of the modular G-PSCs without encapsulation was evaluated by placing the device on a hot plate (85 °C) under ambient air (humidity: 40–80%). As shown in Fig. 5a, the conventional Au-based PSC covered with glass shows a fast decay within 500 h. In contrast, >90% initial performance for G-PSC was maintained after ∼1000 h. Meanwhile, the modular G-PSCs also exhibited excellent stability under continuous light illumination in an N2 atmosphere (Fig. S14, ESI†). Subsequently, the stability of the unencapsulated modular C-PSCs was evaluated by continuously recording their PCE while the samples were kept under ambient air (25–35 °C, humidity: 40–80%). As shown in Fig. S15 (ESI†), no obvious PCE decline occurs over 6000 hours in air ambient storage. The long shelf life was attributed to the modular structure and the hydrophobic feature of carbon materials, which could effectively block the entry of moisture as much as possible. The excellent thermal stability can be ascribed to the chemical robustness and inertness of the carbon materials, where the carbon atoms are connected through a strong covalent bond. Therefore, unlike the atoms in the traditional Ag or Au thin-film electrodes (40–80 nm in thickness), which show high affinity for the halide anions of the perovskite, the carbon atoms show little propensity to diffuse into and react with the adjacent functional perovskite layers in modular C-PSCs. Meanwhile, compared to the observation for the traditional high-efficiency C-PSCs, the good carbon-based interface contact in modular C-PSCs can be achieved without using any additives and binders, which is also considered to be one of the important reasons for the long-term durability of modular C-PSCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Stability of the modular G-PSCs without encapsulation was evaluated by recording the PCE performance as a function of aging time; the complete devices were aged under ambient atmosphere (40–80% humidity) and elevated temperature of 85 °C. The conventional PSC with thermal evaporated Au electrode covered with glass was also examined under the same aging conditions for comparison. (b) Evolution of PCEs of modular G-PSC after various cycles of assembling and disassembling tests; inset is the schematic diagram of the repeated assembling and disassembling experiment. (c) J–V curve of modular G-PSC measured under solar simulator AM 1.5, where the graphene-based semi-cell A was combined with the charge collector B with flexible Al foil as the conductive substrate. (d) J–V characteristics measured under solar simulator AM 1.5 for modular G-PSCs with a scalable active area of 1.30 cm2. Inset shows the deduced photovoltaic parameters. Photos (e) and UV-vis transmittance spectra (f) of different carbon films of about the same thickness. (g) J–V characteristics of modular G-PSCs illuminated from the anode side and the cathode side, respectively. 
In addition to high efficiency and good stability, one of the other advantages of modular C-PSCs over traditional PSCs is that the devices can be assembled and detached readily and repeatedly. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 5b, the modular C-PSC can be separated by hand without other auxiliary means, and good ohmic contact between the two modules can be formed again when the semi-cell A and charge collector B are stacked under a low mechanical pressure (Fig. 2b and Table S6, ESI†). Surprisingly, no PCE decline was observed after repeatedly stacking and separating the modular C-PSCs for 500 cycles (Fig. 5b, Fig. S16 and Table S8, ESI†), indicating excellent structural reliability. The flexibly assembled and readily detachable properties offer a lot of potentials for modular C-PSCs in the future. For example, for the traditional PSCs and normal C-PSCs, the entire device has to be discarded once a part of the device fails, which will cause the waste of resources, environmental pollution, and increase in production cost. On the contrary, the semi-cell A or charge collector B in the modular C-PSCs can be recycled, maintained or replaced to save cost. For example, we have many options available in terms of the conductive substrate in charge collector B. As shown in Fig. 5c, high PCE of 18.04% can still be obtained when using a flexible Al foil as the conductive substrate in charge collector B, exhibiting high adaptability of such a modular architecture. For this kind of a stacking device, the application of an external stress is essential to guarantee the interfacial contact between the semi-cell A and charge collector B. An Al foil as the substrate has high flexibility. Hence, the effect of external stress will be alleviated to a certain degree due to the deformation after stacking semi-cell A and Al-based collector B, which may bring about a negative effect on the interfacial contact and slight decrease in PCE. Meanwhile, the conductive substrate in charge collector B can well offset the shortcoming of the carbon materials in the lateral transport of carriers (Table S9, ESI†) and reduce the energy loss in the charge collection process, as shown in Fig. 5d. Modular G-PSCs with a large active area of 1.30 cm2 can still achieve high PCE of 16.42% with Voc of 1.16 V, surpassing that of previous C-PSCs with a similar active area (Table S2, ESI†). Moreover, the interconnecting layer thickness can be minimized and can even be translucent in the charge collector B. Fig. 5e and f show the photos and UV-vis transmittance spectra of different carbon films with the same thickness (∼4 μm), respectively. The results indicated that the light transmittance for the G-based film was observable, which could be ascribed to the fluffy structure of graphene, implying that modular G-PSCs could work under illumination from either the anode or cathode side. As shown in Fig. 5g, the modular G-PSCs can exhibit PCE of 6.33% when illuminated from the cathode side, which is consistent with the substantial light transmittance of a G-based film (Fig. 5f).
The flexibly assembled and readily detachable properties and light transmittance of the interconnecting layer offer a lot of possibilities for modular G-PSCs. An important potential for the modular G-PSCs is that the functions of the semi-cell A or charge collector B in the modular G-PSCs can be upgraded or expanded independently of each other. As shown in Fig. S17 (ESI†), although we are only at the preliminary stage, the novel stacked architecture in this work may open new avenues for modular interconnections in advanced photovoltaic architectures. For example, it may be extended to some applications like modular flexible photovoltaics, modular inverted photovoltaics, and modular tandem photovoltaics in the future. Continuing to increase the light transmittance of the interconnecting layer (by reducing the thickness of the interconnecting layer or seeking new high light transmittance interconnected materials) and achieving the modularity of these photovoltaic devices will be our research focus in future works.
Conclusions
In summary, here, we introduced a new modular C-PSC configuration, allowing reduction in energy losses during the charge carrier collection by the carbon back contact. Among the different carbon materials tested, graphene emerged as the superior material for the new device design, attaining PCE of 18.65%, which was the highest value reported so far for C-PSCs. G-PSC exhibited excellent stability during exposure to humidity and heat. This designed device exhibited great structural flexibility and could be readily assembled and disassembled for more than 500 times without sacrificing the PCE performance. This also opens up a new option for the modular interconnection of PSCs, facilitating their scale-up, and may be extended to other applications like modular tandem photovoltaics in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51773025, 51872036 and 51605079) and the Natural Foundation of Liaoning Province (Materials Joint Foundation, Grant No. 20180510027), Dalian science and technology innovation fund (2018J12GX033 and 2019J12GX032), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (Grant No. DUT18ZD208 and DUT19LAB07). H. Z. thanks the financial support from the GRAPHENE Flagship Core 2 project supported by the European Commission H2020 Programme under contract 785219. We also give our thanks to Dr Ke Zhou from Xiamen University (Department of Chemistry & College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering) for her help in characterizations.
References
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS .
NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, accessed: April, 2019.
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139 RSC .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero, J. B. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belrnonte, H. P. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Mei, X. Li, L. F. Liu, Z. L. Ku, T. F. Liu, Y. G. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Z. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Gratzel and H. W. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. You, Z. K. Liu, Q. D. Tai, S. H. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Meng, J. S. Zhou, J. Hou, X. Tao, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So and S. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706975 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. G. Rong, X. M. Hou, Y. Hu, A. Y. Mei, L. F. Liu, P. Wang and H. W. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(8), 14555 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gholipour, J. P. Correa-Baena, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, L. Steier, F. Giordano, F. Tajabadi, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, A. M. Ali, N. Taghavinia, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601116 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Yang, J. Y. Xiao, H. Y. Wei, L. F. Zhu, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo, H. J. Wu and Q. B. Meng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52825 RSC .
X. L. Zheng, H. N. Chen, Q. Li, Y. L. Yang, Z. H. Wei, Y. Bai, Y. C. Qiu, D. Zhou, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2496 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, Z. Hawash, L. Qiu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1804284,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201804284 .
K. Cao, Z. X. Zuo, J. Cui, Y. Shen, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grazel and M. K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 171 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Zhang, X. C. Yang, M. Cheng, J. J. Li, W. H. Wang, H. X. Wang and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24272 RSC .
F. G. Zhang, X. C. Yang, M. Cheng, W. H. Wang and L. C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 108 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Xu, Z. H. Liu, Z. X. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. X. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. K. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wu, P. Wang, S. B. Wang, Z. H. Wang, B. Cai, X. J. Zheng, Y. Chen, N. Y. Yuan, J. N. Ding and W. H. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, C. Xie, V. V. Radmilovic, B. Puscher, M. Wu, T. Heumuller, A. Karl, N. Li, X. Tang, W. Meng, S. Chen, A. Osvet, D. Guldi, E. Spiecker, V. R. Radmilovic and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1806516,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201806516 .
Y. Chen, Z. Yang, S. B. Wang, X. J. Zheng, Y. H. Wu, N. Y. Yuan, W. H. Zhang and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805660 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Aitola, K. Sveinbjornsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, A. Kaskela, A. Abate, Y. Tian, E. M. J. Johansson, M. Gratzel, E. I. Kauppinen, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 461 RSC .
H. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Xiao, J. J. Shi, H. Su, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li, H. J. Wu, Y. B. Cheng and Q. B. Meng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802985 CrossRef .
H. Y. Wei, J. Y. Xiao, Y. Y. Yang, S. T. Lv, J. J. Shi, X. Xu, J. Dong, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, Carbon, 2015, 93, 861 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Chen, Z. H. Wei, H. X. He, X. L. Zheng, K. S. Wong and S. H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502087 CrossRef .
Q. Q. Chu, B. Ding, Q. Qiu, Y. Liu, C. X. Li, C. J. Li, G. J. Yang and B. Z. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8271 RSC .
K. Zhang, J. Li, Y. S. Fang, B. B. Luo, Y. L. Zhang, Y. Q. Li, J. Zhou and B. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12981 RSC .
M. Chen, R. H. Zha, Z. Y. Yuan, Q. S. Jing, Z. Y. Huang, X. K. Yang, S. M. Yang, X. H. Zhao, D. L. Xu and G. D. Zou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 791 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kure, T. Kanda, K. Suzumori and S. Wakimoto, Sens. Actuators, A, 2008, 143, 272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ziegenhain, H. M. Urbassek and A. Hartmaier, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 061807 CrossRef .
L. V. Kayser and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1806133,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201806133 .
K. Y. Yan, Z. H. Wei, J. K. Li, H. N. Chen, Y. Yi, X. L. Zheng, X. Long, Z. L. Wang, J. N. Wang, J. B. Xu and S. H. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. S. Dong, Y. T. Shi, C. Y. Zhang, Y. K. Wu and L. D. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 336 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhang, Y. T. Shi, S. Wang, Q. S. Dong, Y. L. Feng, L. D. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Y. Shao, Y. Liu and S. F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17882 RSC .
S. Wang, K. L. Hou, Y. J. Xing, Q. S. Dong, K. Wang, Y. P. Lv and Y. T. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2117 RSC .
F. N. Meng, L. G. Gao, Y. L. Yan, J. M. Cao, N. Wang, T. H. Wang and T. L. Ma, Carbon, 2019, 145, 290 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Hou, Y. Hu, H. W. Liu, A. Y. Mei, X. Li, M. Duan, G. A. Zhang, Y. G. Rong and H. W. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 73 RSC .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Z. Shi, A. Y. Cao, K. W. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. H. Xiong, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee02391gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Long-term durability is the main limitation hindering the practical applications of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). It has been seen that the utilization of carbon materials to replace metal electrodes is an effective strategy to simultaneously improve the stability and reduce the cost of PSCs. Carbon-based PSCs (C-PSCs) have outstanding stability in ambient air or under full sunlight. However, in the past few years, the improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) for C-PSCs has progressed very slowly due to the serious energy loss stemming from carbon electrodes in a chain of charge transfer dynamics. The PCEs of most C-PSCs reported so far are in the range of 10–16%. Therefore, it is highly desired to improve the performance of C-PSCs through conducting great innovation to the cell architecture.


 	Fig. 1  Overview of the fabrication process for the modular C-PSCs; the insets display the microstructure diagrams of the three carbon source materials (CB, GS and G).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Testing diagram of electromechanical contact properties for stacked symmetrical cell (by stacking two charge collectors B together, i.e., FTO/carbon film/carbon film/FTO). (b) The resistance–pressure curves of stacked symmetrical cells based on diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). (c) TRPL spectra of perovskite films based on perovskite, perovskite/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G), perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. (d) TRPL spectra of perovskite films based on perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD, perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) Optical images (left part) and PL mappings of intensity (right part) based on the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/carbon samples with diverse carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). The red part of the optical image is perovskite and the black part is carbon material. The white circles indicate the outline of carbon material. The color scale bar indicates the fluorescence intensity emitted from the sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of graphene-based semi-cell A. (b) J–V curves measured under solar simulator AM 1.5 for modular C-PSCs based on different carbon sources (CB, GS, and G). (c) IPCE spectrum and the integrated photocurrent density Jsc for the modular G-PSC. (d) The steady-state output current and calculated PCE of the modular G-PSC at maximum power point (0.884 V).	 

CB	Champion	1.04	21.11	64	14.05	7.6	2586
Average	1.03 ± 0.01	21.14 ± 0.11	63 ± 1	13.69 ± 0.28	
	



GS	Champion	0.84	21.52	55	9.94	14.8	1351
Average	0.81 ± 0.03	19.25 ± 1.92	51 ± 4	7.95 ± 1.67	
	



G	Champion	1.05	22.78	78	18.65	4.9	3293
Average	1.04 ± 0.01	22.69 ± 0.09	77 ± 1	18.25 ± 0.27	
	


 	Fig. 5  (a) Stability of the modular G-PSCs without encapsulation was evaluated by recording the PCE performance as a function of aging time; the complete devices were aged under ambient atmosphere (40–80% humidity) and elevated temperature of 85 °C. The conventional PSC with thermal evaporated Au electrode covered with glass was also examined under the same aging conditions for comparison. (b) Evolution of PCEs of modular G-PSC after various cycles of assembling and disassembling tests; inset is the schematic diagram of the repeated assembling and disassembling experiment. (c) J–V curve of modular G-PSC measured under solar simulator AM 1.5, where the graphene-based semi-cell A was combined with the charge collector B with flexible Al foil as the conductive substrate. (d) J–V characteristics measured under solar simulator AM 1.5 for modular G-PSCs with a scalable active area of 1.30 cm2. Inset shows the deduced photovoltaic parameters. Photos (e) and UV-vis transmittance spectra (f) of different carbon films of about the same thickness. (g) J–V characteristics of modular G-PSCs illuminated from the anode side and the cathode side, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee02391g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
