A highly efficient light capturing 2D (nanosheet)–1D (nanorod) combined hierarchical ZnO nanostructure for efficient quantum dot sensitized solar cell ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP44045H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP44045H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2109-2116A highly efficient light capturing 2D (nanosheet)–1D (nanorod) combined hierarchical ZnO nanostructure for efficient quantum dot sensitized solar cellsHeejin Kim and Kijung Yong*Surface Chemistry Laboratory of Electronic Materials (SCHEMA), Department of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 790-784, Korea. E-mail: kyong@postech.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-54-279-8619Received 14th November 2012, Accepted 3rd December 2012First published on 6th December 2012AbstractA novel hierarchical ZnO nanostructure array composed of nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) has been fabricated using a two-step solution reaction. The obtained nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) exhibited considerably enhanced light capturing compared with ZnO thin films and ZnO nanorods. This combined 2D (nanosheet) and 1D (nanorod) hierarchical structure has significant potential as an efficient photoanode for quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) because the nanosheets provide a large surface area for quantum dot loading and the nanorods present pathways for fast charge transfer. The CdSe/CdS co-sensitized QDSSCs using these nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) as a photoanode exhibit a highly enhanced solar-energy conversion efficiency of 4.4% under conditions of 1 sun illumination.IntroductionDuring the last several decades, the quantum dot-sensitized solar cell (QDSSC) has attracted considerable attention as a next-generation photovoltaic device. Quantum dots (QDs) have distinctive strengths as light sensitizers. The tunable optical properties of QDs, which result from quantum confinement effects, provide efficient light absorption by simply controlling the size and materials of the quantum dots. Additionally, high extinction, large intrinsic dipole moments and multiple exciton generation by impact ionization facilitate effective electron generation and collection in the device. These unique properties of QDs have considerable potential to increase the power conversion efficiencies of QDSSCs.1–5 Recent thorough studies of QDSSCs have resulted in a significant improvement of 5.4% in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) by using doped QDs.6A high, uniform loading of QDs on the photoanodes is of critical importance for efficient light harvesting in QDSSCs. To meet these requirements, various nanostructured photoanodes with large surface areas have been developed, including mesoporous films,7–9 nanowires/nanotubes,10–15 and three-dimensional nanostructures.16–18 Among these nanomaterials, QDs-modified 1-dimensional nanostructure arrays have recently been widely investigated by many groups due to their visible light-harvesting properties, which are attributed to the QDs and adequate band alignment for efficient charge-carrier transfer.19–25 Because of the unique structural properties of 1-dimensional nanostructures, they provide a direct electron pathway by avoiding particle-to-particle hopping in mesoporous films.10,26,27 Specifically, 1-dimensional ZnO nanorod (NR) arrays have superior electron mobility (205–1000 cm2 V s−1 for ZnO compared with 0.1–4 cm2 V s−1 for TiO2)28 because of their morphological characteristics, which are beneficial factors for efficient electron injection and for reducing electron recombination. However, the ZnO NRs have insufficient internal surface areas, which limit the sensitizer uptake, thereby resulting in a low power conversion efficiency. To overcome these limitations of 1-D nanostructures, 3-dimensional nanostructures based on ZnO nanorods have recently been developed to satisfy the requirements of a large surface area and fast charge transfer at the same time. In this regard, multiscale combined ZnO hierarchical nanostructures, such as the branched nanowire structure29–32 and the nanoflower structure,17,33 have been reported to provide an enhanced internal specific surface area. For example, Cheng et al.29 and Ko et al.30 fabricated a branched 1D ZnO nanostructure using the solvothermal method and used it in a dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC). In addition, a nanorod–nanoparticle hierarchical structure based on ZnO was also reported by Dong et al. to be an efficient photoelectrode in DSSCs.34 Most of these hierarchical nanostructures have primarily been used in organic dye loading for DSSC applications, and a multistep process is generally required to synthesize the structures. The application of the hierarchical nanostructures for QDs loading has rarely been studied so far although they have great potential as photoanodes for efficient QDSSCs. Additionally the design of new hierarchical nanostructures and the development of a more facile fabrication method are also very important in the points of nanomaterial's synthesis and applications.In the current study, a novel hierarchical ZnO nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorod (NR) was fabricated through a simple hydrothermal method and applied as a photoanode for a QDSSC device. These nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) combine the advantages of the 2-dimensional nanosheet and the 1-dimensional nanorod structures, which improves the specific surface area for effective loading of the QDs on the nanosheets and accelerates direct charge transfer along the nanowires. In addition, this hierarchical nanostructure can achieve efficient light capturing through incident light scattering. In this paper, the obtained CdSe/CdS co-sensitized nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) exhibited enhanced photocurrent density and photochemical conversion efficiency compared with the QDSSCs based on 1-dimensional ZnO nanowire arrays.Experimental procedureFabrication of nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs)The nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) were fabricated using a two-step solution reaction. First, the ZnO NR arrays were prepared using the hydrothermal method based on a previous report.35 A 50 nm ZnO buffer film, which was 5 mm × 5 mm in size, was patterned onto a cleaned FTO glass substrate by sputtering a ZnO target at room temperature. Then, the substrate was immersed in a 10 mM Zn(NO3)3·6H2O (98%, Aldrich) aqueous solution in which the pH was adjusted to 11 by adding ammonia (28 wt% in water, Aldrich), and then the solution was heated at 95 °C for 12 h. After the ZnO NR growth process, the substrate was removed from the solution, rinsed with deionized (DI) water, and then dried using a stream of nitrogen gas. In the second step, the ZnO NR arrays were transferred into an aqueous solution of 10 mM Zn(NO3)3·6H2O, equimolar hexamethylenediamine (C6H16N2, Aldrich) and 1 mM trisodium citrate (C6H5Na3·2H2O, Aldrich). The solution was then heated at 70 °C for various growth times.34Deposition of CdSe/CdS on the ZnO nanostructuresThe CdSe/CdS/ZnO NR arrays were prepared using a solution-based method according to a previous report.4 The prepared ZnO nanostructures were sensitized in situ with CdS and CdSe using successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) and chemical bath deposition (CBD) processes, respectively. The samples were dipped into 200 mM CdSO4 for 30 s, rinsed with deionized water for 30 s, dipped for another 30 s in 200 mM aqueous Na2S, and finally rinsed with water for 30 s. All of these processes constitute one SILAR cycle, and they were repeated for 20 cycles to obtain a suitable loading of CdS on the ZnO NRs. CdSe was deposited in situ on the CdS/ZnO NRs by CBD. The samples were immersed in an aqueous solution that contained 0.5 mmol of Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O, 0.25 mmol of Na2SeSO3, and 150 μL of an ammonium hydroxide solution in 20 mL of deionized water for 3–4 h at 95 °C. The CBD process was also repeated for 3 cycles.Fabrication of the solar cellsThe CdSe/CdS/ZnO NR photoelectrode with an active area of 0.25 mm2 was sandwiched between a 60 μm-thick hot-melt ionomer film (Surlyn) under heating. A polysulfide electrolyte was injected through predrilled holes of the counter electrode that was sputtered with Au. The polysulfide used here was composed of 0.5 M Na2S, 2 M S, and 0.2 M KCl in methanol–water (7:3 by volume).Cell characterizationScanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were recorded using a Phillips XL30S field emission SEM. An atomic-scale analysis of the crystal structure was performed using a transmission electron microscope (JEM-2200FS, JEOL at NCNT, POSTECH) that was equipped with an EELS elemental mapping detector (EF-TEM). The optical absorbance of the samples was analyzed using a UV2501PC (SHIMADZU) spectrometer with an ISR-2200 integrating sphere attachment for diffuse reflectance measurements. The photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of the QDSSCs were measured under a simulated air mass 1.5 G solar spectrum. The intensity was adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 using an NREL-certified silicon reference cell equipped with a KG-5 filter. The IPCE spectra were recorded using a PEC-S2015 instrument (Peccell Technologies, Japan). An active area of 0.25 cm2 was accurately defined using a mask placed in front of the cell. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed using a Biologic SP-200 spectrometer in the frequency range of 0.1 to 100 kHz at various voltages under dark conditions.Results and discussionDevelopment of the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) and co-sensitization with CdSe/CdSA novel ZnO hierarchical structure that consists of nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) was synthesized using a two-step solution reaction. During the initial stage, the ZnO NR arrays were grown vertically on the substrate with an ammonia-assisted growth process. The ZnO NRs were 10–15 μm long and 80–100 nm in diameter, as shown in Fig. 1(a). A secondary growth process in a citrate ion solution was used to fabricate nanosheet-shaped branches on the ZnO NRs, and the morphological changes are shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c) with variant growth time. The method used in this research is based on using charged ionic species to inhibit the growth of ZnO along the c-axis. When the ZnO nanostructure was immersed in the citrate ion solution, the side planes of the ZnO nanorod became electrochemically negative due to the isoelectric point of ZnO (8.7–9.5). Therefore, the negatively charged citrate ions preferentially adhered to the positively charged top planes that were terminated with Zn2+.36–38 Because of this capping effect, the growth of ZnO along the c-axis can be inhibited by the citrate ions from the solution, which results in nucleation/growth on the sidewall surface of the ZnO NRs. After 9 h of the secondary growth reaction, a high density of petal-like nanosheets randomly formed on the surface of the ZnO NRs, as shown in Fig. 1(b). When the growth time was extended to 15 h, the additionally grown nanosheets linked together to form a network-like structure (Fig. 1(c)). Fig. 1  Tilted top-view SEM images of the ZnO nanostructure array: (a) the ZnO nanorod array and 3-dimensional nanostructure arrays grown for (b) 9 h and (c) 15 h. For efficient light absorption in the solar cell, the light scattering or capturing capacity is an important parameter for an efficient photoelectrode. The diffuse reflectance spectra were compared for three different samples: a ZnO sputtered film, a ZnO NR array, and nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs). As shown in Fig. 2, the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) exhibited the highest diffuse reflectance among the three samples because of its efficient light scattering in the visible light region. The ZnO film exhibited the lowest diffuse reflectance, which was less than 20%. In the case of the ZnO NRs, the diffuse reflectance increased to greater than ∼60% due to light scattering through the aligned nanorod array. Further enhanced diffuse reflectance was observed from the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) sample, which effectively scatters the incident light through the hierarchical ZnO structure composed of nanosheets and nanorods. This high light capturing capacity is a desirable characteristic of an efficient photoanode in solar cells. Fig. 2  Diffuse reflectance spectra of the bare ZnO nanorod arrays (red dots), ZnO sputtered film (green dots), and 3-D ZnO nanostructure arrays grown for 9 h (black dots). The system under investigation was conducted without a sensitizer and without an electrolyte. For a better understanding of the detailed atomic structures, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was applied for the atomic-scale analysis of the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) that were prepared through 9 h of growth. Fig. 3(a) and (b) displays high-resolution SEM and the corresponding TEM images of the hierarchical nanorods; petal-like nanosheets attach on the surface of the ZnO nanorod. The EELS elemental mapping, which is presented in Fig. 3(c), confirms that the nanosheet consists of Zn and O. The high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) image and FFT (fast Fourier transform) patterns at the interface of the branched nanorod with a single nanosheet reveal that the polycrystalline ZnO nanosheet is deposited on the single-crystal ZnO nanorod (Fig. 3(d)). This result implies that the ZnO particles that formed in solution nucleate on the surface of the ZnO nanorod and grow into nanosheets during the reaction process. Because the cross section of our ZnO nanorods does not have a well-defined hexagonal structure, the growth at the sidewall proceeds in rather random directions rather than through epitaxial deposition. Fig. 3  (a) High-magnification SEM images of the 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructure and (b) the corresponding TEM image. (c) HRTEM image of the ZnO nanosheet on the ZnO nanowire and the corresponding EELS images of (c1) Zn and (c2) O elements. (d) HRTEM image and the corresponding FFT pattern collected from individual regions. The morphological evolution of the nanosheets was examined by observing the reaction time-dependent secondary growth on the ZnO nanorods with every 3 h of growth, as shown in Fig. 4. After 3 h of the secondary growth process, a slight change in the ZnO NR surface was observed; small nanoparticles nucleated on the surface of the nanorods, as shown in Fig. 4(a). As the reaction time increased, the growth of the ZnO on the nuclei proceeded via attachments of the ZnO nanoparticles from the solution, and this random directional growth forms petal-like nanosheets on the surface of the ZnO NRs (Fig. 4(b) and (c)). The obtained nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs), which are shown in Fig. 4(a)–(c), were coated with CdSe and CdS quantum dots (QDs) using a two-step solution reaction: SILAR and CBD reactions. The deposition cycle was fixed to 20 cycles for the SILAR of the CdS and 3 cycles for the CBD of the CdSe. As shown in Fig. 4(d)–(f), the surface of the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) became slightly thicker and rougher after modification with the QDs, which indicates that the CdS and CdSe NPs were uniformly deposited on the surface of the ZnO NRs. Due to the deposition of the QDs, some aggregation was observed on the surface of the hierarchical ZnO NRs. Furthermore, drastic changes in the colors of the samples could be identified with the naked eye (ZnO NRs: white, CdS/ZnO NRs: yellow, CdSe/CdS/ZnO NRs: brown) (Fig. 6 (inset)). Fig. 4  Cross-sectional SEM images of the 3-D ZnO nanostructure array grown over a period of reaction time ((a) 3 h, (b) 6 h, (c) 9 h). (d–e) CdSe/CdS deposited 3-D ZnO nanostructure array under the same conditions of 3 h, 6 h and 9 h of growth, respectively. The structures of the deposited CdS and CdSe quantum dots were investigated using TEM analyses. In Fig. 5(a)–(c), the CdS QDs that were deposited on the nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) were examined using TEM-EELS. The low-magnification TEM image and EELS mappings presented in Fig. 5(a) reveal that the CdS NPs were uniformly deposited on the surface of the ZnO nanostructures. Furthermore, the magnified TEM image presented in Fig. 5(b) confirms the uniform dispersion of CdS NPs on the thin ZnO nanosheet with the SILAR process. The deposited CdS consists of polycrystalline nanocrystals, as shown in the HRTEM image and FFT (inset) of Fig. 5(c), which shows the various crystalline phases of ZnO and CdS. After deposition of CdSe on the CdS/nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs), the atomic structure of the CdSe/CdS/ nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) was also investigated (Fig. 5(d)–(f)). The existence of CdSe NPs, in addition to the CdS NPs and ZnO, was confirmed through HRTEM and EELS analyses. These results indicate that the CdSe and CdS NPs were successfully deposited on the ZnO nanosheets through the SILAR and CBD processes. Note that the ZnO nanosheets are composed of ZnO NPs, which implies that the nanosheets are formed through the deposition of ZnO NPs from solution. Fig. 5  TEM images of (a and b) CdS and (d and e) CdSe/CdS deposited 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructures and the corresponding EELS mapping image of Zn, O, Cd, S and Se, respectively. (c and f) HRTEM images of the magnified hetero-nanostructure of the ZnO nanosheet and FFT patterns (inset). Optical properties of the CdSe/CdS co-sensitized nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs)To investigate the optical properties of the CdSe/CdS co-sensitized nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs), diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) measurements were employed, and the results from these measurements are shown in Fig. 6. Before modification with CdSe/CdS, the bare nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) on the FTO glass substrate has a light absorption edge at 380 nm in the ultraviolet region. After modification with CdS, the CdS/nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) sample exhibited a red-shifted broad absorption band with the absorption edge at 500 nm. Further deposition of the CdSe NPs shifted the absorption edge at around 750 nm, which covers the ultraviolet to visible light region. This enhanced visible light absorption is due to the low bandgap energies of the QDs (CdS: 2.4 eV, CdSe: 1.7 eV), and the co-sensitizers consequently enable light absorption in almost the entire visible spectrum region.4 The changes in the sample color observed with digital images are displayed as insets in Fig. 6. Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of the as-prepared (blue) CdSe/CdS/3-D ZnO, (red) CdS/3-D ZnO, and (black) 3-D ZnO nanostructures. The insets are digital images of the 3-D ZnO, CdS/3-D ZnO, and CdSe/CdS/3-D ZnO on an FTO substrate (from left to right), respectively. Solar to power conversion properties of CdSe/CdS nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) as photoelectrodesQuantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) were fabricated using the CdSe/CdS co-sensitized nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) as a photoanode. The cell performances were studied for various ZnO NR structures, including ZnO NRs and nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) prepared by 3–15 h of secondary growth of ZnO. Fig. 7(a) displays the current (J)–voltage (V) curves from the CdSe/CdS co-sensitized QDSSCs based on various ZnO hierarchical nanostructures, and the resulting photovoltaic parameter values are compared in Fig. 7(b)–(e). For a more accurate comparison, the length of the ZnO NR arrays was fixed at 10 μm, and the sensitizations of CdS and CdSe were also conducted under the same deposition conditions. The QDSSCs in the current study utilize a polysulfide electrolyte with an Au-sputtered counter electrode, and the J–V measurements were performed using air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5 G) full sunlight intensity. The cell dimensions were 5 mm × 5 mm with the patterned ZnO nanorod arrays, and the additional mask in the front of the cell was 6 mm × 6 mm in size. Based on the J–V results, the QDSSCs with the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) grown for 9 h exhibited the best solar electric energy conversion efficiency (η) of 4.4% with a current density (Jsc) of 14.2 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 631 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 48%, which resulted in highly enhanced cell performances compared with ZnO NRs (η = 3.5%, Voc = 643 mV, Jsc = 12.3 mA cm−2, FF = 45%). Fig. 7  (a) The J–V characteristics of different ZnO morphologies with variant secondary growth time. (b–e) Illuminated J–V characteristics comparing the CdSe/CdS/3-d ZnO nanostructure with variant growth time: (b) Voc, (c) Jsc, (d) fill factor, and (e) efficiency. Fig. 7(b) presents the variations in Voc with an increasing secondary growth time of ZnO; Voc slightly decreased up to 9 h of growth. In this system, the open-circuit voltage still retained a relatively higher value than that of other QDSSCs based on nanoparticle films (CdSe/CdS/TiO2 mesoporous film (∼13 μm): 510 mV,7 CdSe/Mn-doped CdS/TiO2 mesoporous films: 560 mV,6 CdSe/CdS/flower-like ZnO (∼1 μm): 510 mV).17 These results imply that the mesoporous films may lead to a higher recombination rate through a series of interparticle hopping steps, which is due to large surface area. On the other hand, the hierarchical 1-dimensional nanostructures can provide fast electron transfer and slower electron recombination along the direct electron pathway of nanowires. However, for the further secondary growth time, it showed a noticeable drop of Voc at 15 h of growth. The drastic decrease at 15 h of growth is thought to be due to the considerably increased interfacial surface area with the electrolyte in this nanosheet-networked structure, which provides more charge recombination sites.Fig. 7(c) revealed that the photocurrent was enhanced by increasing the secondary growth time to 9 h, which can be interpreted in two ways. The first interpretation is that the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) provide a larger specific surface area compared with that of the ZnO nanowire arrays, which results in enhanced QD loadings. Similar effects for the three-dimensional NRs have also been observed for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The second interpretation is that the randomly grown ZnO nanosheets offer efficient light harvesting due to enhanced light capturing through light-scattering effects, as described in Fig. 2. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured for the ZnO NRs and the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) grown for 9 h, and the results are shown in Fig. 8(a) as a function of the wavelength of the monochromatic irradiation. The IPCE spectra clearly indicate that the use of the CdSe/CdS co-sensitizers enabled the harvesting of visible light in the 400–700 nm region. The results reveal that the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) exhibited enhanced IPCE intensity in the entire region compared with ZnO NRs, which is consistent with the results of Jsc, as described in Fig. 7. However, the Jsc value dropped at 15 h of growth. In this highly linked networked structure, it is difficult to uniformly coat QDs in the bottom parts of the NRs, which can reduce light harvesting. Fig. 8  (a) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra as a function of the wavelength of monochromatic irradiation with (red dot) 3-dimensional and (black dot) 1-dimensional ZnO nanostructure QDSSCs. (b) Bode impedance plot of the corresponding samples. (c) The calculated electron lifetimes from the electrical impedance Bode plots with various bias under dark conditions for the different morphologies of the ZnO nanostructure versus applied voltage. The fill factor (FF) was not noticeably dependent on the secondary growth times, as shown in Fig. 7(d). Specifically, the increase of the shunt resistance with further secondary growth may contribute to the enhancement in the fill factor, whereas increased internal trap states can negatively affect the fill factor value competitively. In fact, the fill factor value was slightly decreased in the device with the ZnO grown for 15 h with a decrease of the Voc value, which is due to the increased recombination sites with significantly enhanced surface areas. By combining these parameters, the overall conversion efficiency with various growth times is shown in Fig. 7(e); the best conversion efficiency was obtained in the sample that was grown for 9 h.Although the best cell efficiency was obtained for the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) sample grown for 9 h, the enhancement of the efficiency is less than expected when considering the increased surface area and light trapping. The main reason for this is thought to be due to the increased recombination at the hierarchical nanostructure's interface with the electrolyte. This result was further confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis under the open-circuit and dark conditions with a frequency range from 0.1 to 100 kHz. Under these conditions, the electrons injected into the oxide semiconductor should be recombined at the oxide/QDs/electrolyte interface because there is no current passing through the external circuit.39–41 As depicted in the Bode plot (Fig. 8(b)), the characteristic frequency peak shifted to a lower frequency with further secondary growth of the ZnO nanostructure. This result can be related to the inverse of the electron lifetime (τ). The electron lifetime (τ) in an oxide film can be obtained from the characteristic frequency (fmid) in the middle frequency region (1–103 Hz), which is attributed to the impedance-based charge-transfer process that occurs at the ZnO/QDs/redox interface. The electron lifetime (τ) can be evaluated using the relation τ = 1/2 π fmid, where fmid is the mid-frequency peak of the Bode phase plots in the impedance spectra.42 From the calculation, the photoelectrodes with the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) that were grown for 15 h and 9 h exhibited electron lifetimes of 160 and 812 μs, respectively, whereas the ZnO NR-based QDSSCs have an electron lifetime of 1260 μs. Furthermore, we conducted EIS analysis with different biases from 0.2 to 0.7 V. The analyses were conducted under the same conditions except for the applied bias. As shown in Fig. 8(c), the same trend was observed for the various biases. From the Bode plots, the obtained electron lifetime was presented in figure. It is noticeable that the electron lifetime of the 9 h 3D ZnO sample showed comparable values with that of ZnO nanorod based QDSSC, while the 15 h 3D ZnO sample exhibited much shorter electron lifetime compared to other samples. Based on these analyses, we have concluded that the enhanced surface area of the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) has conflicting effects on the cell performances, such as enhanced light harvesting (QDs loading and light trapping) and increased recombination sites. Therefore, the nanosheet-branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) prepared under optimized conditions (9 h growth) can generate a highly enhanced photocurrent, which can overcome the degradation in Voc due to recombination at the interfaces. In future studies, these unintentional recombination effects of the hierarchical ZnO photoanodes can be further prohibited with the introduction of a passivation layer such as ZnS, TiO2 on the surface of the photoanode.ConclusionIn conclusion, we have developed new hierarchical 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructures based on ZnO NR arrays using a facile hydrothermal growth process. The 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructures consist of a core of ZnO NRs and a ZnO nanosheet grown on the NRs. This ZnO nanostructure with combined nanosheets and nanorods exhibited considerably enhanced light-trapping properties. The hierarchical ZnO nanostructure was further sensitized with CdS and CdSe, which provided light harvesting over the entire visible light region and efficient electron transfer with adequate bandgap structures. Consequently, the modified nanosheet branched (NB) ZnO nanorods (NRs) photoelectrode exhibited a considerably enhanced electric energy conversion efficiency (η) of 4.4% with a current density (Jsc) of 14.2 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 631 mV, and a fill factor (FF) of 48%, which results in considerably greater cell performances compared with QDSSCs based on ZnO NRs.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by grants from the National Research Foundation (NRF2010-0009545) and by the Korea Research Foundation Grants funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2008-005-J00501) and by Hyundai-Kia Motors and POSCO.Notes and referencesW. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 424–429 CrossRef CAS .M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef .M. Seol, H. Kim, Y. Tak and K. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5521–5523 RSC .M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, C. Shen, J. H. Pan, Z. Y. Koh, N. Mathews and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16235–16242 RSC .P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS .Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .M. Shalom, S. Dor, S. Rühle, L. Grinis and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3895–3898 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, X. Yang, J. Gao, H. Tian, J. Zhao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8458–8460 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lai, Z. Lin, D. Zheng, L. Chi, R. Du and C. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 79, 175–181 Search PubMed .P. Sudhagar, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, I. Mora-Sero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and Y. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14228–14235 RSC .S. B. Rawal, S. Do Sung, S. Y. Moon, Y. J. Shin and W. I. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2012, 82, 240–243 Search PubMed .S. A. Vanalakar, S. S. Mali, R. C. Pawar, N. L. Tarwal, A. V. Moholkar, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 044302–044307 Search PubMed .S. Xie, X. Lu, T. Zhai, J. Gan, W. Li, M. Xu, M. Yu, Y.-M. Zhang and Y. Tong, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10558–10564 Search PubMed .X.-Y. Yu, J.-Y. Liao, K.-Q. Qiu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9494–9500 CrossRef CAS .P. Sudhagar, S. Chandramohan, R. S. Kumar, R. Sathyamoorthy, C.-H. Hong and Y. S. Kang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 474–479 Search PubMed .L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116–023118 CrossRef .Y. L. Lee and Y. S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249–3252 CrossRef CAS .P. Sudhagar, T. Song, D. H. Lee, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, M. Laudenslager, W. M. Sigmund, W. I. Park, U. Paik and Y. S. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1984–1990 Search PubMed .R. Zhang, Q. P. Luo, H. Y. Chen, X. Y. Yu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 1435–1439 CrossRef CAS .S. Cheng, W. Fu, H. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Ma, H. Zhao, M. Sun and L. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 2615–2621 Search PubMed .H. Li, C. Cheng, X. Li, J. Liu, C. Guan, Y. Y. Tay and H. J. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 3802–3807 Search PubMed .W. Lee, S. K. Min, V. Dhas, S. B. Ogale and S.-H. Han, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, W. Li, H. Liu and L. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 331–334 Search PubMed .I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 RSC .H.-M. Cheng, W.-H. Chiu, C.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Tsai and W.-F. Hsieh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16359–16364 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef CAS .F. Xu, M. Dai, Y. Lu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2776–2782 CrossRef CAS .J. Qiu, M. Guo and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2358–2367 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo, D. L. Kwong and J. X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263501–263503 CrossRef .H. Dong, L. Wang, R. Gao, B. Ma and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19389–19394 RSC .Y. Tak and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19263–19269 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Kim, H. Song, S. H. Nam, S. M. Kim, H. Jeong, W. B. Kim and G. Y. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 792 CrossRef CAS .D. Andeen, J. H. Kim, F. F. Lange, G. K. L. Goh and S. Tripathy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 799–804 CrossRef CAS .A. Degen and M. Kosec, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 20, 667–673 CrossRef CAS .V. Gonzàlez-Pedro, X. Xu, I. N. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5783–5790 CrossRef CAS .N. Fuke, L. B. Hoch, A. Y. Koposov, V. W. Manner, D. J. Werder, A. Fukui, N. Koide, H. Katayama and M. Sykora, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6377 CrossRef CAS .R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, G. Liu, X. Li, P. Xiang, Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2025–2029 RSC .This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Tilted top-view SEM images of the ZnO nanostructure array: (a) the ZnO nanorod array and 3-dimensional nanostructure arrays grown for (b) 9 h and (c) 15 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diffuse reflectance spectra of the bare ZnO nanorod arrays (red dots), ZnO sputtered film (green dots), and 3-D ZnO nanostructure arrays grown for 9 h (black dots). The system under investigation was conducted without a sensitizer and without an electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) High-magnification SEM images of the 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructure and (b) the corresponding TEM image. (c) HRTEM image of the ZnO nanosheet on the ZnO nanowire and the corresponding EELS images of (c1) Zn and (c2) O elements. (d) HRTEM image and the corresponding FFT pattern collected from individual regions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cross-sectional SEM images of the 3-D ZnO nanostructure array grown over a period of reaction time ((a) 3 h, (b) 6 h, (c) 9 h). (d–e) CdSe/CdS deposited 3-D ZnO nanostructure array under the same conditions of 3 h, 6 h and 9 h of growth, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of (a and b) CdS and (d and e) CdSe/CdS deposited 3-dimensional ZnO nanostructures and the corresponding EELS mapping image of Zn, O, Cd, S and Se, respectively. (c and f) HRTEM images of the magnified hetero-nanostructure of the ZnO nanosheet and FFT patterns (inset).	 

 	Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of the as-prepared (blue) CdSe/CdS/3-D ZnO, (red) CdS/3-D ZnO, and (black) 3-D ZnO nanostructures. The insets are digital images of the 3-D ZnO, CdS/3-D ZnO, and CdSe/CdS/3-D ZnO on an FTO substrate (from left to right), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The J–V characteristics of different ZnO morphologies with variant secondary growth time. (b–e) Illuminated J–V characteristics comparing the CdSe/CdS/3-d ZnO nanostructure with variant growth time: (b) Voc, (c) Jsc, (d) fill factor, and (e) efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra as a function of the wavelength of monochromatic irradiation with (red dot) 3-dimensional and (black dot) 1-dimensional ZnO nanostructure QDSSCs. (b) Bode impedance plot of the corresponding samples. (c) The calculated electron lifetimes from the electrical impedance Bode plots with various bias under dark conditions for the different morphologies of the ZnO nanostructure versus applied voltage.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
