Solution combustion synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR05299H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR05299H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17590-17610Solution combustion synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Fa-tang 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jingrun 
            Ran†
b, 
      
        
          
            Mietek 
            Jaroniec
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Shi Zhang 
            Qiao
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Science, Hebei University of Science and Technology, Shijiazhuang 050018, China
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@adelaide.edu.au
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44240, USA
Received 
      6th August 2015
    , Accepted 24th September 2015First published on 24th September 2015AbstractThe design and synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials is one of the key steps for achieving highly efficient energy conversion and storage on an industrial scale. Solution combustion synthesis (SCS) is a time- and energy-saving method as compared with other routes, especially for the preparation of complex oxides which can be easily adapted for scale-up applications. This review summarizes the synthesis of various metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications for energy conversion and storage, including lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, hydrogen and methane production, fuel cells and solar cells. In particular, some novel concepts such as reverse support combustion, self-combustion of ionic liquids, and creation of oxygen vacancies are presented. SCS has some unique advantages such as its capability for in situ doping of oxides and construction of heterojunctions. The well-developed porosity and large specific surface area caused by gas evolution during the combustion process endow the resulting materials with exceptional properties. The relationship between the structural properties of the metal oxides studied and their performance is discussed. Finally, the conclusions and perspectives are briefly presented.
1. Introduction
With the continuously increasing consumption of fossil fuels, the conversion of solar energy to other consumable forms of energy and energy storage have become important issues of current and future research. To meet the world's fast-growing energy demand, the development of inexpensive materials for energy conversion and storage is a very important task for large-scale industrial applications. Generally, most of these compounds are metal oxide nanomaterials; their small size, surface area and quantum effects result in their unique properties. There are many strategies for the synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials: for example, sol–gel, chemical co-precipitation, chemical vapor deposition, mechanical alloying, solvothermal synthesis, microwave heating, and reverse micelle synthesis.1–3 However, many of these methods require long reaction time, high external temperature, or special instrumentation. Meanwhile, with continuously increasing deterioration of the environment caused by emissions of various pollutants and the inevitable depletion of fossil energy, green and economic production of materials for reducing pollution and for saving energy has become an increasingly important issue.
In 1967, Merzhano et al. presented the concept of self-spreading high-temperature synthesis4 (SHS, also known as combustion synthesis) based on their extensive studies of combustion of condensed substances. This method takes advantage of the exothermicity of the self-sustaining chemical reaction itself to drive the reaction.5 However, for this type of reaction involving solid reagents under combustion conditions,6 the major drawbacks are difficulty in controlling the SHS process and large size of the particles. As a result, this method is not suitable for the preparation of complex oxides.7 Subsequently, Patil et al. further developed this method, known as solution combustion synthesis (SCS), by combining it with wet chemistry.8
Solution combustion synthesis employs metal salts, including nitrates, sulfates and carbonates, as oxidants, and fuels as reducing reagents, such as urea, glycine, sucrose, and starch, based on the exothermicity of the redox reaction. The released heat of the combustion reaction fulfils the energy requirement for the formation of oxides, resulting, in some cases, in temperatures that exceed 3000 °C.9 The most obvious advantage of SCS is its time- and energy-efficiency. Once the mixture of reagents is ignited, the high self-generated energy can convert precursors into the corresponding oxides without the requirement of an additional external energy input. Hence, the products are formed in several minutes. Fig. 1 shows a series of pictures illustrating the formation process.10
 Fig. 1  Series of pictures illustrating the different preparation stages: (a) sol solution; (b) viscous gel; (c) dried gel; (d) as-burned product; (e) calcined product (if post-treatment is needed). Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
In contrast, the other synthesis based on metal hydroxides and/or alkoxides conversion is endothermic, demanding a continuous external energy input.11 Moreover, porous materials have been extensively used for energy storage, catalysis, sensing, adsorption and separation12 because of their large surface areas available for reactions, interfacial transport, and/or dispersion of active sites.13 Unlike hydrothermal,14 electrodeposition,15 chemical vapour deposition (CVD),16 and atomic layer deposition (ALD)17 methods that employ soft or hard templates and require special advanced instruments, SCS can easily afford porous materials due to their inherent characteristics.
Besides the two most obvious advantages of time/energy-efficiency and well-developed porosity, there are other advantages of SCS: (i) the simplicity and low cost of the instrumentation,18 and the easiness of scaling-up the SCS; (ii) the possibility of obtaining products with diverse functionality and structures, such as metallics, intermetallics, metal–matrix composites, cermets, solid solutions, carbides, nitrides, borides, ceramics, and oxides;19 (iii) the possibility of synthesizing ternary or quaternary oxides with high purity, which will be very difficult to achieve otherwise because of the complex structures and low rate of solid state reactions; (iv) the possibility of achieving a novel performance because some metastable phases can be formed in a short time;20 and (v) in the case of heterogeneous photocatalysts, materials with a high active surface area can be prepared via SCS, which is beneficial for the transfer and separation of charge carriers.21 A homogeneous mixed solution and high reaction temperature ensure the formation of complex oxides. Furthermore, environmentally benign raw materials can be used in this method (unlike, for example, in chemical vapor deposition or molecular beam epitaxy).
This review presents the recent advancements in the SCS processing of various metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage devices, including lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, hydrogen and methane production, fuel cells and solar cells. Also, a newly developed SCS method, involving self-combustion of ionic liquids, is briefly discussed. Special emphasis is placed on the relationship between the structure of metal oxide nanomaterials and their performance and on the formation of surface oxygen vacancies in these materials.
2. Fundamentals of solution combustion synthesis
The reaction temperature is a crucial parameter in the synthesis of materials. The combustion temperature can be approximately estimated by using the following equation:22 Tc = T0 + (ΔH0r − ΔH0p)/Cp(1)where T0 denotes the room temperature, ΔH0r and ΔH0p are the enthalpies of formation of the reactants and products, respectively, and Cp is the heat capacity of the products at a constant pressure. Nevertheless, the authentic temperature of a combustion reaction is generally much lower than the calculated theoretical Tc as a result of various factors including the heat evolution of a large amount of gas, incomplete combustion of fuels, and loss of heat by radiation.23–25 It should be noted that high temperature can result in the shrinkage of pores, which results in smaller pore volumes and lower specific surface areas of the products.
Among various metal salts, hydrated nitrates are preferred as metal precursors, because of not only the efficient oxidizing power of NO3− groups, but also their lower decomposition temperature and good solubility in water.10 Furthermore, urea (CO(NH2)2) and glycine (NH2CH2COOH) are the most common fuels used due to their low cost, good availability, high exothermicity, as well as their high coordination ability toward nitrates. For the purpose of illustration, Fig. 2 shows the coordination structure for the Fe(NO3)3/Al(NO3)3–urea system. It is suggested that urea molecules are situated in the second coordination sphere near the carbon atom, while nitrate radical anions are in the outer coordination sphere. This structure facilitates the stabilization of reactive nitrates under an ambient atmosphere.10 Varma et al.26 found that the activity of –NH2 is higher than that of the –OH group, which in turn is more active than –COOH based on the studies of iron nitrate with three model fuels. Urea containing two amino groups located at both ends of its chemical structure,27 and glycine with an amino group located at one end of the chain and a carboxylic acid group at the other end,25 are attractive fuels. The presence of the COOH group in glycine, easily complexing metal ions, explains why it is a more reactive fuel than citric acid (HOC(CH2)2(COOH)3), which possesses only –OH and –COOH.28
 Fig. 2  Proposed coordination structure of the Fe (Al)–urea–nitrate complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from the fuel types, the fuel amount is also one of the key parameters influencing the morphology, particle size, and specific surface area of the product. The fuel/oxidizer ratio, φ, is defined by the following equation proposed by Jain et al.29 Herein, the reaction between urea (CO(NH2)2) and M(NO3)ν is taken as an example to illustrate calculations and N2 is considered as the product of the N element in the reaction. (2)where n is the number of moles of urea and ν is the oxidation state of the metal element M. Accordingly, the stoichiometric equilibrium combustion reaction can be expressed by the following equation:30 (3)
The mixture is stoichiometric when φ = 1, fuel lean when φ > 1 and fuel rich when φ < 1. Eqn (3) shows that the addition of fuel (higher φ) into the system requires more oxygen. When under an ambient atmosphere, the oxygen supply is insufficient for combustion, so the reaction is incomplete, which results in the generation of carbonaceous products. On the other hand, when the amount of fuel is small, the combustion temperature is low. Hence, the fuel amount is an important factor, which can be adjusted for controlling the degree of crystallinity and physical properties of the resulting materials.
Also, eqn (3) shows that a large amount of gaseous products can be generated by the SCS process. For instance, the reaction of Zn(NO3)2 and urea at φ = 1 releases nearly 7.7 moles of gas per mole of ZnO.11 The released gas will produce a large number of pores in the oxide and inhibit their agglomeration, leading to a large specific surface area of the resulting material. On the other hand, the gas amount is also related to the φ value, as shown in eqn (2). In general, a higher φ value means a larger amount of gaseous products and a high combustion temperature. A large volume of the released gases leads to larger porosity and a higher surface area, while higher combustion temperature enhances crystallinity and may reduce the surface area. Thus, the surface area represents a balance of two competing factors: the amount of gaseous products and the combustion temperature. It should also be mentioned that a very high φ value (excess amount of fuel) results in lower combustion temperature and smaller crystallinity of the products because of the incomplete combustion caused by the insufficient amount of oxygen in the atmosphere.31
3. Synthesis of binary metal oxide nanomaterials
3.1 Pristine metal oxide nanomaterials
Simple binary metal oxides including TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, etc. are the frequently used energy materials due to their low cost, earth-abundant availability, and high-efficiency. There is great interest in developing a large-scale, inexpensive and facile SCS of these oxides instead of developing other high-cost methods.
In 1993, Patil's group reported for the first time the combustion synthesis of anatase TiO2 and ZrO2via the exothermic decomposition of the coordination precursors of MO(N2H3COO)2·2H2O (M = Ti, Zr).32 The MO(N2H3COO)2·2H2O (hydrazine carboxylates) were formed by reacting aqueous solutions of titanium and zirconium oxychlorides (MOCl2) with a solution of N2H3COOH in N2H4·H2O (N2H5COON2H3). Since MOCl2 aqueous solutions are not commonly used reagents, titanyl nitrate obtained by hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide has often been employed as the precursor for the synthesis of TiO2.33–35
Fe2O3 is a typical semiconductor with a narrow band gap (ca. 2.0–2.2 eV), which responds to visible light and can be used as an effective photocatalyst. Patil et al. also reported for the first time the combustion synthesis of γ-Fe2O3 using malonic acid dihydrazide (C3H8N4O2) as a fuel.36 Another important member of the iron oxide family, Fe3O4, is formed in the absence of air to avoid the oxidation of Fe2+ in Fe3O4 to Fe3+. Mukasyan's group37 and Deshpande et al.38 reported the preparation of Fe3O4 powders with a specific surface area of 50 m2 g−1 under an argon (oxygen-free) atmosphere. On the other hand, Toniolo et al.27 reported the combustion product of iron nitrate–urea, which is a mixture of α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4. Ianos et al.39 verified the influence of air on the formation of iron oxides. They conducted a series of experiments in the absence and presence of air using the same fuels, respectively. The resulting products synthesized in air were mixtures of α- and γ-Fe2O3, whereas single Fe3O4 was obtained in the absence of air. Furthermore, the phase composition of the product was shown to be less affected by the fuel used, such as sucrose, citric acid, or glucose. On the contrary, Varma's group28 found that the resulting products were affected not only by the atmosphere, but also by the fuel used.
The search for economically feasible routes for the synthesis of metal oxides is of great importance for their potential industrial applications. Al2O3, an “earth abundant” and inexpensive material, has been widely used as a catalyst and catalyst's support.40–42 Recently, our group has found that the partially amorphous Al2O3 obtained by the combustion method showed photocatalytic activity under ultraviolet (UV) light43 owing to its shorter Al–O bond length,44 which makes it a potential energy material. The ratio of amorphous and crystalline phases in this material can be controlled by adjusting the fuel amount. Zhuravlev et al.25 studied the influence of various fuels on the morphology of Al2O3. They found that the agglomerates of Al2O3 particles obtained in the presence of glycine have a friable structure; while Al2O3 aggregates obtained in the presence of urea are denser, larger and more durable without a visible cellular structure.
Other energy materials including WO3,45,46 ZnO,47,48 Co3O4,49–51 SnO2,52 and ZrO253 have also been prepared via SCS, showing extensive applicability of this route for the preparation of binary metal oxides.
On the other hand, it is well known that the morphology plays an important role in the performance of materials. There are several reports on the preparation of nanomaterials with special morphology via SCS. For instance, Kanatzidis et al.11 fabricated diverse electronic metal oxide films (In2O3, and Zn–Sn–O, In–Zn–O, In–Sn–O solid solutions) by integrating combustion processing with solution deposition of oxide-based macroelectronics (see Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical image of a flexible combustion-processed In2O3 device on Ar (30 nm Al gate electrode/41 nm α-alumina dielectric, with 30 nm Al source and drain electrodes) and optical image of an inkjet printed In2O3 line on n++Si/41 nm α-alumina (inset). (b) The structure of a top-contact bottom-gate thin-film transistor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
Nanorod-type structures have received considerable attention. Nagabhushana and Chandrappa54 reported the combustion synthesis of monoclinic VO2 nanorods using solutions of ammonium metavanadate (NH4VO3) and DL-malic acid (C4H6O5) as illustrated in Fig. 4. Kale et al.55 employed glycine and ammonium nitrate as fuels to prepare nanosized necked-type structures of α-Fe2O3 and γ-Fe2O3.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the evolution of a VO2 nanorod-like array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Defective metal oxide nanomaterials

3.2.1 Doping with nonmetal ions from fuels. 
Since traditional metal oxides with large band gaps, e.g., TiO2 and ZnO, are inactive under visible-light irradiation,56–58 a proper modification or doping with non-metals or metal ions, co-doping and noble metal deposition to produce defects have been explored to induce their visible-light activity.58,59
Ever since the pioneering work by Asahi et al.60 showing that nitrogen-doped TiO2 films and powders exhibit a prolonged light absorbance up to 500 nm and are effective in the degradation of methylene blue and gaseous acetaldehyde, doping of metal oxides with various nonmetal ions has been used to enhance their visible-light absorption and quantum yield. Various methods have been explored to dope TiO2 with nonmetal ions (such as C, N, F, B, S, etc.). It was shown that the absorption spectra of TiO2 doped with non-metal species are red-shifted to longer wavelengths, and exhibit higher photocatalytic activities as compared to pristine TiO2, especially in the visible-light region.61–66
Although Asahi et al.60 suggested that the visible light activity of N-doped TiO2 is achieved due to the band-gap narrowing driven by mixing of N 2p states with O 2p states, Lee and coworkers67 concluded on the basis of the first-principles density-functional calculations that the absorption of visible light by N- or C-doped TiO2 is due to the isolated N(C) 2p states above the valence-band maximum of TiO2 rather than due to a band-gap narrowing. Based on the XPS spectra, Chen and co-workers68 reported additional electronic states for C- and N-doped TiO2 nanomaterials, which can explain the red-shifted absorption edge of these photocatalysts and their lowered oxidation potential. However, Varley et al.69 reported that the N atom on the substitutional O sites (NO) is the source of visible-light absorption through the photo-excitation of a localized electron from NO to the extended conduction-band state. They pointed out that the substitutional NO is a deep acceptor that gives rise to the sub-bandgap impurity-to-band transitions in the visible light range and the sub-bandgap absorption is unambiguously attributed to the substitutional N and not to the interstitial N. Although the explanations of the role of N or C doped in TiO2 are different, it is obvious that N/C element doping with an appropriate amount has a positive effect on the photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2.59,70
In the SCS process, N or C doping is obvious because the adopted fuels usually contain these two elements and the combustion temperature is very high, which facilitates the doping of the aforementioned elements into the lattice of crystals. For example, Xiao et al.71 prepared carbon-doped TiO2 nanocrystals using ethylene glycol (C2H6O2) and citric acid (C6H8O7) as fuels. The results showed that the band gap energies (Eg) of the C-doped TiO2 samples are about 2.90 eV, which should be attributed to two factors: (1) the Ti–O–C structure in C-doped titania can be responsible for the visible-light photocatalytic activity;72 (2) the presence of Ti3+ species produced in the process of carbon doping of TiO2 leads to the formation of the oxygen vacancy state between the valence band (VB) and the conduction band (CB) in the TiO2 band structure.73 Several groups73,74 have proved that the combustion synthesis of TiO2 narrowed its band gap as compared to that of commercial TiO2, which can be attributed to the N or N,C-co-doping. Mani et al.75 verified that among glycine, hexamine, and triethyl amine, the former was the most effective fuel for improving the absorbance of co-doped TiO2 in the visible light range.
Sivaranjani and Gopinath76 explained the doping process with urea as a fuel. During the combustion process, urea decomposes to generate in situ NH3, which acts as a nitrogen source and assures a reduction atmosphere. Embryonic titanium-oxo nanoclusters (TixOy, x/y > 1) grow under an ammonia atmosphere to bigger clusters/particles with many defects. As a highly electron donating compound, ammonia easily interacts with the defect-rich clusters, which results in the incorporation of the N element into the TiO2 lattice to produce TiO2−xNx materials. According to the above mentioned study,76 the urea-assisted doping procedure does not retain any organic impurities in the resulting TiO2−xNx due to the complete conversion of urea to ammonia and CO2. Moreover, the resulting materials are mesoporous structures with a high surface area (234 m2 g−1). The same concept has also been adopted for making ZnO1−xNx.77–79
In addition to the possibility of selecting different fuels, another effective way for controlled doping is the usage of properly selected precursors. For example, Chen et al.80 introduced a novel approach to the synthesis of N- and F-co-doped mesoporous TiO2 photocatalysts using TiF4 as a precursor, which is the source of Ti and F, and urea as a fuel and the source of N dopants.
Doping can also lead to the discovery of new energy materials. For instance, using glycine and zirconium nitrate (Zr(NO3)4·5H2O), Polisetti et al.81 synthesized C-doped tetragonal ZrO2, which was found to be photocatalytically active with a band gap of nearly 3.5 eV. This result may provide some suggestions for the development of more effective photocatalysts by proper selection of dopants and doping conditions.


3.2.2 Formation of surface oxygen vacancies. 
In order to engineer efficient photocatalysts, the creation of suitable surface defects is an effective route. For instance, it was reported that oxygen vacancies can act as electron capture centres, and hence improve the separation efficiency of charge carriers.82–87 Oxygen vacancies can also cause the presence of a vacancy-induced band of electronic states just below the conduction band, thus narrowing the band gap of a photocatalyst.85 In the SCS process, there is a balance between oxygen in the surrounding atmosphere and that in the crystal lattice. If the oxygen pressure in the atmosphere is low enough, oxygen from the lattice would be liberated, leaving vacancies at the original lattice sites.88,89
A successful creation of surface oxygen vacancies is also dependent on the fuels used. If the combustion reaction releases oxygen, it is hard to acquire oxygen vacancies. Recently, our group89 fabricated BiOBr/Bi24O31Br10 nanocomposites with surface oxygen vacancies using 2-bromoethylamine hydrobromide (C2H6BrN·HBr) as a fuel. The proposed reaction leading to the formation of BiOBr can be presented as follows: (4)
The ample amount of created surface oxygen vacancies contribute to the extraordinary adsorption properties of the resulting composite, which is reflected by the high adsorption capacities of both the cationic dye, rhodamine B (RhB), and the anionic dye, methylene orange (MO). The adsorption mechanism is shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of adsorption models of (a) MO and (b) RhB on the BiOBr surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The influence of the fuel type and the external atmosphere on the amount of oxygen vacancies has also been verified in the case of Bi2Zr2O7 and WO3.46,90 It was shown that more oxygen vacancies can lead to a narrower band gap of a given photocatalyst and higher photocatalytic activity based on the dual functions of oxygen vacancies resulting in absorbing more light and capturing photogenerated electrons.90
For TiO2, the existence of oxygen vacancies is also recognized as the generation of Ti3+, which can extend the photoresponse of TiO2 from the UV to the visible light region.91 Zuo et al.92 demonstrated that only flammable/combustible imidazoles can generate reducing gases to convert Ti4+ into Ti3+. Meanwhile, they found that some anions, such as Cl−, can prohibit the formation of Ti3+.
A brief survey of the literature indicates that the creation of surface oxygen defects via the SCS process is an effective way of tuning the properties of catalysts, and may attract more and more attention in the near future.

3.3 Doping with foreign ions
As indicated above the SCS process can sometimes result in the doping of non-metal elements such as N and/or C. To further adjust the optical structures and improve the performance of semiconductors, various metal ions can be doped into photocatalysts. Ni et al.93 reported the metal ion doping of TiO2 nanoparticles via SCS by employing a mixture of ethanol and ethylene glycol as solvents, and tetra-n-butyl titanate [Ti(OC4H9)4] as the source of titanium in the presence of small amounts of metal ions such as Cu2+, Mn2+, Ce3+ and Sn4+. The UV-vis DRS shows that the absorption edges of all doped-TiO2 samples are red shifted toward the visible light region with longer wavelength as compared to those of undoped-TiO2. They also found that the introduction of a small amount of Sn into TiO2 increased the amount of oxygen vacancies and/or defects in the TiO2 crystal, while in the case of doping with other metal ions an opposite effect was observed.
In Ramaswamy's work,94 a homogeneous solid solution of Mnx[Ce0.85Ti0.15]1−xO2−δ (x = 0–0.2) was reported, which is thermally stable up to a temperature of 1050 °C, while the samples of a similar composition prepared by co-precipitation or wet-impregnation methods suffer sintering at this temperature and show structural inhomogeneity. Co-doping of TiO2 with other cerium and vanadium ions resulted in Ti0.9Ce0.05V0.05O with oxygen vacancies, as reported by Huang et al.95
To obtain macroporous materials, Song and coworkers96 developed a novel electrospinning technique followed by a self-sustaining combustion procedure. The precursor of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 consisted of interconnected nanofibers as shown in Fig. 6a. Each nanofiber is mesoporous and the inter-connections of nanofibers form macropores. After being heated at 300 °C for 1 h, the macroporous structure is preserved, while the fiber diameters decrease obviously (Fig. 6b) owing to the decomposition of the organic matter and the formation of a solid solution of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of the precursor of composite nanofibers of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 (inset: SEM image at higher magnification). (b) SEM image of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 nanofibers after 300 °C treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In many cases, doping can change the morphology of materials. Ekambaram et al.97 prepared co-doped ZnO and found that the un-doped ZnO particles are connected to each other in the form of a large network structure with irregular pore sizes and shapes. However, a flake-type structure was obtained for cobalt-doped ZnO. The formation of pores is due to the liberation of a large amount of gaseous products during the combustion process. Ahmad et al.98 investigated the surface morphology of pristine ZnO and Al-doped ZnO (AZO) nanopowders. The un-doped ZnO nanoparticles were spherical and bigger, while those of AZO were smaller and ellipsoidal.
In recent decades, metal/non-metal co-doped photocatalysts have been extensively studied to improve their photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation.59 Gopinath et al.78,79 reported (Zn1−zGaz)(O1−xNx) and (Zn1−zInz)(O1−xNx) solid solutions formed during SCS via Ga/In and N co-doping of ZnO with metal nitrates as the source of metal ions and urea as a fuel and the source of nitrogen. The resulting band gaps decreased to 2.5 and 2.3 eV for (Zn1−zGaz)(O1−xNx) and (Zn1−zInz)(O1−xNx), respectively, because the N 2p states of nitride are above O 2p VB. Chen et al.99 reported a mesoporous N, W co-doped TiO2 photocatalyst by utilizing urea and sodium tungstate. The co-doping significantly narrowed its band gap to ca. 2.7 eV that is responsible for high visible light absorption. Furthermore, N, Cu co-doped ZnO, and N, B co-doped TiO2 were also successfully synthesized.100,101
4. Synthesis of ternary and quaternary metal oxide nanomaterials
4.1 Perovskite type oxides (ABO3)
Perovskite-type oxides (ABO3) have attracted much attention due to their extensive applications in catalysis, photovoltaic cells, solid oxide fuel cells as energy materials and in ferroelectric random access memory, magnetic data storage, electromechanical transducers, etc.102 Traditional synthesis of these nanomaterials often results in undesired composition. Also, crystallization requires temperatures above 800 °C due to the difficult solid reaction between oxides. In 1993, Manoharan and Patil103 reported the combustion synthesis of LnCrO3 (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Dy, Gd and Y) and LaMO3 (M = Mn, Co, and Ni) using metal nitrates–tetraformal trisazine (TFTA) mixtures. TFTA was prepared by reacting formaldehyde and hydrazine hydrate at 0 °C under constant stirring. These oxides are of sub-micrometer size with the specific surface area ranging from 3 to 20 m2 g−1. This work initiated the usage of SCS for the synthesis of complex compounds.
Yttrium orthoferrite (YFeO3) is a promising material for visible light photocatalytic applications due to its band gap of 2.2–2.6 eV.104 Wu et al.105 reported its preparation using glycine as a fuel. Chen et al.106 obtained YFeO3 and Y3Fe5O12 by controlling thermal transformation with different Y/Fe initial ratios. In particular, it should be mentioned that YFeO3 appears in two common phases, hexagonal and orthorhombic. Yu et al.107 reported that the phase structure of YFeO3 can be selectively controlled to be hexagonal or orthorhombic by simply adjusting the ratio of glycine to nitrate (G/N). According to their experiments, when the G/N ratio is 0.85, YFeO3 exists as an amorphous phase. As the ratio increases to 1.0 and 1.3, the phase structure is hexagonal; with the ratio of 1.5 or 1.7, the obtained YFeO3 exhibits a high temperature phase, orthorhombic, with a low surface area of 6–4 m2 g−1. Meanwhile, an increase of the glycine amount resulted in the enlargement of the particles.
Recently, LaFeO3 has attracted much interest due to its high efficiency in solid oxide fuel cells and photocatalysis.108,109 The Parida110 and Gallego111 groups reported a sol–gel combustion synthesis of this material, which required further post-treatment at high temperature for more than 2 hours. To improve the preparation efficiency, our group112 proposed a novel solution combustion method, the so-called self-combustion of ionic liquids. We found that some ammonium salts can coordinate with metal nitrates to form ionic liquids (ILs); meanwhile, these salts can also act as fuels in the combustion process. The ILs are mixed homogeneously at the molecular level, which is essential for the formation of nanopowders. Moreover, unlike traditional SCS, no additional water is needed to form the precursor solutions, avoiding destabilization of the system in the process of heating caused by continuous evaporation of water. In our work, ILs were prepared from Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, La(NO3)3·6H2O, and trimethylamine hydrochloride ((C2H5)3N·HCl). The last reagent acts not only as the source of cations in IL, but also as a fuel. The resulting LaFeO3 materials exhibited porous structures with quite high surface areas between 37 and 84 m2 g−1. For the purpose of comparison, the surface areas of the LaFeO3 samples prepared using glycine varied from 6.5 to 28 m2 g−1; the highest surface area was achieved at the glycine-to-nitrate ratio of 2.113 Wei et al.114 also reported the synthesis of LaFeO3 and LaFe0.5Mn0.5−xO3 by the stearic acid solution combustion method; the latter possessed a surface area of 38 m2 g−1.
Other perovskite-type oxides, including SrTiO3,115 BiFeO3,116 LaNiO3,117 doped BiFeO3,118 and layered perovskite-type La4Ni3O10119 and γ(L)-Bi2MoO6120 have also been successfully prepared via SCS, showing the suitability of SCS for the preparation of ABO3 type compounds.
4.2 Spinel type oxide (AB2O4)
Spinel-type oxides (AB2O4) are more complex than ABO3 and their synthesis requires higher temperatures. As a pioneer in SCS, Patil's group8 reported the preparation of alumina-based materials, including spinel-type MgA12O4, CaAl2O4, YAl2O4, and ZrO2/AlO2, Al2O3, LaAlO3, and ruby powder (Cr3+/Al2O3) by combustion of the corresponding metal nitrate–urea mixtures. The synthesis of MgA12O4 revealed that Mg(NO3)2·6H2O and Al(NO3)3·9H2O exhibit different behavior with respect to urea, glycine and β-alanine.121 It was shown that urea is the most appropriate fuel for the decomposition of Al(NO3)3·9H2O, while β-alanine is suitable for Mg(NO3)2·6H2O. As a result, the use of mixed fuels (urea and β-alanine, urea and glycine) afforded the desired materials without subsequent annealing steps. On the contrary, a single fuel (urea, glycine or β-alanine) led to the formation of an amorphous powder.
MgAl2O4 has been extensively used as a catalyst support,122–124 a humidity sensor,125 and a nuclear material126 because of its high melting point, low thermal conductivity, high mechanical strength, good chemical inertness, and excellent radiation resistance.121 However, there was no reference reporting its application in photocatalysis before our group reported it.44 We showed that the photocatalytically active mixed amorphous and crystalline MgAl2O4 nanopowders can be prepared via SCS using urea and glycine as a mixed fuel. The UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of various MgAl2O4 powders are shown in Fig. 7. The observed photo-absorption can be attributed to the amorphous MgAl2O4, which features a shorter Al–O bond length than that in crystalline MgAl2O4.127
 Fig. 7  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of MgAl2O4 powders. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier. 
The Fe-based materials possess magnetic properties, which are beneficial for their recycling and reuse. Patil et al.128 reported the synthesis of MFe2O4 (M = Mg, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Y, La, Nd, Sm, Gd, Dy, Ni0.5Zn0.5) using oxalyldihydrazide (ODH, C2H6N4O2) or TFTA as fuels. The combustion reaction can be controlled by adjusting the heating rate and stoichiometry. A heating rate of less than 75 °C min−1 would not cause the occurrence of combustion, and fuel-rich combustion mixtures would lead to the presence of carbon impurities. Other spinel oxides such as doped ZnFe2O4,129–131 CuCr2O4,132 and (Co,Fe)Cr2O4133 have been reported too.
To control the morphology, Bao et al.134 proposed a post-synthesis treatment method. Firstly, CaIn2O4 particles were obtained by SCS using calcium nitrate and indium nitrate as oxidizers and glycine as a fuel. Afterwards, CaIn2O4 was annealed at high temperature. During the calcination process, nanosized grains of the as-combusted CaIn2O4 self-assembled into nanocapsules, which were further agglomerated into regular CaIn2O4 rods having the diameter of ∼300 nm and the length of about 2 μm.
In the conventional synthesis of ABO3 or AB2O4 type compounds, intermediate products such as various oxides are always generated. SCS does not have this drawback because of the homogeneous solution of the precursors used and the high reaction temperature.
4.3 Scheelite type oxides (ABO4)
Bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) has attracted considerable interest because of its suitable band gap and excellent photocatalytic performance under visible-light irradiation.135,136 There are three phases for BiVO4: monoclinic scheelite, tetragonal scheelite and tetragonal zircon.137 Among these, monoclinic scheelite-structured BiVO4 with a band gap of 2.4 eV exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation over the other forms. Urea138 and citric acid139,140 have been used as fuels to synthesize monoclinic BiVO4 with the specific surface area of around 3.0 m2 g−1. Using DL-malic acid, Chandrappa et al.137 obtained BiVO4 powders possessing a large surface area of ca. 13 m2 g−1.
Jiang et al.141 prepared spherical-shaped BiVO4 photocatalysts via SCS using citric acid and urea as co-fuels followed by annealing at around 500 °C for different times. The morphologies of the resulting samples obtained via SCS and solid-state reaction (SSR) are shown in Fig. 8. As can be seen, the product obtained using SCS shows a uniform spherical morphology, which is not the case for the material prepared by SSR. Martinez-de la Cruz et al.142 obtained BiVO4 nanospheres in the presence of sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC). The spherical morphology induced by the presence of CMC is very different from that obtained by co-precipitation and solid-state reaction methods. The specific surface areas of various samples are as follows: BiVO4-solid state reaction, 0.3 m2 g−1; BiVO4-co-precipitation, 1.5 m2 g−1; BiVO4-CMC200, 4.0 m2 g−1, and BiVO4-CMC300, 3.0 m2 g−1. The proposed formation route of BiVO4 nanospheres via the CMC-assisted SCS method is shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 8  FE-SEM micrographs of the BiVO4 crystallites obtained via (a) SCS and (b) SSR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the CMC-assisted formation of BiVO4 nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier. 
Thin film structures are advantageous for many applications as compared to the powder morphology. BiVO4 thin films have also been prepared through the solution combustion synthesis coupled with the dip-coating process.143,144Fig. 10 shows the SEM images of BiVO4 thin films. He et al.145 immobilized BiVO4 onto bentonite to obtain the BiVO4/bentonite composite by SCS, which featured a larger surface area and better performance than the initial BiVO4, and could be easily recovered. Also, a series of other scheelite type oxides with the ABO4 structure, FePO4,146 ZnWO4,147 and CeVO4148 have also been obtained via SCS using glycine or oxalyldihydrazide as fuels.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of the surface and cross-section of a BiVO4 film deposited on a soda-lime glass substrate with ten layers and thermally annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2014, Springer. 
4.4 Other complex oxides
The preparation of more complex ternary or quaternary oxides, such as Bi2WO6,149 Bi2Ce2O7,150 Bi4Ti3O12,151 K0.80Ti1.733Li0.267O4,152 Li4SiO4,153 and Bi4TaO8Cl,154 has been reported, which possess small particle sizes, relatively large specific surface areas, good crystallinity and often superior performance. Generally, higher formation temperature and longer reaction time are required to prepare oxides with a more complex structure; thus, the advantages of SCS are more obvious in the synthesis of these compounds.
Besides common fuels, some rare fuels, such as acenaphthene155 and diformyl hydrazine,156 were also used to prepare the Li-containing compounds. Ananth et al.155 mentioned that acenaphthene fuel was better than sucrose in reducing the particle size of LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 to a smaller value than that of the compound prepared by simple solid state methods.
Akiyama et al.157 reported the influence of the fuel ratio on the surface area and morphology of Ce0.6Mn0.3Fe0.1O2 (CMF) as an anode material for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC). The samples were designated as CMF1, CMF2, and CMF3 at φ = 0.5, φ = 1, and φ = 1.8, respectively. The BET surface areas of CMF1, CMF2, and CMF3 were estimated to be 56, 16 and 37 m2 g−1, respectively, which are about 3–10 times larger than that of the SSR CMF sample, 6 m2 g−1. The CMF1 sample was obtained in the form of porous particles (with pores below 50 nm), while CMF2 and CMF3 were shown to have much larger pores.
Furthermore, the Huang group158 prepared In2TiO5 containing octahedra [InO6] and [TiO6] with a band gap of 3.02 eV. The band calculations show that the open coordination environment of Ti, large dispersion of In 5s states, and the optical indirect transition are in favor of photon energy storage and electron–hole separation to benefit the photocatalytic activity of In2TiO5.
5. Fabrication of nanocomposites
In the case of single semiconductors there is a contradictory situation for utilizing the visible light: semiconductors with wide band gaps are not responsive to visible light, but semiconductors with narrow band gaps including the modified oxides feature low charge separation efficiency, which makes them ineffective photocatalysts. Combining two semiconductors with well-matched energetic levels of the valence band (VB) and the conduction band (CB), where one of them can harvest visible light, to form heterojunctions has been proven to be an effective method for promoting charge separation and consequently enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency.159,160 At present, many methods have been developed to prepare hybrid photocatalysts, such as solvothermal, chemical etching, co-precipitation or precipitation–deposition, and microwave-assisted methods. Usually, one component of the composite is firstly synthesized and then coupled with the other. As a result, the contact interface of the various compounds is limited, which is a very important factor influencing the charge carrier transfer efficiency. However, one-pot preparation of heterostructured products from distinct starting materials is difficult because of their different growth mechanisms and reaction rates. Hence, combining different components to engineer complex hybrid photocatalysts with a proper interface remains a challenging but exciting topic.161
Again, SCS has unique advantages for the fabrication of hybrid photocatalysts. It can ensure high homogeneity of mixed precursors and narrow size distribution, which benefit the preparation of chemically homogeneous, uniform and well-dispersed heterojunctions with more active contact sites, thus improving the charge transfer efficiency.162
5.1 Heterostructured metal oxides

5.1.1 Support immersion synthesis. 
Support-assisted immersion synthesis involves infiltrating the pre-prepared component with the precursor solution prepared for combustion. At high temperatures generated by the exothermic reaction or calcination, two or more components are combined firmly to form heterojunctions. For example, as mentioned in section 4.3, BiVO4 is a potential photocatalyst in energy-related applications. However, its low quantum efficiency restricts further applications of this material. Jiang et al.163 obtained CuO/BiVO4 composite photocatalysts by the incipient wetness impregnation technique. Firstly, BiVO4 was prepared by a combustion method using citric acid and urea as co-fuels. Then, BiVO4 was mixed with water and Cu(NO3)2·3H2O to obtain a paste. Finally, the paste was dried and annealed to form a CuO/BiVO4 composite. As for TiO2, various semiconductors with narrower band gaps have been combined with TiO2 to improve its quantum efficiency and the visible-light absorption ability. For instance, an infrared-to-ultraviolet upconversion agent Y2O3:Yb3+,Tm3+ and a novel composite photocatalyst TiO2/Y2O3:Yb3+,Tm3+ have been synthesized by combustion and precipitation methods.164
Recently, graphene oxide (GO) has attracted a lot of attention as a good candidate for supporting nanoparticles in the liquid phase, which can facilitate the transfer of photo-generated electrons from photocatalysts to GO due to its excellent electronic conductivity, and thus reduce the recombination of charge carriers.165 Moreover, the high surface area of GO is beneficial for adsorption of reactants and their diffusion to the photocatalyst. Naturally, GO was selected to combine with TiO2,165,166 CoFe2O4167 and NiFe2O4.168
Generally, the specific surface area of the composites after combustion should be lower than that of the components before combustion. For instance, when α-Al2O3, γ-Al2O3, and ZrO2 were used as porous supports, the specific surface areas of the supported catalysts were about or below the surface areas of the supports. However, Mukasyan et al.169 observed that the surface area of combusted Fe2O3/activated Al2O3 increased as compared to that of the support. They thought that the decrease of the reaction temperature caused by the water evaporation from activated Al2O3 and the intensification of gas-phase evolution in the combustion wave led to an increase in the surface area of the composite products. The former restricts the kinetics of growth of nuclei and the latter hinders the collision between formed solid nuclei. In the case of α-Al2O3, γ-Al2O3, and ZrO2, the decrease in the surface area of the loaded catalysts may be due to the “epitaxial” coverage of the support surface and the sintering at high combustion temperature.
Inspired by the above result and the previous research that amorphous MgAl2O4 has a shorter Al–O bond length and a narrower band gap,44 our group43 developed a TiO2/amorphous Al2O3 composite containing the amorphous Al2O3 ingredient, which shows an ultraviolet light response ability. To obtain TiO2/Al2O3, commercial P25 TiO2 was immersed in the solutions of Al(NO3)3·9H2O, urea, and water; then the suspension was heated to carry out the combustion. The resulting hybrids exhibited interesting properties: firstly, the N element contained in urea was introduced (doped) into the lattice of TiO2, which resulted in the shift of light absorbance of TiO2 from the red to visible region; secondly, the composite exhibited a much higher surface area (the highest was 161 m2 g−1) than that of P25 (46 m2 g−1); thirdly, the photocatalytic activity of the heterojunction was greatly enhanced due to the larger amount of defect sites on amorphous Al2O3 that can transfer electrons from TiO2. In this combustion process, TiO2 was used as a support; while from the photocatalysis viewpoint, Al2O3 acts as an active support. Hence, this combustion method can be called “reverse support combustion”.
However, the support-assisted immersion synthesis is not an in situ process and the contact area of the components is also limited. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop more effective methods for enhancing the transfer efficiency of charge carriers.


5.1.2 One-step preparation from homogeneous solution. 
In SCS, hybrids can be obtained by using a homogeneous solution of precursors. The high temperature of combustion can cause the simultaneous formation of various metal oxides. In order to obtain TiO2-based heterostructures, Reddy et al.170 employed titanyl nitrate (TiO(NO3)2) formed by the reaction of titanium iso-propoxide with nitric acid, zirconyl nitrate (ZrO(NO3)2), siliconyl nitrate obtained by reacting tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) with nitric acid, aluminum nitrate nona-hydrate (Al(NO3)3·9H2O) as precursors and urea as a fuel to prepare TiO2–SiO2, TiO2–Al2O3, and TiO2–ZrO2 mixed oxides, which were found to be quite thermally stable (i.e., no phase transformation from anatase to rutile) and showed a high surface area ranging from 89 to 115 m2 g−1. By varying the amount and type of metal nitrates, α-Bi2O3/Bi2WO6,171 Sm2Ti2O7/SmCrO3,172 Gd2Ti2O7/GdCrO3,173 ZnO/Fe2O3,174 and V2O5/BiVO4175 have also been developed.
In the combustion process, when the amount of oxygen is insufficient or the fuel is in excess, the combustion reaction would be incomplete, which can result in the presence of carbonaceous impurities in the resulting materials. For example, Falaras et al.176 modified TiO2 by controlling the urea content and calcination temperature, thus reaching an absorption threshold of 2.19 eV. The visible light absorption of TiO2 was ascribed to the existence of monolayer of carbonaceous species, which covered the surface of TiO2 anatase nanoparticles.
On the other hand, it should be stated that there is also a disadvantage of the one-step in situ preparation of hybrid photocatalysts. Because of a homogeneous composition, very high reaction temperature, unexpected intermediate products, additional phases, such as CeAlO3 in the CeO2/Al2O3 system and Al2O3 in CeO2/CeAlO3 composites, are often formed.177,178 In some cases, it is difficult to adjust the reaction conditions to avoid the formation of by-products.
The aforementioned hybrids are composed of two kinds of oxides. It is known that some metal oxides have many phases (polymorphism) or compositions. For example, iron oxides can exist as Fe3O4 or four different Fe2O3 phases:179 α-, β-, ε-, and γ-Fe2O3. Iron oxides with different phases possess various band gap energies. Sometimes it is desirable to prepare composites with a mixed-phase or a composition derived from the same oxide family. However, some phases are metastable and it is hard to obtain such hybrids using traditional synthesis methods because their long reaction time will affect the stability of the metastable phases; in this case SCS is the method of choice for the synthesis of mixed-phase oxides. Our group20 reported mixed-phase Fe2O3 with α and β structures via self-combustion of ILs using (C2H5)3N·HCl as a fuel. The β/α-Fe2O3 ratio was controlled by adjusting the fuel amount; this ratio decreased with increasing the amount of fuel. This method afforded the metastable β-Fe2O3. Other analogous composites, such as (α+γ)-Fe2O3,28 Fe2O3/Fe3O4,27,39 and CoO/Co3O4,22 were also synthesized by varying the fuel amount or calcination atmosphere.
In recent years, BiOCl has attracted much attention due to its good photocatalytic activity under UV irradiation since Zhang et al. reported its high efficiency in photodegradation of methyl orange.180 However, the band gap of BiOCl is in the range of 3.19–3.60 eV, which is too large for the efficient utilization of solar energy. Bi24O31Cl10 with the band gap of ca. 2.90 eV is a product of the thermal decomposition of BiOCl.181 Our group21 fabricated Bi24O31Cl10/BiOCl heterojunctions via the self-combustion of ILs, which were prepared from Bi(NO3)3 and diethylamine hydrochloride ((C2H5)2NH·HCl). The latter is not only the cation in IL, but also the main fuel in the combustion process. The ratio of Bi24O31Cl10 to BiOCl can be controlled by adjusting the ratio of (C2H5)2NH·HCl to urea, which acts as an additional fuel.

5.2 Metal supported inorganic oxides
Transition metals have been widely used as co-catalysts for enhancing the electron transfer efficiency of photocatalysts. Especially the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) properties of noble metals make them responsive to visible light. Therefore, deposition of noble metals on the surface of photocatalysts can be used to make them responsive to visible light. In SCS, metal nanoparticles can be in situ generated by reducing metal oxides under a reductive atmosphere that can be created by the excess of fuels,30 for instance by ammonia formed due to the decomposition of urea as shown by the following equations:182,183 CO(NH2)2 → NH3 + HCNO(5) NiO + NH3 → Ni + H2O + N2 (T > 450 °C)(6)
By selecting an appropriate fuel and controlling atmosphere, inorganic oxides loaded with metal nanoparticles, such as Pd, Pt, Ag, Cu, and Ni on TiO2, ZnO, CeO2, Al2O3, NiO, can be prepared by using SCS.33,183–195 The formed heterojunctions exhibit much better performance than those present in the traditionally prepared composites due to a very good dispersion of metal particles in porous oxides.
On the other hand, it is well known that the size and amount of the loaded metal particles are important factors that influence the performance of the composite photocatalysts. However, it is difficult to precisely estimate the size and amount of the deposited metal particles, which is a drawback of SCS.
6. Energy storage and conversion
6.1 Energy storage

6.1.1 Electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries. 
To efficiently generate clean and safe electric power, the development of highly efficient energy storage devices is an important task. The Li-ion rechargeable battery (LIB) is a device converting chemical energy to electrical energy, which has been widely used in mobile phones, laptops, digital cameras, and medical microelectronic devices thanks to its high energy density and long cycle life.13,196,197 An electrochemical cell is composed of two electrodes, the negative electrode (anode) and the positive electrode (cathode), separated and connected by a Li+ conducting electrolyte. The LIB performance including the specific energy and power, cycle life, and discharge rates rely largely on the intrinsic chemistry of cathode and anode materials. When the LIB is working, chemical potential is converted into electrical energy via Faradaic reactions, which is affected by the composition, crystal structure, and morphology of the electrodes.198 Hence, great efforts have been recently made to improve the electrode materials, especially cathode materials, because cathodes affect the cell voltage, charge transfer kinetics, safety, and cost.199
Lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2) is a common commercial cathode material ensuring high voltage, good reversibility, and high theoretical specific capacity of Li-ion batteries. LiCoO2 has a layered rhombohedral structure with lithium atoms in the 3a, cobalt atoms in 3b, and oxygen atoms in 6c positions (with respect to hexagonal axes).200 Both Rodrigues156 and Kalyani201 groups verified that LiCoO2 obtained by SCS features the first discharge capacity of over 120 mA h g−1 and a less than 10% capacity fade after 30 cycles. However, the high cost and toxicity of cobalt, limited rate capability and safety concerns of LiCoO2 restrict its further applications. To tackle these problems, ion-doped LiCoO2 materials have been proposed; for example, LiCo1−xNixO2,202,203 LiCo0.6Ni0.2Mn0.2O2204 show a higher specific discharge capacity and good cycle-life performance.
As alternative cathode materials with smaller toxicity, olivine-type and layered manganese-based materials have attracted much attention. Hong et al.205 reported that a multi-metal oxide Li[Mn0.547Ni0.16Co0.10Li0.193]O2 solid solution delivered the first discharge capacity of 265 mA h g−1 between 4.8 and 2.0 V at the specific current of 100 mA g−1. Ananth's group154 prepared LiMn0.5Ni0.5O2via SCS, which exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 161 mA h g−1 in a voltage range of 4.6–2.5 V at 0.1 C (1 C is defined as one lithium per formula in one hour) rate and can be subjected to more than 50 cycles. This desirable electrochemical property can be attributed to the pure phase of LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2, which is difficult to prepare, especially by the conventional solid state fusion method.206,207 However, Park et al.208 explored a simple combustion method for the synthesis of Li[Mn(2/3−x/3)NixLi(1/3−2x/3)]O2 compounds with a low Ni content. Based on the XRD and electrochemical data they concluded that LiMn0.5Ni0.5O2 exhibited a relatively low initial discharge capacity of 200 mA h g−1 and a large loss in the capacity during cycling; while Li[Mn0.61Ni0.17Li0.22]O2 and Li[Mn0.58Ni0.25Li0.17]O2 solid solutions featured high initial discharge capacities of over 245 mA h g−1 and a stable cycle performance between 4.8 and 2.0 V. Aurbach's group209 obtained LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2, LiNi0.33Mn0.33Co0.33O2 and LiNi0.4Mn0.4Co0.2O2 cathode materials with the capacity of 190, 180 and 170 mA h g−1, respectively, via a self-combustion reaction following by calcination; while their rate capability (discharge capacity vs. cycle number at different C rates) follows the order: LiNi0.33Mn0.33Co0.33O2 < LiNi0.4Mn0.4Co0.2O2 ≪ LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2. The spinel-type lithium manganate (LiMn2O4) also serves as a high-capacity intercalation cathode for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries due to its economic and environmental advantages.210–212 LiMn2O4 can be synthesized via SCS and its electrochemical behavior is reported elsewhere.210,213 To reduce the capacity fading at elevated temperatures and during the overcharge of LiMn2O4 powder-based electrodes, Novak et al.214 developed nanostructured LiMn2O4 thin films by flame spray deposition and in situ annealing via igniting and depositing a precursor solution. The obtained LiMn2O4 film exhibited good cyclability.
Besides the aforementioned cathode materials, Goodenough et al.215 explored lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) as a cathode. Shao et al.216 reported the preparation of LiFePO4 at an optimal glycine/LiFePO4 ratio of 4:1 using inexpensive iron(III) as a precursor. The obtained material exhibited a discharge capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at a 0.1 C rate. Govindaraj et al.217 also reported another phosphate, LiNiPO4 doped with Cu2+ and Mg2+ ions via SCS. They found that the ionic conductivity increased at lower concentrations of dopants due to the increased channel size for Li+ diffusion; however, the ionic conductivity decreased with increasing dopant concentration due to inherent anti-site defects.
Carbon materials are frequently applied to improve the electrochemical performance of electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries.218–223 In the case of the solution combustion synthesis, solid carbon can be in situ generated as a primary product from fuels under fuel-rich conditions or under a reductive atmosphere; hence, the electrical conductivity of the electrodes can be enhanced. For example, Shao et al.216 further treated LiFePO4 with sucrose as a carbon source after auto-combustion. They greatly increased the discharge capacity of the LiFePO4/C sample containing about 2.86 wt% carbon to 160 mA h g−1 at a 0.1 C rate and 110 mA h g−1 at a 5 C rate. In addition, the electrodes show excellent cycling performance during 90 cycles at various rates. Kalaiselvi et al.224 employed ODH as a combustible fuel and a carbon source to prepare the Li3MxV2−x(PO4)3/C (M = Fe, Co) composite to further enhance the electronic conductivity and lithium transport kinetics based on the fact that native Li3V2(PO4)3 has a high theoretical capacity of 197 mA h g−1. The combined effect of residual carbon from ODH and the added super P carbon (a kind of commercial carbon) led to the formation of carbon wiring. Li3Co0.10V1.90(PO4)3/C showed the highest capacity (178 mA h g−1) and very little fade (4%) after 50 cycles at a 10 C rate due to the synergistic effect of the present carbon and the optimum concentration of Co substituent.
As negative-electrode materials, cobalt oxides (Co3O4 and CoO) have also attracted great interest because of their high theoretical specific capacity (890 mA h g−1 for Co3O4 and 715 mA h g−1 for CoO).225,226 However, the high cost of cobalt oxides as compared to other transition-metal oxides diminishes their application value, which, in part, can be counterbalanced by a low cost synthesis route. Hence, Wu and co-workers227 synthesized the Co3O4/CoO composite by facile and inexpensive SCS and investigated its performance in LIBs. They verified that the composite obtained in the presence of NaF exhibited higher discharge capacity, higher initial Columbic efficiency, and better cycling performance than that achieved for the material without NaF.
The commercially applied graphite anode materials have a low theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1 and a poor safety caused by the low voltage plateau (about 0.1 V vs. Li/Li+).228 Therefore, nano-structured metal oxide anodes have attracted a lot of interest because of their chemical stability and high capacity aimed at the replacement of graphite anode materials.229–232 Using SCS in the presence of NaF, Wu et al.233 obtained NiO/Ni nanoparticles as an anode material according to the following reaction mechanism.225 (7)
NiO/Ni nanoparticles have a charge capacity of 743 mA h g−1 and the capacity at the end of the 20th cycle is 702 mA h g−1 with a retention of 94%. Moreover, the coulomb efficiency with a high initial value of 70.8% keeps this value over 96% during cycling. As compared to the capacity of nanosheet-based NiO microspheres, which decreased sharply to 50 mA g−1 after 8 cycles,234 they indicated that nanoparticles are better due to the shorter diffusion lengths for Li+, and enhanced electric conductivity by the presence of Ni. Meanwhile, the fluffy porous structure generated by the released gases during the combustion process not only buffers the volume change during cycling but also benefits the efficient entry and permeation of the electrolyte into the electrode and diffusion of ions.
Iron oxides are also promising anode materials because of their high theoretical capacity (1007 mA h g−1 for Fe2O3, 924 mA h g−1 for Fe3O4), non-toxicity, low cost, good safety, environment friendliness and high resistance to corrosion.226,235,236 Liang et al.235 constructed a Fe2O3/C nanocomposite by simply increasing the dosage of citric acid in the precursor solution. The as-prepared Fe2O3/C composite exhibited high reversible capacities of 470 and 419 mA h g−1 at 80th and 200th cycles with a current density of 125 mA h g−1, which are much higher than those of the counterparts without carbon (i.e., Fe2O3 nanoparticles), which can be ascribed to the in situ formed carbon, the well-developed mesopores and the relatively high specific surface area achieved by SCS.
Complex oxides are useful as anode materials; for instance, nanosized spinel Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) prepared via combustion synthesis exhibited high electrochemical performance and fairly stable cycling performance because of the good crystallinity and high phase purity. Shukla et al.237 compared the influence of the synthesis methods on the capacity of LTO. The recorded capacities for the combusted LTO were equal to 125, 102, 90, and 70 mA h g−1 at 25, 50, 80, and 100 C rates, respectively; these values are higher than those measured for nanosized LTO prepared by a solid-state method (see Fig. 11). An analogous finding was also reported by Yuan et al.238 Thus, high crystallinity and phase purity, a large specific surface area, and high porosity of the electrodes (as shown in Fig. 12) facilitate the diffusion of Li species and the electrolyte percolation through the porous structure, which ensures a high flux of Li ions. Li et al.239 further modified LTO with nitrogen (N-LTO) and showed that N-LTO with 1.1 wt% of nitrogen featured higher rate capability and better reversibility as compared to pristine LTO. The superior electrochemical performance of N-LTO was ascribed to its porous structure and nitrogen modification, which facilitate the transfer of ions and electrons. Li et al.240 also verified the effectiveness of porous anodes in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries in the case of Li2MTi3O8 (M = Zn, Co) flakes obtained via one-step solution-combustion.
 Fig. 11  Capacity–voltage profiles for nanocrystalline Li4Ti5O12 synthesized by the combustion method at different rates. The inset shows the capacity voltage profile for bulk Li4Ti5O12 prepared by a solid-state method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  SEM images of Li4Ti5O12 prepared via (a) solution combustion and (b) solid-state reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier. 
In future, the development of electrode materials should be directed toward an improvement of their structural stability and charge carrier transport by reducing the size of particles to the nanometer level.241 Also, the design of well-developed porosity and ion doping are essential for the fabrication of high-performance electrode materials.241,242 SCS is a well suited method for achieving electrode materials with the desired properties for Li-ion batteries.


6.1.2 Electrode materials for supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors (SCs), also known as ultracapacitors or electrochemical capacitors, have attracted great interest due to their high energy density, long cycle life (>100000 cycles), simple principle, and high dynamics of charge propagation.243,244 Generally, the electrode materials for supercapacitors can be categorized into three principal types: electrical double layer-based electrodes such as porous carbons and graphene, Faradic reaction-based electrodes such as metal oxides/hydroxides, and conductive polymers.245,246 Transition metal oxides based on Faradaic redox reactions have been widely studied due to their potentially higher capacitance as compared to porous carbon materials, mainly originating from their multiple oxidation states. However, the intrinsically low electrical conductivity and the fact that fast Faradaic reactions only occur on the surface of oxides restrict their applications.247 Therefore, the development of nanostructured porous materials is of high priority. Based on the fact that CuCo2O4 nanostructures have been used as the anode in Li-ion batteries with high Li-ion storage capacities,248,249 Mousavi et al.247 prepared cauliflower-like nanostructured CuCo2O4via the urea combustion method combined with a post annealing process. The resulting material possessed a high capacitance of 338 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (8 times greater than that of CuCo2O4 microparticles) and exhibited a capacitance of 88 F g−1 at an extremely high current density of 50 A g−1, with a high power density of 22.11 kW kg−1. Furthermore, 5000 continuous cycles performed at various current loads demonstrate its electrochemical suitability as a promising electrode material for high-rate SC.
Recently, metal molybdates have been used as electrode materials in Li-ion batteries250,251 and SCs.252–254 After combustion synthesis of MnMoO4, CoMoO4·xH2O and NiMoO4 with a specific capacitance of 126, 401 and 1116 F g−1 at 5 mA cm−2, respectively,255 Selvan et al.256 prepared β-NiMoO4–CoMoO4·xH2O nanocomposites via SCS and verified that the NiMoO4–CoMoO4·xH2O nanocomposite with a Ni:Co ratio of 3:1 exhibited a capacitance of 1472 F g−1 at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. They attributed this excellent electrochemical capacitance behavior to uniform small particle sizes, high specific surface area and increased electronic conductivity.
Metal oxides containing lithium have been reported to be used as electrode materials in supercapacitors.257,258 Among different lithium insertion compounds, spinel-type LiMn2O4 materials are economically feasible and environmentally friendly. To eliminate a severe reduction in the capacity during long-term cycling, Wang et al.259 prepared Cr-substituted LiMn2O4 samples by the urea-assisted combustion method and found that partial substitution of Mn3+ by Cr3+ can increase the stability of the spinel structure and improve the cycling performance. Kim et al.260 also reported that Li4Mn5O12 obtained by combustion synthesis showed good properties because of its large specific surface area.
Similar to the utilization of carbon as an additive/support in rechargeable Li-batteries, electrode materials with carbon introduced by in situ or ex situ processes have also been developed for SCs to enhance their electrical performance and durability. For example, ZnO/C,261 Fe2O3/C, Fe2O3–SnO2/C, and Fe2O3–ZnO/C262 were synthesized by the Jayalakshmi group via SCS.
Efficient electrode materials for supercapacitors should feature a narrow particle size distribution and a high specific surface area. Therefore, to develop more efficient electrodes, the pore sizes and pore distribution should be controlled, which cannot be achieved without a good understanding of the solution combustion synthesis.

6.2 Energy conversion
Energy conversion refers to the transformation of energy from one form to another, for example, solar energy to chemical or electrical, electrical to chemical or mechanical energy.13 With the ever-increasing rapid depletion of fossil fuels, the energy issue became one of the most important and challenging topics in the world. Advanced energy conversion devices (including artificial photosynthesis catalysts, fuel cells, and solar cells) are expected to play an important role in utilizing the clean and safe solar energy.263 The development of low cost, highly efficient new materials is the key for successful application of energy conversion devices. In this section, the application of nanomaterials, obtained via the SCS method, for energy conversion is reviewed.

6.2.1 Artificial photosynthesis. 
Artificial photosynthesis mainly refers to the conversion of photon energy into chemical energy. For example, solar fuels such as hydrogen, methanol or formic acid can be obtained by water splitting or by photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction.264–268 As regards the CO2 reduction, the Ye group83 reported a self-doped SrTiO3−δ obtained by a carbon-free one-step combustion method and subsequent thermal treatments in Ar. They demonstrated that higher oxygen deficiency is beneficial for chemical adsorption of CO2 on the surface and in the bulk of SrTiO3−δ, especially for the accommodation of CO2 in oxygen vacancies, which improves the artificial photosynthesis efficiency for methanol production.
Ye's work explains clearly that the structure of the SCS-generated material affects its performance. However, due to the complexity and diversity of morphologies and structures of the SCS-generated materials, sometimes it is difficult to establish their influence on the catalytic activity. For example, Groven et al.269 reported that the hydrogen generation rate over Co3O4 prepared via SCS in the presence of NaBH4 was about twice that obtained over commercial Co3O4, though their specific surface areas are comparable. They attributed the observed significant enhancement to the foam-like morphology achieved via the SCS method, which may facilitate the effective conversion of Co3O4 to the active catalyst, cobalt boride, derived via a reaction between Co3O4 and NaBH4.
Besides the structure effect, chemical composition is also important. Gomathisankar et al.234 prepared B-doped ZnO via SCS, the photocatalytic activity of which for H2 evolution from aqueous Na2S + Na2SO3 solution was shown to be about twice that of undoped ZnO. The role of B was ascribed to the improved separation efficiency of the photoexcited electron/hole pairs and the formation of new B2O3. The authors also proposed an in situ formation of p–n heterojunctions. The p-type ZnS formed from photoreduced Zn2+ and S2− was coated on the surface of n-type B/ZnO to form B/ZnO-ZnS.


6.2.2 Electrode materials in fuel cells. 
Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are considered efficient energy conversion devices with the advantage of direct usage of hydrocarbon fuels. SOFCs consist of two porous electrodes, the anode and the cathode, separated by a dense solid oxygen ion conducting electrolyte. On the cathode (air electrode) side, oxygen is reduced to oxygen ions, which are transported through the electrolyte to the anode.270
In the most frequently used SOFC system, Y2O3 stabilized ZrO2 (YSZ) is usually employed as an electrolyte, the cermet-like Ni-YSZ as the anode, and electronically conducting oxides such as lanthanum manganites or LaCoO3 as the cathode.271
In the case of the Ni-YSZ anode, Ni tends to sinter and agglomerate at the high SOFCs operation temperature of nearly 1000 °C, which would decrease the anode performance. Furthermore, coke deposition and sulfur poisoning reduce the anode properties in the presence of gas as an anode fuel.157 To minimize these disadvantages, various oxides have been explored, such as fluorite, perovskite, tungsten bronze, and pyrochlore types.270,272
As a fluorite-type compound, CeO2 has been used as the anode in SOFCs. To further improve its electrical properties and/or chemical stability against reduction under open-circuit voltage (OCV) conditions, ion doping and cermet-like materials have been used.108,273 Zhu et al.157 prepared via the SCS method the Ce0.6Mn0.3Fe0.1O2 (CMF) anode for SOFC and compared it with the conventional SSR sample. This comparison showed that the SCS product exhibited power densities of 1.23 W cm−2 at 1000 °C under the configuration of the cell of CMF/La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.8Mg0.15Co0.05O3/Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3 using humidified hydrogen gas as a fuel and O2 as an oxidizing agent, which is higher than 1.09 W cm−2 for the SSR-derived sample under the same evaluation conditions.
In a direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), the reaction intermediate, CO, would strongly bind to the catalyst surface and occupy the active sites during the process of low temperature oxidation of the fuel. Among different approaches for solving this problem, the use of a Pt–Ru alloy was shown to be successful. To reduce the cost by replacing the use of noble metals, Mukasyan et al.274 prepared LaRuO3–Pt and SrRuO3–Pt composites via SCS, which contained four times less platinum and displayed a comparable apparent catalytic activity to that of a standard Pt–Ru alloy.
To decrease the high operation temperature, it is necessary to develop solid electrolytes having high ionic conductivity at intermediate temperatures. Doped-CeO2 solid solutions have been widely reported as promising low temperature electrolytes.275–277 Parkash et al.278 reported that Ce0.82Sm0.16Sr0.02O1.90 prepared via SCS and post-calcination exhibited a conductivity of 2.67 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 600 °C. Aruna et al.279 prepared Ce0.8Gd0.2O2 powders using oxalyl dihydrazide as a fuel with a conductivity of 3 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 400 °C. Park et al.280 compared the performance of Nd-doped ceria electrolytes obtained via solid state, combustion, co-precipitation and hydrothermal syntheses. The results show that Nd0.2Ce0.9O2 and Nd0.1Ce0.9O2 intermediate temperature solid oxide electrolytes synthesized by the combustion method and sintered at 1450 °C for 4 h featured the highest ionic conductivities in air at 600 °C and below 550 °C, respectively.
In the development of cathode materials via SCS for intermediate temperature SOFCs, Jiang et al.281 prepared La0.8Sr0.2Co0.8Ni0.2O3 (LSCN) nanopowders. Next, the chemical compatibility of LSCN, YSZ and Gd2O3 doped CeO2 (GDC) and the electrochemical activity of LSCN were evaluated. The results show that LSCN is compatible with YSZ at temperatures below 850 °C, and its electrode area specific resistance (ASR) is 0.30 and 0.10 Ω cm2 at 700 and 750 °C, respectively, indicating its potential as an alternative cathode material for intermediate temperature SOFCs. Akiyama et al.282 produced LaMO3 (M: Fe, Co, Mn) perovskite type oxides and tested their electrocatalytic activities for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) using a three-electrode half-cell design and a full rechargeable Zn-air battery with a 6 M KOH electrolyte. Electrochemical characterization showed that the order of activity is as follows: LaMnO3 > LaCoO3 > LaFeO3 > CB (carbon black). However, the LaMnO3-catalyzed air electrode degraded very quickly in the cycling performance measurements, whereas the LaCoO3-based electrode showed the best recharge ability and stability.
Cathode or electrolyte materials in SOFCs require appropriate chemical compositions, lattice parameters (adjusted by dopant type and content), and structure (particle size, microstructure).


6.2.3 Photovoltaic solar cells. 
As the most important source of renewable energy, solar light can be either used directly as the heat source or converted into electrical energy by photovoltaic cells.283 Over the past several decades, crystalline silicon and thin film solar cells, known as the first and second generation solar cells, have been used. As compared to silicon cells, thin films are less costly, but show lower efficiency.284 To develop the third generation high-performance photovoltaic solar cells, various nanostructure-based semiconductors are needed to convert sunlight into clean electrical power.285 The need for low-cost semiconductors opens new opportunities for SCS as a facile and energy-saving method.
Among several different types of solar cells, dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have been considered as a highly promising device due to their simple fabrication process, low production cost and high photoelectrical conversion efficiency.286 In DSSC, dye molecules are adsorbed on a TiO2 thin film photoelectrode, which is attached to a piece of transparent conducting oxide (TCO) glass, and the photo-generated electrons of dyes can be injected into the CB of TiO2 films, and then transferred to the TCO glass and the external circuit. Hence, the absorbance ability of TiO2 films is a very important factor influencing their electron transfer and photoelectrical conversion efficiency, and the requirement for these films is due to their high porosity and nanosized structure.287 Chung et al. synthesized TiO2 nanopowders by SCS and fabricated photoelectrodes using them in DSSCs. Their study indicates that the aforementioned nanopowder shows a similar performance to that of commercial P25 TiO2 and can work well as a photoelectrode in DSSCs.
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great attention due to their low-cost and wide applications from flexible and low-weight solar modules to photon recycling in liquid-crystal displays.288,289 Li et al.290 prepared a solution-processed molybdenum oxide (MoO3) hole selective layer via SCS. The obtained MoO3 hole selective layer exhibited a high charge transportation ability similar to that of poly-(ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS); meanwhile, it possessed better device stability. The hole-transport layers (HTLs) are of great importance for solution-processed optoelectronic devices to improve the efficiency of the charge extraction/injection and increase device stability.291–293 Jin et al.294 fabricated NiOx thin films via SCS. When these films were used as HTLs in the solution-processed optoelectronic devices such as heterojunction organic photovoltaics with a model system of poly[2,3-bis-(3-octyloxyphenyl)quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-thiophene-2,5-diyl](TQ1):[6,6]-phenyl-C 71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC 71 BM), a noticeable power conversion efficiency of 6.42% with a high fill factor of 0.70 was obtained. These devices showed better long-term stability under ambient conditions than devices with common poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) HTLs.
The factors affecting the adsorption performance of dyes on these materials include not only the specific surface area, pore structure and distribution, but also the surface charges and surface defects. To further improve the properties of solar cells, the relationship between physicochemical characteristics and solution technology should be established.

7. Conclusions and outlook
This review article highlights the fundamentals and applications of solution combustion for the preparation of energy materials, including binary compounds, complex ternary and quaternary oxides, and nanocomposites. In many cases, solution combustion synthesis opens new opportunities for the synthesis of novel structures, such as surface oxygen vacancies and in situ heterojunctions. Furthermore, the application of the materials prepared via SCS in energy storage and conversion is also reviewed, such as lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, artificial photosynthesis, fuel cells, and photovoltaic solar cells. Although some outstanding advances have been made in the fabrication of complex nanomaterials with special structures and high performance, development of novel combustion synthesis techniques and engineering of surface oxygen vacancies, many challenging topics require further studies.
From the viewpoint of a fundamental understanding of combustion science and technology, the correlations between the morphology, structure and fuel types, and the heating rate are still not well established. Basically, the type of starting material, the fuel–oxidizer ratio, and the water amount in solution would affect thermodynamic variables including enthalpy, adiabatic flame temperature and the total amount of decomposed gas, which are related to the powder characteristics, such as crystal structure and surface area. In general, a good combustion synthesis does not proceed violently, would produce non-toxic gases and possess excellent complexing between metal salts and fuels. For example, when the solution is heated, water should be evaporated, which affects the stability of metal ions in the solution. Hence, the coordination ability of the fuel, the type of metal salt, and the heating rate are key factors for designing objective materials. Furthermore, the type and amount of fuels and metal salts decide the combustion temperature and the amount of released gases. The basic understanding of the raw materials should be improved. Moreover, surface oxygen defects can be easily created during solution combustion synthesis.
From the viewpoint of applications, the relationship between the performance, composition, and structure of materials requires further studies. The design of materials with the desired properties is still a great challenge. In particular, regular porous materials or films with special properties should be exploited by solution combustion synthesis combined with template-assisted methods.
From the viewpoint of industrial production, the design and development of large-scale combustion reactors is necessary. The scale-up reactors should have devices for introducing and emitting gas, collecting nanopowders, and basically, the heating rate can be controlled.
This review focuses on the synthesis and applications of inorganic oxides and shows the progress and development trends in SCS to stimulate further efforts in the design and fabrication of new materials, and in studying the correlation between the performance and properties of these materials.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21376061, 21076060), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (No. NCET-12-0686), the Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholar of Hebei Province (B2015208010), the Scientific Research Foundation for High-Level Talent in University of Hebei Province (GCC2014057), and by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the Discovery Project programme (DP140104062, DP130104459). F. T. Li acknowledges the funding from the China Scholarship Council.
Notes and references

          J. A. Rodríguez and M. Fernández-García, Synthesis, properties, and applications of oxide nanomaterials, JohnWiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2007 Search PubMed .
T. Guo, M. S. Yao, Y. H. Lin and C. W. Nan, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3551 RSC .
D. Bekermann, D. Barreca, A. Gasparotto and C. Maccato, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 6347 RSC .
A. G. Merzhanov, Ceram. Int., 1995, 21, 371 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gonzalez-Cortes and F. E. Imbert, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 452, 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Merzhanov, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1779 RSC .
X. T. Su, Q. Z. Yan and C. C. Ge, Prog. Chem., 2005, 17, 430 CAS .
J. J. Kingsley and K. C. Patil, Mater. Lett., 1988, 6, 427 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar and N. R. de Tacconi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1984 RSC .
J. S. Zhang, Q. J. Guo, Y. Z. Liu and Y. Cheng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 12773 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti1 and T. J. Marks, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Z. Ma and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4909 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Y. Fu and B. L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Brun, L. Edembe, S. Gounel, N. Mano and M. M. Titirici, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kloke, C. Kohler, R. Gerwig, R. Zengerle and S. Kerzenmacher, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, J. Yan, G. Q. Ning, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 60, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. B. Li, X. P. Yao, Z. G. Wang, W. H. Xing, W. Q. Jin, J. Huang and Y. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. de Tacconi, H. K. Timmaji, W. Chanmanee, M. N. Huda, P. Sarker, C. Janaky and K. Rajeshwar, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Lackner, Combustion Synthesis: Novel Routes to Novel Materials, Bentham Science Publisher,  2010 Search PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Liu, Z. M. Sun, R. H. Liu, L. J. Chen and D. S. Zhao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1455 CAS .
F. T. Li, Q. Wang, X. J. Wang, B. Li, Y. J. Hao, R. H. Liu and D. S. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 574 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Toniolo, A. S. Takimi and C. P. Bergmann, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Yang, X. Li, Y. Yang and X. M. Li, J. Lumin., 2007, 122, 707 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Deb, P. Chatterjee and S. P. S. Gupta, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 59, 124 CrossRef PubMed .
V. D. Zhuravlev, V. G. Bamburov, A. R. Beketov, L. A. Perelyaeva, I. V. Baklanova, O. V. Sivtsova, V. G. Vasilev, E. V. Vladimirova, V. G. Shevchenko and I. G. Grigorov, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Erri, P. Pranda and A. Varma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 3092 CrossRef CAS .
J. Toniolo, A. S. Takimi, M. J. Andrade, R. Bonadiman and C. P. Bergmann, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 4785 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deshpande, A. Mukasyan and A. Varma, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4896 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Jain, K. C. Adiga and V. R. P. Verneker, Combust. Flame, 1981, 40, 71 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, E. E. Wolf and A. S. Mukasyan, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, J. Liu, C. Li, G. Li and Q. Du, Adv. Powder Technol., 2011, 22, 72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. A. Sekar and K. C. Patil, Mater. Res. Bull., 1993, 28, 485 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sivalingam, K. Nagaveni, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 45, 23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deshpande, G. Madras and N. M. Gupta, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 126, 546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Nagabhushana, S. Ashoka, P. Chithaiah and G. T. Chandrappa, Mater. Lett., 2013, 91, 272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Suresh and K. C. Patil, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1993, 12, 572 CAS .
A. S. Mukasyan and P. Dinka, Int. J. Self-Propag. High Temp. Synth., 2007, 16, 23 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deshpande, M. Nersesyan, A. Mukasyan and A. Varma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 6196 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ianos, A. Taculescu, C. Pacurariu and I. Lazau, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 2236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Abbasi, M. Haghighi, E. Fatehifar and S. Saedy, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shekhar, J. Wang, W. S. Lee, W. D. Williams, S. M. Kim, E. A. Stach, J. T. Miller, W. N. Delgass and F. H. Ribeiro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Hong, D. W. Lee, H. J. Eom and K. Y. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 438 CrossRef PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. J. Hao, X. J. Wang, R. H. Liu, D. S. Zhao and D. M. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 239, 118 CrossRef PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. J. Hao, R. H. Liu and D. S. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 173, 750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Morales, M. Cason, O. Aina, N. R. de Tacconi and K. Rajeshwar, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 130, 6318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, P. Ifeacho, C. Schulz and H. Wiggers, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2011, 33, 1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmad, Z. L. Hong, E. Ahmed, N. R. Khalid, A. Elhissi and W. Ahmad, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nagaraja, C. R. Girija, B. M. Nagabhushana, N. Donappa and K. M. Sastry, Asian
J. Chem., 2011, 23, 5040 CAS .
L. H. Ai and J. Jiang, Powder Technol., 2009, 195, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sahoo, H. Djieutedjeu and P. F. P. Poudeu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15022 CAS .
T. L. Pfeil, T. L. Pourpoint and L. J. Groven, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Fraigi, D. G. Lamas and N. E. W. de Reca, Mater. Lett., 2001, 47, 262 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Deshpande, S. Polisetti and G. Madras, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Nagabhushana and G. T. Chandrappa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11539 CAS .
S. K. Apte, S. D. Naik, R. S. Sonawane and B. B. Kale, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Djurisic and Y. H. Leung, Small, 2006, 2, 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. F. Chi and Y. D. Yin, Angew Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, J. P. Lewis, Z. L. Hong, A. Manivannan, M. J. Zhi, M. Li and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L. C. Yin, J. Q. Wang, P. Niu, C. Zhen, Y. P. Xie and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9603 CAS .
X. Yang, C. Cao, K. Hohn, L. Erickson, R. Maghirang, D. Hamal and K. Klabunde, J. Catal., 2007, 252, 296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Yu, J. G. Yu, W. K. Ho, Z. T. Jiang and L. Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3808 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Yang, C. D. Cao, L. Erickson, K. Hohn, R. Maghirang and K. Klabunde, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, J. Park and J. H. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 011904 CrossRef PubMed .
X. B. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Varley, A. Janotti and C. G. V. de Walle, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiao and L. L. Ouyang, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 148, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, Z. Ai, F. Jia, L. Zhang, X. Fan and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 69, 138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nagaveni, M. S. Hegde, N. Ravishankar, G. N. Subbanna and G. Madras, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2900 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagaveni, G. Sivalingam, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 48, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Mani, B. R. Raju, N. Xanthopoulos, P. Ghosal, B. Sreedhar and C. Subrahmanyam, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 545 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sivaranjani and C. S. Gopinath, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2639 RSC .
M. Mapa and C. S. Gopinath, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 351 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mapa, K. S. Thushara, B. Saha, P. Chakraborty, C. M. Janet, R. P. Viswanath, C. M. Nair, K. V. G. K. Murty and C. S. Gopinath, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mapa, K. Sivaranjani, D. S. Bhange, B. Saha, P. Chakraborty, A. K. Viswanath and C. S. Gopinath, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 565 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Wu, J. L. Wen, S. Nigro and A. C. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 085701 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Polisetti, P. A. Deshpande and G. Madras, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 12915 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, T. Xu, J. Lu, S. M. Gao, N. S. Hosmane, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai and Y. B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1128 CAS .
K. Xie, N. Umezawa, N. Zhang, P. Reunchan, Y. J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4211 CAS .
G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, H. Y. Wang, X. Y. Yang, C. C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180 CAS .
H. Li, S. Yin, Y. H. Wang, T. Sekino, S. W. Lee and T. Sato, J. Catal., 2013, 297, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lv, C. S. Pan, X. G. Ma, R. L. Zong, X. J. Bai and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kong, Y. Z. Li, X. Chen, T. T. Tian, P. F. Fang, F. Zheng and X. J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. P. Wu and R. Krol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Li, Q. Wang, J. R. Ran, Y. J. Hao, X. J. Wang, D. S. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1116 RSC .
V. M. Sharma, D. Saha, G. Madras and T. N. G. Row, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18938 RSC .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Y. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Y. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zuo, L. Wang and P. Y. Feng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ni, Y. Zhu and X. Ma, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3689 RSC .
B. Murugan and A. V. Ramaswamy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20429 CAS .
B. Guan, H. Lin, L. Zhu, B. Tian and Z. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 181–182, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Chen, Y. Yu, W. Li, C. Y. Cao, P. Li, Z. F. Dou and W. G. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12836 RSC .
S. Ekambaram, Y. Iikubo and A. Kudo, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 433, 237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmad, E. Ahmed, Y. W. Zhang, N. R. Khalid, J. F. Xu, M. Ullah and Z. L. Hong, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 697 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Thind, G. S. Wu and A. C. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 38 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nuneza, V. A. de la Pena O'Shea, P. Jana, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, Catal. Today, 2013, 209, 21 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Wu, J. L. Wen, J. P. Wang, D. F. Thomas and A. C. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Pena and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Manoharan and K. C. Patil, J. Solid State Chem., 1993, 102, 267 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stevens, R. Cloots, D. Poelman, B. Vertruyen and C. Henrist, Mater. Lett., 2014, 114, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, S. J. Liang, J. H. Bi, J. Gao and L. Wu, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 25, 1922 CAS .
Q. Y. Chen, X. Gu, Y. H. Wang and D. W. Jing, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 1117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, J. C. Yu, L. Z. Zhang, X. C. Wang and S. K. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 3666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Shin, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Liu, R. H. Liu, Z. M. Sun, D. S. Zhao and C. G. Kou, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Parida, K. H. Reddy, S. Martha, D. P. Das and N. Biswal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 12161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Gallego, N. M. Alzate and O. Arnache, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 549, 163 CrossRef PubMed .
F. T. Li, Y. Liu, Z. M. Sun, R. H. Liu, C. G. Kou, Y. Zhao and D. S. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Kondakindi, K. Karan and B. A. Peppley, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wei, Y. Wang, J. P. Liu, C. M. Xiao and W. W. Zeng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xue, Z. H. Li, X. X. Wang and X. Z. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, X. C. Li, J. Y. Zhou, Y. Tang, Y. M. Zhang and Y. W. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 9271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Li, S. S. Yao, W. Wen, L. H. Xue and Y. W. Yan, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 491, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Chaudhari, A. Singh, C. M. Mahajan, P. P. Jagtap, E. M. Abuassaj, R. Chatterjee and S. T. Bendre, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2013, 347, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Wu and W. Wen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 9123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saha, G. Madras and T. N. G. Row, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ianos, I. Lazau, C. Pacurariu and P. Barvinschi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 3408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jeong and M. Kang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. R. Evans, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, J. Catal., 2004, 226, 292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Li, M. Comotti, A. H. Lu and F. Schuth, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1772 RSC .
A. Laobuthee, S. Wongkasemjit, E. Traversa and R. M. Laine, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 20, 91 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chartier, T. Yamamoto, K. Yasuda, C. Meis and S. Matsumur, J. Nucl. Mater., 2008, 378, 188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ishimaru, Y. Hirotsu, I. V. Afanasyev-Charkin and K. E. Sickafus, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 1237 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suresh, N. R. S. Kumar and K. C. Patil, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tangcharoen, A. Ruangphanit, W. Klysubun and W. Pecharapa, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 66, 387 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Borhan, P. Samoila, V. Hulea, A. R. Iordan and M. N. Palamaru, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 279, 17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choodamani, G. P. Nagabhushana, S. Ashoka, B. D. Prasad, B. Rudraswamy and G. T. Chandrappa, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 578, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Sathiskumar, C. R. Thomas and G. Madras, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 10108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mestre, M. D. Palacios and P. Agut, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Ding, S. Sun, J. Bao, Z. L. Luo and C. Gao, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130, 147 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Nagabhushana, G. Nagaraju and G. T. Chandrappa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 388 CAS .
B. Xie, H. Zhang, P. Cai, R. Qiu and Y. Xiong, Chemosphere, 2006, 63, 956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kakihana, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 6, 7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Zhang, W. Z. Wang, M. Shang and W. Z. Yin, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Jiang, H. Endo, H. Natori, M. Nagai and K. Kobayashi, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 28, 2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. G. Perez, S. Sepulveda-Guzman, A. Martinez-de la Cruz and U. O. Mendez, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2011, 335, 169 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. da Silva, L. H. Dall'Antonia, L. V. A. Scalvi, D. I. dos Santos, L. O. Ruggiero and A. Urbano, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 3267 CrossRef .
M. R. Silva, A. C. Lucilha, R. Afonso, L. H. Dall'Antonia and L. V. A. Scalvi, Ionics, 2014, 20, 105 CrossRef .
J. G. Qu, N. N. Li, B. J. Liu and J. X. He, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baykan and N. A. Oztas, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Dong, Z. H. Li, Z. X. Ding, L. Wu, X. X. Wang and X. Z. Fu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2008, 43, 1694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Deshpande and G. Madras, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 158, 571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhang, W. Z. Wang, M. Shang and W. Z. Yin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 177, 1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saha, G. Madras and T. N. G. Row, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9598 RSC .
O. Subohi, G. S. Kumar, M. M. Malik and R. Kurchania, Physica B, 2012, 407, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yin, W. X. Zhang, L. H. Xue and Y. W. Yan, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 1533 CrossRef CAS .
A. Choudhary, B. S. Sahu, R. Mazumder, S. Bhattacharyya and P. Chaudhuri, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 590, 440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Manikandan, M. V. Ananth, T. P. Kumar, M. Raju, P. Periasamy and K. Manimaran, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. M. Bhat and N. G. Sundaram, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14371 RSC .
S. Rodrigues, N. Munichandraiah and A. K. Shukla, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 322 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhu, A. Nobuta, Y. W. Ju, T. Ishihara and T. Akiyama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Wang, F. Q. Huang, C. M. Liu, X. P. Lin and J. L. Shi, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 139, 74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Qu and X. F. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, Q. F. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, F. M. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326 RSC .
W. L. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Hu, Y. J. Zhong, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Z. Li, X. H. Liu, F. Gu, H. L. Du and L. Y. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Jiang, H. Endo, H. Natori, M. Nagai and K. Kobayashi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Li, S. W. Liu, H. P. Zhang, E. H. Wang, L. J. Song and P. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2882 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Pu, D. F. Zhang, Y. Y. Gao, X. Shao, G. Q. Ding, S. S. Li and S. P. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 551, 382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Gao, X. P. Pu, D. F. Zhang, G. Q. Ding, X. Shao and J. Ma, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Zhang, X. P. Pu, Y. Y. Gao, C. H. Su, H. Li, H. Y. Li and W. X. Hang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 113, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Zhang, Q. Ding, X. P. Pu, C. H. Su, X. Shao, G. Q. Ding, Z. G. Zhang and Q. N. Fang, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2014, 7, 1350065 CrossRef .
P. Dinka and A. S. Mukasyan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Reddy, G. K. Reddy, K. N. Rao, I. Ganesh and J. M. F. Ferreira, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 4874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hao, F. T. Li, F. Chen, M. J. Chai, R. H. Liu and X. J. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 124, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nashim and K. M. Parida, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 215, 608 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. Parida, A. Nashim and S. K. Mahanta, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 12839 RSC .
G. K. Pradhan, S. Martha and K. M. Parida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 707 CAS .
H. Q. Jiang, M. Nagai and K. Kobayashi, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 479, 821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Moustakas, A. G. Kontos, V. Likodimos, F. Katsaros, N. Boukos, D. Tsoutsou, A. Dimoulas, G. E. Romanos, D. D. Dionysiou and P. Falaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 130, 14 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Prakash, C. Shivakumara and M. S. Hegde, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 139, 55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Aruna, N. S. Kini and K. S. Rajam, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sakurai, A. Namai, K. Hashimoto and S. I. Ohkoshi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Zhang, C. M. Liu, F. Q. Huang, C. Zheng and W. D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 68, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Eggenweiler, E. Keller and V. KraEmer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2000, 56, 431 Search PubMed .
K. Tahmasebi and M. H. Paydar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 109, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Manukyan, A. Cross, S. Roslyakov, S. Rouvimov, A. S. Rogachev, E. E. Wolf and A. S. Mukasyan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24417 CAS .
K. R. Priolkar, P. Bera, P. R. Sarode, M. S. Hegde, S. Emura, R. Kumashiro and N. P. Lalla|, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sontakke, J. Modak and G. Madras, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165, 225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bera, K. C. Patil, V. Jayaram, M. S. Hegde and G. N. Subbanna, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1801 RSC .
S. Sontakke, C. Mohan, J. Modak and G. Madras, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 189–190, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, H. Q. Fan, M. M. Xu and Q. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 436, 787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ansari, M. M. Khan, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colussi, A. Gayen, J. Llorca, C. de Leitenburg, G. Dolcetti and A. Trovarelli, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 7510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bera, K. C. Patil, V. Jayaram, G. N. Subbanna and M. S. Hegde, J. Catal., 2000, 196, 293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hao, F. T. Li, S. S. Wang, M. J. Chai, R. H. Liu and X. J. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 186, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Zhao, W. Y. Ying, H. T. Zhang, H. F. Ma and D. Y. Fang, Catal. Commun., 2012, 17, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nasiri, J. Vahdati Khaki and S. M. Zebarjad, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Reddy, G. K. Reddy, D. Devaiah and B. M. Reddy, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 445–446, 297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Su, Q. L. Wu, J. C. Li, X. C. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Q. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Weng, H. Guo, X. M. Liu, S. L. Wu, K. W. K. Yeung and P. K. Chu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 24758 RSC .
X. H. Rui, Q. Y. Yan, M. Skyllas-Kazacose and T. M. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Julien, M. A. Camacho-Lopez, T. Mohan, S. Chitra, P. Kalyani and S. Gopukumar, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 241 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kalyani, N. Kalaiselvi and N. Muniyandi, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 232 CrossRef CAS .
P. Suresh, S. Rodrigues, A. K. Shukla, S. A. Shivashankar and N. Munichandraiah, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 665 CrossRef CAS .
P. Periasamy, H. S. Kim, S. H. Na, S. I. Moon and J. C. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bentaleb, I. Saadoune, K. Maher, L. Saadi, K. Fujimoto and S. Ito, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Hong, Y. J. Park, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and Y. J. Shin, J. Power Sources, 2005, 147, 214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Li, T. Muta and H. Noguchi, J. Power Sources, 2004, 135, 262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohzuku and Y. Makimura, Chem. Lett., 2001, 30, 744 CrossRef .
Y. J. Park, Y. S. Hong, X. Wu, K. S. Ryu and S. H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Martha, H. Sclar, Z. S. Framowitz, D. Kovacheva, N. Saliyski, Y. Gofer, P. Sharon, E. Golik, B. Markovsky and D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Lu and G. T. K. Fey, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Ragavendran, L. Lu, K. Barner and A. K. Arof, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23547 CAS .
K. Ragavendran, D. Sherwood, D. Vasudevan and B. Emmanuel, Physica B, 2009, 404, 2166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jayalakshmi, M. Mohan Rao and F. Scholz, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chew, T. J. Patey, O. Waser, S. H. Ng, R. Büchel, A. Tricoli, F. Krumeich, J. Wang, H. K. Liu, S. E. Pratsinis and P. Novak, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Zhao, X. Yu, R. Cai, R. Ran, H. T. Wang and Z. P. Shao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2900 RSC .
L. Vijayan, R. Cheruku and G. Govindaraj, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Mo, Z. Y. Lei, K. N. Sun and D. Rooney, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Sun, X. Huang, M. Muhler, W. G. Schuhmann and E. Ventosa, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5506 RSC .
R. Yi, F. Dai, M. L. Gordin, S. R. Chen and D. H. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Xu, Y. J. Zhu, Y. H. Liu and C. S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, D. Li, W. C. Li, C. Lei, Q. Sun and A. H. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Li, C. P. Han, Y. B. He, C. Yang, H. D. Du, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9595 CAS .
K. Nathiya, D. Bhuvaneswari, Gangulibabu, D. Nirmala and N. Kalaiselvi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6885 RSC .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wen, J. M. Wu and J. P. Tu, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 513, 592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, D. Xia and K. Zheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 513, 460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300958 Search PubMed .
J. Lin, A. R. O. Raji, K. W. Nan, Z. W. Peng, Z. Yan, E. L. G. Samuel, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wang, L. Zhou and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1093 Search PubMed .
J. M. Haag, G. Pattanaik and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wen and J. M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4112 CAS .
P. Gomathisankar, K. Hachisuka, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki, K. Funasaka and S. Kaneko, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 982 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Li, J. C. Deng, Y. Li, W. Liang, K. Wang, L. T. Kang, S. Z. Zeng, S. H. Yin, Z. G. Zhao, X. G. Liu, Y. Z. Yang and F. Gao, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 590, 318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, L. N. Xu, W. Y. Li and X. L. Gou, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Prakash, P. Manikandan, K. Ramesha, M. Sathiya, J.-M. Tarascon and A. K. Shukla, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yuan, R. Cai, K. Wang, R. Ran, S. M. Liu and Z. P. Shao, Ceram. Int., 2009, 35, 1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. C. Lin, W. J. Cui, Q. Xiao and J. B. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7895 CAS .
X. Li, Q. Xiao, B. Liu, H. C. Lin and J. B. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vu, Y. Q. Qian and A. Stein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .
W. F. Wei, X. W. Cui, W. X. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697 RSC .
S. Chen, W. Xing, J. J. Duan, X. J. Hu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2941 CAS .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 Search PubMed .
A. Pendashteh, M. S. Rahmanifar, R. B. Kaner and M. F. Mousavi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1972 RSC .
Y. Sharma, N. Sharma, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, C. Yu, F. Jiahuan, K. P. Loh and B. V. R. Chowdari, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9619 RSC .
W. Xiao, J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haetge, I. Djerdj and T. Brezesinski, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6726 RSC .
L. Q. Mai, F. Yang, Y. L. Zhao, X. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Z. Luo, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 381 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Cai, D. D. Wang, B. Liu, Y. R. Wang, Y. Liu, L. L. Wang, H. Li, H. Huang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12905 CAS .
J. Chang, M. Jin, F. Yao, T. H. Kim, V. T. Le, H. Yue, F. Gunes, B. Li, A. Ghosh, S. Xie and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Senthilkumar, K. Vijaya Sankar, R. Kalai Selvan, M. Danielle and M. Manickam, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 352 RSC .
B. Senthilkumar, D. Meyrick, Y. S. Lee and R. K. Selvan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16542 RSC .
H. G. Jung, N. Venugopal, B. Scrosati and Y. K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Choi, J. H. Im, T. Kim, J. H. Park and C. R. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16986 RSC .
B. Wang, T. R. Kang, N. Xia, F. Y. Wen and L. M. Chen, Ionics, 2013, 19, 1527 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Kim, Y. K. Sun, K. H. Shin and C. S. Jin, Phys. Scr., 2010, T139, 014053 CrossRef .
M. Jayalakshmi, M. Palaniappa and K. Balasubramanian, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2008, 3, 96 CAS .
M. Jayalakshmi and K. Balasubramanian, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2009, 4, 878 CAS .
M. R. Gao, Y. F. Xu, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986 RSC .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Francas, C. Gimbert-Surinach, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7501 RSC .
M. Cargnello, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, T. Montini, D. Barreca and P. Fornasiero, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Barreca, G. Carraro, V. Gombac, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, P. Fornasiero and E. Tondello, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Kaneco, T. Miwa, K. Hachisuka, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki, S. C. Verma and K. Sugihara, Nanocatalysis for Fuels and Chemicals, ACS Symposium Series,  2012, vol. 1092, ch. 2 Search PubMed .
M. E. A. Warwick, K. Kaunisto, D. Barreca, G. Carraro, A. Gasparotto, C. Maccato, E. Bontempi, C. Sada, T. P. Ruoko, S. Turner and G. V. Tendeloo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8667 CAS .
L. J. Groven, T. L. Pfeil and T. L. Pourpoint, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Ge, S. H. Chan, Q. L. Liu and Q. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Aruna, M. Muthuraman and K. C. Patil, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 2499 RSC .
C. W. Sun and U. Stimming, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shishkin and T. Ziegler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21411 CAS .
A. D. Lan and A. S. Mukasyan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9573 CAS .
W. G. Zhao, S. L. An and L. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 94, 1496 CAS .
M. G. Bellino, D. G. Lamas and N. E. W. de Reca, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yan, T. Mori, J. Zou and J. Drennan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 92, 2745 CAS .
N. Jaiswal, S. Upadhyay, D. Kumar and O. Parkash, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Prakash, V. K. W. Grips and S. T. Aruna, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 358 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kim, N. Lee, K. B. Kim, B. K. Kim, H. Chang, S. J. Song and J. Y. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, F. Liang, L. Liu, S. P. Jiang and L. Jian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, A. Nobuta, I. Nakatsugawa and T. Akiyama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roncali, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Zhang, S. Finefrock, D. X. Liang, G. G. Yadav, H. R. Yang, H. Y. Fang and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2430 RSC .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. H. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Chung and C. M. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2012, 28, 713 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, A. Kumar and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yao, X. J. Xu, J. S. Wang, L. L. Shi and L. D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1100 CAS .
H. Ma, H. L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J. L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, L. M. Andersson, Z. George, K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, P. Heriksson, R. Kroon, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganas, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, M. T. Cao, Y. Z. Jin, X. L. Dai, X. Y. Liang, Z. Z. Ye, M. Li, J. P. Cheng, X. Z. Xiao, Z. W. Wu, Z. H. Xia, B. Q. Sun, E. G. Wang, Y. Q. Mo, F. Gao and F. L. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301460 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These two authors have contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Series of pictures illustrating the different preparation stages: (a) sol solution; (b) viscous gel; (c) dried gel; (d) as-burned product; (e) calcined product (if post-treatment is needed). Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
Tc = T0 + (ΔH0r − ΔH0p)/Cp	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Proposed coordination structure of the Fe (Al)–urea–nitrate complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical image of a flexible combustion-processed In2O3 device on Ar (30 nm Al gate electrode/41 nm α-alumina dielectric, with 30 nm Al source and drain electrodes) and optical image of an inkjet printed In2O3 line on n++Si/41 nm α-alumina (inset). (b) The structure of a top-contact bottom-gate thin-film transistor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright © 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the evolution of a VO2 nanorod-like array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of adsorption models of (a) MO and (b) RhB on the BiOBr surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of the precursor of composite nanofibers of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 (inset: SEM image at higher magnification). (b) SEM image of Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 nanofibers after 300 °C treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of MgAl2O4 powders. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  FE-SEM micrographs of the BiVO4 crystallites obtained via (a) SCS and (b) SSR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the CMC-assisted formation of BiVO4 nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of the surface and cross-section of a BiVO4 film deposited on a soda-lime glass substrate with ten layers and thermally annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright © 2014, Springer.	 
CO(NH2)2 → NH3 + HCNO	(5)
NiO + NH3 → Ni + H2O + N2 (T > 450 °C)	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 11  Capacity–voltage profiles for nanocrystalline Li4Ti5O12 synthesized by the combustion method at different rates. The inset shows the capacity voltage profile for bulk Li4Ti5O12 prepared by a solid-state method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of Li4Ti5O12 prepared via (a) solution combustion and (b) solid-state reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright © 2008, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These two authors have contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
