Recent progress in morphology control of supramolecular fullerene  assemblies and its applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C000680G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C000680G
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4021-4035Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsRecent progress in morphology control of supramolecular fullerene assemblies and its applications

        
          
            Sukumaran Santhosh 
            Babu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Helmuth 
            Möhwald
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Takashi 
            Nakanishi
          
          
        
      *abc
aNational Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba 305-0047, Japan. E-mail: NAKANISHI.Takashi@nims.go.jp
bMax Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany
cPRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Japan
Received 
      26th April 2010
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      24th September 2010
    AbstractSelf-organisation is an elegant tool for the creation of assemblies controlled in all dimensions with tunable properties in natural as well as artificial supramolecular systems. Especially, the supramolecular organisation of fullerene (C60) using π-stacking interaction to form various functional assemblies is of particular importance as it can provide excellent optoelectronic properties. Interestingly, the insufficient solubility of C60 has been overcome through the noncovalent interaction with other hosts and covalent functionalisation with organic moieties. This has resulted in supramolecular assemblies at the nano/micro/macro scales under different preparation conditions. The developments in the area of fullerene self-assembly during the last few decades have significantly contributed to the sensible design and fabrication of organic electronic devices. A summary of the very recent reports regarding the organisation of pristine C60, its coassembly with other hosts, unique polymorphs of fullerene derivatives, functional liquid crystalline assemblies, donor/acceptor heterojunctions and its applications will be presented in this tutorial review. Future research directions in which the supramolecular fullerene assembly may achieve more precision and improve the efficiency of the photovoltaic devices are also discussed.
S. S. Babu, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi
Dr Sukumaran Santhosh Babu was born in Kerala, India, in 1980. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry from National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Trivandrum (2009, from the group of Dr A. Ajayaghosh), where his doctoral studies focused on the synthesis, organogelation and photophysical analysis of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)s. In 2009 he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the research group of Professor Helmuth Möhwald at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany (MPI-NIMS International Joint Laboratory, with Dr Takashi Nakanishi). His research interests include synthesis of functional organic molecules, self-assembly of fullerene (C60) derivatives and their photovoltaic applications.Prof. Helmuth Möhwald received his diploma in physics (1971) and PhD (1974) from Univ. Gottingen (Germany). He spent nearly 5 years in industry at IBM San Jose (1974/75) and Dornier-Systems (1975-81), in between getting a habilitation at Univ. Ulm (1975–78). After professorships in biophysics (TU Munich, 1981–1987) and physical chemistry (Univ. Mainz 1987–93) he became founding director of the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. Among his recent awards are the lectureship award of the Japanese Chemical Society, the Overbeak medal of the European Colloid and Interface Society, the Wolfgang-Ostwald award of the German Kolloidgesellschaft, the Gay-Lussac-award from the French ministry of science and technology and a honorary doctorate of Univ. Montpellier. He has more than 780 publications, which have been cited more than 27000 times. His main interests are molecular interfaces and films, capsules and controlled release, membrane biophysics and supramolecular interactions.Dr Takashi Nakanishi was born in 1974 in Nagasaki, Japan, and received his PhD from Nagasaki University in 2000. After JSPS postdoctoral research at Houston University and at Oxford University, he joined his current institution in 2004, National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba. In 2007 he became a senior researcher. In 2007–2010, he was promoted to group leader at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany. He is also a researcher for PRESTO (“Structure Control and Function”), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). His primary research interest is the development of self-organized multifunctional soft materials including dimension and morphology controlled supramolecular architectures and optoelectronic-active fluids (e.g. liquid crystals, room temperature liquids).
1. Introduction
Fullerene (C60), a truncated icosahedron (Ih) with 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons consisting of sp2-hybridised carbon atoms and having a diameter of 7.1 Å, is one of the most extensively studied carbon nano-materials in recent years due to the excellent redox, optical and optoelectronic properties.1 Hence, the self-organization of fullerenes has gathered much attention in developing various functional nanostructures with controlled dimensionality and tailored properties.2 The low reorganisation energy, accelerated forward and decelerated backward electron transfer when compared to planar electron acceptors and the magnificent carrier mobility has led to an extended use in next-generation organic electronic devices such as field effect transistors (FETs) and solar cells (SCs).2,3 The basic understanding of the contribution of intermolecular ordering of fullerenes at the nano/macroscopic level and the important role of the organised morphology in device performance have attracted the attention of scientists.4,5 The number of publications in recent years related to the development of supramolecular architectures and their application in photovoltaic organic/polymeric devices testify the importance of self-assembly of C60 and its better performance in nanodevices.6,7 Apart from pristine C60 assemblies, the preparation of inclusion complexes with various host molecules is also widely exploited as an efficient technique for the construction of functional supramolecular assemblies.8,9 In addition, various supramolecular dyads, triads and polyads carrying C60 and different electron donors has also attracted attention in the recent past for intramolecular photo-induced electron transfer reactions with longer charge-separated state lifetime and thereby resembling natural photosynthetic antennas.7 Moreover, the design and development of new functional C60 derivatives in combination with other organic compounds in a cost effective way, that would provide efficient supramolecular assemblies for practical applications, is a challenging task for fullerene and supramolecular chemists.
In this tutorial review, we discuss the self-organisation of C60 and its derivatives towards functionally optimised supramolecular architectures and their applications. In addition to the optoelectronic properties, morphology oriented surface features such as superhydrophobicity in hierarchically organised supramolecular structures of fullerenes are also described as one of the newly established supramolecular materials based on fullerene assemblies.10 Studies of the morphology control are important for various reasons. (i) Not only superhydrophobicity but also other properties like electrical, optical characteristics as well as device manufacturing are dependent on it. (ii) From detailed understanding of the morphology control, one can draw conclusions regarding the mechanism of the assembly. The main idea is to disclose the recent developments in the area of fullerene self-assembly including pristine C60, supramolecular architectures, liquid crystals, electron donor/acceptor heterojunctions and application of some of these organised structures in photovoltaics. The motivation for such a review is the unavailability of a comprehensive literature sketch regarding the very recent developments in this area mainly during the last five years. The available and useful reviews are limited to self-organisation on surfaces such as studies of scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and self-assembled monolayers of fullerenes.11,12 Hence, we hope that this tutorial review will be beneficial to a wide readership including the research field in supramolecular chemistry (self-assembly), materials chemistry and photophysics highlighting photovoltaic applications.
2. Controlled self-organization of pristine C60
Pristine C60 forms crystalline assemblies with different shapes under different sample preparation procedures.13 The vapor-driven crystallization and solution-driven self-assemblies such as liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation (LLIP),14 template-assisted dip drying15 and drop drying process16 are some of the important and developed methods for the assembly of C60. It is a meaningful approach to understand the formation of various close packed structures of the spherical C60 through three-dimensional π–π interactions resulting in C60 microcrystalline assemblies. The preparation, characterisation and application of crystalline C60 with specific geometries are of both fundamental and practical importance. Recently, there have been several reports in the area of solvent-controlled crystallisation of C60 to form dimensionally regulated nanostructures with different sizes and shapes such as nanorods, nanotubes, nanoplates and nanowhiskers.13–28 Interestingly, the electrical and optical properties of C60 could be retained, enhanced or modulated by the controlled geometries obtained through various preparation methods. The current section deals with the preparation of crystalline assemblies of pristine C60, and finally the application of C60-nanowhiskers as OFETs is also described.
Liu et al., synthesized hexagonal single-crystalline C60m-xylene nanorods with diameters in micrometres and nanometres by the evaporation of an m-xylene C60 solution on substrates such as glass, silicon, diamond and different metals at room temperature.16 The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the nanorods indicated a mass loss at a temperature of 112 °C corresponding to the evaporation of m-xylene from the C60 solvate nanorods, which was further confirmed by the 770 cm−1 peak in the IR spectrum. Fluorescence studies indicated that doping of m-xylene enhanced the luminescence of C60 by about two orders of magnitude compared to that of pristine C60 crystals in air. The van der Waals interaction between C60 and m-xylene molecules in the C60 solvate nanorods reduces the icosahedral symmetry of the C60 molecule and thereby enhances the fluorescence intensity.
In 2002, Miyazawa et al., prepared C60 nanowhiskers using the LLIP method at the isopropyl alcohol (IPA)/toluene interface.14,17 The slow addition of IPA to the toluene C60 solution resulted in the formation of fine needle-like crystals of C60 with submicron diameter and 10 nm thickness at the interface after 24 h (Fig. 1a). The fibers exhibited a time-dependent growth in length and reached a maximum of 10 mm after 53 h. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements suggested that two different types of needle-like crystals were formed; a smaller, stable Type A, resistant to an electron beam, and a less stable Type B. The stability of the Type A crystal is due to the polymerization of C60 nanowhiskers via “2+2” cycloaddition. When the solvent system was changed to an IPA–benzene mixture, nanoporous whiskers were obtained.18 After cooling the solutions to 5 °C, IPA was slowly added to saturated benzene C60 solution and ultrasonicated for 1 min at 5 °C, followed by incubation at the same temperature for 24 h, resulted in the formation of very thin nanoporous nanowhiskers having lengths of a few hundred micrometres.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of the nanowhiskers14 and schematic representation of the selective precipitation of (b), (c), (d) fullerene nanosheets and the structural transformation from 2D nanosheets to (e) 1D nanorods (from (c), (d)) and (f) nanosheets (from (b)).20 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Miyazawa, NIMS). 
In 2007, a report from the same group established the preparation of size-tunable, stable, flexible and transparent C60 hexagonal thin crystalline nanosheets via an alcohol/CCl4 interfacial precipitation method.19 The hexagonal nanosheets with uniform thickness (∼7.7 μm in diameter) showed a steady decrease in the diameter by varying the alcohol from IPA (∼7.5 μm, Fig. 1b) to ethanol (∼2.5 μm) and to methanol (500 nm). Repeated experiments with alcohols of different polarity such as n-butanol, 2-butanol and n-pentanol indicated that the number of carbon atoms and the polarity of the alcohol play a vital role in the particle size variation. High polarity alcohols only lead to the formation of regular hexagonal nanosheets. TEM studies revealed the fine porous nature of these nanosheets irrespective of the nature of the alcohol used, and the hexagonal crystalline nature was confirmed by the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern experiments.
In self-assembly, due to the interplay of several decisive factors, it is very difficult to obtain nano- and microstructures with predetermined morphologies. This challenging task has been achieved in the C60 assembly through controlled formation of two dimensional (2D) hexagons, rhombi crystals and one-dimensional (1D) rods through the LLIP method (Fig. 1).20 The addition of IPA or tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) (6 mL) to saturated C60 solutions in benzene, toluene, CCl4 (1 mL) resulted in various 2D crystals. Uniform shaped hexagons, rhombi and polygon mixtures were obtained, respectively, at IPA/CCl4 (Fig. 1b), TBA/toluene (Fig. 1c) and TBA/benzene (Fig. 1d) interfaces. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the rhombus nanosheet from TBA/toluene exhibited a mixed crystalline lattice of face centered cubic (fcc, a = 1.410 nm) and hexagonal (a = 2.382 nm and c = 1.089 nm), whereas the corresponding patterns of pristine C60 powder and the hexagonal nanosheet from IPA/CCl4 showed fcc and hexagonal crystalline structures. This was further confirmed by a significant shift of the Ag(2) mode peak to 1459 cm−1 in the Raman spectrum. Interestingly, the exposure of nanorhombi and polygons to water results in the selective transformation of 2D sheets to 1D nanorods through a sheet rolling process (Fig. 1e), whereas the nanohexagon does not undergo shape changes (Fig. 1f). The shape transformation is accompanied by a change in the XRD pattern to the fcc lattice and back shift of the Raman Ag(2) peak to 1464 cm−1. The reason for this transformation is that the metastable and strained mixed crystalline structure of the nanorhombi metamorphosize into stable 1D nanorods.
As another concept, Cha, Miyazawa et al. reported a simple method for the preparation of vertically aligned hexagonal C60 microtube arrays over a large area.21 Injection of IPA at a rate of 0.05 mL min−1 into C60/toluene solution from the bottom, resulted in supersaturation near the anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) membrane and thereby leads to the heterogeneous nucleation of C60 crystals (Fig. 2). The diameter and density of the C60 microtubes could be controlled to some extent by changes in the growth conditions such as injection rate of IPA and amount of saturated C60/toluene solution. An increase in the density and a narrowing in the size distribution of vertically aligned C60 microtubes on the substrates were observed with a decrease in the injection rate of IPA.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the apparatus used for preparing vertically grown C60 microtube arrays and the substrates on which the vertically aligned C60 microtubes were grown. (b) SEM image (side view) of vertically grown C60 microtube arrays.21 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Miyazawa, NIMS). 
An interesting report from the group of Choi exhibited a substrate-independent, solvent geometry controlled self-assembly of C60 crystals. It is through a “solution drop-drying process” by dropping target C60 solutions onto solid substrates and drying them at room temperature to form disc, wire and dot structures of C60 (Fig. 3).22 The detailed understanding of the process established a direct correlation between solvent geometry and final self-assembled C60 structures from pseudo 3D (p3D) solvents (CCl4, SnCl4), p2D (m-xylene, 1,3-dichlorobenzene, mesitylene) and p1D (n-hexane) solvents, resulting in the formation of p2D hexagonal discs, p1D wire and p0D C60 dot structures, respectively (Fig. 3). Similarly disk-shaped 2D single-crystalline C60 was prepared by using a vapor-solid process.23
 Fig. 3  SEM and optical microscopic images of C60 crystals obtained from solutions of (a) CCl4, (b) m-xylene and (c) n-hexane. The scale bars of the inset figures in (a) and (c) are 30 nm and 500 nm, respectively.22 
In contradiction to previous reports, a reprecipitation method using m-xylene and IPA for the synthesis of C60 micro/nano crystals (M/NCs) with unique multibranched structures was developed by Masuhara and coworkers.24 Due to the fast mutual diffusion-assisted rapid nucleation and crystal growth, the size of C60 M/NCs showed a gradual decrease with increasing m-xylene concentration. Interestingly, a morphology variation from multibranched to cubic structure was observed with increase in the concentration of the injected solution from 0.5 to above 1.5 mM. At a fixed concentration of m-xylene solution of C60 (2 mM), the volume of the injected solution also played a crucial role in controlling the shape of the obtained crystals. For example, rod-like nanocrystals (Fig. 4a) and different hollow nanocrystals with a bundle structure (Fig. 4b) were obtained from at 100 mL and at 500 mL of the m-xylene C60 solution, respectively.25 Moreover the aging temperature after reprecipitation also affected the sizes and shapes of the obtained C60 fine crystals. At higher temperature (353 K), longer rods with smaller diameters at both ends than that at the central part were obtained (Fig. 4c). C60 fine crystals with different shapes such as spherical (m-xylene (1 mM, 200 mL)/IPA (10 mL), 353 K) (Fig. 4d), fiber (m-xylene (3 mM, 200 mL)/IPA (10 mL), 273 K), star (toluene (1 mM, 500 mL)/IPA (10 mL), rt), hexagon plate (p-xylene (3 mM, 200 mL)/1-propanol (10 mL) rt) (Fig. 4e) and nanoball (pyridine (0.3 mM, 200 mL)/ethanol (10 mL) at rt) (Fig. 4f) were obtained by using different combinations of good solvents, poor solvents and aging temperatures. Other reports related to the synthesis of C60 nanorods having nanometre width by the evaporation of m-xylene solution26 and unusually long crystalline C60 nanowires from 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene27 have also found interest in recent years.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of C60 fine micro/nano crystals prepared by the reprecipitation method at injected amounts of the m-xylene solution of C60 (2 mM) (a) 100 ml, (b) 500 ml, (c) rod-like crystals obtained at an aging temperature of 353 K after reprecipitation and different shaped crystals obtained, (d) spherical, (e) hexagons plates, (f) nanoballs.25 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Dr A. Masuhara, Tohoku University). 
The significant part in the preparation of C60 nano/micro structures depends on their performance in the end use applications. A practical demonstration of the C60 nanowhiskers synthesized by the LLIP method using IPA/m-xylene in FET was shown by Ogawa and coworkers.28 The placement of the long straight nanowires with hexagonal cross section as channels to bridge the electrodes in FET showed a carrier mobility of 2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 under vacuum at room temperature. The absence of a saturation behavior of the nanowire FET device at any of the gate voltages indicates the possibility of high contact resistance due to the bridging of source and drain electrodes using C60 NWs.
The advantage of different solution-based self-assembling processes is the control over dimensionality of the resulting C60 crystalline structures. Even though different C60 nano/micro structures with different shapes and aspect ratios could be prepared, till now, no detailed understanding and correlation between the different crystalline ordering and optoelectronic or photoconductive properties is available. In addition, the sizes of the reported C60 structures are not large enough to yield a ready to use functional material in organic electronic applications because of the necessary micrometre level interface contact in the device fabrication especially in FETs. Hence, efficient strategies for the preparation of C60 structures with sizes even in the micro/centimetre range are yet to be developed. Other challenging issues in this regard are the placement of the structures in the precise position and minimizing the high contact resistance which reduces the carrier mobilities, in bridging the electrodes.
3. Supramolecular coassembly of fullerenes
Another research area that has received much attention in the recent past is the spontaneous supramolecular self-assembly of C60 with polymers or π-conjugated molecules to form functional assemblies at the nanometre scale. The multicomponent supramolecular organisation at the molecular level can deliver spectacular assembled architectures with specific properties. Since pristine C60 is used in most of the cases, π-stacking interaction between the components is the main driving force for the assembly. One of the advantages in these hybrid systems is that the optoelectronic properties of C60 can be retained. The important criterion in this bottom-up approach for nanofabrication is the selection of the other component to encapsulate or form a coassembly with fullerenes.
Sanders and coworkers reported α-amino acid functionalised naphthalenediimide (NDI) based polymeric, and dynamic helical nanotube receptor 1 for C60 (Scheme 1).29 The addition of C60 to a chloroform solution of 1 showed a drastic color change from pale yellow to dark orange or brown within a few minutes due to the formation of a supramolecular inclusion complex. The formation of chiral assemblies with C60 inside the NDI nanotube was confirmed by a significant Cotton effect at 595 and 663 nm in the circular dichroism (CD) spectrum, attributed to an electronic transition of C60. The complexation of C60 inside the cavity resulted in an upfield shift of more than 1.4 ppm in the 13C NMR signal of C60, indicative of a shielding effect due to the proximity of the naphthyl units.
 Scheme 1  Chemical structures of various systems used for coassembly with C60: α-amino acid functionalised naphthalenediimide 1, syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) 2, amphiphilic oligo(p-phenylene) containing mono (3) and bis (4) ethylene oxide side chain, and amphiphilic (p-phenylene) polymer 5. 
A report from the group of Yashima showed the development of supramolecular nanospheres and/or nanonetworks of C60-end-capped isotactic and syndiotactic poly(methylmethacrylate)s through stereocomplex formation.30 Another approach from the same group showed a peapod-like crystalline complex of C60 encapsulated inside the helical cavity of syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) 2 (Scheme 1).31 The organogel obtained after cooling the hot toluene solutions of 2 and C60 to room temperature showed high thermal stability (up to 60 °C), indicating that encapsulated C60 molecules reinforce the physical gel. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the 2/C60 monolayer showed a crystalline rod-like helix-bundled structure and the individual stripe patterned chains possess a chain–chain lateral spacing of 1.9 ± 0.1 nm and a helical pitch of 0.9 ± 0.1 nm. TEM images suggested a 1D alignment of C60 molecules encapsulated within the helices, and this was finally confirmed by the presence of a bisignate CD band at 656 nm due to the encapsulation of the C60 molecules within the tubular cavity of 2.
The creation of 1D assemblies of C60 is of particular interest from the application point of view, in this context, the strategy of using different molecular aggregates as templates to organise C60 in a 1D manner has attracted much attention. Recently, Lee et al. reported C60-triggered tubular stacking of water-soluble toroids with a hydrophobic cavity formed by the coassembly of laterally grafted p-phenylene rod amphiphiles (Scheme 1).32 In the coassembly of 3 and 4, when the content of 3 was 80 mol%, due to the increasing volume fraction of hydrophilic segments through coassembly, the ribbon structures were transformed into highly curved barrel-like toroids. The toroids are composed of a single layer of the molecules with highly uniform cross-sectional diameter (∼4 nm). The toroids have a hydrophobic interior with a diameter of ∼2 nm and a hydrophilic exterior with a diameter of ∼10 nm. The TEM image of the coassembly of 3 and 4 with 30 mol% of C60 revealed the presence of cylindrical aggregates with a diameter of 10 nm. The effective encapsulation of C60 in the inner hydrophobic cavity is confirmed by the decrease in the fluorescence intensity of the p-phenylene backbone and the increase in the hydrodynamic radius (RH) of the mixed solution of 3 and 4 upon addition of up to 30 mol% of C60. It indicates that C60 drives the supramolecular rings to stack on top of one another to form a tubular structure in which several C60 molecules are encapsulated within the internal cavity.
High aspect ratio nanofibers were obtained by the synergistic self-assembly of C60s and amphiphilic poly(p-phenylene) (PPP) 5 upon casting of the dilute solution on solid substrates and on water under ambient conditions (Scheme 1).33 The resulting nanofibers having average diameters of 35 ± 5 nm and length of 30–50 μm, packed in a parallel way to form whiskers (Fig. 5a). The higher level of ordering investigated by high resolution TEM (HR-TEM) showed regular lattice fringes in the nanoneedles spanning along the growth axis (Fig. 5b). The fine-tuning of the aspect ratio was possible by adjusting the kinetics of solvent evaporation during the direct casting. Interestingly, the morphology of the nanohybrid whiskers was effectively controlled using different solvent mixtures, for example, honeycomb structures with a high degree of directionality were obtained when a mixture of toluene and CHCl3 (50%, v/v) was used (Fig. 5c), and CHCl3 solution resulted in ordered honeycomb arrays of polymer film with cuboctahedral fullerene structures (Fig. 5d). Whereas, a solvent mixture of CS2 and CHCl3 (85%, v/v) led to the controlled crystallization of C60 to develop a large area of periodic and intricately patterned nanohybrid thin films with C60 integrated into the honeycomb matrix (Fig. 5e).
 Fig. 5  SEM and HRTEM images of 1:1 C60:amphiphilic 5 nanohybrid (0.5 mg mL−1). (a) Side view SEM image and (b) HR-TEM image along the lattice fringes for assemblies prepared from toluene solution. SEM images of the nanohybrid forming honeycomb structures cast from (c) toluene/CHCl3 (50%, v/v), (d) CHCl3 and (e) CS2/CHCl3 (85%, v/v).33 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission). 
Jayawickramarajah and coworkers reported the formation of water-soluble unidirectional C60–porphyrin nanorods using β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) functionalised octadentate tetraphenylporphyrin 6 and pristine C60 in a DMF–toluene mixture, utilising the ability of the β-CD cavity to encapsulate one C60 molecule (Fig. 6a).34 The TEM image of the aqueous assembly revealed the presence of several unidirectional structures with 300 to 500 nm length and the long axes of the resulting nanorods are formed by the inclusion complexation of approximately 150–250 units of the porphyrin–C60 coassembly (Fig. 6b). The formation of self-assembled nanorods was confirmed by UV-vis, IR and DLS measurements as well as by chains of bright protrusions with periodicity of around 2 nm and height of 2.5 nm, evidenced in the STM studies (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the mode of complexation of pristine C60 by β-CD carrying porphyrin 6. (b) TEM and (c) STM micrographs of the assembly.34 
The interaction between C60 and conjugated π-polymers such as p-phenylene has been successfully utilised to develop supramolecular assemblies.33 Another π-conjugated polymer was also found to be effective in assisting the self-organisation of C60. Takeuchi et al. reported the controlled formation of single-crystalline C60 microspheres comprised of nanoplates with a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure through porphyrin-polymer-assisted supramolecular self-assembly.35 The interaction of porphyrin polymer 7 with C60 leads to the preorganization of C60 molecules around the polymer chain and to the formation of disc-like objects and microspheres (Fig. 7). Interestingly, the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis indicated that only a minor amount of porphyrin polymer is present in the microspheres (Zn/C = 1:1357, [Por]/[C60] = 1:20) and this could be attributed to the exclusion of porphyrin during the C60 crystal formation which resembles a bio-inspired mechanism of mineralization. The initially formed nanoparticle aggregates upon slow evaporation assemble to form micrometre-sized multilayer discs and thereby provide a platform for the formation of other discs composed of freshly formed nanoparticle aggregates perpendicular to the initial platform. Further, the oriented-attachment growth mechanism helps the formation of complex microspheres of nanoplates.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of C60 microspheres of nanoplates formed by slow evaporation of a toluene solution of C60 and porphyrin polymer 7 (0.25 mg ml−1).35 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr M. Takeuchi, NIMS). 
The selective interaction of acidic species with the polyvinyl pyridine (P4VP) domain due to the very different surface basicities of the polystyrene (PS) and P4VP domains in the polystyrene-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine)s copolymer 8 was utilised to organise C60 carboxylic acid derivative 9 (Fig. 8).36 Spherical nanoclusters of C60 with controlled size (several tens of nanometres) and morphology were obtained by a supramolecular approach using random-coil copolymer 8 as a host and 9 as a guest. Uniform black spheres with diameters of 20–30 nm are formed in 3-pentanone solution of these coassemblies. The poor solubility of the C60-complexed P4VP block and the high solubility of the PS block in 3-pentanone resulted in the formation of micelle-like superstructures, hence the morphology is mainly dependent on the composition of the polymer chains. Whereas the P4VP/PS ratio changes from 0.96:1 → 0.41:1 → 0.1:1, the diameter of the spherical aggregates shows a small decrease from 20–30 → 20–25 → 15–20 nm, respectively. However, for a further increase in the content of P4VP (P4VP/PS = 1.5:1) the formation of a mixture of sphere and cylinder superstructures is observed.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of PS-P4VP block copolymer 8 and C60 carboxylic acid derivative 9 as well as a schematic representation of the formation of supramolecular rod-coil polymers leading to the generation of C60 encapsulated micelles.36 
The first example of the tuning of self-assembled fullerene morphology from cylindrical to spherical structure by using charge-transfer complexation between C60 and 8 was reported by Ikkala and coworkers.37 The complexation of C60 with the copolymer 8 in xylene retains the characteristic purple colour of pristine C60. Upon aging, the solution becomes brown with an increase in the absorbance in the region of 450–550 nm characteristic of the charge-transfer complexation between C60 and the pyridine units of the block copolymer. Interestingly, this interaction in fresh solution resulted in a cylindrical morphology consisting of P4VP cylinders in the PS matrix. In contrast, the aged solution showed a remarkable morphological change from cylinders to spheres and this unusual observation can be explained as the movement of C60 molecules from the major PS domains to the minor P4VP domains upon complexation, which results in an increase in the effective volume fraction of the P4VP-rich domain in relation to that of PS. This interaction and the strong tendency of C60 molecules to form aggregates provided the corresponding morphology transition.
The coassembly approach within the cavity of different hosts or molecular template assisted organisation of C60 has achieved much attention due to the capability to refine the self-organisation conditions and developments of organised donor/acceptor systems with promising electronic properties. A detailed discussion in connection with applications of the coassembled structures of C60 is presented in a later section of this review.
4. Supramolecular assemblies of functionalised fullerenes
4a. Amphiphilic (π-hydrophobic) approaches
Amphiphilic molecular organisation is one of the widely used methods in supramolecular chemistry to construct nanoarchitectures through the controlled balance between two competing interactions. The well-known strategy of using the balanced hydrophilic–hydrophobic structural motifs gives rise to micelles, bilayers and further vesicular structures. This has widely been accepted due to the sensitivity and tunability of the structural units to form diverse structures under favorable solvent conditions. The advantage of this method is the possibility to solubilise the extremely hydrophobic C60 in polar media and to utilise the propensity of amphiphilic fullerenes to form prominent assemblies. Recently, there has been large number of reports regarding self-assembly of amphiphilic fullerenes, in particular, studies from the groups of Hirsch and Nakamura have demonstrated aggregation behaviors of amphiphilic C60 derivatives (Scheme 2).38–40 The decoration of C60 with five pairs of dodecyl chains, one pair of polyamide dendrons (10),38 as shown in Scheme 2, and a potassium salt of pentaphenyl fullerenes (11, 12)39,40 forms vesicles in aqueous conditions. Interestingly, the potassium salt of (p-perfluorooctyl)phenyl functionalised C60 (12) with a nonpolar/polar/nonpolar ternary motif also spontaneously forms vesicles in water.40 In this section, we discuss important C60 based donor–acceptor amphiphilic assemblies, their properties and applications.
 Scheme 2  Chemical structure of fullerene amphiphiles; polyamide globular amphiphile 10, potassium salts of pentaphenyl (11), (p-(perfluorooctyl)phenyl) (12) fullerene and zinc phthalocyanine–C60 dyad 13. 
Guldi, Torres, Prato and coworkers reported the organisation of a phthalocyanine–C60 amphiphilic derivative 13 (Scheme 2) as a donor–acceptor dyad into ordered one-dimensional nanotubules (NTs) in polar solvents. The system showed a facile electron transfer with six orders of longer lifetime of the charge separated state (τ ≈ 1.4 ms) when compared to the monomer (τ ≈ 3 ns).41 Transient absorption measurements confirmed the electron-transfer process by the appearance of the peaks in the far-visible region with maximum at 850 nm corresponding to the one-electron oxidized π-radical cation of zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc˙+) and the near-infrared region with maximum at 1010 nm resembling one-electron reduced C60 (C60˙−). The presence of elements of phthalocyanine and C60 ordering in the system through intermolecular forces increased the lifetime of the charge-separated state.
As another donor–acceptor system, Fukushima, Aida and coworkers reported the self-assembly and photovoltaic properties of C60-appended amphiphilic hexabenzocoronene (HBC) 14, which forms coaxial nanotubes with a π-stacked HBC array covered by a molecular layer of C60 (Fig. 9).42 The field effect charge carrier mobility measurements of the nanotube formed by 14 containing long, paraffinic side chains at one end and triethylene glycol containing C60 at the other end (Fig. 9) revealed an ambipolar charge carrier mobility (hole mobility (μh) of 9.7 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1 and electron mobility (μe) of 1.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and photovoltaic response upon light illumination due to the peculiar coaxial configuration. The nanotubes resulting from the coassembly with HBC derivative 15 without C60 showed a nonlinear relation in the values of μe and μh with the nanotube composition. In comparison with that, the advantage of the coassembly is the possibility to optimize the p/n heterojunction and ambipolar carrier transport properties, thereby enhancing the open-circuit voltage in the photovoltaic output. The coassembled nanotube with 10 mol% of 14 showed an intratubular hole mobility of 2.0 cm2 V−1 s−1, closer to the intersheet mobility in graphite measured by flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC). The photovoltaic studies also indicated the importance of a small content of 14 in achieving the largest short-circuit current (ISC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and largest incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE, 2%) in the coassembled nanotube. This study clearly indicates that the coassembly approach of the two amphiphiles 14 and 15 can control the performance of the system by balancing the hole and electron transporting molecular components.
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM micrograph of air-dried toluene suspension of the coassembled nanotubes with 25% of 14. (b) Schematic representation of the formation of homotropic and coassembled nanotubes of 14 and 15 and the wall structure of the nanotube of 14 containing an electron-transporting molecular layer of clustering C60 (orange) and a hole-transporting graphite-like layer of π-stacked HBC units (blue).37 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Prof. T. Aida and Dr T. Fukushima, University of Tokyo). 
Another interesting amphiphilic assembly approach has been demonstrated by Charvet, Ariga and coworkers.43 Photoconductive films of domain-segregated nanowires with tailorable dimensions were formed by block copolymer 16 (Fig. 10) coupled with a hydrophilic porphyrin donor and a hydrophobic C60 acceptor as side chains. Irrespective of the substrate used (silicon, mica, glass, or highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surfaces), spin-coating or drop-casting of the chloroform solutions resulted in the formation of nanowire-like 1D nanostructures (Fig. 10a). Due to the amphiphilicity of the structure, block copolymers self-assemble to form discs with porphyrins/C60s segregated respectively above/below the discs′ planes and further stack into fiber structures through self-recognition resulting in orderly stacked supramolecular p/n heterojunctions. TEM images indicated that the nanowires of the polymers consist of regularly alternating domains arranged perpendicular to their long axes and consists of dark regions of C60-rich domains within the 1D nanostructures due to amphiphilic segregation (Fig. 10b). The nanowires of 16 showed an overall conductivity (ΦΣμ) of 6.4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 measured by FP-TRMC and an overall charge carrier mobility of 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the nanowires formed by drop casted CHCl3 solution of 16.43 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Ariga, NIMS). 
4b. Uncommon amphiphilic (π-hydrophobic) assemblies
In recent years there have been lots of efforts to construct self-assembled arrays of alkylated fullerenes in solution and on surfaces.44 Patnaik and coworkers reported the self-assembly of alkyl chain functionalised methanofullerene (17) (Scheme 3a).45,46 The fabrication of monolayer nanowire structures of tris(dodecyloxy)benzamide functionalised fullerene organogelator (18) (Scheme 3b) at the air/water interface was shown by Nakamura and coworkers.47 These are the two important developments in the area of alkylated fullerene assembly. In this section, we wish to discuss the crucial roles of molecular design in the creation of functional assemblies and different physical states of fullerene with exciting optoelectronic properties. In contrast to the conventional amphiphilic (hydrophobic–hydrophilic) assemblies, the combination of C60 (π–π) and aliphatic chains (van der Waals), namely “hydrophobic amphiphilicity”, enabled the control of the dimensionality of the supramolecular soft materials with various applications such as enhanced hydrophobic properties and excellent carrier mobilities. These systems are eligible to be considered as advanced functional soft materials based on supramolecular fullerene assembly.
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of alkyl-conjugated C60 derivatives; (a) double-alkyl tailed methanofullerene dyad 17, (b) 3,4,5-tris(dodecyloxy)benzamide linked C60 organogelator 18 and (c) fulleropyrrolidine functionalized with 3,4,5-alkyloxyphenyl (19–22, semiperfluoroalkyl (21), diacetylene (22)), and 2,4,6-alkyloxyphenyl groups (23–25). 
Reports from our own group have shown that a series of fulleropyrrolidines functionalized with a multi(alkyloxy)phenyl group form a highly ordered mesophase under solvent-free conditions and dimensionally controlled architectures by varying the nature of the solvent system (Scheme 3c).48 The detailed analysis of self-assembly processes revealed that the combined effect of different intermolecular forces such as π-stacking interactions of the curved surface of C60 and van der Waals interactions of long aliphatic chains resulted in differently shaped supramolecular architectures. Interestingly, the self-assembly process upon cooling down the 1,4-dioxane solution of 19 from 60 °C → 20 °C → 5 °C resulted in the transformation of initially formed single bilayer discs with 0.2–1.5 μm diameter and 4.4 nm thickness (at 20 °C) to hierarchically organised microscopic flower-like architectures in micrometre size (3–10 μm) composed of crumpled sheet- or flaked nanostructures with several tens of nanometres in thickness (at 5 °C). The rapid cooling of the homogeneous 1,4-dioxane solution from 60 to 5 °C, enabled the identification of the intermediate structures of these microscopic objects. The rolling up of the pre-formed discs at the edges resulted in energetically more favourable square-shaped objects and the continuous rolling-up procedure leads to crumpling, bending, stretching, and fracture of the discs, and finally the bilayer growth at the edges leads to the formation of the flower-shaped objects.49 High resolution cryogenic-TEM (HR-cryo-TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis confirmed that the multilayer nanostructures obtained were comprised of lamellar bilayer assemblies of 19 with interdigitated alkyl chains. Apart from this, the spin-coated chloroform solutions on HOPG formed epitaxially grown 1-D lamellar structures with more than 100 nm length.50 AFM images revealed the formation of fullerene nanowires with periodicity of 6.3 nm, composed of molecules having a head-to-head bilayer packing and fully extended alkyl chains. The proposed model was confirmed by AFM analysis of another derivative with longer eicosanyl chains (20). In this case, lamellae with larger domain size and higher periodicity (7.2 nm) were obtained. Hence, it can be concluded that the distance between adjacent nanowires can be regulated at the nanometre level by the molecular design.
The macroscopic globular objects with a roughness on the micro- and nanoscopic length scale with high roughness lead to the creation of superhydrophobic surfaces.10,51 The thin films of the globular objects formed from 20 of approximately 20 μm thickness on silicon lead to the formation of water-repellent superhydrophobic surfaces with a water contact angle of 152°, and surprisingly these films are durable towards polar organic solvents, and acidic/basic aqueous media, as well as heating (Fig. 11a). The water repellency and the durability can be attributed to the fractal morphology and roughness of the globular objects of 20 on both the nano- and microscopic length scale of the fabricated structures originating from a combination of π–π interaction of C60 moieties and van der Waals interactions of aliphatic chains. Interestingly, the superhydrophobic thin films obtained using the self-assembly approach are able to be recovered by simply dissolving them in CHCl3 and can be readily reused.
 Fig. 11  SEM images of globular objects of 20 deposited from (a) 1,4-dioxane,10 (b) n-decane, (c) n-dodecane dispersions and (d) of 21 from diethoxyethane at −13 °C.51 Insets show photographs of a water droplet on the surface with static water contact angles (a) 152°, (b) 163°, (c) 164° and (d) 148°. 
An interesting aspect of the discussion of the water repellency of the self-assembled C60 derivatives is the molecular level arrangement in the self-assembled particles, whether C60 or the alkyl part is exposed at the outer surface of the films.51 In order to find out the controlling factors of the alkyl tail moieties and C60 during self-organisation, the globular particle formation was conducted in other nonpolar solvents such as n-decane (Fig. 11b) and n-dodecane (Fig. 11c). Similar to findings in 1,4-dioxane, SEM images of the precipitates obtained after heating and cooling revealed the formation of microparticles of around 5–10 μm in size with nanoflaked outer surfaces in the alkanes which showed water contact angles of 163° and 164°, respectively (Fig. 11b,c). The higher contact angle values observed for the objects assembled from nonpolar solvents could be attributed to the presence of more hydrophobic hydrocarbon tails when compared to the moderately hydrophobic C60 on the outer surface of the objects, whereas in the case of polar solvents such as 1,4-dioxane driven assemblies the C60 part is exposed to the outer surface.51
In this context, the replacement of the hydrocarbon chains with more hydrophobic fluorinated tails with low surface free energy was designed and synthesised as a better choice for enhanced dewetting properties. The self-assembly process of the C60 derivative with three semiperfluoroalkyl chains 21 in diethoxyethane at −13 °C resulted in the formation of several micrometre (2–5 μm) sized particles with nanoflaked outer morphology (Fig. 11d) and lamellar arrangement at the molecular level. The assembled structures exhibited a water contact angle of 148°, which is comparable to that of assemblies formed by the hydrocarbon-derivative (20) in 1,4-dioxane. It indicates that similar to the hydrocarbon derivatives, in assemblies obtained from polar solvents, the C60 moieties are exposed to the outer surface of the nanoflaked microparticles resulting in the water-repellent features.
It is interesting to see the water repellent hydrophobicity in self-assembled objects, especially in C60-based functional materials of high potential application. However, the fragile nature of the resulting structures limits the possible application of these functional materials. An interesting and durable way of improving the stability is the possibility of photo-cross-linking without hampering the assembled nanostructures, surface morphologies and properties (Fig. 12a). The self-assembly of the C60 derivative containing cross-linkable diacetylene equipped alkyl tails 22 exhibited flake-like particles of around 1 μm size with crumpled petal-shaped structures of around 100 nm thickness (Fig. 12b) and multi-lamellar structure as the molecular arrangement.52 Remarkably, the UV-irradiated cross-linked flake-like particles (Fig. 12c) maintain their shape even after immersion in a polar, good solvent for the monomer (22) such as chloroform for 12 h and display high resistivity to most organic solvents. In addition, the thermal stability (>250 °C) and stiffness of about 25-fold of the particles were also remarkably enhanced upon cross-linking as confirmed by DSC and AFM analyses. The water contact angle measurements of the flake-like particles exhibited a value of around 146.2° (Fig. 12d) which is larger than that of the spin coated flat surface (102.1°). Heat treatment of the self-assembled structures before and after crosslinking also showed a clear difference in the contact angle values: a huge decrease from 146.2° to 100.8° is observed in the former case (Fig. 12d) whereas the cross-linked one retained the same value under both conditions (145.3° and 144.1°, Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the photo-cross-linking process in the bilayer structural subunit of 22. SEM image of the self-organised particles of 22 prepared from THF/MeOH solution (b) before (inset shows an enlarged particle image) and (c) after UV irradiation. Changes in the water contact angles on heating (at 150 °C for 5 s) the surfaces of assembled particles of 22 (d) before and (e) after UV irradiation (at 200 °C for 12 h).52 (Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH). 
The fine tuning of C60 aggregation at the molecular level by attaching a 2,4,6-tris(alkyloxy)phenyl group to the C60 moiety (23–25) resulted in room temperature liquid materials as a new kind of nano-carbon fluid matter (Fig. 13a).53 The C60 derivatives were designed in such a way that the substitution pattern and length of alkyl chains should be sufficient to serve as an effective steric stabilizer preventing C60 aggregation, resulting in the fluid behavior. The XRD pattern of the liquid form exhibits a very broad peak when compared to the well-defined diffraction patterns of the solid form. The liquid character of the derivatives was further confirmed by the higher loss modulus (G′′) value than the storage modulus (G′). The detailed investigation of the rheological properties indicated that the fluid behavior (viscosity) of liquid fullerenes can be controlled by changing the alkyl chain length (Fig. 13b). In addition to the fluid nature, liquid fullerenes retain the characteristic features of C60 such as electrochemical properties and carrier mobility. The cast films of the liquid fullerenes showed two-reductive events characteristic of C60 and exhibited a relatively high hole mobility of ∼3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 25 at 20 °C. These features make it an extremely attractive novel carbon material for future applications because of the absence of structural defects.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of the liquid fullerenes 23–25 at room temperature and (b) complex viscosity of 23–25 at a γ value of 0.01.53 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission). 
5. Liquid-crystalline fullerenes
Liquid crystals (LC) are soft materials with high potential for advanced applications in material science, which uniquely self-organize within a precise temperature range and show interesting optoelectronic properties due to peculiar alignment. Nowadays, C60-based LCs find applications in photovoltaic devices such as solar cells due to their pre-determined organisation at the molecular level in a controllable fashion. Therefore, it is extremely important to select the necessary anisotropic building blocks along with C60 to attain the preferred ordering. Deschenaux54 and Felder-Flesch,55 the leading contributors in the area of C60-based liquid crystals, demonstrated how the design strategies can be utilised to impart anisotropic liquid-crystalline character to completely isotropic fullerenes. Here we describe the recent and most attractive fullerene liquid crystals showing advanced photo- and photoconductive properties.
Even though C60 is considered to be a promising n-type organic semiconductor, the carrier mobility of fullerenes in the liquid-crystalline state has not been studied in detail. A recent study from our group revealed that alkylated C60 derivatives with a high C60 content (up to 50%) satisfy the requirements for high carrier mobility in the highly ordered mesophase.56 Polarised optical microscopic (POM) studies of 20 show birefringent optical texture (Fig. 14a) comparable to smectic phases with a fluid nature in the wide temperature range between 62 and 193 °C. The presence of multiple Bragg peaks in the LC state indicates an unusually long-range ordered lamellar mesophase in which molecules are assumed to arrange their long axis on average perpendicular to the plane of the layers with the C60 moieties in a head-to-head configuration.57 The mesomorphic fullerenes feature reversible electrochemistry as cast films on a glassy carbon electrode above the solid/mesomorphic phase transition temperatures, such as at 70 °C for 20. The electron mobility derived by a time-of-flight (ToF) setup was found to be ∼3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 14b) which is comparable to those of smectic liquid-crystalline phases of organic semiconductor oligomers and columnar liquid crystals, and is so far the largest value for C60-containing liquid crystals. It indicates a dense packing of the fullerenes carrying the charges (Fig. 14c,d).
 Fig. 14  (a) Polarized optical micrographic texture of a mesophase of 20 at 190 °C. (b) Transient photocurrent curves as a double logarithmic plot for a negative carrier of 20 in the mesophase at 120 °C.56 (c) Three-box electronic density profile (d) and comparison between the corresponding model (red line) and the experimental (blue line) X-ray diffraction pattern of 20 in the mesophase.57 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission). 
Nakamura and coworkers utilised shuttlecock-shaped fullerene mesogens for the creation of a variety of liquid-crystalline fullerenes with polar columnar structure.58 Further, they have reported amphiphilic fullerenes with silyl acetylene tethers containing linear alkyl chains 26 (Scheme 4) forming layered lamellar liquid-crystalline structures.59 The tight C60/C60 packing within the layer and hydrocarbon/hydrocarbon van der Waals interactions in the space between the neighboring C60 layers resulted in the structural ordering. The appearance of small peaks with large d-spacing values in the XRD pattern revealed the presence of a structurally more ordered smectic phase than the conventional smectic A and C phases. As the alkyl chain length and bulkiness increases, the interdigitated dimer structure is disturbed and a true layered structure is formed, hence 26, was found to be liquid crystalline at room temperature.
 Scheme 4  Shuttlecock-shaped amphiphilic C60-containing silyl acetylene tethers 26, bow-tie-shaped C60 mesogen 27 and amphiphilic 28, lipophilic 29 oligothiophene–C60 dyads. 
The importance of the molecular shape in the formation of mesogenic superstructures was demonstrated by the same group using luminescent bow-tie-shaped decaaryl C60 derivative 27 (Scheme 4).60 This new class of mesogen formed a smectic mesophase over a wide temperature range (ΔT = 240 °C) with an anisotropic luminescence of C60 derivatives (quantum yield, Φ = 0.21), which is in addition tunable by uniaxial shearing of the LC film. POM studies showed a fan-shaped texture upon heating to 241 °C and the characteristic texture was found to be stable for several months at room temperature. The presence of the emissive 40π-electron [10]cyclophenacene system exhibited strong photoluminescence in cyclohexane solution and drop-casted film (Φfilm = 0.18), indicating the hindering of self-quenching due to spatial separation of the cyclophenacene units. Since the cyclophenacene group is rigidly embedded in the lamellar layers, it causes anisotropic light emission from the bulk liquid-crystalline state.
Li, Fukushima and Aida et al. reported an amphiphilic, liquid crystalline and photoconductive oligothiophene–C60 dyad with a bicontinuous densely packed donor–acceptor array.61 The molecular design strategy of 28 is in such a way that the two end parts are decorated with a hydrophilic wedge of triethylene glycol chains and a hydrophobic wedge of paraffinic chains (Scheme 4). POM studies of 28 displayed a focal conic texture characteristic of the smectic A phase (136.1 to ∼18.3 °C). Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) analysis exhibited reflections corresponding to lamellar structure with 10.6 nm layer spacing. In the case of the nonamphiphilic derivative 29 containing hydrophobic wedges on both ends of the oligothiophene–C60 dyad, also Smectic A phase consisting of a layer width of 5.7 nm was formed with a nonuniform head/tail wise orientation in the lamellar structure. This was further proved by the presence of an additional charge-transfer band at 600–800 nm due to the interaction between oligothiophene and C60 units in the uniform head/tail orientation. Photoconductivity measurements of the two derivatives showed drastic differences in the values, for example, the photocurrent generated by 29 was only 10% compared to that of 28 under identical conditions. FR-TRMC measurements with a 355 nm laser pulse at 25 °C showed comparable maximum conductivity values (φ∑μmax in cm2 V−1 s−1) for both derivatives, 4.1 × 10−4 and 3.7 × 10−4, respectively, for 28 and 29. The low structural integrity and poor photoconducting nature of 29 lead to short-lived charge carriers, suggesting the presence of a larger number of trapping sites and nonuniform ordering of 29.
6. Self-assembled heterojunctions and photovoltaic applications
In recent years, the construction of ordered supramolecular architectures of C60 functionalised with various donor molecules on surfaces have shown profound interests in advanced applications. The resulting supramolecular assemblies with various shapes are known to have excellent electrical, optoelectronic properties which are widely exploited in the area of supramolecular electronics. The introduction of the bulk heterojunction concept with an interpenetrating network of electron-donor (D) and -acceptor (A) domains to separate the excitons has made a huge impact on solar energy conversion efficiency when compared to the bilayer device with limiting exciton diffusion length. In bulk heterojunction devices, the nanoscale morphology is one of the important factors governing the performance because of two main reasons: “dissociation of the excitons at the interface” and “carrier transport to the respective electrodes”. Hence, methods to control the size and shape of the morphology at the nanometre scale, use of cosolvent and additives for the control of morphology, crystallinity and ordering through heat treatments etc. have been found to be effective in the creation of devices with better performance.5,62 Recently, there has been a lot of reports regarding the use of C60-based D/A systems and in most of the cases, functionalised C60, 1-(-3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-phenyl-[6,6]-methanofullerene (PCBM) 30 was used as an electron acceptor (Scheme 5). This section features the recent advances in the area of fullerene-based self-assembled heterojunctions and its applications.
 Scheme 5  Chemical structure of donors and acceptors used in solar cells; methanofullerene 30, (p-phenylenevinylene) polymer 31, melamine-functionalised oligothiophene 32 and barbiturate-substituted C6033. 
After the first report of Heeger and coworkers regarding the morphological studies of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV):C60 bulk heterojunction solar cells, there have been attempts to optimize the morphology to achieve maximum efficiency. One of the detailed reports, from the group of Janssen,63 discusses the dramatic influence of their morphology, that is phase separation of the active layer and the device performance. Blends of poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV) 31 and 30 exhibited an extremely smooth surface at lower content of 30. Interestingly, at 50 wt% of 30, phase separation gives rise to domains of 30 in the donor matrix. Photovoltaic measurements of the blends enabled a correlation between the morphology and the performance, they reveal that 80 wt% of the acceptor is necessary to get the maximum performance due to the increased charge transport, collection efficiency and the minimum charge recombination at this composition. This work highlights the necessity of both percolating pathways and a minimum domain size for barrier escape from the interface and overcoming excessive recombination losses.
After the exciting studies from the group of Janssen, as an extension, the relation between the nanoscale morphology and the device performance was investigated by Sariciftci and coworkers using variations in experimental conditions.64 The blend morphology showed remarkable differences in phase separations in spin cast films from toluene and chlorobenzene, such that toluene cast films consist of nanoclusters with one order of magnitude larger height variations than those of chlorobenzene cast films. Moreover, the unquenched photoexcitations in the toluene cast films lead to a residual photoluminescence of 30, indicating the radiative recombination of the excitons in the large clusters before reaching the interface, whereas complete exciton dissociation at the bulk interface leads to undetectable photoluminescence from chlorobenzene cast blends. Hence, a lower photocurrent resulting in lower power conversion efficiency was observed in solar cells made out of toluene cast films when compared to those of chlorobenzene cast films. It should be noted that apart from exciton diffusion and phase separation parameters, the connectivity and percolation of the transporting phases to the respective electrodes are also important for improving the efficiency of organic solar cells.
Apart from mixing of the donor and acceptor, complimentary multiple hydrogen bonding interactions between donor and acceptor have been effectively used as a tool to develop D/A heterojunctions.65 In this context, Bassani and coworkers used complementary interactions between melamine and barbituric acid. (Scheme 5).66 The photovoltaic response of the melamine-functionalised oligothiophene 32 alone and in conjunction with pristine C60 or barbiturate-substituted fullerene 33 were investigated as drop casted films. The incorporation of 33 resulted in a 5-fold increase in the photocurrent when compared to that of pristine C60 in the presence and absence of light at an applied potential of −100 mV. This can be attributed to the high degree of charge separation due to supramolecular ordering of the thiophene unit upon mixing with 33 possessing better miscibility through complementary molecular recognition. The interaction at the molecular level by incorporating the C60 derivative 33 has led to an increase in the device efficiency to 25% and sustained the efficiency when aerated aqueous solution of methyl viologen was used as the electron-transport agent.
The electrical properties of the self-organised fibers and films of covalently linked phthalocyanine–fullerene dyad 34 at the nanoscale have been investigated by Torres and coworkers.67 The electrical transporting properties of the D–A nanostructures measured by using conductive AFM (CAFM) revealed that self-assembled structures of 34 showed the highest electrical conductivity measured for different supramolecular nanostructures (Fig. 15). The importance of supramolecular organisation on the current values was revealed by the less efficient electrical transporting properties of the fibers when compared to that of plaques and also with the spin coated samples. Similarly, a remarkable increase in the electrical conductivity was observed for drop casted dyad assembly on a graphite oxide physisorbed HOPG substrate (GO@HOPG) due to formation of highly organised supramolecular films.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the CAFM experiment carried out for cast films of 34 on HOPG substrate deposited with micrometre-sized GO flakes.67 
An organic solar cell composed of quaternary self-organisation of porphyrin and C60 by clustering with gold nanoparticles was reported in a combined effort by the research groups of Imahori, Kamat and Fukuzumi (Fig. 16).68 The porphyrin–alkanethiolate monolayer-protected gold nanoparticles form complexes of C60 resulting in clusters of variable sizes depending on the alkyl chain lengths of the porphyrin part (50–500 nm with irregular size and random shapes for 35, 200–300 nm for 36 and 50–100 nm for 37), in acetonitrile/toluene mixed solvents. The self-assembled structures deposited on nanostructured SnO2 films using electrophoretic deposition exhibited an IPCE of 54% and, broad photocurrent action spectra (up to 1000 nm). The variation of the alkyl chain length of porphyrin–alkanethiol had a remarkable influence on the power conversion efficiency (PCE), for example, upon increasing the chain length from 11 (36) to 15 (37), the PCE value increased significantly from 0.61% to 1.5%. Interestingly, the power conversion efficiency of 1.5% of the composite electrode is 45 times higher than that of the reference system consisting of both single components of porphyrin and C60.
 Fig. 16  A schematic illustration of the quarternary organisation of secondary structures of porphyrin–alkanethiolate monolayer-protected gold nanoparticles in the presence of C60 in an acetonitrile/toluene solvent mixture.68 
Among the interesting reports of organic assemblies with bicontinuous donor–acceptor arrays through self-assembly, the selection and handling of such materials for the end use application has been difficult. Interestingly, Hasobe et al., reported the preparation and light energy conversion properties of C60-encapsulated zinc meso-tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin 38 hexagonal nanorods prepared using a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) surfactant in a mixture of DMF and acetonitrile.69 The diffusion of a DMF solution containing 38 and C60 into acetonitrile solution (0.20 mM CTAB) results in the formation of flake assemblies of porphyrin and nanoparticles of C60 (ca. 5–20 nm) separately, with further increase in time coassembled C60–38 nanorods, 0.94–4.12 μm in length and 90–490 nm in outside diameter were formed (Fig. 17a). The anisotropic crystal growth of encapsulated C60 in the longitudinal direction, due to π–π interaction, resulted in a large increase in length from nanotubes of 38 (2.13 μm) to coassembled (4.12 μm) without much variation in the diameter (∼500 nm). Transient absorption spectroscopy measurements of nanorods revealed the presence of transient bands corresponding to both the C60 radical anion at 1080 nm and porphyrin radical cation at 680 nm, indicating a charge recombination after the formation of a charge separated state. The prompt, steady and reproducible photocurrent generation of the nanorod coating on SnO2 electrode during visible light illumination indicates the pertinence of the self-assembled nanorods for solar energy conversion (Fig. 17b). The maximum IPCE value of 20% at 460 nm was found to be larger than the sum of the two individual IPCE values and that of the non-organised system (8%).
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of organisation process of C60 and 38. (b) Illustration of the photoelectrochemical solar cell. The inset shows photocurrent generation responses under white light illumination. Input power: 82 mW cm−2. The bar is 0.3 mA cm−2.69 
A solution-processed small-molecule based organic photovoltaic device with the highest power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.2% containing a three-layered p–i–n structure composed of highly crystalline tetrabenzoporphyrin (BP) 40 donor and bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)fullerene 41 acceptor was reported by Nakamura and coworkers (Scheme 6).70 The i-layer possesses a clearly defined interdigitated structure formed by spontaneous crystalline phase separation during thermal processing with the 39-to-40 conversion after spin coating from chloroform/chlorobenzene and leads to the formation of an interdigitated bulk heterojunction structure. The fabricated cell shows a slight increase in the PCE value from 4.1% to 4.5% when the annealing temperature after the n-layer fabrication is increased to 180 °C. The enhanced performance could be attributed to the crystallisation of 41 in the n-layer at 150 °C, and a further improvement in the PCE up to 4.8–5.2% was observed when 2,9-bis(naphthalen-2-yl)-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (NBphen) buffer was used.
 Scheme 6  Donor and acceptor materials for three-layered organic photovoltaic devices; (a) thermal retro-Diels–Alder conversion of the donor precursor 39 to tetrabenzoporphyrin donor 40 and bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)[60]fullerene 41 acceptor. 
The extensive studies over the past few years including proper understanding of electronic factors and contribution of supramolecular ordering in heterojunctions has made a striking difference in the performance of bulk heterojunction solar cells. The overall efficiency of organic solar cells reached just below 10% and promising studies are going on in this direction. The challenging task is the commercialisation and the stability of the solar cells under environmental conditions. Hence, more focus is needed in designing new, stable and sustainable donor–acceptor systems to commence organic solar cells as the future energy source.
7. Conclusion and outlook
It is remarkable that supramolecular fullerene assembly yields spectacular morphologies with molecular-level precision in the bottom-up approaches using the simple spherical π–π stacking interaction. One of the intriguing ways in this area is to obtain salient functional assemblies with high C60 content, in this regard the new concept of hydrophobic amphiphilicity is of particular importance. Both covalent and noncovalent functionalisations of C60 have led to the fabrication of self-assembled structures which find applications in different areas of the current trend in research interests such as organic photovoltaics. In order to compete with their inorganic counterparts and to attain efficiency beyond 10%, organic photovoltaics have to improve in many areas such as designing suitable D/A systems with high content of active components, easy synthetic methods for bulk scale preparation, controlled molecular ordering at the nanometre length scale, effective methods for minimizing losses of recombination, water-repellent features, environmental stability, mechanical stiffness and long-life performance. All these concepts along with solution processibility and use of printing technology will ensure roll-to-roll manufacturing of highly efficient solar cells with large area. The topics covered in this review discussed the recent developments in the area of supramolecular fullerene assemblies and we anticipate that control over morphology is the key challenge in constructing functional fullerene assemblies and will be extensively investigated in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by KAKENHI (21655054 and 21111522) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sciences, Sport and Technology, and “PRESTO”, JST, as well as the Kato Foundation (1909), Japan. Some of the subjects described in this manuscript were performed within the joint German–Japanese laboratory supported by the Max-Planck Society and the National Institute for Materials Science (T.N. and H.M.). The authors are grateful to their co-workers and colleagues who kindly provided original photos and images illustrated here.
Notes and references
M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1097 RSC .
T. Hasobe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 44 RSC .
J. L. Segura, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 31 RSC .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 19, 3028 .
D. M. Guldi, B. M. Illescas, C. M. Atienza, M. Wielopolskia and N. Martín, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1587 RSC .
R. Bhosale, J. Míšek, N. Sakai and S. Matile, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 138 RSC .
K. Tashiro and T. Aida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 189 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, P. Liang and H.-Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2690 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, T. Michinobu, K. Yoshida, N. Shirahata, K. Ariga, H. Möhwald and D. G. Kurth, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sánchez, R. Otero, J. M. Gallego, R. Miranda and N. Martín, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2081 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bonifazi, O. Engerc and F. Diederich, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 390 RSC .
K. Miyazawa, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 41 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyazawa, Y. Kuwasaki, A. Obayashi and M. Kuwabara, J. Mater. Res., 2002, 17, 83 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li, L. Jiang, H. Luo, S. Xiao, H. Fang, H. Li, D. Zhu, D. Yu, J. Xu and B. Xiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13370 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Liu, S. Yu, M. Yao, D. Liu, Y. Hou, T. Cui and G. Zou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4190 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyazawa, K. Hamamoto, S. Nagata and T. Suga, J. Mater. Res., 2003, 18, 1096 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish, K. Miyazawa and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish and K. Miyazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathish, K. Miyazawa, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6372 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Cha, K. Miyazawa and J.-D. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1667 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, H. J. Song and H. C. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4803 RSC .
H. S. Shin, S. M. Yoon, Q. Tang, B. Chon, T. Joo and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 693 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, A. Masuhara, H. Kasai, H. Nakanishi and H. Oikawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 1426 CrossRef CAS .
A. Masuhara, Z. Tan, H. Kasai1, H. Nakanishi and H. Oikawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 050206 CrossRef .
L. Wang, B. Liu, D. Liu, M. Yao, Y. Hou, S. Yu, T. Cui, D. Li, G. Zou, A. Iwasiewicz and B. Sundqvist, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1883 CrossRef CAS .
J. Geng, W. Zhou, P. Skelton, W. Yue, I. A. Kinloch, A. H. Windle and B. F. G. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogawa, T. Kato, A. Ikegami, H. Tsuji, N. Aoki, Y. Ochiai and J. P. Bird, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 112109 CrossRef .
G. D. Pantos, J.-L. Wietor and J. K. M. Sanders, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2238 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawauchi, J. Kumaki and E. Yashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10560 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawauchi, J. Kumaki, A. Kitaura, K. Okoshi, H. Kusanagi, K. Kobayashi, T. Sugai, H. Shinohara and E. Yashima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 515 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, J.-K. Kim and M. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18242 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Nurmawati, P. K. Ajikumar, R. Renu, C. H. Sow and S. Valiyaveettil, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fathalla, S.-C. Li, U. Diebold, A. Albb and J. Jayawickramarajah, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4209 RSC .
X. Zhang and M. Takeuchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9646 CAS .
N. Fujita, T. Yamashita, M. Asai and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laiho, R. H. A. Ras, S. Valkama, J. Ruokolainen, R. Österbacka and O. Ikkala, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bretreich, S. Burghardt, C. Böttcher, T. Bayerl, S. Bayerl and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 39, 1845 .
S. Zhou, C. Burger, B. Chu, M. Sawamura, N. Nagahama, M. Toganoh, U. E. Hackler, H. Isobe and E. Nakamura, Science, 2001, 291, 1944 CrossRef CAS .
T. Homma, K. Harano, H. Isobe and E. Nakamura, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1665 CAS .
D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez, T. Torres, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5811 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamamoto, G. Zhang, W. Jin, T. Fukushima, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, T. Minari, K. Tsukagoshi and T. Aida, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21051 CrossRef CAS .
R. Charvet, S. Acharya, J. P. Hill, M. Akada, M. Liao, S. Seki, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18030 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3425 RSC .
S. S. Gayathri, A. K. Agarwal, K. A. Suresh and A. Patnaik, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12139 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gayathri and A. Patnaik, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4800 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tsunashima, S.-i. Noro, T. Akutagawa, T. Nakamura, H. Kawakami and K. Toma, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8169 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, W. Schmitt, T. Michinibu, D. G. Kurth and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5982 RSC .
T. Nakanishi, K. Ariga, T. Michinobu, K. Yoshida, H. Takahashi, T. Teranishi, H. Möhwald and D. G. Kurth, Small, 2007, 3, 2019 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, N. Miyashita, T. Michinobu, Y. Wakayama, T. Tsuruoka, K. Ariga and D. G. Kurth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, Y. Shen, J. Wang, H. Li, P. Fernandes, K. Yoshida, S. Yagai, M. Takeuchi, K. Ariga, D. G. Kurth and H. Möhwald, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1253 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Shen, S. Kessel, P. Fernandes, K. Yoshida, S. Yagai, D. G. Kurth, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2166 CrossRef CAS .
T. Michinobu, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, M. Funahashi and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campidelli, P. Bourgun, B. Guintchin, J. Furrer, H. Stoeckli-Evans, I. M. Saez, J. W. Goodby and R. Deschenaux, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3574 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mamlouk, B. Heinrich, C. Bourgogne, B. Donnio, D. Guillon and D. Felder-Flesch, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2199 RSC .
T. Nakanishi, Y. Shen, J. Wang, S. Yagai, M. Funahashi, T. Kato, P. Fernandes, H. Möhwald and D. G. Kurth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9236 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. L. Fernandes, S. Yagai, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, A. Muramatsu, R. Hamasaki, N. Mizoshita, T. Kato and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 432 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Zhong, Y. Matsuo and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3052 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, Y. Matsuo and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17058 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Li, Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, H. Masunaga, S. Sasaki, M. Takata and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8886 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang. J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggeman, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Xiao, H. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6256 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Huang, N. D. McClenaghan, A. Kuhn, J. W. Hofstraat and D. M. Bassani, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 3409 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, D. Olea, C. Gómez-Navarro, F. Zamora, J. Gómez-Herrero and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2026 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Fujimoto, T. Hirakawa and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Wadac and Y. Arakic, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3372 RSC .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

S. S. Babu, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi
	Dr Sukumaran Santhosh Babu was born in Kerala, India, in 1980. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry from National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Trivandrum (2009, from the group of Dr A. Ajayaghosh), where his doctoral studies focused on the synthesis, organogelation and photophysical analysis of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)s. In 2009 he was appointed as a postdoctoral fellow in the research group of Professor Helmuth Möhwald at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany (MPI-NIMS International Joint Laboratory, with Dr Takashi Nakanishi). His research interests include synthesis of functional organic molecules, self-assembly of fullerene (C60) derivatives and their photovoltaic applications.
	Prof. Helmuth Möhwald received his diploma in physics (1971) and PhD (1974) from Univ. Gottingen (Germany). He spent nearly 5 years in industry at IBM San Jose (1974/75) and Dornier-Systems (1975-81), in between getting a habilitation at Univ. Ulm (1975–78). After professorships in biophysics (TU Munich, 1981–1987) and physical chemistry (Univ. Mainz 1987–93) he became founding director of the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. Among his recent awards are the lectureship award of the Japanese Chemical Society, the Overbeak medal of the European Colloid and Interface Society, the Wolfgang-Ostwald award of the German Kolloidgesellschaft, the Gay-Lussac-award from the French ministry of science and technology and a honorary doctorate of Univ. Montpellier. He has more than 780 publications, which have been cited more than 27000 times. His main interests are molecular interfaces and films, capsules and controlled release, membrane biophysics and supramolecular interactions.
	Dr Takashi Nakanishi was born in 1974 in Nagasaki, Japan, and received his PhD from Nagasaki University in 2000. After JSPS postdoctoral research at Houston University and at Oxford University, he joined his current institution in 2004, National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba. In 2007 he became a senior researcher. In 2007–2010, he was promoted to group leader at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Germany. He is also a researcher for PRESTO (“Structure Control and Function”), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). His primary research interest is the development of self-organized multifunctional soft materials including dimension and morphology controlled supramolecular architectures and optoelectronic-active fluids (e.g. liquid crystals, room temperature liquids).

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM image of the nanowhiskers14 and schematic representation of the selective precipitation of (b), (c), (d) fullerene nanosheets and the structural transformation from 2D nanosheets to (e) 1D nanorods (from (c), (d)) and (f) nanosheets (from (b)).20 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Miyazawa, NIMS).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the apparatus used for preparing vertically grown C60 microtube arrays and the substrates on which the vertically aligned C60 microtubes were grown. (b) SEM image (side view) of vertically grown C60 microtube arrays.21 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Miyazawa, NIMS).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM and optical microscopic images of C60 crystals obtained from solutions of (a) CCl4, (b) m-xylene and (c) n-hexane. The scale bars of the inset figures in (a) and (c) are 30 nm and 500 nm, respectively.22	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of C60 fine micro/nano crystals prepared by the reprecipitation method at injected amounts of the m-xylene solution of C60 (2 mM) (a) 100 ml, (b) 500 ml, (c) rod-like crystals obtained at an aging temperature of 353 K after reprecipitation and different shaped crystals obtained, (d) spherical, (e) hexagons plates, (f) nanoballs.25 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Dr A. Masuhara, Tohoku University).	 

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structures of various systems used for coassembly with C60: α-amino acid functionalised naphthalenediimide 1, syndiotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) 2, amphiphilic oligo(p-phenylene) containing mono (3) and bis (4) ethylene oxide side chain, and amphiphilic (p-phenylene) polymer 5.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM and HRTEM images of 1:1 C60:amphiphilic 5 nanohybrid (0.5 mg mL−1). (a) Side view SEM image and (b) HR-TEM image along the lattice fringes for assemblies prepared from toluene solution. SEM images of the nanohybrid forming honeycomb structures cast from (c) toluene/CHCl3 (50%, v/v), (d) CHCl3 and (e) CS2/CHCl3 (85%, v/v).33 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the mode of complexation of pristine C60 by β-CD carrying porphyrin 6. (b) TEM and (c) STM micrographs of the assembly.34	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of C60 microspheres of nanoplates formed by slow evaporation of a toluene solution of C60 and porphyrin polymer 7 (0.25 mg ml−1).35 (The image was provided by the courtesy of Dr M. Takeuchi, NIMS).	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of PS-P4VP block copolymer 8 and C60 carboxylic acid derivative 9 as well as a schematic representation of the formation of supramolecular rod-coil polymers leading to the generation of C60 encapsulated micelles.36	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structure of fullerene amphiphiles; polyamide globular amphiphile 10, potassium salts of pentaphenyl (11), (p-(perfluorooctyl)phenyl) (12) fullerene and zinc phthalocyanine–C60 dyad 13.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM micrograph of air-dried toluene suspension of the coassembled nanotubes with 25% of 14. (b) Schematic representation of the formation of homotropic and coassembled nanotubes of 14 and 15 and the wall structure of the nanotube of 14 containing an electron-transporting molecular layer of clustering C60 (orange) and a hole-transporting graphite-like layer of π-stacked HBC units (blue).37 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Prof. T. Aida and Dr T. Fukushima, University of Tokyo).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the nanowires formed by drop casted CHCl3 solution of 16.43 (The images were provided by the courtesy of Dr K. Ariga, NIMS).	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of alkyl-conjugated C60 derivatives; (a) double-alkyl tailed methanofullerene dyad 17, (b) 3,4,5-tris(dodecyloxy)benzamide linked C60 organogelator 18 and (c) fulleropyrrolidine functionalized with 3,4,5-alkyloxyphenyl (19–22, semiperfluoroalkyl (21), diacetylene (22)), and 2,4,6-alkyloxyphenyl groups (23–25).	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM images of globular objects of 20 deposited from (a) 1,4-dioxane,10 (b) n-decane, (c) n-dodecane dispersions and (d) of 21 from diethoxyethane at −13 °C.51 Insets show photographs of a water droplet on the surface with static water contact angles (a) 152°, (b) 163°, (c) 164° and (d) 148°.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the photo-cross-linking process in the bilayer structural subunit of 22. SEM image of the self-organised particles of 22 prepared from THF/MeOH solution (b) before (inset shows an enlarged particle image) and (c) after UV irradiation. Changes in the water contact angles on heating (at 150 °C for 5 s) the surfaces of assembled particles of 22 (d) before and (e) after UV irradiation (at 200 °C for 12 h).52 (Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of the liquid fullerenes 23–25 at room temperature and (b) complex viscosity of 23–25 at a γ value of 0.01.53 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Polarized optical micrographic texture of a mesophase of 20 at 190 °C. (b) Transient photocurrent curves as a double logarithmic plot for a negative carrier of 20 in the mesophase at 120 °C.56 (c) Three-box electronic density profile (d) and comparison between the corresponding model (red line) and the experimental (blue line) X-ray diffraction pattern of 20 in the mesophase.57 (Copyright American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission).	 

 	Scheme 4  Shuttlecock-shaped amphiphilic C60-containing silyl acetylene tethers 26, bow-tie-shaped C60 mesogen 27 and amphiphilic 28, lipophilic 29 oligothiophene–C60 dyads.	 

 	Scheme 5  Chemical structure of donors and acceptors used in solar cells; methanofullerene 30, (p-phenylenevinylene) polymer 31, melamine-functionalised oligothiophene 32 and barbiturate-substituted C6033.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the CAFM experiment carried out for cast films of 34 on HOPG substrate deposited with micrometre-sized GO flakes.67	 

 	Fig. 16  A schematic illustration of the quarternary organisation of secondary structures of porphyrin–alkanethiolate monolayer-protected gold nanoparticles in the presence of C60 in an acetonitrile/toluene solvent mixture.68	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of organisation process of C60 and 38. (b) Illustration of the photoelectrochemical solar cell. The inset shows photocurrent generation responses under white light illumination. Input power: 82 mW cm−2. The bar is 0.3 mA cm−2.69	 

 	Scheme 6  Donor and acceptor materials for three-layered organic photovoltaic devices; (a) thermal retro-Diels–Alder conversion of the donor precursor 39 to tetrabenzoporphyrin donor 40 and bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)[60]fullerene 41 acceptor.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
