An in-depth review on the role of carbon nanostructures in dye-sensitized solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03644E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03644E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17914-17938An in-depth review on the role of carbon nanostructures in dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Murugesan 
            Janani
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pillalamarri 
            Srikrishnarka
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shantikumar V. 
            Nair
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            A. Sreekumaran 
            Nair
          
          
        
      *
      Amrita Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences (AIMS), Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, AIMS PO, Ponekkara, Kochi 682041, Kerala, India. E-mail: sreekumarannair@aims.amrita.edu
Received 
      19th May 2015
    , Accepted 29th June 2015First published on 3rd July 2015AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are considered to be promising, low-cost alternatives to amorphous silicon solar cells. The major components of a DSC include a metal oxide (usually TiO2), a dye, an electrolyte and a Pt- or carbon-deposited counter electrode. The photoexcited electrons from the dye diffuse through the TiO2 network and reach the counter electrode through an external circuit. However due to the trap-limited diffusion process, the electron collection efficiency is affected. Thus, for a hassle-free transport of electrons there is a need for additional electron transport channels. Further in order to reduce the overall cost of the device there is also a need for cheaper alternative counter electrodes in place of Pt. The 15th most abundant element in the earth's crust, carbon and its allotropes with their outstanding catalytic activity and electrical conductivity prove to be promising materials to overcome all these shortcomings and demerits. The review presented below summarizes the up-to-date research efforts on the role of carbon nanostructures in DSSCs, the various synthesis strategies adopted for their preparation and their photovoltaic performance. The review also includes a brief discussion about the role of carbon nanostructures in non-planar flexible wire-shaped DSSCs.Murugesan JananiMiss Janani completed her MSc degree in Physics from Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. She is currently doing MTech in Nanotechnology in Amrita Center for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine under Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University in Kochi, Kerala, India. Her research interest includes carbon/TiO2 composites for photoanodes of dye-sensitized solar cells.Pillalamarri SrikrishnarkaMr P. Srikrishnarka received his BTech degree in Chemical Engineering from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India. He is currently pursuing his MTech in Nanotechnology in Amrita Center for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine under Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University at Kochi, Kerala, India. His areas of interest are self-cleaning coatings and TiO2 based materials as photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells.Shantikumar V. NairDr Shantikumar V Nair is currently Dean Research, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, and the Director of Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita University, at Kochi, Kerala, India. A graduate of IIT Bombay (Mumbai) in Metallurgical Engineering, he received his PhD from Columbia University, New York (1983). Prior to joining Amrita, he was a professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He is a recipient of the prestigious Presidential Young Investigator Award from the President of the United States (1986), National Research Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India (2011) and Prof. C. N. R. Rao Bangalore INDIA NANO Science Award (2014).A. Sreekumaran NairDr A. Sreekumaran Nair is currently an Associate Professor at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. He did PhD (Chemistry) at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras (2006) and had postdoctoral training at the University of Hyogo, Japan (JSPS fellow, 2006–2008) and Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative at the National University of Singapore (2008–2012), respectively. His current research interest includes organic–inorganic nanohybrids for renewable energy, self-cleaning coatings and environmental remediation.
Introduction
History of dye sensitized solar cells
The history of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) goes way back to 1873 when the German photochemist Vogel invented the first panchromatic film rendering a realistic black and white image by the dye sensitization of silver halide emulsions leading to an extended response into the infrared region.1 Then in 1960 Namba and Hishiki2 and Tributsch and Gerischer et al.3 worked on the sensitization of ZnO with chlorophyll as the sensitizer. They found that upon excitation of a dye, the excited electrons from the dye are injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor substrates. However the conversion efficiencies were poor owing to the poor anchoring of the dyes on the semiconductor substrate. This was followed by the breakthrough experiments on the splitting of water on TiO2 by Fujishima and Honda that attracted the scientific community to the wide band gap material, TiO2. In 1977, Spitler and Calvin proved that TiO2 could be used instead of ZnO for DSCs.4 This eventually led to the invention of dye sensitized solar cells in 1991 by Gräztel and his co-workers.5
The DSC invented by Gräztel is the third generation solar cell and it consists of a conducting glass plate, usually fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated with TiO2. The TiO2 is sensitized with a dye. The most commonly used dyes are ruthenium based dyes such as N3,6 N719 (ref. 7) and black dye.8 The electrolyte usually contains an I−/I3− or a cobalt-based redox couple and a counter electrode usually made of platinum (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic showing the working of dye sensitized solar cells.22b 
Working of a DSSC
When light is incident on the cell, the electrons from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the dye are excited to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the dye. The electrons are then injected into the conduction band of TiO2, which in turn are transferred to the conducting glass plate through a trap-limited diffusion process. Thus the role of the photoanode includes dye adsorption and charge transport. Meanwhile the oxidized dye is regenerated by the electrolyte. The electrolyte in turn is regenerated by the electrons reaching the counter electrode through the external circuit.
Recombination reactions in DSSCs
The electron injection from the excited dye to the conduction band of TiO2 takes place in femtoseconds and the regeneration of the oxidized dye takes place in microseconds. The mesoporous TiO2 network is mainly composed of nanocrystals of TiO2 connected together. The electron transport mechanism through the TiO2 network can be explained in two ways namely the electric field driven charge transport9 and trap-limited diffusion process.10 Since TiO2 is not electronically doped and it is surrounded by the ions of the electrolyte, contribution by the electric field to the transport of electrons through the TiO2 network is negligible. Thus the main driving force for the migration of electrons through the dense TiO2 network is mainly the diffusion process.11 During the diffusion of electrons through the TiO2 network the electrons encounter three important interfaces namely the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface, TiO2/TiO2 interface and FTO/TiO2 interface. These interfaces act as electron trap centres where the electrons can undergo recombination. Since TiO2 is mesoporous there are chances that the electrolyte can get accommodated in the space between the TiO2 molecules in the TiO2 film. So electrons from the conduction band of TiO2 can recombine with the electrolyte. The electrons can also recombine with the oxidized dye. Thus these recombination reactions are known as the dark reactions. Fig. 2 summarizes the various recombination reactions that take place in DSSCs.
 Fig. 2  Light and dark reactions in DSSCs.12 
Due to this recombination process all the electrons that are injected in the conduction band of TiO2 do not reach the FTO effectively and thus the overall efficiency of the cell is reduced. Thus the efficiency of the dye sensitized solar cell is solely dependent on the effective electron injection (high dye loading) and the competition between the effective transfer of electrons through the TiO2 network without recombination and the regeneration of the dye.
Role of nanotechnology
Materials in their bulk size vary differently as their size reduces to the nano-regime. As the size reduces, more and more atoms of the material are concentrated towards the surface thus leading to high surface energy. This high surface energy of nanomaterials has been manipulated so as to use in various fields such as renewable energy, textiles, biomedical, health care, food and agriculture, electronics and environment. These nano-materials fabricated, via the top-down approach or bottom-up approach, have low to zero impurities in them. This is one of the main reasons for utilizing these materials for drug delivery, imaging and also cancer therapy. By controlling the reaction conditions, various morphologies of nanomaterials can be obtained such as, 0D, 1D, 2D etc. Particles and dots come under the 0D category, where in the particle synthesis is the simplest. Wires, rods, tubes, and fibres come under the 1D morphology, which have majority of applications in DSSCs, photocatalysis, drug delivery etc. Sheets, flakes and films generally come under the 2D regime, wherein the fabrication is slightly complicated compared to that of 0D/1D. Anisotropic 3D structures, like flowers, tetrapods, tripods, are difficult to fabricate on a large scale; however they are being researched for photocatalysis, photoanodes in DSSCs, batteries and supercapacitors.
As the size reduces, the band gap increases which gives an additional advantage in imaging, storage and energy storage fields. As the band gap increases the energy quantization phenomenon (quantum confinement) takes place as observed in quantum dots. This quantum confinement phenomenon has been applied in fields like cellular imaging and QDSCs using quantum dots. Thus by tuning the morphology of TiO2 used in the DSSCs, recombination losses can be minimized and the performance of the device can be improved. Due to the high surface area of the nanostructures the dye loading capacity is greatly enhanced. This increased dye loading enhances the light harvesting efficiency and thus the overall performance of the cell. Several nanostructures with a high surface area such as hollow spheres,13 micro-beads,14 core–shell nanostructures,15etc. were widely investigated. However zero-dimensional nanostructures do not provide a direct pathway for the electrons to travel. Thus in order to provide a direct pathway for the electrons, one-dimensional nanostructures such as nanowires,16 nanorods,17 nanotubes18 and nanofibers19 of TiO2 were employed in DSSCs. However, the one-dimensional nanostructures owing to their low internal surface area have poor dye loading which pulls down the light harvesting efficiency and in turn the overall performance of the cell. Thus in order to have the advantages of both one-dimensional nanostructures and the high surface area of zero-dimensional particles, TiO2 particle–fiber composites20,21 were employed. In addition to these morphologies several anisotropic morphologies were also used in DSSCs. There is a detailed review article that describes the different anisotropic structures used in DSSCs.22 The collection efficiency of the electrons could also be improved by decreasing the electron path distance. Chapel et al. developed a photoanode that contains a transparent conductive nanoporous TiO2 matrix coated with a thin layer of TiO2.23 Another significant way to prevent the recombination of electrons is to open an additional electron transport network in the TiO2 film. This can be achieved by incorporating carbon nanostructures into the TiO2 network.
Carbon nanostructures
The group 14 chemical element carbon with the atomic number 6 is widely distributed in nature in various forms and it is considered to be the 15th most abundant element in the earth's crust. Among the various allotropes of carbon diamond, graphite and amorphous carbon are the most common allotropes. In addition there are various allotropes of carbon having a wide range of dimensions varying from zero dimensional structures like fullerene, one-dimensional structures like carbon nanotubes, two-dimensional sheets like graphene to three-dimensional graphite synthesized in the laboratory for various applications (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Illustration showing the applications of nanomaterials. 
These allotropes have different properties based on their structure. Table 1 summarizes the properties of various allotropes of carbon.
Table 1 Properties of allotropes of carbon




Form of carbon
Hybridisation
Electron mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Young's modulus
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Diamond
sp3
1800
1220 GPa
25 W cm−1 K−1


Graphite
sp2
1.5 × 104 (ref. 24a)
0.795 (ref. 28) TPa
2200 (ref. 24b)


Graphene
sp2
200000 (ref. 25a)
1.06 (ref. 29 and 30) TPa
(4.84 × 103) to (5.50 × 103) (ref. 25b)


CNTs
sp2
120000 (ref. 26a)
1.033–1.042 (ref. 31) TPa
6600 (ref. 26b)


Fullerenes
sp2
0.4–1 (ref. 27)
53–69 (ref. 32) GPa






Due to the high electron mobility and conductivity, these carbon materials such as graphite,34 carbon black,35 mesoporous carbon,36 carbon nanotubes,37–39 and graphene40–42 have a great deal of applications in optoelectronic devices. Among them graphene is a monolayer of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms tightly packed into a two-dimensional honey-comb network43 and it is the building block of all other allotropes of carbon. The charge carriers in graphene behave as massless Dirac fermions44–47 exhibiting the quantum Hall effect46,47 and ambipolar electric field effect.44 Due to long-range π interactions, they exhibit unique thermal, electrical and mechanical properties48 and have a high electron mobility of 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature. Thus they find a lot of applications in nanoelectronics,49–53 batteries, solar cells, photocatalysis,54etc.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are formed when a layer of graphene is rolled and it was first observed by Iijima. These CNTs are either single walled or double walled or multiwalled depending on the number of graphene sheets that are rolled to form the nanoscale CNTs (Fig. 4).55
 Fig. 4  Structures of various allotropes of carbon.33 
In addition, depending on the chiral angle in which they are rolled-up, a number of structures like zig-zag, arm chair, and chiral exist.55 Based on the diameter of the CNTs and the helicity of the arrangement of the graphite ring, the CNTs are either metallic or semiconducting. By joining different CNTs, molecular wires with unique mechanical, electrical, magnetic and optical properties are obtained.57,58 Due to these unique properties, CNTs have potential applications in single molecular transistors,59 SEM tips,60 gas and electrochemical storage,61 electron field emitting flat panel displays62 and sensors.63 Further the addition of graphene as reinforcement enhances the electrical, mechanical and optical properties.64,65
Characterisation of DSSCs
The standard method to measure the performance of a solar cell is to measure its current density–voltage characteristics. Light with a well-defined spectrum and intensity usually AM 1.5 G is illuminated on the solar cell and the corresponding J–V characteristics are measured. From the J–V plot several parameters such as the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, fill-factor, maximum power density and photovoltaic conversion efficiency can be measured.

1. Open-circuit voltage (Voc). 
It is the maximum potential that can be drawn from a cell when there is no current. It is the potential difference of the cell when I = 0 and r → ∞. It is the measure of the potential difference between the Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (A) CNT arm chair, (B) CNT zig-zag, (C) CNT chiral.56 


2. Short-circuit current (Isc). 
It is the measure of the net effective current produced in the cell neglecting the current that is produced under dark conditions.Jsc = Jsc − Jdark
The short circuit current is dependent on the light harvesting efficiency and it is given asLHE = 1 − 10−Γσ(λ)where Γ is the no. of moles of sensitizer per square cm and σ is the absorption cross-section.


3. Fill-factor (FF). 
It is the measure of the deviation of the behaviour of an actual cell from the ideal cell. It is defined as the ratio of the maximum power to the product of Voc and Isc.  
The photovoltaic conversion efficiency is defined as the ratio of the maximum power delivered to that of the incident power.  

Carbon nanostructures/TiO2 composites for DSSCs
There are different ways by which carbon nanostructures/TiO2 composites could be made. In this review we explain about the various methods that are adopted for the synthesis of carbon nanostructures/TiO2 composites and their photovoltaic performance (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics of a typical DSSC.22 

1. Carbon nanotube/TiO2 composites. 
Jung et al. were the first group to incorporate single walled carbon nanotubes (SW-CNTs) into TiO2 to facilitate electron transport through the TiO2 film and showed 50% enhancement in the short-circuit current density.66 However, since the distribution of TiO2 on the SW-CNTs was irregular Kim et al. used acid treated multiwalled CNTs. The treatment of the CNTs with H2SO4 and HNO3 introduces carboxylic acid groups on the surfaces of the CNTs which facilitate better adhesion of TiO2 on the CNTs. The increase in the efficiency is due to the fact that the rutile form of TiO2 has superior light scattering property due to its higher refractive index than the anatase form and also the increase in the interconnection among the TiO2 particles when acid treated MW-CNTs are added, which blocks the surface electron trap sites (Fig. 7).67
 Fig. 7  (A) FE-SEM image of MW-CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 68) and (B) TEM image of MW-CNTs/TiO2.67 
Sawatsuk et al. mixed multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and TiO2 powder directly and reported an efficiency of 10.29% with about 0.025 wt% of MWCNTs.68 Lee et al. synthesized a multiwalled CNTs–TiO2 composite in which TiO2 was prepared by a sol–gel method and the MWCNTs were pre-processed with COOH groups. Multiwalled CNTs are generally hydrophobic in nature. However oxidation of MWCNTs with H2O2 makes them hydrophilic by the generation of the carboxylic acid group on the CNTs. An overall efficiency of 4.97% was reported for 0.1 wt% of CNTs.69
The ruthenium dye that is used in DSSCs anchors on to the metal oxide, i.e. TiO2 and not onto the surface of the carbon nanotubes. Thus if the mass density of the metal oxide is less, the active dye adsorption sites decrease. Thus if the metal oxide is not immobilized uniformly on the surface of the CNTs, the total amount of the dye loaded will be poor, thereby reducing the light harvesting efficiency. In order to overcome this demerit and improve the binding between TiO2 and CNTs, Jang et al. treated CNTs with concentrated H2SO4 and HNO3 which resulted in the introduction of –COOH groups on the surface of the CNTs. The presence of these –COOH groups on the CNT surface facilitates better adhesion between CNTs and TiO2. The acid treated single walled CNTs (a-SWCNTs) were used in two ways. In the first case a-SWCNTs were incorporated into the TiO2 films to improve the charge transfer in the DSSC and the solar cell fabricated showed 25% increase in Jsc compared to the one without the CNTs. In the second case, the dye molecules were anchored onto the a-SWCNTs and they were introduced at the TiO2/electrolyte interface where the a-SWCNTs acted as light scattering centres. In this case Voc increased whereas Jsc remained constant. The increase in Voc implies the reduction of dark current and the increase is also attributed to the negative shift of the conduction band edge of TiO2 owing to the basicity of the TiO2 surface due to the –NH groups of the dye–SWCNT complex.70 The conventional method for producing a TiO2/CNT composite for the DSSC involves high temperature sintering at 450 °C. High temperature sintering aids in the removal of the polymer and establishes a good interconnection between the TiO2 particles. However in order to make flexible solar cells on plastic substrates low temperature fabrication is required. Lee et al. reported a low temperature fabrication process to form a TiO2/MWCNT photo-anode and reported an efficiency of about 5.65%.71 It was observed that as the concentration of CNTs increased in the CNTs/TiO2 composite, the performance of the cell decreased due to the aggregation of the CNTs. Thus in order to improve the dispersion of CNTs without causing damage to the side walls and the tip of the CNTs, Zhang et al. introduced oxygen containing groups on the surface of the CNTs by radio frequency inductively coupled oxygen plasma treatment. The oxygen groups on the surface of the plasma treated CNTs made them hydrophilic and thus improved the dispersion. Fig. 8 compares the dispersion of TiO2 between chemically modified CNTs and plasma-treated CNTs. The good dispersion of TiO2 leads to a high surface area which in turn improves the dye loading and hence the overall efficiency. They have also shown that the addition of the plasma treated CNTs brings about 75% enhancement in the efficiency.72
 Fig. 8  Schematic showing the dispersion using chemically modified CNTs (A) and plasma treated CNTs; (B) and (C) TEM image of the plasma treated CNTs/TiO2 composite.72 
Yun et al. synthesized a TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite by direct mechanical mixing and showed an overall conversion efficiency of 4.71% with 0.1 wt% of CNTs. The enhancement in the efficiency was mainly due to the high surface area and hierarchical nanoporous structure. Fig. 9 shows the mechanism of electron transport in the TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite.73
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of hollow spheres of anatase TiO2, (B) SEM image of a TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite and (C) schematic showing the electron transfer mechanism in the TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite.73 
Muduli et al. employed a hydrothermal route for the synthesis of a TiO2/MW-CNT composite, as the auto-generated pressure upon heating aided in achieving the crystalline phase with fewer defects at relatively lower temperature and showed an enhancement in the power conversion efficiency of about 50% compared to the one without the MW-CNTs. Fig. 10B shows the functionalization of the CNTs upon the hydrothermal treatment and bonding with the TiO2 surface by ester bonds.74
 Fig. 10  (A) SEM image of a MW-CNTs/TiO2 composite and (B) functionalisation of CNTs upon hydrothermal treatment.74 
Dan et al. have succeeded in reporting a power conversion efficiency of 10.6% by using genetically engineered M13 virus as a template for the synthesis of a single walled carbon nanotube–TiO2 nanocrystal core–shell nanocomposite. The as-produced carbon nanotubes are generally a mixture of semiconducting and metallic forms. The semiconducting CNTs have a non-continuous band structure so that the electrons in the conduction band of the CNTs are easily transferred to FTO thereby increasing the electron collection efficiency. However due to the continuous band structure of the metallic CNTs, the electrons transferred from the conduction band of the TiO2 stay at the energy levels near the Fermi level thereby undergoing recombination with the dye and the electrolyte and thus reducing the overall energy conversion efficiency. M13 is a filamentous bacteriophage that can be genetically engineered to bind to specific peptides. Fig. 11 shows the synthesis procedure of the TiO2/SWCNT complex with M13 virus as the template. The major advantage of this approach is that the M13 virus acts as a surfactant thereby preventing the bundling of SWCNTs.75
 Fig. 11  Synthesis procedure of a TiO2/SWCNT complex with M13 virus as the template.75 
Subha et al. successfully grew single-crystalline one-dimensional rutile TiO2 nanorods along with MWCNTs on the FTO substrate by adopting a template-free synthesis method. They also showed that the formation of TiO2 and its anchoring on MWCNTs took place simultaneously due to the presence of the polar oxygenated group. The composite used as the photoanode in the DSSC exhibited about 60% enhancement in the conversion efficiency (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (A) SEM image, (B) SAED pattern, (C) TEM image of 1D-rutile TiO2 MWCNT composite grown on FTO.76 
Since TiO2 nanowires are single crystalline, grain boundaries are absent and hence recombination reactions are prevented by providing a smooth electron transport path. The presence of MWCNTs facilitates better charge separation thus preventing the exciton recombination reactions.76 Chang et al. employed a simple and facile electrophoretic deposition (EPD) technique. The DSSC fabricated using TiO2 modified MWCNTs as the photoanode with a natural dye extracted from Ipomoea showed about 30% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency with 0.01 g of CNTs.77 Patrick et al. electrophoretically deposited carbon nanotubes on an optical transparent electrode (OTE) followed by immersing the OTE into the TiO2 colloid. Fig. 13A shows the schematic comparing the flow of electrons in the 1D TiO2 nanostructures and CNT modified TiO2 composite photoanodes in DSSCs. The SWCNTs facilitate better charge separation by preventing the electron back-transfer reaction, i.e. the recombination of the injected electrons with the oxidized dye thus improving the charge collection efficiency and thus 45% enhancement in the short-circuit current density could be achieved.78
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of electron flow in one-dimensional nanostructures and CNT modified TiO2 photo-anode. (B) SEM image of the composite. (C) J–V characteristics.78 
Rice grain-shaped TiO2/MWCNTs were synthesized by Zhu et al. by the electrospinning method. The single crystallinity and the high surface area of the composite brought about 32% enhancement in the energy conversion efficiency with 0.2 wt% of CNTs (Fig. 14).79
 Fig. 14  (A) SEM image, (B) TEM image and (C) J–V characteristics of rice grain shaped TiO2–MWCNT composite.79 
Zhang et al. synthesized a flexible single wired DSSC by wrapping freestanding carbon nanotube films around the co-axial Ti–TiO2 nanotube wires. TiO2 nanotube arrays radially anchored on a Ti surface were synthesized by anodic oxidation and wrapped with the free standing CNTs by chemical vapour deposition. The DSSCs made with this material exhibited high stability and flexibility even at bending angles up to 90°. The efficiency reported was about 1.6% which was further improved by an additional second conventional metal wire such as silver and copper (Fig. 15).80
 Fig. 15  Single wire DSSC wrapped with a carbon nanotube film electrode.80 


2. Graphene/TiO2 composites. 
Two-dimensional graphene sheets have a high surface area and exhibit higher electrical conductivity than the one-dimensional carbon nanotubes. The higher electrical conductivity aids in faster electron transport and thus lowers the recombination. Due to the single molecular layered structure graphene exhibits intermolecular forces such as physisorption and charge transfer interaction with TiO2.81 Thus TiO2 nanoparticles can anchor better on graphene so that the photo-induced electrons can be easily captured and transferred to FTO. Fig. 16 shows the distribution of TiO2 on CNTs and graphene. Yang et al. have compared the photovoltaic performance of CNTs/TiO2 and graphene/TiO2 composites for DSSCs. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies reveal that the charge transfer resistance (Rct = 21.66 Ω) is smaller for the graphene/TiO2 photoelectrode than for CNTs/TiO2 whose Rct is found to be 140 Ω. This result implies that the graphene/TiO2 composite has a higher electron transport rate than that of the CNTs/TiO2 composite (Table 2).82
 Fig. 16  Distribution of TiO2 on CNTs and graphene.82 
Table 2 Summary of various CNTs/TiO2 composites, their synthesis procedure and photovoltaic performances




Composite
Method
Efficiency




MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 68)
Direct mixing
10.29%


MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 69)
MWCNTs by thermal CVD and TiO2 by sol–gel
4.97%


CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 72)
Plasma treated CNTs
6.34%


CNTs/TiO2 hollow sphere73
Direct mixing
4.71%


MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 74)
Hydrothermal
7.37%


CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 75)
Virus-mediated method
10.6%


MWCNTs/rutile TiO2 nanorods76
Template-free synthesis
2.4%


MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 77)
EPD
0.35%


Rice grain shaped TiO2/MWCNTs79
Electrospinning
6.12%


CNT film around co-axial Ti–TiO2 nanotubes80
Anodic oxidation of TiO2 followed by CVD of CNTs
1.65%





Fig. 17 shows the energy level diagram of the DSSC when carbon nanostructures are added along with TiO2.
 Fig. 17  Energy level diagram of DSSCs when (A) graphene sheets84 and (B) CNTs are added.79 
There are different ways by which TiO2/graphene composites could be made. In general there are three important steps involved. They are: (1) mixing of graphene oxide with TiO2, (2) reduction of graphene oxide to graphene by chemical reductants or UV radiation, (3) coating the composite on FTO followed by calcination at 450 °C.83 However the major disadvantage is the aggregation of graphene and the poor contact with the metal oxide. Further dense and uniform distribution of the metal oxide is essential to promote electron transfer. Tang et al. proposed a method for incorporating graphene in nanostructured TiO2 film by molecular grafting. The schematic in Fig. 18 shows the incorporation of graphene sheets in nanostructured TiO2 films by the molecular grafting method. Conductivity of the reduced graphene sheets and good attachment of TiO2 could be achieved by controlling the oxidation time of the chemical exfoliation process. The graphene implanted TiO2 showed conversion efficiency of 1.68%.84 Zhou et al. developed a novel in situ simultaneous reduction hydrolysis technique in ethylenediamine solvent. This method was based on the simultaneous reduction of graphene oxide to graphene by ethylenediamine and formation of TiO2 by the hydrolysis of titanium(IV)dihydroxybis and its subsequent loading in situ onto graphene by the formation of Ti–O–C bonds. The DSSC fabricated using this composite showed a conversion efficiency of 7.1%.85
 Fig. 18  Schematic of the molecular drafting method.84 
Few layer graphene/TiO2 nanocrystals were synthesized in situ at a low temperature of 400 °C using C28H16Br2 as a precursor and the composite was used in a DSSC as a photoanode by Liu et al. During the in situ thermal decomposition processes, both C-doped TiO2 and few-layer graphene (FLG)–TiO2 composites were formed.
The optical absorption spectra showed enhanced UV and visible light absorption for the FLG–TiO2 composite compared to the bare TiO2 nanocrystals. This enhancement in the absorption with a red shift was due to C-doping. Under irradiation, the electrons can be excited from the valence band to the conduction band of TiO2 or from the carbon impurity level to the conduction band of TiO2 as shown in Fig. 19D. Thus optical absorption increases due to narrowing of the band-gap. Further the charge transport is also enhanced. A short-circuit current density of 18.03 mA cm−2 and a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 8.25% was reported for a DSSC with 0.75 wt% of few layer graphene.86 Tsai et al. prepared a graphene–TiO2 composite by mixing TiO2 powder with different wt% of graphene and fabricated a DSSC by spin-coating it on an ITO substrate. They showed that with a graphene content of about 1 wt% in TiO2 film, there was an improvement in efficiency from 5.98% to 6.86%.87 The hydrothermal synthesis of TiO2/graphene composites generally involves multiple steps.88 Anjusree et al. reported a one pot synthesis of TiO2/graphene nanocomposites. According to their results, the average thickness of the graphene sheets was 1.1 nm and the TiO2 nanoparticles were dispersed uniformly on the surface of the graphene sheets. The results are shown in Fig. 21. The DSSC made with a composite having 0.7 wt% of graphene showed an efficiency of 4.26% which was 25% higher than the one without graphene (Fig. 20).89
 Fig. 19  (A) J–V characteristics of the graphene/TiO2 composite; (B) TEM image of the graphene/TiO2 composite; (C) absorption spectra of the graphene/TiO2 composite and (D) schematic showing the electron transfer mechanism.86 
 Fig. 20  (A) TEM image of a graphene/TiO2 composite by a one pot hydrothermal method and (B) J–V characteristics.89 
A graphene–TiO2 composite prepared by a one-step solvothermal process was reported by Ziming et al. They synthesized graphene/TiO2 composites with different TiO2 nanostructures like ultra-small 2 nm TiO2 nanoparticles (USTG), 12 nm nanoparticles (STG) and nanorods (NRTG) just by controlling the solvothermal reaction conditions. Fig. 21 shows the schematic of producing graphene/TiO2 composites by the solvothermal method. Among the three different nanocomposites, the composite with ultra-small 2 nm TiO2 particles showed modest efficiency of 7.25%. The high efficiency is attributed to the high specific surface area produced by ultra-small TiO2 nanoparticles and the lower recombination rate.90 A reduced graphene oxide/TiO2 nanocrystal composite was prepared by Shu et al. by a solvothermal method and they were used as photoanodes in DSSCs. The DSSC with 0.75 wt% of r-GO showed maximum power conversion efficiency of 5.5% which was about 35% higher than the DSSC with the conventional P25.91 A hierarchical titania mesoporous sphere/graphene composite was synthesized by the controlled hydrolysis of a titanium precursor in the presence of graphene oxide followed by the hydrothermal treatment. The high surface area of both graphene and mesoporous spheres increased the dye absorption and the high electrical conductivity of graphene improved the charge transfer and collection efficiency. The DSSC constructed using this composite as the photoanode showed 7.19% cell efficiency.92
 Fig. 21  Schematic showing the solvothermal synthesis and the TEM images of (a) STG, (b) NRTG, (c) USTG under high magnification, (d) USTG under low magnification.90 
Sun et al. reported a very simple method for producing a graphene/TiO2 composite by heterogeneous coagulation. It is based on the principle that when two types of particles with opposite charges are mixed together, mutual coagulation occurs. The graphene used in their work was Nafion functionalized. The hydrophobic interactions of the fluoro backbones of Nafion prevent graphene aggregation. The overall energy conversion efficiency was found to be 4.28%.93 Asha et al. reported a simple and cost-effective method to form a graphene/TiO2 composite. Molten salt synthesis is a technique by which nanoparticles with varied morphology could be made.94 In this method graphene was added to TiO2 at the early stage of growth of the TiO2 from its precursor solution thus ensuring uniform distribution of graphene on the TiO2 matrix. The graphene formed a bridging layer between the TiO2 networks. The overall energy conversion efficiency was found to be 5.41% (Fig. 22).95
 Fig. 22  (A) TEM image of a Nafion functionalised graphene/P25 composite and (B) J–V characteristics.93 
Compared to the zero-dimensional nanostructures, one-dimensional nanostructures provide a direct pathway for the electrons to travel thereby reducing the loss of electrons by recombination.96 The one-dimensional nanostructures also act as light scattering centres, scattering light in the red part of the spectrum thereby increasing the light absorption by the dye molecules97 and thus enhance the light harvesting efficiency. Thus the preferred morphology of TiO2 for better electron transport and improved light scattering is the one-dimensional structures. Electrospinning is one of the most common ways for producing one-dimensional nanostructures such as nanowires, nanofibers and nanorods. Zhu et al. synthesized a one-dimensional TiO2/graphene composite using CTAB functionalized graphene mixed with the polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) polymer as the electrospinning solution and reported cell efficiency of 6.49%.98 Conductive nanofiber mats were synthesized by Asha et al. by electrospinning a TiO2/graphene composite using PVP as the carrier solution. The DSSC assembled using this nanofiber mat as the photoanode showed efficiency of 7.6%.99Fig. 23C shows the TEM image of the electrospun TiO2/graphene composite. Wang et al. fabricated graphene sheets on highly oriented TiO2 nanotube arrays by a one-step electrochemical method. The surface coverage of the nanotube arrays by graphene was controlled by controlling the reaction time and they reported a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 4.46%.100 However the smooth-walled TiO2 nanotubes had a very low internal surface area and as a result the dye loading was poor which in turn reduced the light harvesting efficiency and the overall efficiency of the cell. So the surface area must be improved without compromising the one-dimensional architecture. The surface area of the nanotube arrays was improved by creating ridges on the surface of the nanotube thus forming bamboo-type TiO2 nanotubes.101,102 Luan et al. electrophoretically deposited reduced graphene oxide on the bamboo-type TiO2 nanotube array and they reported an efficiency of about 6.01%.103
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic of electrospinning.98 (B) Rice grain shaped TiO2/graphene composite.98 (C) Graphene/TiO2 by electrospinning.99 
In comparison with the one-dimensional nanostructures, two-dimensional nanostructures have a very high surface area and they are mostly employed as scattering layers in DSSCs. However the photoanodes made of two-dimensional nanosheets show inferior performance to those of one-dimensional nanostructures due to the low conductivity of the TiO2 films and poor contact between FTO and the TiO2 film.104 So in order to overcome this demerit, Fan et al. fabricated a two-dimensional TiO2 nanosheets/graphene composite films and fabricated a DSSC which showed photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 5.77%. They attributed the improvement in efficiency to the following reasons: (1) good anchoring between TiO2 nanosheets and the two-dimensional graphene sheets, (2) the two-dimensional structures provide a very high surface area thereby more sites for the loading of dye molecules, and (3) due to the large pore volume, the electrolyte diffusion is enhanced and as a result the dye is regenerated faster.105 In addition to 0-D, 1-D and 2-D TiO2/graphene composites, composites with graphene containing both zero and one dimensional TiO2 nanostructures were used as bilayer photoanodes in DSSCs. TiO2 nanotubes are adhered onto FTO coated with graphene/TiO2 nanoparticles. The 1-D nanotubes cause scattering of light and the 0-D nanoparticles provide a very high surface area for good dye loading thus improving the light harvesting. Further, graphene aids in the hassle-free transport of the electrons and the overall energy conversion efficiency was found to be 6.29% with 0.1 wt% of graphene (Fig. 24).106
 Fig. 24  SEM image of (A) graphene oxide on TiO2 nanotube arrays100 and (B) bamboo type TiO2.103 TEM image of (C) TiO2 sheet/graphene composite105 and (D) MWCNTs/graphene/TiO2 hybrid.108 
Tang et al. reported a three-layered photoanode in which alternating graphene/TiO2 acts as the electron transport layer, P25 as the working layer and graphene/titanate nanotubes as the scattering layer. The graphene/TiO2 composite was synthesized by layer-by-layer self-assembly technology and the graphene/titanate nanotubes were synthesized by the hydrothermal route. The superior light scattering and the electron transport properties of the composite film were responsible for the overall conversion efficiency as high as 8.67%.107 The high specific surface area and strong π–π interactions between the graphene sheets prevent the dispersion of graphene. Yen et al. introduced MWCNTs on graphene which reduce the π–π interactions thereby reducing the aggregation. An optimum ratio of about 2:1 of MWCNTs to graphene aids in better dispersion and an overall conversion efficiency of 6.11% could be achieved (Fig. 25).108
 Fig. 25  Schematic showing the synthesis of a MWCNTs/graphene/TiO2 hybrid material.108 
A graphene-coated TiO2 core–shell structure was synthesized and its photocatalytic and photoelectrical properties were studied by Kim et al. The enhanced H2 production and the photocurrent generation of graphene shell coated TiO2 compared to that of the typical TiO2 coated graphene sheets proves that it is a promising architecture for solar energy conversion (Fig. 26).109
 Fig. 26  (A) Synthesis procedure of a TiO2/graphene core–shell structure. (B) TEM image of TiO2/graphene.109 
In addition to carbon nanotubes and graphene, carbon nanofibers also aid in the facile transport of electrons through the TiO2 film. One such hybrid composite was reported by Liu et al. in which vertically aligned CNFs were grown by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) and the same was coated with TiO2 needle-like structures by metal–organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) forming a co-axial nanowire array structure. The authors achieved an overall low power conversion efficiency of about 1.09% (Fig. 27).112
 Fig. 27  TiO2 coated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers.112 


3. Role of graphene quantum dots. 
In order to develop a low cost and eco-friendly DSSC with the reduced use of dyes containing heavy metals like ruthenium, graphene quantum dots-optimized photoanodes were reported by Fan et al. The short-circuit current density and the power conversion efficiency of the DSSC with the quantum dots optimized photoanode were 30.9% and 19.6% higher than those of the conventional DSSC, respectively. The photo-excitation of graphene quantum dots and the hot electron injection of quantum dots to TiO2 were responsible for the outstanding performance in spite of the minimum dye loading (Fig. 28).110
 Fig. 28  (A) Structure of the graphene quantum dot modified solar cell. (B) Structure of graphene quantum dots. (C) SEM image of graphene quantum dots. (D) Amount of dye loaded.110 
Lee et al. successfully fabricated highly luminescent graphene quantum dots by oxidation of herring bone type carbon nanofibers followed by size-selective precipitation. The size-selective precipitation helps in the separation of the nanometer-sized quantum dots from the bulk graphene quantum dot solution. These graphene quantum dots exhibited up-conversion PL properties and the DSSC with 2.6 mg of graphene quantum dots showed 9.2% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency compared to the pristine DSSC (Fig. 29).111
 Fig. 29  (A) Synthesis procedure of graphene quantum dots (GQDs), (B) TEM image of GQDs, (C) J–V characteristics and (D) IPCE measurement.111 

Role of carbon nanostructures at the TiO2/FTO interface
Carbon nanostructures not only enhance the electron transport through the TiO2 network but also increase the electron collection efficiency by minimizing the interfacial resistance at the TiO2/FTO interface (Table 3).
Table 3 Summary of various graphene/TiO2 composites, their synthesis procedure and photovoltaic performances




Composite
Method
Efficiency




Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 84)
Molecular grafting
1.68%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 85)
Simultaneous reduction hydrolysis
7.1%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 89)
Hydrothermal
4.26%


Ultra-small TiO2 nanoparticles/graphene90
Solvothermal
7.25%


r-GO/TiO2 (ref. 91)
Solvothermal
5.5%


Mesoporous titania/graphene92
Hydrothermal
7.19%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 93)
Heterogeneous coagulation
4.28%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 94)
Molten salt
5.41%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 99)
Electrospinning
7.6%


rGO/bamboo type TiO2 nanotube array103
Electrophoretic deposition
6.01%


TiO2 sheet/graphene105
Hydrothermal
5.77%


Vertically grown CNF/TiO2 composite112
MOCVD deposition of TiO2 on PECVD grown CNF
1.09%


Rice grain shaped TiO2/graphene98
Electrospinning
6.49%


Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 87)
Spin coating
6.86%




In addition to the recombination reactions at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte and TiO2/TiO2 interfaces, a possible centre for recombination is the TiO2/FTO interface. In order to prevent recombination at the TiO2/FTO interface, conventionally FTO is subjected to a pre-treatment by hydrolysing it with TiCl4 forming a thin layer of TiO2.113 However since TiCl4 hydrolyses faster when exposed to air, there is a need for an alternative to be used as an electron transporting layer at the TiO2/FTO interface without compromising the transmittance of the FTO. Chen et al.'s was the first group to report on the functionalization of FTO using graphene as the electron transport layer at the TiO2/FTO interface. The graphene was deposited on FTO by spin-coating. Since the work function of graphene lies below that of TiO2, and also matches with that of FTO, the electron transport from graphene to TiO2 is prevented. Thus the interface functionalization leads to 8% enhancement in the power conversion efficiency compared to the one pre-treated with TiCl4.114 Hu et al. deposited a 60 nm thin layer of graphene on ITO by sputtering. The graphene prevents the back reaction and thus the short-circuit current density and power conversion efficiency increase from 6.9 mA cm−2 and 1.45% to 17.5 mA cm−2 and 3.98%, respectively.115 A photocatalytically reduced mixture of graphene oxide/TiO2 was introduced as the interfacial layer at the FTO/TiO2 interface by Kim et al. and the power conversion efficiency improved from 4.89% to 5.26%.116
Role of carbon nanostructures in the counter electrodes
The other important component in the DSSC is the counter electrode. The counter electrode acts as a catalyst to reduce the I−/I3− redox couple electrolyte. The redox reaction usually takes place at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The reaction is given asI3− + 2e− ⇔ 3I−
The most commonly used counter electrode is platinum due to its outstanding chemical and electrochemical stability, low charge transfer resistance and higher catalytic activity towards I−/I3− redox species. However in spite of all these merits, owing to the high cost, low availability and degradation of the counter electrode due to the electrolyte and the catalyst forming PtI4,117 there was a need for an alternative conductive counter electrode material. Further, the highly corrosive nature of the electrolyte restricts the use of other metals such as silver, aluminium, copper, nickel and gold as counter electrodes.118 These requirements opened up the way for carbon materials-based counter electrodes due to their good electrical conductivity, resistance against corrosion and catalytic reduction of the redox couple.119,120

1. Carbon black and activated carbon. 
The catalytically active sites in carbon materials are mostly located at the crystal edges. As a result carbon materials with low crystallinity and edges are considered to be catalytically more active than the highly oriented CNTs and graphene. One such carbon material with low crystallinity is carbon black.121 It is mostly produced by incomplete combustion of heavy petroleum products, coal tar and vegetable oil. The first carbon-based counter electrode was developed by Kay and Gräztel in 1996 making use of 20% carbon black and 15% nanocrystalline TiO2 added to graphite powder. The enhanced catalytic activity was due to the high surface area of carbon black.118 In addition, photovoltaic parameters such as the fill-factor and efficiency were found to be dependent on the thickness (roughness factor) of the film. As the thickness (roughness factor) is increased, the fill-factor also increases due to the apparent decrease in the charge transfer resistance for the redox reaction of the I−/I3− redox couple.121,122 However, the catalytic activity of carbon-based counter electrodes would be comparable with that of platinum only if the thickness is greater than that of few tens of micrometers.122 This not only reduces the transparency but also increases the internal resistance leading to reduction in efficiency. Thus nanocarbon powder with an average particle size of 30 nm and a surface area of 100 m2 g−1 was used as a counter electrode and the performance was compared with that of a microcarbon-based counter electrode. The DSSC with the nanocarbon based counter electrode showed an efficiency of 6.73%.123 A pure carbon-based flexible counter electrode for DSSCs was fabricated by Chen et al. using graphite sheet as a substrate and 20 μm thick activated carbon as the catalytic layer. The reduction of the sheet resistance increases the fill-factor as well as the overall energy conversion efficiency of the cell. The fill-factor and efficiency of the pure carbon based counter electrode was found to be 70.2 and 6.46%, respectively (Fig. 30).124
 Fig. 30  SEM image of nanocarbon and J–V characteristics of the DSSC comparing nanocarbon and microcarbon.123 


2. Mesoporous carbon. 
Mesoporous carbon materials have a very large internal surface area and narrow pore size distribution. A mesoporous carbon material prepared by the self-organization of a surfactant and a carbon precursor was used as the counter electrode in a DSSC and the performance was compared with that of activated carbon by Wang et al. and they showed that the DSSC with mesoporous carbon as the counter electrode showed better performance than the one with activated carbon mainly due to the difference in the pore size distribution of the mesoporous and the activated carbons. The easily accessible pore size of the mesoporous carbon aids in better ionic diffusion and thus improves the fill-factor and the overall cell performance.125 According to EIS studies, counter electrodes based on electrospun carbon nanofibers also prove to be a low-cost alternative due to the low charge transfer resistance, large capacitance and high reaction rate for the tri-iodide reduction. However, the overall performance was not comparable with that of the Pt counter electrode due to the lower fill-factor which could be substantially improved by using thinner and porous carbon nanofibers (Fig. 31).126
 Fig. 31  (A) TEM image of mesoporous carbon125 and (B) SEM image of electrospun carbon nanofibers on FTO.126 


3. Inverse opal carbon. 
Inverse opal carbon is a 3-D structure with interconnected pores which aid in both fast electron transport and diffusion of the electrolyte ions. Three different types of inverse opal carbon-based counter electrodes, namely inverse opal carbon, inverse opal carbon with mesopores and graphitized inverse opal carbon were fabricated by Kang et al. The inverse opal carbon with mesopores showed better performance than the other two forms due to the higher specific surface area and interconnected ordered pores. The DSSC showed an overall energy conversion efficiency of 5.5% which is comparable with that of platinum which was found to be 5.8% (Fig. 32).127
 Fig. 32  SEM images of (A) inverse opal carbon, (B) inverse opal carbon with mesopores, (C) graphitized inverse opal carbon, (D) J–V characteristics.127 


4. Hierarchical carbon nanostructures. 
A hierarchical nanostructured carbon counter electrode with a 60 nm diameter hollow macroporous core and 30 nm thick shell with a large surface area and mesoporous volume showed an energy conversion efficiency of 7.56% and a fill-factor of 67% which is comparable with that of the Pt-based counter electrode. The unique feature of this hierarchical structure is that the macroporous hollow core acts as an electrolyte buffering reservoir, thus reducing the diffusion distance to the interior surface of the shell. Further the 3D large inter-connected interstitial volume favours fast transfer of electrons and ions. Thus both the porosity and the hierarchical nanostructure are responsible for efficient mass transport and enhancement of the performance of the cell.128 A hierarchical porous carbon structure with a lot of micropores generated within the walls of the mesoporous carbon was synthesized by Wang et al. by a combination of self-assembly and chemical activation method. A very high surface area of about 1661 m2 g−1 enhanced the electrocatalytic activity and the overall conversion efficiency was 6.48% similar to that of the Pt counter electrode.129 Electrospun-activated carbon nanofibers with a hollow core and a highly mesoporous surface with a mesoporous surface area of 151 m2 g−1 used as the counter electrode in a DSSC showed an efficiency of 7.21%. The hollow core–mesoporous shell structure facilitates better electron and ion exchange by increasing the contact area between the fibres and the electrolyte. This in turn promotes the I3−/I− redox reduction reaction. In addition, the 1-D morphology facilitates semi-directional electron transport. Thus the synergistic effect of both the one-dimensional structure and higher catalytic activity was responsible for the improvement in the overall cell performance.130a Pt nanoparticles were attached to the surface of the carbon nanofibers synthesized by electrospinning followed by stabilisation and carbonisation and subsequent growth of Pt nanoparticles through a redox reaction. A DSSC was fabricated with this composite as the counter electrode and the performance of the device was found to be dependent on the concentration of the Pt loading. The surface attached Pt nanoparticles on electrospun carbon nanofibers result in more number of catalytic active sites leading to higher electrocatalytic activity. This in turn lowers the charge transfer resistance. Maximum efficiency of 7.6% was obtained for the composite having 200 wt% of Pt nanoparticles on the electrospun carbon nanofibers.130b A carbon nanofiber/TiO2 nanoparticle composite as a counter electrode material was synthesized by Sigdel et al. The composite was deposited on FTO by spray coating and the DSSC fabricated showed a power conversion efficiency of 7.25% under one sun illumination. The performance of the device was further improved by adding 8 wt% of Pt to the composite (Fig. 33).130c
 Fig. 33  TEM images of (A) hierarchical nanostructured carbon with hollow macropores,128 (B) electrospun activated carbon nanofibers.130a 


5. Sub-micrometer sized graphite. 
Graphite is a conducing material that is available in abundance in nature. However when compared with the basal planes, the edge planes of the crystal exhibit faster electron transport.131 Thus the edge planes prove to be catalytically more active than the basal planes. The sub-micrometer sized graphite with abundant edge planes enhances the reduction rate of I3−. The DSSC fabricated with a 9 μm thick spin-coated graphite layer as the counter electrode showed a photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 6.2% (Fig. 34).132
 Fig. 34  SEM images of (a) sub-micron sized graphite, (b) micron sized graphite and (c) schematic of graphite and reaction at the counter electrode.132 


6. Fullerenes. 
Fullerenes, also known as bucky balls, are an allotrope of carbon containing sp2 hybridized carbon atoms resembling a soccer ball with twenty hexagons and twelve pentagons as the basis of an icosahedral symmetry closed cage structure.133 Thin films of fullerene were deposited on ITO by a coating method called the electrolyte micelle disruption method using surfactants. Fig. 35 shows the schematic of the micelle disruption method. The thickness of the coating was controlled by controlling the electrolysis time and the highest efficiency was obtained for thin films formed by electrolysis for 2 h (Fig. 36).134
 Fig. 35  Schematic of the micelle disruption method.134 
 Fig. 36  SEM images of (A) multiwalled CNTs,136 (B) vertically aligned SWCNTs,138 (C) bamboo type MWCNTs140 and (D) CNT microballs.141 


7. Carbon nanotubes. 
Carbon nanotubes have attracted greater attention due to the high surface area and electron transport properties. Suzuki et al. compared the performance of DSSCs with SWCNTs, carbon filaments (multiwalled carbon tubes with 1 μm diameter and 10–40 μm length) and nanohorns as counter electrodes. SWCNTs with a very large surface area of 764 m2 g−1 showed an efficiency of 4.5% due to the enhanced electrochemical catalytic activity. In addition, the good contact between the SWCNTs reduces the resistance and also increases the mechanical strength of the film.135 Ramasamy et al. spray-coated multiwalled CNTs on the FTO and from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies they showed that the charge transfer resistance value of these counter electrodes decreased with increase in the spraying time which eventually increased the photovoltaic parameters.136 Although the CNTs exhibit good catalytic activity towards the tri-iodide reduction, the catalytic activity could be further enhanced significantly by introducing defect sites onto the CNTs. This could be done by exposing the CNTs to ozone. For an exposure time of about 20 minutes, the catalytic activity increased significantly without changing the light transmission or the sheet resistance. However, longer exposure of the CNTs to ozone eliminated the CNTs thus increasing the transmittance, Rct as well as the sheet resistance.137 However, most of these carbon nanostructures were deposited as 2D films employing the wet chemical approach which limited the catalytic activity. Deposition of vertically aligned SWCNTs on FTO by a dry transfer approach is a simple and repeatable technique and it offers high density of SWCNT arrays. The device performance was found to be dependent on the length of the CNTs and the DSSC fabricated with an optimal length of 34 μm CNTs showed an overall power conversion efficiency of 5.5%.138 When the graphene sheets were rolled in parallel with the tube axis, hollow-structured multiwalled CNTs were formed whereas when the graphene sheets were folded at an angle with the tube axis, bamboo-type multiwalled CNTs were formed.139 Since the electron transfer kinetics in the edge planes are faster than in the basal planes, the defect rich basal planes of the bamboo type CNTs facilitate faster electron transport and prove to be a suitable alternative for the platinum counter electrode. The constant Rct value during the temporal evaluation has shown that the counter electrodes made of these MWCNTs are stable. The presence of the defect edge plane was proven by Raman spectroscopy with highly intense D bands. In spite of the high Voc and efficiency, Jsc was poor because of the opaque nature of the MWCNTs which restricted the reflection of the unabsorbed solar spectrum towards the TiO2 photoanode.140 In order to build DSSCs with carbon nanotubes based counter electrodes showing performance similar to that of the platinum-based counter electrodes retaining both high efficiency and transparency at the same time, Cha et al. synthesized MWCNT microballs and deposited them on ITO. The DSSC performance as well as transparency can be tuned by controlling the deposition time. The DSSC with a CNT microball-based counter electrode with 70% transparency can reach efficiency of about 80% of that of the platinum counter electrode.141 The electrical and electrochemical properties of the CNTs are dependent on the dispersion of the CNTs. If the CNTs aggregate together to form bundles, the surface area is reduced, which in turn alters the properties of CNTs. In order to fabricate DSSCs with MWCNTs with better dispersion, water soluble MWCNTs with covalently attached polyelectrolytes were synthesized by Han et al. using an electrostatic spray method. Fig. 37A shows the schematic of the synthesis using the grafting route. The photovoltaic conversion efficiency of the DSSC was found to be 7.03%.142
 Fig. 37  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of water soluble MWCNTs,142 (B) SEM image of bucky paper142 and (C) conducting polymer/CNT composite.144a 
Free-standing flexible single walled carbon nanotubes known as bucky papers treated with plasma have a vertically oriented, micron-sized, pillar-like structure on their surface and the base with a dense mesh of single walled carbon nanotubes. The performance of the DSSC fabricated was comparable with that of platinum due to a larger accessible surface area and enhanced catalytic activity.143 In addition, composites of MWCNTs with conductive polymers such as PEDOT:PSS have also been used as counter electrodes.144a
Aligned carbon nanotubes. 
In order to improve the applications of carbon nanotubes, it becomes necessary to extend the properties of CNTs from the nanoscale to the macroscopic scale which could be done by tuning the alignment of the CNTs. Sun et al. have highlighted the various synthetic strategies, properties and applications of aligned CNTs.144b If the CNTs are randomly oriented with lots of inter-connections, boundaries and contacting points, the charge separation and transport of the charges are hindered resulting in poor efficiency. Thus in order to overcome these hindrances, fabrication of the aligned CNTs with highly oriented geometry becomes an effective solution. Making use of these aligned CNTs both planar and non-planar wire-shaped flexible DSSCs were fabricated. Yang et al. synthesized aligned carbon nanotube sheets with good transparency, flexibility and electrical conductivity as a counter electrode material and compared the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs based on aligned CNTs with that of DSSCs based on randomly oriented CNT film. Firstly, CNTs were prepared using CVD. These synthesized CNTs were later spun using a blade. This was further transferred onto FTO glass and poly(ethylene terephthalate) to check for its transparency. Using this system they achieved a conversion of 4.18%. On the other hand, randomly arranged CNTs gave an efficiency of 3.24%. The major reason for the higher efficiency of the aligned CNTs than the randomly arranged ones is, as the latter are randomly arranged, the charge carriers have to cross over multiple points to reach the electrolyte which is not so in the case of aligned CNTs. They have also shown that the structure and electrical conductivities of the CNTs remain unchanged even after the deformable bending process.144c Lee et al. synthesized vertically aligned N-doped carbon nanotube arrays via a growth detachment process. The doping of the CNTs with electron rich nitrogen reduced the band gap of the CNTs thus making them metallic, which in turn resulted in high conductivity and catalytic activity. The fill factor and efficiency of the DSSC were found to be 0.67 and 7.04% respectively. At the same time flexible DSSCs with an N-CNTs/ITO/polyethylene naphthalate substrate yielded an overall efficiency of 2.85%.144d However more efforts are required to increase the cell efficiency of flexible DSSCs. Malara et al. have fabricated a free standing, flexible counter electrode by transferring a vertically aligned CNT forest onto oxygen plasma treated conductive nano-composite film. Firstly, an Al foil was taken onto which CNTs were grown via CVD. The nanocomposite film was fabricated via dispersion of CNTs onto polypropylene film which was then extruded to form pellets of CNTs/polypropylene. This was later prepared as a film and was etched with oxygen plasma to remove the polymer content. The Al/CNT film was later hot pressed onto the NC film which was used as a counter electrode. This system gave an efficiency of 7.26%.144f
CNTs/graphene composite. 
Velten et al. successfully fabricated a multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/graphene flake (GF) composite as a possible replacement for the Pt counter electrode. This composite showed an efficiency of 7.55% when compared to independently used MWCNTs (6.62%) and GFs (4.65%). CNTs were synthesized via CVD and graphene through the modified Hummers process. Firstly the CNTs were transferred onto a FTO glass layer by layer. Graphene solution was dropped on top of the CNT sheet and was put in an oven to evaporate excess solution. This process was repeated till the number of CNT layers was 5 and a total of 0.35 mL of graphene solution was drop cast. The CNTs/graphene composite had a larger surface area than independent CNTs, which acts as a good catalyst for the electrolyte.144e
Graphene. 
2-D graphene sheets, an allotrope of carbon containing covalently bonded sp2 hybridized carbon atoms, exhibit unique electronic as well as catalytic activity.145–147 Wang et al. developed a transparent, conductive graphene electrode for DSCs. These thin graphene films deposited on hydrophilic substrates like quartz exhibited a high conductivity of 550 S cm−1 and a transparency of more than 70% in the wavelength of 1000–3000 nm.148 There are various methods by which graphene based counter electrodes for DSSCs can be made, namely electrophoretic deposition,149 chemical reduction of graphene oxide by microwave irradiation,150etc. However the catalytic activity of the graphene sheets is mainly dependent on their structure. Kaniyoor et al. thermally exfoliated graphene from graphite oxide. The graphene sheets thus obtained were highly wrinkled and had a surface area of about 470 m2 g−1 and the DSSC thus fabricated showed a conversion efficiency of 2.82%.151 Though the 2-D graphene sheets possess a very high surface area and high electrical conductivity, defect-free graphene sheets are not suitable for better device performance. Thus always a good balance between the electrical conductivity and catalytic activity towards the reduction of the redox couple is required for graphene to be used as a counter electrode in DSSCs. The active sites for the reduction of the redox couple are mostly the defects and the surface functional groups located at the crystal edges.137,152,153 Kaven et al. used defect-rich graphene nanoplatelets drop-cast on FTO as a counter electrode. Under one Sun illumination the DSSC thus fabricated with graphene nanoplatelets as the counter electrode showed an efficiency of 4.4% and a fill-factor of 0.60.154 Roy-Mayhew et al. successfully demonstrated that the catalytic activity towards I3− reduction could be tuned by increasing the amount of oxygen containing functional groups.155 Doping the carbon materials with nitrogen introduces local strain in the hexagonal carbon network which in turn leads to structural deformations. Further the additional lone pair of electrons of the N atom brings about a negative charge with respect to the delocalized π system of the sp2 hybridized carbon framework. This can enhance both the electron transfer ability as well as the electrocatalytic activity.156,157 Ju et al. have successfully fabricated a DSSC with N-doped graphene nanoplatelets as the counter electrode and a Co(bpy)33+/2+ redox couple. They have reported a very high photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 9.05%. Fig. 38a shows the schematic of the synthesis of N-doped graphene nanoplatelets and their SEM image.158
 Fig. 38  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of N doped graphene,158 (b) SEM image of N-doped graphene158 and (c) TEM image of thermally exfoliated graphene.151 


8. Composites with graphene. 
Graphene/polymer composites. 
The first composite based on graphene/polymers was reported by Stankovich159 following which several composites of graphene with conductive polymers have been reported for various applications. Composite film of graphene/PEDOT–PSS was synthesized by Hong et al. for use as counter electrodes in DSSCs. PEDOT–PSS acts as a conductive support in which the graphene sheets are dispersed uniformly due to the strong interactions between the 1-pyrenebutyrate (PB−) functionalized graphene and the positively charged PEDOT chains. The thin graphene sheets with a high specific surface area and chemical defects act as a catalyst towards tri-iodide reduction whereas the PEDOT–PSS acts as a conductive matrix around the graphene. The energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC turned out to be 4.5%.160 Graphene/polyaniline nanocomposites as the counter electrode were reported by Wang et al. In this composite graphene sheets acted as the supporting medium in which the polyaniline nanoparticles were coated uniformly. The homogeneous and uniform dispersion of the PANI nanoparticles enhanced both the conductivity and the catalytic activity. The energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC turned out to be 6.09%.161 Benlin et al. synthesized a PANI/graphene composite by a reflux technique. The lone pair of electrons of –NH– is shared with the carbon atoms forming a covalent bond which accelerates the charge transfer along the PANI chains. The composite with 8 wt% graphene showed the best performance with 7.78% as the conversion efficiency.162 A cationic polymer PDDA-decorated electrochemically reduced graphene oxide as the counter electrode in a DSSC was reported by Xu et al. The composite was synthesized by a layer-by-layer self-assembly technique. The composite showed enhanced electrocatalytic activity due to the electron withdrawing ability of PDDA. The DSSC thus fabricated with this composite as the counter electrode and Z946 as the electrolyte showed a fill-factor and conversion efficiency of 0.74 and 9.14%, respectively.163 Similarly polypyrrole nanoparticles of size 20–30 nm embedded in reduced graphene oxide in which polypyrrole nanoparticles act as catalytic active centers showed photovoltaic performance comparable with that of Pt-based counter electrodes (Fig. 39).164
 Fig. 39  SEM images of (a) graphene/PEDOT:PSS composite160 and (b) graphene/PANI composite.161 
Graphene/metal composites. 
In addition to the composites of graphene with polymers, composites of graphene with metals have also been widely investigated. Ni is a transition metal with good catalytic activity and it also exhibits high stability in the I2 + LI electrolyte.165,166 Bajpai et al. synthesized a Ni nanoparticle/graphene composite in which the Ni nanoparticles were deposited on the surface of the graphene platelets. The Ni nanoparticles acted as an active catalyst which is reflected in the stronger I3− reduction peak in the cyclic voltammetry scans and the efficiency of the cell turned out to be 2.19%.167 The DSSC fabricated with the graphene–Pt nanoparticle-based counter electrode showed an efficiency of 6.77%. Two pairs of peaks were observed in the cyclic voltammogram corresponding to oxidation and reduction. The reduction processes can be given asI3− + 2e− → 3I−3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−
Tjoa et al. have also shown that an optimized balance between the conductivity and the catalytic activity is required for good device performance.168 Gong et al. employed an electrostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly technique to synthesize a graphene/Pt monolayer to be used as the counter electrode in DSSCs. The device achieved 7.6% conversion efficiency. Since it employs a simple technology making use of a small amount of Pt, the overall cost of the device is reduced thus facilitating production at a large scale (Fig. 40).169
 Fig. 40  Electron transport mechanism in a graphene/metal composite.171 
Gou et al. reported a nickel phosphide–graphene composite for use as a counter electrode. In this composite, graphene ensured better electrode–electrolyte contact and also provided a fast diffusion pathway for the electrons. The Ni12P5 nanocrystallites not only acted as active sites for electrocatalytic processes but also as spacers among the graphene layers thus activating the diffusion of the electrolyte species. The photovoltaic parameters Voc, Jsc, FF and η for the DSSCs fabricated were 0.727 V, 12.86 mA cm−2, 0.61 and 5.70%, respectively (Fig. 41).170
 Fig. 41  SEM image of (A) graphene/Pt composite168 and (B) graphene/Ni12P5.171 


9. Nine kinds of carbon. 
Wu et al. compared the performance of DSSCs with counter electrodes based on nine different kinds of carbon materials, namely activated carbon (Ca), carbon black (Cb), carbon nanotubes (Cn), conductive carbon (Cc), carbon dyes (Cd), carbon fiber (Cf), mesoporous carbon (Cm), discarded toner of a printer (Cp) and fullerene (C60). From the cyclic voltammetry study it was found that the counter electrodes based on mesoporous carbon and carbon dye exhibited a large current density thus indicating a high electrochemical activity and both the materials showed energy conversion efficiencies comparable with that of platinum. Thus a carbon dye with a small size and large surface area obtained by the incomplete combustion of coal tar proved to be a low cost alternative counter electrode material for DSSCs (Fig. 42).
 Fig. 42  SEM images of 9 different kinds of carbon.170 
The lower diffusion co-efficient and diffusion-limited current density were responsible for the inferior photovoltaic performance of DSSCs with fullerene-based counter electrodes. Toner is in general a mixture of carbon powder and iron oxide and it is used in laser printers. The DSSC with this material as the counter electrode showed an efficiency of 4.3% and thus it is another cheaper alternative and thus comes under the category of waste reutilization (Table 4).171
Table 4 Summary of photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs with different carbon counter electrodes




Form of carbon

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Fill factor
Efficiency




Carbon black121
0.78
16.8
0.68
9.1%


Mesoporous carbon125
0.6
15.5
0.65
6.18%


Nanocarbon123
0.74


0.62
6.73%


Activated carbon nanofiber130
0.73
15.4
0.64
7.21%


MWCNTs136
0.78
15.64
0.62
7.59%


Core–shell porous carbon structure128
0.74
15.81
0.67
7.56%


Graphene151
0.68
7.7
0.54
2.82%


Graphene nanoplatelets155
0.67
11
0.60
4.38%


N doped graphene nanoplatelets158
0.88
13.83
0.74
9.02%


Inverse opal carbon127
0.77
11.04
0.64
5.49%


Sub-micrometer graphite132
0.79
12.7
0.62
6.2%


Graphene/Pt nanoparticles169
0.71
15.20
0.71
7.66%


Graphene/Ni12P5 (ref. 170)
0.73
12.86
0.61
5.70%





Non-planar wire-shaped DSSCs
One of the major disadvantages of a planar DSSC is the higher leakage rate of the electrolyte due to the large contact area between the electrolyte and the sealing material. Due to the thermal dilation, deformation and strain, two assembled planar electrodes tend to break at the interface.172,173 In addition to the high surface area, good electrical conductivity and electrocatalytic properties, these carbonaceous materials also exhibit high stability and good flexibility. Thus they play an important role in fabricating flexible solar cells in order to meet the requirement of portable electricity and roll-to-roll industrial fabrication.174,175 Recently non-planar DSSCs with a 3D structure have attracted a great deal of attention due to the facile integration of these modules using textile technology.176 Flexible fiber shaped DSSCs fabricated with pure commercial carbon fiber as the counter electrode showed a cell efficiency of 2.7% which was further improved to 5.8% by platinizing it.177 Zhang et al. developed Pt nanoparticles adsorbed carbon nanotube yarns for use as a counter electrode in flexible-fiber shaped DSSCs. Pt nanoparticles were adsorbed onto a free standing CNT fiber web and the hybrid film was spun into yarn. The uniform distribution of the Pt nanoparticles onto the porous carbon nanotube yarn increases the effective catalytic sites and thus the overall cell performance. The DSSC fabricated with this composite material with 0.7 wt% Pt loading as the counter electrode showed a cell efficiency of 4.85%. The cell performance was also dependent on the diameter of the yarn. Thicker yarns with more number of nanotubes have a larger number of catalytic active sites which aid in enhancing the cell performance. However beyond a certain thickness the efficiency drops due to the limited diffusion of the electrolyte into the inner portion of the CNT network and the blocking of the incident light. The best performance was shown by yarns with 90 μm diameter having an Rct value of 214.8 Ω. From the mechanical stability aspect, the cell efficiency was stable over repeated bending to 180° for 500 cycles (Fig. 43).178
 Fig. 43  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis procedure, (B) TEM image of CNT–Pt nanoparticles, (C) SEM image and (D) J–V characteristics.178 
Hou et al. synthesized a carbon fiber/PEDOT–PSS composite material with a highly ordered carbon fiber conductive core and PEDOT–PSS films as the catalytic shells for use as a counter electrode in wire-shaped DSSCs. Due to the good flexibility of the composite it can be easily wrapped along a Ti wire-based photoanode. From the CV measurements it was found that the CF/PEDOT composite showed higher electrochemical stability than the carbon fiber/Pt electrode and the DSSC fabricated showed a high conversion efficiency of 5.5%.179 The first all-carbon based fiber-shaped dye sensitized solar cell was demonstrated by Cai et al. The photoanode had a core–shell structure with a carbon fiber core and TiO2 film as a shell. The sensitized TiO2 aided in light harvesting whereas the conductive carbon core collected the charges. The counter electrode was made of carbon fiber covered with carbon ink on the surface. The carbon ink particles with a relatively large specific surface area of 32.78 m2 g−1 showed excellent catalytic activity towards the tri-iodide reduction. The fiber shaped DSSC with 2.5 cm length showed an efficiency of 1.09%. As we know Voc is the potential difference between the Fermi level of TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte. However in the presence of the carbon fiber, since the work function of carbon fiber is much deeper than that of the conduction band of TiO2, the contact between carbon fiber and TiO2 causes a negative shift in the Fermi level of TiO2 and as a result, reduction in Voc. Thus the device performance can be enhanced by tuning the interface barrier of carbonfiber/TiO2 (Fig. 44).180
 Fig. 44  (a) Schematic showing an all-carbon electrode DSSC. SEM image of the top view (b) and cross-sectional view (c) of a carbon fiber/TiO2 photoanode, top view (d) of carbon fiber ink and (e) carbon fiber substrate and ink carbon SEM image.180 
An intertwined aligned carbon nanotube fiber based dye sensitized solar cell was reported by Chen et al. The device was fabricated by intertwining dye adsorbed CNTs/TiO2 composite fiber with bare CNT fiber which acted as a counter electrode. The authors achieved a power conversion efficiency of 2.94%. The device performance was highly dependent on the twining structure and if the electrodes were twined tightly, short-circuiting occurred and the efficiency was drastically reduced if they were twined loosely. Since the cell efficiency was independent of the cell length and the incident light it may be scaled up easily for various potential applications (Fig. 45).181
 Fig. 45  (A) Schematic showing the intertwined carbon nanotube fiber based fiber shaped DSSC and (B) SEM image of the twined structure.181 
Pan et al. have fabricated and compared the performance of a wire-shaped DSSC with four different types of carbon nanostructures namely carbon nanotubes, core–sheath CNTs/reduced graphene oxide nanoribbon (RGONR), CNTs/RGO and RGO fibers as the counter electrode. Among the four different nanostructures core–sheath CNTs/RGONR showed the highest energy conversion of 5.64%. The electrocatalytic activity is also dependent on the type of electrolyte used. For the organic T−/T2 electrolyte, the CNT fiber counter electrode showed the best performance with 4.78% energy conversion efficiency. From the cyclic voltammetry studies it was found that the electrocatalytic activity towards the tri-iodide reduction increased from RGO fiber, CNTs/RGO composite, CNT fiber to core–sheath/RGONR. The high electrical conductivity of the aligned CNT core (380 S cm−1) and the active edge site of the RGONR for catalysis are responsible for the excellent performance of the device. However for the T−/T2 reduction, the presence of RGO in the core–sheath/RGONR hinders the infiltration of the organic T−/T2 redox couple into the fibers resulting in lower catalytic activity (Fig. 46).182
 Fig. 46  SEM images under low and high magnification of CNT fiber (a and b), core–sheath CNTs/RGO composite (c and d), CNTs/RGO composite (e and f) and RGO fiber (g and h) respectively.182 
Conclusions
Due to the two dimensional π conjugated structure and excellent electron conductivity, graphene proves to be a competitive acceptor183 and superior charge transport material.184 Thus both the outstanding acceptor and transport properties of graphene are responsible for efficient charge separation and transportation of the electrons. Since the work function of carbon nanostructures such as graphene and carbon nanotubes is more negative than that of TiO2, the favourable band alignment aids in opening additional electron transport channels for the flow of electrons. Graphene also acts as a superior light scattering layer scattering light in the visible region of the spectrum.106 However, as the concentration of the carbon nanostructures increases the photovoltaic performance decreases. Thus always an optimal concentration of carbon nanostructures is required. This is because as the concentration of carbon nanostructures increases, agglomeration of the particles on the surface increases which reduces the specific surface area of the film. As a result the quantity of dye that is absorbed also decreases.185 Further a red shift in the absorption onset is also observed with the increase in the concentration of the carbon nanostructures due to the formation of a Ti–O–C bond which leads to the narrowing of the band-gap of TiO2 leading to visible light absorption.186 This in turn leads to competition in light harvesting between the dye and the composite.187 There are two ways by which the carbon nanostructures/TiO2 composites could be made. In the first case carbon is added to TiO2 till a percolation network is formed and in the second case, TiO2 is deposited on the surface of the carbon nanostructure. However since the metal oxide, i.e. TiO2, acts as the photoactive material onto which the dye anchors, there must be uniform immobilization and adhesion of the metal oxide on the surface of the carbon nanostructures for better dye loading and light harvesting. Hence uniform immobilization of TiO2 on the carbon nanostructure surface proves to be a promising approach for further improvement. Although the efficiency of the DSSC had achieved the level needed for commercialization, the counter electrode made of platinum which is an expensive noble metal must be replaced to reduce the overall device cost. An ideal counter electrode must exhibit long term stability and high electrocatalytic activity. Carbon nanostructures with a high surface area and unique electrical properties prove to be a suitable alternative for Pt-based counter electrodes. Several carbon nanostructures have been used either independently or as composites with other metals as a replacement for Pt. In-addition, due to the flexible nature of these carbonaceous materials, non-planar flexible solar cells for portable electronic devices have also been fabricated. However, the efficiencies of these wire shaped devices are not comparable with that of the conventional planar DSSC. Due to the mismatch in the band-gap between these carbon materials and TiO2Voc is highly compromised, which is one of the major reasons for the poor performance of the flexible devices. This in turn restricts the commercialization of these products. Further investigation in the lines of tuning the band alignment as well as retaining the structural integrity and flexibility can be a future scope for the commercialization of DSSCs.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Govt. of India and Solar Energy Research Initiative (SERI) of the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India for financial support.
References
W. West, Photogr. Sci. Eng., 1974, 18, 35–48 CAS .
H. Gerischer and H. Tributsch, Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., Ber., 1968, 72, 437–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tributsch and H. Gerischer, Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., Ber., 1969, 73, 251–260 CAS .
M. T. Spitler and M. Calvin, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 66, 4294–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Comte and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 3686–3687 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeerudin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humpry-Baker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy and M. Gratzel, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1705–1706 RSC .
B. O'Regan, J. Moser, M. Anderson and M. Graztel, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8720–8726 CrossRef .
S. Sodergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552–5556 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Petterson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Reddy, T. G. Deepak, G. S. Anjusree, S. Thomas, S. Vadukumpully, K. R. V. Subramaniam, S. V. Nair and A. S. Nair, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6838–6858 RSC .
S. Yang, D. Yang, J. Kim, J. Hong, H. Kim, I. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, D. Chen, X. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Diamant, S. Chappel, S. G. Chen, O. Melamed and A. Zaban, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943–14949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujihara, A. Kumar, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna and S. Uchida, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 365709 CrossRef .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graztel, ACS Nano, 2008, 6, 1113–1116 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Nair, R. Jose, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, D. Davoux, Z. Zhu, D. Galopeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1507–1510 CAS .
B. Tan and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 111, 15932–15938 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) A. S. Nair, Z. Peining, V. J. Babu, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21248–21261 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Jena, S. P. Mohanty, P. Kumar, J. Naduvath, V. Gondane, P. Lekha, J. Das, H. K. Narula, S. Mallick and P. Bhargava, Trans. Indian Ceram. Soc., 2012, 71, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chappel, L. Grinis, A. Offir and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1643–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. E. Soule, Phys. Rev., 1958, 112, 698 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Fugallo, A. Cepellotti, L. Paulatto, M. Lazzeri, N. Marzari and F. Mauri, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6109–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone and P. Kim, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Pennington and N. Goldsman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 045426 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Berber, Y. Kyun Kwon and D. Tamonek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Singh, N. Marjanovic, G. J. Matt, S. Gunes, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Montaigne Ramil, A. Andreev, H. Sitter, R. Schwodiauer and S. Bauer, Org. Electron., 2005, 6, 105–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tsai and J. Tu, Mater. Des., 2010, 31, 194–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Zhang, A. Y. T. Leung and W. Zhong, Thin-Walled Structures, 2006, 44, 667–676 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Natsuki, K. Tantrakarn and M. Endo, Carbon, 2004, 42, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shokreih and R. Rafiee, Mater. Des., 2010, 31, 790–795 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Saito, K. Miyazawa and T. Kizuka, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 010217 CrossRef .
A. R. Oganov, R. J. Hemley, R. M. Hazen and A. P. Jones, Rev. Mineral. Geochem., 2013, 75, 47–77 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, K. Huang, D. Fang and S. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Park and H. K. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 789 Search PubMed .
E. Ramasamy and J. Lee, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Li, W. Guo, T. Hreid, J. Hou, H. Su and Z. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Hseih, B. H. Yang and J. Y. Lin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3092 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Y. Yen, M. C. Hsiao, S. H. Liao, P. I. Liu, H. M. Tsai, C. C. M. Ma, N. W. Pu and M. D. Ger, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3507 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, S. Wang, X. Wang, B. Dong, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, B. Yang, S. Peng, J. Wang and C. Xu, Solid State Sci., 2011, 13, 468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, T. Xu, T. Lv, L. Pan, Q. Zhao and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 650, 248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giljie, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2011, 7, 3394 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Gelm, S. V. Morozov, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Gelm, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. G. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Tang, C. S. Lee, Z. H. Chen, G. D. Yuan, Z. H. Kang, L. B. Luo, H. S. Song, Y. Liu, Z. B. He, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1374–1377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gilje, H. Song, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. J. F. Harris, Carbon Nanotubes and Related Structure, New Material for the twenty first century, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1999 Search PubMed .
V. N. Popov, Carbon Nanotubes: properties and application, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2004, 43, 61–102 CrossRef PubMed .

Carbon Nanotubes, ed, M. Endo, S. Iijima and M. S. Dresselhaus, Pergamon, New York,  1996 Search PubMed .
S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verscheuren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 398, 49–52 Search PubMed .
H. Dai and J. H. Haffner, Nature, 1996, 384, 147–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Reuckes, K. Kim, E. Joselevich, G. Y. Tsang and C. L. Cheung, Science, 2000, 289, 94–97 CrossRef .
B. J. Hinds, N. Chopra and T. Rantell, Science, 2004, 393, 346–349 Search PubMed .
Y. Saito and K. Hamaguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, L1340 Search PubMed .
L. Dai, P. Soundarrajan and T. Kim, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 1753–1772 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 814–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Watcharaotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommet, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 7, 1882–1892 Search PubMed .
K. H. Jung, S. R. Jang, R. Vittal, D. Kim and K. J. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2003, 24, 1501–1504 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Kim, S. R. Jang, R. Vittal, J. Lee and K. J. Kim, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 1433–1439 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sawatsuk, A. Chindaduong, C. Sae-kung, S. Pratontep and G. Tumcharern, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2009, 18, 524–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Lee, P. S. Alegaonkar and J.-B. Yoo, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5131–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Jang, R. Vittal and K. J. Kim, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9807–9810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Lee, C. W. Hu, H. W. Chen and K. C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1628–1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Niu, Y. Lan, C. Cheng, J. Xu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22025–22034 CAS .
J. Yu, J. Fan and B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7891–7898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Muduli, W. Lee, V. Dhas, S. Mujawar, M. Dubey, K. Vijayamohan, S. Han and S. C. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interface, 2009, 1, 2030–2035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dang, H. Yi, M. H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammord and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadhu and P. Poddar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19363–19373 CAS .
H. Chang, T. J. Hsieh, T. L. Chen, H. S. D. Huang, C. S. Jwo and S. H. Chein, Mater. Trans., 2009, 50, 2879–2884 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brown, K. Takechi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4776–4782 CAS .
Z. Peining, A. S. Nair, Y. Shengyuan, P. Shengjie, N. Elumalai and S. Ramakrishna, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 231, 9–18 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, R. Liu, X. Xia, D. Yun, L. Zhang, C. Huong and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383–3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, Z. Li, C. Bao, H. Dai, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3481–3485 RSC .
Y. Tang, C. Lee, J. Xu, Z. T. Liu, Z. H. Chen, Z. He, Y.-L. Cao, G. Yuan, H. Song, L. Chen, L. Luo, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 6, 3482–3488 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, Z. Li, C. Bao, H. Dai, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3481–3485 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, W. Shu, Z. Pong, K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen and G. S. Zakharova, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6755–6762 RSC .
T. H. Tsai, S. C. Chiou and S. M. Chen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 3333–3343 CAS .
W. Hailiang, T. R. Joshua, D. Georgi and D. Hongie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Anjusree, A. S. Nair, S. V. Nair and S. Vadukumpully, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12933–12938 RSC .
Z. He, G. Gai, J. Liu, C. Guo, J. S. C Loo, C. M. Li, T. Thatt and Y. Tan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4613–4616 RSC .
W. Shu, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, K. Chen, C. Zhang and W. Chun, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 563, 229–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, J. Yang, P. Ma, D. Wu, L. Tian, Z. Gao, K. Jiang and L. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 394, 231–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, L. Gao and Y. Qiao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 083113 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Roy, S. P. Ahrenkeil and P. A. Fuierer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 2455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Madhavan, R. Ranjusha, K. C. Daya, P. Praveen, K. P. Sanosh, K. R. V. Subramanian, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2014, 6, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tan and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15932–15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peining, A. S. Nair, P. Shengjie, Y. Shengyuan and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 581–585 CAS .
A. A. Madhavan, S. Kalluri, D. K. Chacleo, T. A. Arun, S. Nagarajan, K. R. V. Subramanian, A. S. Nair, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 13032–13037 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Tian, W. Zhao, X. Liu and J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 7991–7999 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luan, D. Guan and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14257 CAS .
D. Kim, A. Ghicov, S. P. Albu and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16454–16455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luan, L. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Qu, J. C. Flake and Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 216–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, J. J. Fan and K. L. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144 RSC .
J. Fan, S. Liu and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17027–17036 RSC .
C. B. Song, Y. H. Qiang, Y. L. Zhao, X. Q. Gu, L. Zhu, J. Song and X. Liu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 8090–8096 CAS .
B. Tang and G. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 95–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Yen, M. C. Hsiao, S. H. Liao, P. I. Liu, H. M. Tsai, C. C. M. Ma, N. W. Pu and M. D. Ger, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3597–3606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, G. Moon, D. M. Satoca, Y. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1535–1543 CAS .
X. Fang, M. Li, K. Guo, J. Li, M. Pan, L. Bai, M. Luoshean and X. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, J. Ryu and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9995–9997 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. T. Kuo, K. J. Klabunde, C. Rochford, J. Wu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1645–1649 CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Gratzel, M. K. Nazeerudin and M. Gratzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, W. Hu, J. Song, G. H. Guai and C. M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5245–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hsu, J. R. Wu, L. C. Chen, P. S. Chan and C. C. Chen, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2014, 14, 312–316 Search PubMed .
S. R. Kim, Md. K. Parvez and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 438, 124–127 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Olsen, G. Hagen and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Graztel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Wroblowa and A. Saunders, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1973, 42, 329 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kinoshita, Carbon, Electrochemical and Physiochemical Properties, Wiley - Interscience Publications, Newyork,  1987, pp. 226–379 Search PubMed .
T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. H. Baker, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Graztel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2255–A2261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imoto, K. Takahashi, T. Yamaguchi, T. Komura, J. Nakamura and K. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 459–469 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy, W. J. Lee, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173103 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Li, Y. Luo, X. Guo, D. Li, M. Deng, S. Huang and Q. Meng, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2704–2708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 568–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572–3577 CAS .
D. Y. Kang, Y. S. Lee, C. Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7033–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fang, S. Q. Fan, J. H. Kim, N. K. Chaudri, J. Ko and J. S. Yu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11238–11243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2011, 685, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. H. Park, B. K. Kim and W. J. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 122–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Aboagye, H. Elbihy, A. D. Keljar, Q. Qiao, J. Zai, X. Qian and L. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 550–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Sigdel, A. Dubey, H. Elbohy, A. Aboagye, D. Galipeau, L. Zhang, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11448 RSC .
C. E. Banks, T. J. Davies, G. G. Wildgoose and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2005, 7, 829–841 RSC .
G. Veerapan, K. Bojan and S. W. Rhee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 857–862 Search PubMed .
B. C. Yadav and R. Kumar, International Journal of Nanotechnology and Applications, 2008, 2, 15–24 Search PubMed .
T. Hino, Y. Ogawa and N. Kuramoto, Carbon, 2006, 44, 880–887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Suzuki, M. Yamaguchi, M. Kumagai and S. Yamagida, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy, W. J. Lee, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1087–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Trancik, S. C. Barton and J. Hone, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 982–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dong, C. L. Pint, M. Hainey, F. Mirri, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, M. Pasquali, R. H. Hauge, R. Verduzco, M. Jiang, H. Lin and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3157–3161 CAS .

          E. G. Rakov, in Nanotubes and Nanofibers, ed. Y. Gogoysi, Taylor & Francis, Newyork,  2006, p. 39 Search PubMed .
W. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1145–1149 CAS .
S. I. Cha, B. K. Koo, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, J. Mater.
Chem., 2010, 20, 659–662 RSC .
J. Han, H. Kim, D. Y. Kim, S. M. Jo and S. Y. Jang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, R. Bajpai, A. Jena, P. Kumar, N. Kulshrestha and D. S. Misra, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7001–7006 CAS .

  (a) B. Fan, X. Mei, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 143103 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Sun, T. Chen, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 539–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Yang, T. Chen, R. He, G. Guan, H. Li, L. Qiu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5436–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) K. S. Lee, W. J. Lee and N. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4264–4266 RSC ; 
  (e) J. Velten, A. J. Mozer, D. Li, D. Officer, G. Wallace, R. Baughmam and A. Zakhidov, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 85201–85207 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (f) F. Malara, M. Manca, M. Lanza, C. Hubner, E. Piperopoulos and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8377–8383 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, H. Choi, S. Hwang, Y. Kim and M. Jeon, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 53 CrossRef PubMed .
C. T. Hsieh, B. H. Yang and J. Y. Lin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3092–3097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kaniyoor and S. Ramprabhu, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 124308 CrossRef PubMed .
T. N. Murakami and M. Graztel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Banks, T. J. Davies, G. G. Wildqoose and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2005, 829–841 RSC .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Graztel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 165–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subramanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
K. A. Kurak and A. B. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6730–6734 CAS .
M. J. Ju, J. C. Kim, H. J. Choi, S. G. Kim, K. Lim, J. Ko, J. J. Lee, I. Jeon, J. B. Baek and H. K. Kum, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5243–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommet, K. M. Kohlhass, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. B. T. Nguyen and R. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, S. Zhuo and X. Wing, Mater. Lett., 2012, 69, 27–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, Q. Tang, M. Wang, H. Chen and S. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8230–8236 CAS .
X. Xu, D. Huang, K. Cao, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. P. Lim, A. Pandikumar, Y. S. Lim, N. M. Huang and H. N. Lim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5305 Search PubMed .
T. Ma, X. Fang, M. Akiyama, K. Inoue, H. Noma and E. Abe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 574, 77–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miettunen, X. Ruan, T. Saukkonen, J. Halme, M. Toivola, H. Guangsheng and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B814–B819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bajpai, S. Roy, N. Kulshreshtha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 926 RSC .
V. Tjoa, J. Chua, S. S. Pramana, J. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3447–3452 CAS .
F. Gong, H. Wang and Z. S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17676–17682 RSC .
M. Wu, X. Lin, T. Wang, J. Qiu and T. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci, 2011, 4, 2308–2315 CAS .
Y. Y. Dou, G. R. Li, J. Song and X. P. Gao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1339–1342 RSC .
K. Okada, H. Matsui, T. Kawashima, T. Ezure and N. Tanave, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, X. Fang, M. Akiyama, K. Inoue, H. Noma and E. Abe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 574, 77–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lindstorm, A. Holmberg, E. Mangnusson, S. E. Lindquist, L. Malmqvist and A. Hagfeldt, Nano Lett., 2001, 2, 97–100 CrossRef .
D. C. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Z. Chu, Z. B. Lv and X. Fan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1169–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, X. Cai, Y. Fu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13776 RSC .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, P. Zu, L. Zhang, D. Liu, E. Shi, Y. Shang, H. Peng, Q. Cheng, D. Wang, C. Huang and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7191–7198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, Y. Fu and D. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, S. Hou, H. Wu, Z. Lv, Y. Fu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Kafafy, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 125–130 RSC .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Cai, F. Gong, Z. Yang, Z. Wang and H. Peng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pen, Z. Yang, P. Chen, X. Fang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16419–16425 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, M. Li, K. Guo, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, B. Sebo and X. Z. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2014, 101, 176–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Liu, Y. R. Teng, R. H. Liu, S. L. Luo, Y. H. Tang, L. Y. Chen and Q. Y. Cai, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5312–5320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Murugesan Janani	Miss Janani completed her MSc degree in Physics from Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. She is currently doing MTech in Nanotechnology in Amrita Center for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine under Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University in Kochi, Kerala, India. Her research interest includes carbon/TiO2 composites for photoanodes of dye-sensitized solar cells.
Pillalamarri Srikrishnarka	Mr P. Srikrishnarka received his BTech degree in Chemical Engineering from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, India. He is currently pursuing his MTech in Nanotechnology in Amrita Center for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine under Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University at Kochi, Kerala, India. His areas of interest are self-cleaning coatings and TiO2 based materials as photoanodes for dye-sensitized solar cells.
Shantikumar V. Nair	Dr Shantikumar V Nair is currently Dean Research, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, and the Director of Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita University, at Kochi, Kerala, India. A graduate of IIT Bombay (Mumbai) in Metallurgical Engineering, he received his PhD from Columbia University, New York (1983). Prior to joining Amrita, he was a professor at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He is a recipient of the prestigious Presidential Young Investigator Award from the President of the United States (1986), National Research Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India (2011) and Prof. C. N. R. Rao Bangalore INDIA NANO Science Award (2014).
A. Sreekumaran Nair	Dr A. Sreekumaran Nair is currently an Associate Professor at Amrita Centre for Nanosciences & Molecular Medicine at Kochi, Kerala, India. He did PhD (Chemistry) at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras (2006) and had postdoctoral training at the University of Hyogo, Japan (JSPS fellow, 2006–2008) and Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative at the National University of Singapore (2008–2012), respectively. His current research interest includes organic–inorganic nanohybrids for renewable energy, self-cleaning coatings and environmental remediation.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic showing the working of dye sensitized solar cells.22b	 

 	Fig. 2  Light and dark reactions in DSSCs.12	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration showing the applications of nanomaterials.	 

Diamond	sp3	1800	1220 GPa	25 W cm−1 K−1
Graphite	sp2	1.5 × 104 (ref. 24a)	0.795 (ref. 28) TPa	2200 (ref. 24b)
Graphene	sp2	200000 (ref. 25a)	1.06 (ref. 29 and 30) TPa	(4.84 × 103) to (5.50 × 103) (ref. 25b)
CNTs	sp2	120000 (ref. 26a)	1.033–1.042 (ref. 31) TPa	6600 (ref. 26b)
Fullerenes	sp2	0.4–1 (ref. 27)	53–69 (ref. 32) GPa	


 	Fig. 4  Structures of various allotropes of carbon.33	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) CNT arm chair, (B) CNT zig-zag, (C) CNT chiral.56	 
Jsc = Jsc − Jdark
LHE = 1 − 10−Γσ(λ)

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics of a typical DSSC.22	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) FE-SEM image of MW-CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 68) and (B) TEM image of MW-CNTs/TiO2.67	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic showing the dispersion using chemically modified CNTs (A) and plasma treated CNTs; (B) and (C) TEM image of the plasma treated CNTs/TiO2 composite.72	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of hollow spheres of anatase TiO2, (B) SEM image of a TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite and (C) schematic showing the electron transfer mechanism in the TiO2 hollow sphere/CNT composite.73	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) SEM image of a MW-CNTs/TiO2 composite and (B) functionalisation of CNTs upon hydrothermal treatment.74	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis procedure of a TiO2/SWCNT complex with M13 virus as the template.75	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) SEM image, (B) SAED pattern, (C) TEM image of 1D-rutile TiO2 MWCNT composite grown on FTO.76	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of electron flow in one-dimensional nanostructures and CNT modified TiO2 photo-anode. (B) SEM image of the composite. (C) J–V characteristics.78	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) SEM image, (B) TEM image and (C) J–V characteristics of rice grain shaped TiO2–MWCNT composite.79	 

 	Fig. 15  Single wire DSSC wrapped with a carbon nanotube film electrode.80	 

 	Fig. 16  Distribution of TiO2 on CNTs and graphene.82	 

MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 68)	Direct mixing	10.29%
MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 69)	MWCNTs by thermal CVD and TiO2 by sol–gel	4.97%
CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 72)	Plasma treated CNTs	6.34%
CNTs/TiO2 hollow sphere73	Direct mixing	4.71%
MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 74)	Hydrothermal	7.37%
CNTs/TiO2 (ref. 75)	Virus-mediated method	10.6%
MWCNTs/rutile TiO2 nanorods76	Template-free synthesis	2.4%
MWCNTs/TiO2 (ref. 77)	EPD	0.35%
Rice grain shaped TiO2/MWCNTs79	Electrospinning	6.12%
CNT film around co-axial Ti–TiO2 nanotubes80	Anodic oxidation of TiO2 followed by CVD of CNTs	1.65%

 	Fig. 17  Energy level diagram of DSSCs when (A) graphene sheets84 and (B) CNTs are added.79	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of the molecular drafting method.84	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) J–V characteristics of the graphene/TiO2 composite; (B) TEM image of the graphene/TiO2 composite; (C) absorption spectra of the graphene/TiO2 composite and (D) schematic showing the electron transfer mechanism.86	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) TEM image of a graphene/TiO2 composite by a one pot hydrothermal method and (B) J–V characteristics.89	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic showing the solvothermal synthesis and the TEM images of (a) STG, (b) NRTG, (c) USTG under high magnification, (d) USTG under low magnification.90	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) TEM image of a Nafion functionalised graphene/P25 composite and (B) J–V characteristics.93	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic of electrospinning.98 (B) Rice grain shaped TiO2/graphene composite.98 (C) Graphene/TiO2 by electrospinning.99	 

 	Fig. 24  SEM image of (A) graphene oxide on TiO2 nanotube arrays100 and (B) bamboo type TiO2.103 TEM image of (C) TiO2 sheet/graphene composite105 and (D) MWCNTs/graphene/TiO2 hybrid.108	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic showing the synthesis of a MWCNTs/graphene/TiO2 hybrid material.108	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Synthesis procedure of a TiO2/graphene core–shell structure. (B) TEM image of TiO2/graphene.109	 

 	Fig. 27  TiO2 coated vertically aligned carbon nanofibers.112	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Structure of the graphene quantum dot modified solar cell. (B) Structure of graphene quantum dots. (C) SEM image of graphene quantum dots. (D) Amount of dye loaded.110	 

 	Fig. 29  (A) Synthesis procedure of graphene quantum dots (GQDs), (B) TEM image of GQDs, (C) J–V characteristics and (D) IPCE measurement.111	 

Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 84)	Molecular grafting	1.68%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 85)	Simultaneous reduction hydrolysis	7.1%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 89)	Hydrothermal	4.26%
Ultra-small TiO2 nanoparticles/graphene90	Solvothermal	7.25%
r-GO/TiO2 (ref. 91)	Solvothermal	5.5%
Mesoporous titania/graphene92	Hydrothermal	7.19%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 93)	Heterogeneous coagulation	4.28%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 94)	Molten salt	5.41%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 99)	Electrospinning	7.6%
rGO/bamboo type TiO2 nanotube array103	Electrophoretic deposition	6.01%
TiO2 sheet/graphene105	Hydrothermal	5.77%
Vertically grown CNF/TiO2 composite112	MOCVD deposition of TiO2 on PECVD grown CNF	1.09%
Rice grain shaped TiO2/graphene98	Electrospinning	6.49%
Graphene/TiO2 (ref. 87)	Spin coating	6.86%
I3− + 2e− ⇔ 3I−

 	Fig. 30  SEM image of nanocarbon and J–V characteristics of the DSSC comparing nanocarbon and microcarbon.123	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) TEM image of mesoporous carbon125 and (B) SEM image of electrospun carbon nanofibers on FTO.126	 

 	Fig. 32  SEM images of (A) inverse opal carbon, (B) inverse opal carbon with mesopores, (C) graphitized inverse opal carbon, (D) J–V characteristics.127	 

 	Fig. 33  TEM images of (A) hierarchical nanostructured carbon with hollow macropores,128 (B) electrospun activated carbon nanofibers.130a	 

 	Fig. 34  SEM images of (a) sub-micron sized graphite, (b) micron sized graphite and (c) schematic of graphite and reaction at the counter electrode.132	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic of the micelle disruption method.134	 

 	Fig. 36  SEM images of (A) multiwalled CNTs,136 (B) vertically aligned SWCNTs,138 (C) bamboo type MWCNTs140 and (D) CNT microballs.141	 

 	Fig. 37  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of water soluble MWCNTs,142 (B) SEM image of bucky paper142 and (C) conducting polymer/CNT composite.144a	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of N doped graphene,158 (b) SEM image of N-doped graphene158 and (c) TEM image of thermally exfoliated graphene.151	 

 	Fig. 39  SEM images of (a) graphene/PEDOT:PSS composite160 and (b) graphene/PANI composite.161	 
I3− + 2e− → 3I−
3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−

 	Fig. 40  Electron transport mechanism in a graphene/metal composite.171	 

 	Fig. 41  SEM image of (A) graphene/Pt composite168 and (B) graphene/Ni12P5.171	 

 	Fig. 42  SEM images of 9 different kinds of carbon.170	 

Carbon black121	0.78	16.8	0.68	9.1%
Mesoporous carbon125	0.6	15.5	0.65	6.18%
Nanocarbon123	0.74	
	0.62	6.73%
Activated carbon nanofiber130	0.73	15.4	0.64	7.21%
MWCNTs136	0.78	15.64	0.62	7.59%
Core–shell porous carbon structure128	0.74	15.81	0.67	7.56%
Graphene151	0.68	7.7	0.54	2.82%
Graphene nanoplatelets155	0.67	11	0.60	4.38%
N doped graphene nanoplatelets158	0.88	13.83	0.74	9.02%
Inverse opal carbon127	0.77	11.04	0.64	5.49%
Sub-micrometer graphite132	0.79	12.7	0.62	6.2%
Graphene/Pt nanoparticles169	0.71	15.20	0.71	7.66%
Graphene/Ni12P5 (ref. 170)	0.73	12.86	0.61	5.70%

 	Fig. 43  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis procedure, (B) TEM image of CNT–Pt nanoparticles, (C) SEM image and (D) J–V characteristics.178	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) Schematic showing an all-carbon electrode DSSC. SEM image of the top view (b) and cross-sectional view (c) of a carbon fiber/TiO2 photoanode, top view (d) of carbon fiber ink and (e) carbon fiber substrate and ink carbon SEM image.180	 

 	Fig. 45  (A) Schematic showing the intertwined carbon nanotube fiber based fiber shaped DSSC and (B) SEM image of the twined structure.181	 

 	Fig. 46  SEM images under low and high magnification of CNT fiber (a and b), core–sheath CNTs/RGO composite (c and d), CNTs/RGO composite (e and f) and RGO fiber (g and h) respectively.182	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
