Cascaded band gap design for highly efficient electron transport layer-free perovskite solar cells   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC01807A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC01807A
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 6749-6752Cascaded band gap design for highly efficient electron transport layer-free perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Liguo 
            Gao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Cai 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingjie 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anmin 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tingli 
            Ma
          
        
      bc
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: liguo.gao@dlut.edu.cn
bCollege of Materials and Chemistry, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 310018, China
cGraduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan
Received 
      30th March 2022
    , Accepted 15th May 2022First published on 17th May 2022AbstractThe elimination of the electron transport layer (ETL) to fabricate ETL-free perovskite solar cells (PSCs) could save manufacturing cost and time. However, the direct contact of the perovskite and transparent conducting oxide (TCO) electrodes results in mismatched energy level alignment and current leakage. Therefore, ETL-free PSCs suffer from unsatisfactory photovoltaic performance. Herein, a special perovskite material with a cascaded band gap, called gradient homojunction perovskite (GHJP), is designed and synthesized by a large cation-assisted method. The inherent nature of GHJP was the type-II cascaded energy level alignment, which could block holes during the electron collection. This facilitated the dissociation of the excitons in the GHJP. Due to the excellent properties, ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP obtained 20.55% PCE, which was over 90% higher than that of ETL-free PSCs based on the control perovskite material.
Organic-inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have drawn tremendous attention due to their infinite potential and outstanding photovoltaic performance. The certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has reached 25.7%, higher than that of other thin-film photovoltaic technologies.1–3 To date, the highly efficient PSCs are based on complicated device architectures, in which a perovskite layer is sandwiched between the hole transport layer (HTL) and the electron transport layer (ETL).4 Studies have demonstrated that the inherent nature of perovskite materials results in fast exciton dissociation and ambipolar carrier transport advantages.5 This means that the perovskite material can efficiently and spontaneously transport free electrons and holes in the absence of the HTL and ETL.6 Thus, a lot of effort has been paid to simplifying the architecture of PSCs to reduce the cost, enhance the stability, and fabricate flexible devices.7
The elimination of the ETL to fabricate ETL-free PSCs can save at least one-third of the manufacturing cost and time, especially for the devices where the ETLs give rise to stability issues.8 However, compared with PSCs with ETLs, the photovoltaic performance of ETL-free PSCs is not satisfactory. Only a few ETL-free PSCs have obtained PCE over 20%.9 This is because of the direct contact of the perovskite materials and pristine transparent conducting oxide (TCO) in ETL-free PSCs. The direct contact will cause two problems: on the one hand, the mismatched energy level alignment of the perovskite material and TCO gives rise to a large energy barrier for electron transport and a small energy barrier for hole blocking. This makes the charge transfer and extraction at the interfaces lack driving force and the charge recombination is serious; on the other hand, the insufficient coverage and pinholes of the perovskite will lead to the ohmic contact of other layers with TCO, acting as shunt paths and causing current leakage.10
To solve these issues, many efforts have been paid to improving the photovoltaic performance of ETL-free PSCs. One strategy is to optimize the mismatched energy level alignment by TCO modification and perovskite component engineering. TCO modification is conducive to improving the energy level alignment and interfacial contact, such as ultraviolet ozone (UVO) treatment11 and deposition of ultra-thin organic and inorganic film materials on TCO.12 Another strategy is to deposit high-quality perovskite films. It is believed that a continuous, compact, smooth, and flat perovskite film with high crystallinity, large grain size, and reduced defects is the basic prerequisite for high device performance, especially for ETL-free PSCs. Composition engineering,13 textured perovskite morphology,14 and heterojunction engineering through a co-deposition strategy15 could improve the crystal growth of the perovskite, passivate surface defects, and facilitate charge extraction, resulting in the PCE enhancement of the ETL-free PSCs.
In this paper, a special perovskite material with cascaded band gap, named gradient homojunction perovskite (GHJP), is designed and synthesized by a large cation-assisted method. The inherent nature of GHJP was beneficial to the fast exciton dissociation and collection. Compared with the ETL-free PSCs based on the control perovskite (CPVK), ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP obtained 20.55% PCE and better stability.
The GHJP film was prepared by a large cation-assisted method, where the solution of bulky organic cations n-butyl ammonium salt (BA+) was firstly spin-coated on TCO substrates. Then, the perovskite precursor was dropped during a dynamic rotation procedure, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In order to verify the distribution of BA+ in the GHJP film, time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) has been carried out. The results demonstrated that the concentration of BA+ was gradient distributed in the GHJP film, which was higher on the side near ITO, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and Fig. S1 (ESI†). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) provided additional proof for the gradient distribution of BA+. During the XPS measurements, argon was used to slightly etch the GHJP film and simultaneously detect the chemical composition. Because BA+ is rich in methyl groups, the higher the BA+ concentration, the higher the carbon ratio. When there are not any lead ions in the BA+ precursor, the higher the BA+ concentration, the lower the lead ratio. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the atomic concentration demonstrated that the ratios of carbon increased and lead decreased with continuous etching. This meant that the concentration of BA+ was higher close to the ITO side. This is consistent with the ToF-SIMS results.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the large cation-assisted method. (b) ToF-SIMS 3D tomography of the BA+ (blue dots) distribution in the GHJP film, Sn (green dots) representing ITO, Pb (red dots) representing perovskite. (c) Tauc plot curve of GHJP films with different thicknesses left on ITO. (d) CB and VB values of GHJP films with different thicknesses left on ITO. (e) PL spectra of different perovskite films on ITO. (f) XRD patterns of CPVK and GHJP films. 
Reports have demonstrated that the bulky organic amine could change the energy level of the perovskite.16 In order to investigate the distribution of the energy level in the GHJP film, ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) have been carried out, as shown in Fig. S3 and S4 (ESI†). The blue-shifted UV-vis absorption indicated that the GHJP film had a gradient band gap from 1.555 to 1.569 eV,17 as shown in Fig. 1(c). More accurate energy levels demonstrated that the energy levels, both the conducting band (CB) and valence band (VB) of the GHJP film, moved down close to the ITO side. This is consistent with ToF-SIMS results that BA+ lowers the energy level of the GHJP film. Compared with the CPVK film, the results demonstrated that the GHJP film showed much lower photoluminescence (PL) intensity, as shown in Fig. 1(e). This indicated that the recombination of the electrons and holes had been suppressed in the GHJP film. Femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) has been carried out to further understand the carrier dynamics, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The negative transient absorption signals can be observed distinctly at around 750 nm for both samples, attributed to the fluorescence emission of the perovskite. The negative peak intensity of the GHJP film was slightly weakened in comparison to that of the CPVK film. This indicated that the GHJP film presented better electron extraction capability in comparison with the CPVK film, which is consistent with the PL results. The slightly blue-shifted PL peak may be due to the change of band gap of the GHJP films.18 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) results demonstrated that the GHJP film yielded remarkably lower diffraction intensities at 12.9° in Fig. 1(f), which meant that a small quantity of residual PbI2 was left in the GHJP film.19 This could reduce the trap state density of the GHJP film caused by residual PbI2. The less residual PbI2 was due to the interaction between Pb2+ and BA+, as the XPS results show in Fig. S6 (ESI†). Because of the large amount of methyl (electron donor) in BA+, the binding energy of Pb 4f in the GHJP film was transferred to lower levels. This indicated that BA+ could interact with Pb2+, leading to less residual PbI2. The space charge limited current (SCLC) with electron-only devices and the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) were studied to further demonstrate that the GHJP film had a lower trap state density and improved electrical conductivity, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†).
The above investigations illustrated that the bulky organic cation BA+ was gradient distributed in the GHJP film, where the concentration was higher close to the ITO side. The high concentration of BA+ was more inclined to react with PbI2 and form a two-dimensional (2D) crystal structure at the initial stage of perovskite formation.20 However, far from the ITO side, the high concentration of MA+ promoted the nucleation and growth of the 3D perovskite.21 Therefore, we concluded that the GHJP film had been synthesized with 3D perovskite components at the top and 2D perovskite components at the bottom. Due to the different energy levels of 3D and 2D perovskite components, the GHJP film showed a gradient band gap, which was beneficial to the fast exciton dissociation and suppressed the recombination. In addition, the interaction between Pb2+ and BA+ could reduce the trap state density of the GHJP film caused by residual PbI2.
The architecture of the ETL-free PSCs with the GHJP was prepared as ITO/GHJP/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The PCE of the ETL-free PSCs based on the GHJP was 20.55%, which was similar to devices with ETLs (ITO/SnO2/CPVK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au). It was over 90% higher than that of the ETL-free devices prepared by directly spin-coating perovskite on an ITO substrate (ITO/CPVK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au), as shown in Fig. 2(b) and Table S1 (ESI†). Fig. S8, ESI† showed the forward and reverse scanning current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion devices. The calculated hysteresis factors (HFs) showed that ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP had much lower HF than that of ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK. The reduction of the hysteresis effect was attributed to better charge collection and lower carrier recombination at the ITO and GHJP interface, which effectively reduced the potential barrier of electron transport and expanded the potential barrier of hole recombination. The efficiency distribution histogram of 30 cells with different device structures is shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†). Compared with the ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK, ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP have better reproducibility and higher average efficiency. The corresponding incident monochromatic photon-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was consistent with the short-circuit current density (Jsc) enhancement, as shown in Fig. 2(c).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP. (b) J–V curves and (c) IPCEs of champion PSCs with different architectures. (d) TPC decay curves, (e) Voc plotted versus light intensity, and (f) The Nyquist plots and the fitted equivalent circuit of PSCs with different architectures. (g) Stability tests of PSCs with different architectures. 
In order to demonstrate the reason why ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP had much higher PCEs than those of ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK, transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) spectra in Fig. 2(d) and Fig. S10a, ESI† were utilized to analyze the charge extraction of each device. Compared with ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK, the photocurrent decay time (τext) of ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP decreases from 47.2 μs to 33.2 μs, and the photovoltage decay time (τrec) increases from 5.3 μs to 13.3 μs. This suggested that ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP exhibited more efficient charge extraction and reduced the interfacial charge accumulation, resulting in higher Jsc and open-circuit voltage (Voc). The ratio of τext and τrec reflected the FF of the PSCs.22 The decreased ratio (from 8.9 to 2.5) proved that ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP had better FF. This is consistent with the parameters obtained in J–V curves. To further demonstrate the charge recombination, the relationship between Voc and light intensity has been analyzed. The results demonstrated that Voc had a linear relationship with light intensity on a logarithmic scale, which was representative of the charge carrier recombination process,23 as shown in Fig. 2(e). Compared with PSCs with an ETL (1.24 kBT/q), the ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP have similar ideal factor (1.36 kBT/q), which is much lower than that of ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK (1.77 kBT/q). This meant that the ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP could effectively inhibit charge recombination in the devices. The Jsc plotted versus light intensity also demonstrated faster electron extraction in the GHJP film, as shown in Fig. S10b (ESI†). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was analyzed to illustrate the charge transfer characteristics, as shown in Fig. 2(f). The spectra can be fitted using the equivalent circuit shown in the illustration. The value of the starting point at the real part is denoted by a series resistance (Rs), which is related to the resistance of external wires and substrates. The large arc at low frequency is attributed to the recombination resistance (Rrec), as shown in Table S2, ESI.† ETL-free PSCs based on the GHJP film listed much higher Rrec (50.1 kΩ) than that of the ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK (19.9 kΩ), which was also slightly higher than that of the devices with ETL (49.4 kΩ). This indicated that the inherent nature of GHJP could block the hole transfer in the process of electron extraction, resulting in effectively inhibiting charge recombination. This was consistent with the results discussed above. The stability tests demonstrated that more than 94% of the initial PCE could be maintained after 1000 hours of storage (room temperature, RH 40%) in N2, while the ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK maintained only 80% of the initial PCE, as shown in Fig. 2(g). When the CPVK directly contacted ITO, the mismatch of energy levels at the interface resulted in poor interface charge transfer. The accumulated electrons could change the structure of the perovskite, giving rise to the stability issue of ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK. The enhanced stability of ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP may be due to the gradient distribution of the band gap. The gradient energy level alignments achieved much better charge extraction and effectively inhibited the charge accumulation at the interface, thus enhancing the stability of the devices.24
Compared with traditional ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK, the PCE of ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP was improved more than 90%. This may be caused by three reasons: the first reason was the downward shift of the CB and VB in the GHJP film, which better realized the energy level alignment with ITO, as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). In the absence of ETLs, the mismatched energy level between ITO and PVK resulted in a significant increase of the barrier of electron transport (ΔEe) and serious interfacial recombination loss, as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). However, the GHJP film could form effective energy level alignment and reduce the recombination loss. The second reason was the type-II cascade energy level alignment. The gradient distribution of the band gap gave rise to electrons more conducive to the transport along the ITO direction, but the hole transmission was blocked. The effective separation of electrons and holes was improved and the conductive recombination was avoided in Fig. 3(b). This is similar to the hole blocking of PSCs with ETLs. When the CPVK directly contacted with ITO, the interface energy levels bent upward due to the formation of the built-in electric field. The electrons could not transfer smoothly and the holes were not effectively blocked. As a result, serious charge accumulation and recombination would occur at the interfaces, resulting in lower PCE, as shown in Fig. 3(d). In addition, the inefficient transfer of electrons and holes would also lead to a stability issue, as mentioned above. The third reason may be the pinhole blocking effect of BA+. In ETL-free PSCs with CPVK, the pinholes and defects would raise the chances of current leakage or device shunting. As shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†), the CPVK film directly deposited on ITO was uneven with pinholes and defects. However, in the GHJP film, BA+ was gradient distributed throughout the whole film, which could fill in the grain boundary close to the ITO substrate, so the GHJP film was uniform and smooth. In addition, the BA+ gradient distribution in the whole film could also inhibit the direct contact between the HTL and the conductive substrate, thus suppressing interface charge recombination, preventing device shunting and current leakage as shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy level alignment of ETL-free PSCs based on the GHJP film. (b) Interfacial energy level alignment between ITO and GHJP. (c) Schematic illustration of the energy level alignment of ETL-free PSCs based on the CPVK film. (d) Interfacial energy level alignment between ITO and CPVK. 
In summary, we have designed and synthesized a new perovskite material and utilized it in ETL-free PSCs. The results have shown that both the CB and VB energy levels have gradient distribution at different depths of the GHJP film. The type-II cascaded energy level alignment leads to electrons more conducive to transmission along the ITO direction, but the hole transmission is blocked. The results indicated that the nature of this GHJP film was beneficial to collect electrons and block holes at the same time. The final fabricated ETL-free PSCs based on this novel and simple GHJP obtained a PCE of 20.55%, which was similar to that of PSCs with ETLs, and over 90% higher than that of ETL-free PSCs based on CPVK.
L. G. conceived and carried out the experimental study on the device fabrication and wrote the manuscript together with C. X. C. X. and Y. S. conducted most measurements. L. G. assumed all the correspondence with the editor and reviewers. A. L. and T. M. discussed all the results.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests or personal relationships.
Notes and references
Best research-cell efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, 2022.
D. Zhang, M. Stojanovic, Y. Ren, Y. Cao, F. T. Eickemeyer, E. Socie, N. Vlachopoulos, J. E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Pan, L. Liu and L. Ding, J. Semicond., 2022, 43, 030203 CrossRef .
L. Huang and Z. Ge, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900248 CrossRef .
T. Ghosh, S. Aharon, L. Etgar and S. Ruhman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18262–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Collavini, S. F. Volker and J. L. Delgado, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9757–9759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Huang, T. H. Liu, C. Liang, J. M. Xia, D. Y. Li, H. C. Zhang, A. Amini, G. C. Xing and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, C. T. Zuo, Y. Z. Wu, Z. G. Li, B. M. Xu, Y. Hua and L. M. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1237–1241 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, J. F. Liao, J. X. Zhong, Y. F. Xu, L. Wang and J. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20980–20987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang and Y. Zhu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2100006 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Cha, P. M. Da, J. Wang, W. Y. Wang, Z. H. Chen, F. X. Xiu, G. F. Zheng and Z. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, Y. Li, M. Zhang, K. Zhao and Z. S. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2779–2785 Search PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Ryu, J. W. Lee, J. Roh, K. Lee, J. Yun, J. Lee, Y. K. Kim, D. Hwang, J. Kang, S. K. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8113–8120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, W. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Kuang and L. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800268 CrossRef .
C. H. Chiang and C. G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Liu, M. Q. Long, M. Q. Cai, L. M. Ding and J. L. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 715–720 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, C. Liu, F. Meng, A. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Li, C. Zhang, M. Fan, G. Wei and T. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9250–9256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, G. Lv, Z. Xu, Y. Dong, X. Ji and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11114–11122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Lai, T. Liu, D. Lu, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901242 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, G. Wu, M. Wang, B. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Xia, S. Yue, K. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. J. Fang, J. J. Zhao, Y. C. Shao, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, H. Ade, Q. Wang, J. E. Shield, N. H. Zhou, A. M. Moran and J. S. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1008 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Leng, P. Wang, M. Chen, D. Zhang, K. Zhao, S. F. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1903889 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J.-A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W.-M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, D. Zhang, S. Bu, R. Peng, Q. Wei and Z. Ge, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc01807aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the large cation-assisted method. (b) ToF-SIMS 3D tomography of the BA+ (blue dots) distribution in the GHJP film, Sn (green dots) representing ITO, Pb (red dots) representing perovskite. (c) Tauc plot curve of GHJP films with different thicknesses left on ITO. (d) CB and VB values of GHJP films with different thicknesses left on ITO. (e) PL spectra of different perovskite films on ITO. (f) XRD patterns of CPVK and GHJP films.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of ETL-free PSCs based on GHJP. (b) J–V curves and (c) IPCEs of champion PSCs with different architectures. (d) TPC decay curves, (e) Voc plotted versus light intensity, and (f) The Nyquist plots and the fitted equivalent circuit of PSCs with different architectures. (g) Stability tests of PSCs with different architectures.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy level alignment of ETL-free PSCs based on the GHJP film. (b) Interfacial energy level alignment between ITO and GHJP. (c) Schematic illustration of the energy level alignment of ETL-free PSCs based on the CPVK film. (d) Interfacial energy level alignment between ITO and CPVK.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc01807a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
