Morphology of polymer -based bulk heterojunction films for organic photovoltaics  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0SM01502D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0SM01502D
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482-5493Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMorphology of polymer-based bulk heterojunction films for organic photovoltaics

        
          
            Matthias A. 
            Ruderer
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Müller-Buschbaum
          
          
        
      *
      Technische Universität München, Physik-Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, James-Frank-Str. 1, 85747, Garching, Germany. E-mail: muellerb@ph.tum.de;  Fax: +49 (0)89 289 12473;   Tel: +49 (0)89 289 12451
Received 
      16th December 2010
    , Accepted 9th March 2011First published on 9th April 2011AbstractIn recent years organic photovoltaics have become one of the most increasing research areas due to their potential towards a cheap and broad applicability. Besides the chemical structure and the resulting electronic and absorption properties, the morphology of the active layer in such systems was found to be one of the most important issues to gain reasonable device performance. The development of tomography and advanced scattering techniques enables the detection of 3-dimensional morphologies in these materials. In this review we focus on the latest findings concerning the morphology and its control parameters in polymer-based bulk heterojunction systems and its importance for the development of high performance organic solar cells.Matthias A. RudererGraduated in Physics from Technische Universität München at the Chair of Functional Materials. In 2008 M. A. Ruderer continued his research in the framework of “Morphology-related functions of Organic Photovoltaics” at the Chair of Functional Materials under the supervision of Prof. P. Müller-Buschbaum and worked as a visiting research student at the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge in the group of Prof. Neil Greenham and at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in the group of Dr. Alexander Hexemer. He is a member of the graduate school “Materials Science of Complex Interfaces” of the “Elite Network of Bavaria”.Peter Müller-BuschbaumGraduation in Physics and PhD in Physics at Univerität Kiel were followed by a postdoctoral work at Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. In 1999 Peter Müller-Buschbaum moved to the Physics department of Technische Universität München and joined the Chair of Professor Winfried Petry on a group leader position. In 2002 he finished his habilitation and becomes an assistant professor. Since 2006 he is a full university professor and heading the Chair of Functional Materials in replacement of Professor Petry. He is a member of TUMEnergy and heading the Network of Renewable Energy of the Munich School of Engineering (MSE).
Introduction

Polymer-based photovoltaics promise potential as a novel type of a renewable, delocalized and competitive energy source. A broad range of applications appears feasible due to the high capability of organic semiconductors in tunability, processibility and flexibility. Moreover, the possibility of combining different carbon-based photoactive units to a semiconducting polymer enables to adapt the absorption as well as the electrical behaviour of these compounds. Because polymers are mostly processed via solution based methods, the production of polymer-based photovoltaics does not need high energy or vacuum steps. In addition, high throughput options like inkjet-printing and roll-to-roll processing can be used for device fabrication, which can result in production at a low price.1 Furthermore, polymer-based solar cells will allow for alternative shapes which are different from the flat panels used in today's silicon based photovoltaics.
Nevertheless polymer-based systems for photovoltaics are subject to specific requirements due to their particular material properties. Most semiconducting polymers are so-called conjugated polymers which have a carbon backbone of alternating single and double bonds. These materials show very high absorption coefficients on the order of 105 cm−1 which gives an optimum in film thickness of 100 to 200 nm to absorb most of the incoming light.2 However, the main absorption of semiconducting polymers is typically in a narrow wavelength band and likely in the blue wavelength regime. The search for particular conjugated polymers absorbing in the red wavelength region is still in progress.
In addition, absorbing light in organic semiconductors creates excitons with a binding energy of about 0.5 eV.3 Therefore thermal exciton dissociation does not take place and organic solar cells containing only one component (e.g. one conjugated polymer) are very inefficient. Introducing a second component, with matching electronic properties, strongly increases the device performance.4,5 The exciton dissociation in two component systems occurs at the interface between both components. For fullerene–polymer systems this process was found to be very efficient, i.e. when an exciton reaches the interface the process of exciton dissociation occurs in some tens of femtoseconds and is therefore much faster than any other relevant process in a photovoltaic system.4,6 Besides the high exciton binding energy also the short exciton diffusion length, which is typically in the order of 10 nm, constrains the exciton dissociation.7 A more detailed description of the device physics in an organic solar cell was recently published by Deibel et al.8
For a layered system the two essential length scales, namely 100 nm for maximal absorption and 10 nm for exciton dissociation, make a high performance organic solar cell implausible as long as only layered systems are involved. To overcome this problem the so-called bulk heterojunction approach has been introduced.9,10 In this approach a blend of two organic semiconductors is used. Two immiscible components undergo phase separation and thus create internal interfaces inside the active layer. The aim for a highly efficient photovoltaic film is to achieve phase separation on a length scale of the exciton diffusion length in the active layer with interconnected phases and a thickness to optimize the absorption of light. Thus, besides the chemical composition or rather the molecular architecture, which mainly defines the absorption range and the electronic band structure, the morphology of the active layer on different length scales and its orientations are of utmost importance.
In an optimum morphology for organic photovoltaics the process of charge carrier harvesting can be explained as follows. An exciton is created by light absorption in one phase of the active layer. Because the phase separation in an optimum morphology is in the range of the exciton diffusion length, most excitons reach an internal interface and are dissociated at this interface. Thus the length scale of the phase separation is crucial for the efficiency of exciton dissociation. The created free charge carriers move along percolation paths to the corresponding electrodes. In addition to an interconnected network also a high charge carrier mobility of the organic compound is necessary for the charge carrier transport. It is well known that the crystallinity of organic semiconductors is directly affecting its charge transport properties.11 Consequently, a high crystallinity of the polymers is required. Thereby the degree of crystallinity is just as important as the orientation of the crystallites. Finally, also the vertical composition influences the performance as it supports the charge carrier transport to the correct electrodes.12 For example, to avoid charge carriers arriving at the wrong electrode an enrichment layer of one component at the corresponding electrode is advantageous.13 A model to describe the morphology dependent charge transport using a combination of numerical charge transport and a morphology model was published recently.14
Because the creation of a bulk heterojunction film for the active layer of an organic solar cell is a self-assembly process the structure can only be influenced indirectly. Typical control parameters are the molecular architecture of the involved materials, the solvent used, the blending ratio of the two components and post-production treatments such as thermal or vapour annealing. The aim is always to obtain a structure which fits the given requirements best by changing these control parameters. The resulting optimum morphology is usually far from thermodynamic equilibrium.
There are first investigations to create equilibrium structures which fulfil the given requirements using block copolymers of semiconducting polymers.15 Furthermore, top-down process techniques like (double) imprinting are used to form structures which also fit the needs.16
However, in this review we restrict the field of research of organic photovoltaics to polymer-based systems used for the active layer, i.e. at least one component of the active layer is a semiconducting polymer. In addition, the selected examples are restricted to bulk heterojunction systems. Consequently homopolymer or layered systems are not discussed in this review. In summary, the focus is put on the morphology of polymer-based bulk heterojunction systems and different length scales are considered.
In the Introduction we give a broad historical description of the development and refer here to several reviews.12,17 An overview of recently established investigation techniques in the field of organic photovoltaics like electron tomography and advanced scattering techniques to study the structure of these systems follows the introduction. In the main part of the review the influence of selected control parameters, such as chemical structure, used solvent, blending ratio and post-production treatments, on the structure evolution of polymer-based bulk heterojunction systems is discussed. Therefore mainly studies were taken into account which investigated the morphology of polymer-based bulk heterojunction systems. The main focus is on the usage of the recently established scattering techniques. The review is completed with a short conclusion.
Investigation techniques
Recently established structural probes, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), have been complemented with tomography and advanced scattering techniques.18 In this section of the review we shortly introduce these complementary techniques.
Electron tomography
Electron tomography is based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. TEM probes the full volume of an investigated specimen and provides a 2-dimensional (2D) projection of the material in the specimen volume. If a series of 2D projections (typically 100 images) is taken at different tilt angles, the 3-dimensional (3D) morphology of the probed volume can be reconstructed. The probed volume has a size of a typical TEM image (in the µm range) times the film thickness of the sample. The resolution in lateral directions is defined by the resolution of the original TEM image while the resolution in the vertical direction is given by the number of projections and the diameter of the reconstructed volume which is related to the film thickness and the maximal tilt angle for thin-film samples. Thus the resolution is typically in the nanometre range for both directions.
Due to the specimen holder the tilt series is limited and wedges are missing. This can result in artefacts in the reconstructed data. Further attention has to be drawn to beam sensitivity and contrast in polymer samples.19

Reflectometry


Reflectometry is a scattering technique which reveals information about the material composition vertical to the sample surface. A beam of X-rays or neutrons impinges under an incident angle θ onto the sample surface and the specular intensity I(θ) is detected in a θ/2θ-geometry. From the obtained data a vertical material composition profile can be extracted. The profile is an average over the area of the beam footprint on the sample which is on the order of square cm. It is therefore equivalent to the area which is used to obtain I–V characteristics i.e. the electrode size. For X-rays the contrast depends on the electron densities of the investigated materials which can be small for some specific material compositions of polymers. By deuteration of one component the contrast can be controlled when neutrons are used in the scattering experiment instead of X-rays. Furthermore, neutrons do not degrade the investigated materials as they interact with the nuclei. For X-rays the susceptibility to radiation damage has to be considered for some materials.20 However, the availability of deuterated conjugated polymers is very limited at present.
Grazing incidence small/wide angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS/GIWAXS)
In the case of grazing incidence scattering the specular reflection is blocked and the diffuse scattering is detected. From the diffuse scattering information on the vertical structure as well as lateral structural correlations such as domain geometry, size distributions and spatial correlations can be extracted. Similar to reflectometry excellent sampling statistics are obtained, which again means that the structural information is averaged over an area equivalent to a typical electrode size. The experiments can be performed with X-rays and neutrons, however this scattering geometry is typically used at synchrotrons due to higher intensities and brilliance of the X-ray beam in comparison to the neutron beam.
The schematic setup of grazing incidence scattering is shown in Fig. 1. A focused X-ray beam impinges under a small incident angle (below 1°) onto the sample surface. X-rays probe the full sample volume and the scattered intensity is typically recorded with a 2D-detector. The resolvable length scales are defined by the sample–detector distance and the related experiments are typically referred to as GIWAXS (or sometimes GIXRD) and GISAXS.
 Fig. 1  Schematic view of a grazing incidence small/wide angle X-ray scattering setup. The X-ray beam (red line) impinges under a small incident angle (below 1°) onto the sample. A 2D-detector records the scattered intensity. The sample–detector distance sdd defines the resolvable length scales, e.g. for sdd = 10 cm and sdd = 2 m molecular structures (GIWAXS) and mesoscopic structures (GISAXS) are resolved, respectively. 

(a)GIWAXS. 
To obtain information on the molecular arrangement of the semiconducting polymers (length scales of 0.25–5 nm) a sample–detector distance of typical 10 cm is appropriate. GIWAXS reveals information on the crystalline arrangement of polymers, i.e. lattice type and lattice constants, the degree of crystallinity and an estimation of crystal sizes. In addition, the orientation of the crystalline regions relative to the substrate is measured. Amorphous regions do not contribute to the scattering signal and no detailed information on these parts of the active layer can be extracted.21


(b) GISAXS. 
At a sample–detector distance of 2 m mesoscopic structures of the active layer, from 10 nm to 2 µm, are resolved. To gain detailed structural information the scattering data have to be modelled. Different approaches of modelling are available, such as for example the simple effective interface approximation which only obtains information on the lateral correlations of different phases.22 To achieve more detailed structural information, the scattering data have to be modelled based on the more complex distorted wave Born approximation (DWBA).23 Within such model approaches the domain shapes, sizes and size distributions as well as inter-domain distances can be extracted. To resolve even larger length scales as compared to the GISAXS setup (lengths up to 10 µm) the sample–detector distance can be further increased (GIUSAXS).24
Analogous to reflectometry, the contrast between the investigated materials and the beam sensitivity of the polymers have to be taken into account. The contrast can be optimized by deuteration of one component if grazing incidence small angle scattering is performed with neutrons instead of X-rays (named GISANS instead of GISAXS). However, limited counting statistics due to the limited available neutron flux is still challenging these experiments.25

Control parameters
To obtain bulk heterojunctions with morphologies fitting to the given requirements of a photovoltaic device different control parameters have to be optimized. In the following section we discuss recent findings concerning the morphologies for different polymer-based systems.

Influence of chemical structure. 
The principle chemical structure of a conjugated polymer defines the electronic band structure, charge carrier mobility and absorption range. Already the change of one atom can alter the photovoltaic performance dramatically.26 In addition, parameters such as the type of side-chains, the molecular weight and the regioregularity influence the morphology evolution and therefore the performance of organic solar cells. The introduction of side-chains in the case of conducting polymers as well as of the Buckminster fullerene C60 made it finally possible to increase the solubility and to produce organic solar-cells with reasonable performance via solution based processes.10,27
For example, Nguyen et al. investigated P3AT:PCBM films for organic photovoltaics with different side-chain lengths.28Grazing incidence XRD (GIWAXS) investigations revealed an increased spatial distance between the polymer backbones with increasing side chain length (see Fig. 2, left part). The difference in peak height was attributed to the side-chain dependence on melting temperatures. Furthermore, the longer side-chain polymers allowed for better diffusion of PCBM in the film. Indeed, AFM images (see Fig. 2, right part) and optical microscope images of identically annealed P3AT:PCBM films showed bigger PCBM aggregates for longer side-chains. The difference in side-chain lengths also made an optimization of the annealing conditions for every P3AT system necessary. The best performance was found for P3HT. While P3BT suffered from bad solubility, the P3ATs with longer side-chains showed lower performance due to increased phase separation.
 Fig. 2  
Grazing-incidence XRD diffraction diagrams of pristine P3AT and P3AT:PCBM blend films as-cast and identically annealed (left) and tapping-mode AFM topography scans of identically annealed blend films (right): (a) P3BT:PCBM, (b) P3HT:PCBM, (c) P3OT:PCBM, (d) P3DT:PCBM, and (e) P3DDT:PCBM. Scans (d) and (e) are taken from a region of the film that was fully depleted of PCBM. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. 
Huang et al. found similar results regarding the influence on the solubility, PCBM diffusion and miscibility.29 The first study on P3PT found results similar to P3HT based systems and attributed the change in performance to the altered morphology. Also the importance of appropriate processing conditions was pointed out by the authors.30 The all-polymer bulk-heterojunction system F8TBT:P3AT was investigated by Friedel et al. regarding the side chain influence.31 Also in this system the highest efficiency was found for the system with P3HT which is attributed to the matching band structures as well as to the similar glass transition temperature of both components. For this reason the reorganization of P3HT and the morphology formation of the blend film are possible at the same temperatures.
Besides the length of the side-chains also the length of the backbone, i.e. the molecular weight, influences the morphology and performance. Ma et al. investigated P3HT:PCBM systems with different molecular weights Mw of P3HT with TEM.32 It was found that high MwP3HT based solar cells exhibit a higher performance due to the higher conjugation length, better interconnection within the bicontinuous network and increased thermal stability. To overcome solubility problems and unfavourable PCBM distribution in the case of high MwP3HT a combination of low and high MwP3HT improved the performance which was therefore referred to as ‘ideal morphology’. In the case of D–A copolymers such as PCPDTBT and Si–PDTBT higher molecular weight polymers were found to exhibit increased charge carrier mobility and better photovoltaic performance due to the improved crystallinity.33
In addition, the regioregularity of the side chain configuration influences optical and electronic properties of conjugated polymers. For homopolymer films of P3HT it was reported that high regioregularity increases the performance of organic field effective transistors due to the higher charge carrier mobility.11
Kim et al. found strong influence of the regioregularity on the performance for P3HT:PCBM systems.34,35 This was attributed to an enhanced optical absorption and transport in the P3HT phase which was concluded from optical and electronic characterization as well as GIWAXS measurements. However, Woo et al. reported opposite results for the same system with regioregularities from 86% to 96% where similar efficiencies were found for all systems.36 While absorption and charge carrier mobility were increased in highly regioregular P3HT, the increased degree in the crystallinity resulted in a stronger phase separation and the formation of bigger PCBM clusters after thermal annealing. This caused disadvantageous blend morphologies and the optimization of the preparation procedure was crucial. Furthermore, the thermal stability was improved for lower regioregularity and therefore an introduction of a controlled disorder into the polymer backbone was suggested.
Besides the alteration of the chemical structure of the polymer also the influence of the modification of the fullerene-based materials for not all-polymer systems is broadly investigated. Apart from the widely used PCBM, which belongs to the group of methanofullerenes,37 also (2 + 4) adducts38 and pyrrolidinofullerenes39 are used. In this review these will not further be addressed.
In summary, the chemical structure strongly influences the solubility and ordering of the polymer chains which is important for the charge transport properties. But it seems that the effects of the molecular structure are contrary and therefore it is a trade-off between higher solubility and higher order or rather charge carrier mobility. First attempts to combine different molecular structures to optimize the device performance are reported.32,36


Influence of solvent. 
In general, in solution based processing methods the solvent has a big impact on the resulting morphology. Important parameters are the boiling point and therefore the evaporation rate, the viscosity and the solubility of the used polymers.
One of the first correlations of device performance and morphology was presented by Shaheen et al.40 The authors investigated the polymer–fullerene system MDMO–PPV:PCBM, in which they found a strong increase of efficiency from 0.9% to 2.5% due to the solvent change from toluene to chlorobenzene. AFM investigations revealed topographies with two different length scales and a smaller nano-morphology for the films made from chlorobenzene. Hoppe et al. investigated the same system with high-resolution SEM and found similar deviations in the morphology.41 Furthermore, a polymer skin layer around the fullerene clusters for the films prepared from toluene was revealed which had already been proposed by McNeill et al. before.42 Because of this skin layer electrons have to cross the hole conducting material to reach the electrode. In addition the holes have an increased distance to their electrode. Both effects result in a higher recombination probability and therefore in decreased charge carrier harvesting.
Rispens et al. studied the topography of the MDMO–PPV:PCBM system with variation of the solvent from xylene over chlorobenzene to dichlorobenzene.43 Decreasing length scales in the topography were found as a result of the change of solvent. Furthermore, the crystalline structure of PCBM was investigated. The best efficiency was revealed for chlorobenzene, which was attributed to the 3D electron mobility in the PCBM crystals, the beneficial effect on the hole mobility in the electron-donor and the optimal morphology formation.
Within the search for the most favourable solvent for each system, one approach is the combination of two solvents to achieve the optimum blend morphology. Campbell et al. studied the all-polymer systems P3HT:F8TBT and PFB:F8BT with transient absorption to obtain information on phase segregation.44 By mixing high and low boiling point solvents the drying time was controlled and therefore the extent of phase demixing and crystallinity was directed.
For the system P3HT:PCBM the application of a small amount of an unfriendly/dipolar solvent was used to control the aggregation of P3HT. AFM investigations revealed higher roughness with increased P3HT aggregation which had no influence on the performance. The usage of the dipolar additive resulted in devices with 4% power efficiency without any further treatments such as annealing.45
Several examples of polymer:fullerene systems using processing additives showed a modification of the bulk heterojunction morphology, i.e. improved phase separation and crystallinity which accompanies an increase in photovoltaic performance.46 Lee et al. found that additives with higher boiling points and selective solubility seem to be advantageous.47 Recently the system PTB7:PC71BM reached a power conversion efficiency of 7.4% by using an octane as additive.48

Fig. 3 shows the effect of solvent and solvent mixtures on the surface morphology and the device performance of PCDTBT:PC70BM. TEM and AFM images show the smallest nanoscale phase separation for dichlorobenzene. For this solvent also the best performance was found. Mixtures of dichlorobenzene with other solvents showed similar IPCE behaviour. For dichlorobenzene solvent the best efficiency of 6% was achieved. The authors attributed this to the combination of better connected percolated networks in combination with the nanoscale phase-separation.49
 Fig. 3  The effects of CF, CB and DCB solvents on film morphology and device performance. TEM images of PCDTBT:PC70BM films spin-cast from CF (a), CB (b) and DCB (c) solvents. The insets show the surface phase images measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM). IPCE spectra (d) and J–V characteristics (e) of the devices fabricated with films cast from CF, CB and DCB. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics,49 copyright 2009. 
The tendency in the choice of the solvent goes into the direction of high boiling point solvents. Due to the low evaporation rate of these solvents the drying time is increased and the polymers show higher ordering. With the combination of different solvents a more precise control of the drying time appears possible.


Influence of blending ratio. 
For polymer blends it is well known that the corresponding structure strongly depends on the ratio of the components involved. The overall aim for bulk heterojunction systems is to obtain a network with percolation paths for the charge carrier transport with a structure size of the exciton diffusion length in order to optimize exciton separation.
As mentioned above for the system MDMO–PPV:PCBM it was found that devices made from chlorobenzene are outperforming devices made from toluene. Furthermore, the blending ratio of these two components has also a strong influence on the performance. The ratio of 1:4 was found to be optimum for this system.40 Also for the system MEH–PPV:PCBM a very similar ideal proportion was reported.50 Yang et al. investigated MDMO–PPV:PCBM with PCBM ratios ranging from 20 to 90 wt% with TEM and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED).51 Up to a value of 60 wt% a homogenous film was detected. With further increasing PCBM content phase separation between the two components became visible. PCBM rich domains of 45 nm were revealed. Nevertheless, the SAED analysis showed PCBM crystallites for all blending ratios which were also present in the homogenous phase. In good agreement, van Duren et al. also found the beginning of phase separation at a value of 67 wt% PCBM.52 The optimum blending ratio concerning device performance was confirmed to be 1:4. The low efficiency at small PCBM proportion was attributed to missing percolation paths in the PCBM phase. Investigations with TOF-SIMS revealed lateral phase separation at all depths. But a vertical stratification was not found by the authors.
Also varying the composition for the MDMO:PCBM films cast from toluene showed strong influence on the morphology as revealed by high resolution SEM measurements (see Fig. 4).41 With increasing PCBM content the PCBM clusters were growing. For a blending ratio of 1:1, nanospheres (20–30 nm) embedded in a homogeneous matrix were found. For higher PCBM content clusters developed which were covered with a skin layer of MDMO–PPV. The device performance of these films was found to saturate with increasing PCBM content as the inactive volume inside the PCBM clusters increased.
 Fig. 4  
SEM side views (cross-sections) of MDMO–PPV/PCBM blend films cast from toluene with various weight ratios of MDMO–PPV and PCBM. For the ratios 1:4, 1:3, and 1:2 (b–d) the nanoclusters, in the form of discs, are surrounded by another phase, called the skin that contains smaller spheres of about 20–30 nm diameter. For the 1:1 film, only these small spheres are found. The magnifications used are 100000 (c and d), 150000 (b), and 200000 (a). Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. 
For the system P3HT:PCBM an optimum blending ratio around a value of 50 wt% was reported from several groups.53,54 Consequently, a certain optimum blending ratio is not easily transferable from one system to another.
We investigated the inner film morphology of the all-polymer system P3HT:MEH–PPV with AFM, X-ray reflectometry and GISAXS techniques.55 These conjugated polymers did not fit very well concerning the electronic structure but were a good test system with relatively simple units to compare lateral structures on the basis of a simple mean field theory describing phase separation in polymer blend films. Fig. 5 shows lateral structures as revealed from GI(U)SAXS measurements as a function of the blending ratio. A minimum structure was found for a value of 10 wt% of MEH–PPV. This critical blending ratio, ΦC, calculated from the degrees of polymerization of P3HT and MEH–PPVvia the Flory–Huggins theory, was found to be a good prediction for the minimum structure in thin films of P3HT:MEH–PPV. In addition a vertical stratification with a MEH–PPV enriched top layer was detected with X-ray reflectivity measurements.
However, for the polyfluorene system PFB:F8BT no simple picture of spinodal decomposition can be applied. Lateral structures for three different blending ratios (5:1, 1:1, 1:5) were revealed with AFM and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) with a spatial resolution of 50 nm. Raman spectroscopy showed that the homopolymers enrich at the interfaces.45,56 In another study the mapping of this system with scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) and AFM was performed for the three different blending ratios 5:1, 1:1 and 1:5 (see Fig. 6). Lateral structures in the micrometer regime were found. The domains were not formed by only one component but contain still significant proportions of both polymers. The better device performance for the 1:5 film compared to the 5:1 film (see Fig. 7) was attributed to the higher proportion of 60–80 wt% F8BT blend composition. For the lower performance of the 1:1 film additional vertical structures were proposed to explain the findings. The difference of the films made from xylene and chloroform could not be explained and the authors suggested differences in the degree of a smaller nano-scale phase separation which could not be resolved by the used experimental techniques.46,57
 Fig. 5  Detected characteristic lateral length Λ of MEH–PPV:P3HT blended polymer films as a function of the blending ratio ΦMEH–PPV. Λ (A) (solid triangles) was determined by GIUSAXS. The dashed line shows the value of the critical ratio ΦC. The solid line is drawn as a guide for the eyes. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
McNeill et al. investigated the evolution of lateral phase separation of this system viaspin coating in solvent saturated atmosphere.59STXM measurements revealed purification of the phases with increasing drying time. For devices made with longer drying times, a decrease in performance was found which is explained with the higher purity in the domains. The increased purity resulted in lower exciton dissociation efficiency as shown by higher photoluminescence intensity.
 Fig. 6  5 µm by 5 µm STXM composition maps (left and center columns) and AFM images (right column) of PFB/F8BT blend films. The left column shows F8BT wt% composition maps while the center column shows PFB wt% composition maps. (a), (b), and (c) are of a 1:1 PFB:F8BT blend film; (d), (e), and (f) are of a 5:1 PFB:F8BT blend film; (g), (h), and (i) are of a 1:5 PFB:F8BT blend film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
In summary, while a prediction of the blending ratio resulting in a minimal structure seems possible for relative simple binary polymer systems, a forecast for systems based on polymers and fullerenes or more complicated copolymers remains difficult. Consequently, the optimum blending ratio for a specific system still has to be obtained by experimental means.


Influence of post-production treatments. 
The obtained structures resulting from solution based preparation methods, which are controlled by the parameters mentioned above, are far from equilibrium. Thus, the initially installed bulk heterojunction structure changes by introducing mobility to the system due to e.g.annealing. It is important to note that it is typically not the aim of post-production treatments to achieve an equilibrium structure but to obtain an optimum morphology which results in high performance solar cells. Annealing steps such as thermal or solvent treatments on polymer-based systems for photovoltaics result in two main structural evolutions: crystallization and phase separation including coarsening, which has already been investigated for many different systems.53,56,60
 Fig. 7  Calculated efficiencies of xylene-processed blends (squares) based on the distribution of local blend composition compared to the measured efficiencies of xylene-processed devices (circles) and chloroform devices (triangles; data points for pure PFB and F8BT devices taken from Arias and Snaith et al.58), all at a wavelength of 465 nm. The dashed line shows the fit to the chloroform data used to calculate the xylene efficiencies. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
For example, McNeill et al. investigated the all-polymer system PFB:F8BT processed from chloroform solution.61 With AFM and transient absorption the influence of different annealing temperatures on the lateral structural size was detected. The resulting length scales differ from 5 to 40 nm depending on thermal annealing. Concerning device performance an optimum structure scale of 20 nm was found which is significantly larger than the exciton diffusion length. The authors concluded that the recombination of geminate charge pairs was the limiting factor. The 20 nm structure balanced the efficiency of charge generation and charge separation. With STXM measurements rather intermixed domains of 85 nm size were found which get purer due to annealing up to 160 °C. Above 160 °C the loss of hierarchy and merging domains were observed.62
We recently published studies on thermal annealing of the system P3HT:F8TBT combining structural investigations with GISAXS and device performance measurements.63 At an annealing temperature of 100 °C already a red-shift of the absorption spectrum and a decrease in PLQE and PL lifetime were observed which are evidence for P3HT reorganization or rather crystallization.64 However, concerning device performance an optimum annealing temperature of 140 °C was found (see Fig. 8). GISAXS investigations (see Fig. 9) revealed coarsening of the lateral structure with increasing annealing temperature promoting charge separation. Surprisingly, at 100 °C a structure size of 25 nm and at 140 °C of 100 nm was found. Consequently, P3HT reorganization alone was not sufficient but a coarsened structure was necessary to optimize the device performance. Perhaps larger domains were beneficial because the recombination of separated charges was reduced and charge transport enhanced. In contrast to P3HT:F8TBT, in the very similar P3HT:F8BT system low performance was found which was attributed to the failure of P3HT reorganization which occurred only above 200 °C.
 Fig. 8  Variation in the device characteristics of xylene-processed P3HT:F8TBT photovoltaic devices with annealing. (a) Current–voltage characteristics under simulated sunlight (100 mW cm2 AM1.5G). (b) Spectral dependence of external quantum efficiency. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. 
 Fig. 9  (a) 2D GISAXS patterns of as-spun and annealed (100 °C, 140 °C, and 180 °C) P3HT:F8TBT films. The color code represents the scattering intensity. The specular reflection is shielded by a beam stop. (b) Double logarithmic plot of the out-of-plane cuts of the GISAXS data taken at the critical q-value of F8TBT (qz = 0.52 nm−1). The data (black triangles) are fitted (red solid lines) with a mathematical model. The dashed line represents the resolution limit. All curves are shifted along the y-axis for clarity. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. 
For the system P3OT:CN–PPV we investigated the crystallization of the individual homopolymers and the bulk heterojunction films due to thermal annealing with GIWAXS. While increased crystallinity and reorientations were found for both homopolymer films, blending the homopolymers hindered the crystallisation process of P3OT. This prevented crystallisation explained the low photovoltaic performance in the system P3OT:CN–PPV.65
For P3HT:PCBM thermal annealing was found to be crucial to reach high efficiency. Ma et al. addressed the improvement in performance to the change in the morphology, the increase in the crystallinity and the improvement in electron transport across the electrode interface.66
Campoy-Quiles et al. used Raman spectroscopy as well as imaging methods such as AFM and ellipsometry to investigate the structural evolution of P3HT:PCBM due to thermal and vapour annealing.67 The structural evolution started with crystallization of P3HT followed by diffusion of PCBM and finally, aggregation of PCBM. Furthermore, also a vertical phase separation with a linear profile from higher PCBM content at the lower interface and higher P3HT content at the surface was revealed. For the different annealing procedures similar morphology changes as well as performances were found.
With the use of different spinning times Liet al. controlled the active layer growth rate in the P3HT:PCBM system. For slow growth rates a higher order of P3HT and an increased photovoltaic performance were found.68
Investigations on thermal annealing on P3AT:PCBM revealed that PCBM diffusion was the limiting process to reach a high device performance. It was concluded that annealing has to be optimized for every single system even in the case of similar components.28
Parnell et al. investigated the vertical composition profile of P3HT:PCBM thin films with neutron reflectivity.69Fig. 10 shows the PCBM concentration profiles depending on the film depth. For the as-spun films the authors revealed a depletion of PCBM in a 25 nm thick surface-near layer as well as an 8 nm thick enrichment layer at the substrate interface. Vapour annealing increased the surface roughness but did not influence the composition profile. However, thermal annealing increased the PCBM concentration at the surface to the value found in the bulk of the film. The thin PCBM enrichment layer at the substrate did not change due to annealing. The authors concluded that the depleted PCBM layer was partly responsible for the relatively poor performance of the not annealed devices.
 Fig. 10  The PCBM concentration profiles for the P3HT/PCBM blend films. (a) For the pristine blend film, the solvent annealed film as well as the sample both solvent annealed and thermally annealed for 60 min. (b) All of the PCBM concentration profiles for the six samples measured by NR. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. 
In a similar experiment, the PCBM enrichment layer at the substrate was confirmed by Kiel et al.70 However, for the surface-near region the authors found a different vertical composition. At the top surface a thin PCBM depletion layer followed by an enrichment layer of PCBM was revealed. Annealing did not change the composite profile significantly. The authors concluded that already subtle variations in the morphology improve the device performance.
van Bavel et al. investigated the 3D nanoscale organization of P3HT:PCBM with electron tomography.71 For the as-spun films the contrast between P3HT and PCBM was quite poor as the P3HT crystals were still very imperfect. As a result of annealing the crystallinity of P3HT increased and nanorods became visible. In Fig. 11 slices of the bottom (a) and top (b) near region taken from the reconstructed volume are shown. At the bottom more nanorods compared to the top region of the film were found. The corresponding gradient of the P3HT content was favourable concerning photovoltaic performance. The enrichment was attributed to different surface tensions and sedimentation of P3HT aggregates which were already present in solution. Furthermore, the thickness dependent morphology was investigated with electron tomography (see Fig. 11c). It was found that annealing effects were basically independent of the film thickness. Concerning the absorption, a thicker film was favourable as it harvested more photons. However, thicker films showed less overall crystallinity and the advantageous enrichment layer of P3HT nanorods at the substrate was not present. The best photovoltaic performance was found for a medium thickness with lower absorption but high P3HT gradient.72
 Fig. 11  Results of electron tomography: quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanorods distribution through the thickness of the thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM photoactive layer. Images (a) and (b) are original slices taken out of the reconstructed volume of the film, with a slice (a) located close to the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top of the film. Dimensions of the slices are 1700 nm × 1700 nm. (c) Quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanowires distribution through the thickness of the thermally annealed (TA) P3HT/PCBM photoactive layers: 50, 100, and 200 nm thick. The thickness of 0 nm corresponds to the bottom side of the layer, i.e., the one next to the hole collecting PEDOT:PSS/ITO electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 58 and 72. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To achieve a vertical composition gradient Kumar et al. introduced a PCBM layer at the top.13 Because of this additional layer the series resistance was decreased and the power conversion efficiency increased.
Chiu et al. investigated the structure in P3HT:PCBM films at both, molecular and mesoscopic length scales, with simultaneous GIWAXS and GISAXS measurements.73 The authors extracted the lateral structural sizes of P3HT crystallites and PCBM aggregates as a function of the annealing temperature from the scattering data. The efficiency was improved when the PCBM aggregates were bigger than 20 nm and the P3HT crystals had sizes of about 16 nm.
For the MDMO–PPV:PCBM system lateral segregation due to thermal annealing was investigated. However, no vertical stratification was revealed.74 In addition, PCBM crystal growth was observed.
Zhong et al. imaged the crystal evolution with in situAFM.75 The PCBM crystals grew in height as well as in lateral dimension. For the surrounding depletion zone a decreased thickness was found. The crystal growth had priority in height compared to the lateral direction. For films with increasing confinement (free standing film, film on a substrate and with a top layer) a reduced crystal growth was monitored.76
To achieve high performance organic solar cells post-production treatments are essential for most systems . Besides the increased crystallinity of the single components providing higher charge carrier mobility, phase separation of the binary system evolves. It seems that the structure size of an optimum phase separation is larger than the exciton diffusion length. This structure size balances the efficiencies of charge carrier generation and separation. In addition, charge carrier recombination is minimized in larger domains. Furthermore, vertical segregation changes with annealing and can improve charge carrier transport. For every particular system post-production treatments have to be optimized individually to reach an ideal morphology.

Conclusion
In conclusion, up to now already many different blend systems based on semiconducting polymers have been investigated with respect to potential application in photovoltaics. It turned out that the evolving film morphology of polymer-based systems for photovoltaics is complex and depends on the combination of several parameters. To achieve high performance photovoltaic devices the combination of two components with matching optical and electronic properties has to form an optimum morphology. This optimization is related to the maximum absorption of light, the effective separation of generated excitons, the transport of charges and the charge collection at the electrodes. Thus many different aspects need to be realized by one morphology of the active layer material and different polymers will result in different optimal sizes of the required structures. Despite the necessity to adapt the size of the structures to the individual polymers used in the film, general trends are clear. Internal interfaces as realised in a bulk heterojunction and charge carrier blocking layers at the counter electrodes are beneficial and give a design rule for the overall morphology.
However, for new systems it is still almost impossible to predict the influence of individual parameters on the optimum morphology. With the new experimental methods, which have been recently established to achieve a 3D picture of the whole active layer, it is now possible to probe the morphology which is representative for the overall sample. As a consequence, these techniques contribute to a better understanding of the relation between the morphology and the function of the photovoltaic device.
Acknowledgements
M.A.R. thanks the Bavarian State Ministry of Sciences, Research and Arts for funding through the International Graduate School “Materials Science of Complex Interfaces” (CompInt).
References
T. Wang, A. D. F. Dunbar, P. A. Staniec, A. J. Pearson, P. E. Hopkinson, J. E. MacDonald, S. Lilliu, C. Pizzey, N. J. Terrill, A. M. Donald, A. J. Ryan, R. A. L. Jones and D. G. Lidzey, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 4128–4134 RSC ; E. Tekin, P. J. Smith and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 703–713 RSC ; F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
U. Zhokhavets, T. Erb, G. Gobsch, M. Al-Ibrahim and O. Ambacher, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 347–350 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, in Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1999 Search PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585 CrossRef CAS .
I.-W. Hwang, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4350–4354 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS ; L. Lüer, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. Oelkrug, G. Cerullo, G. Lanzani, B.-H. Huisman and D. de Leeuw, Org. Electron., 2004, 5, 83 CrossRef CAS ; T. Stübinger and W. Brütting, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 3632 CrossRef .
C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096401 CrossRef .
G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salleo, T. W. Chen and A. R. Völkel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 70, 115311 .
C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3840–3850 CrossRef CAS ; H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45–61 RSC ; X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, G. Li, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165202 CrossRef .
K. Maturová, S. S. van Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464 CrossRef CAS ; M. Sommer, S. Huettner and M. Thelakkat, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10788–10797 RSC ; Y. Tao, B. McCulloch, S. Kim and R. A. Segalman, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4219–4230 RSC ; M. Al-Hussein, M. A. Ruderer, E. Metwalli, V. Körstgens, U. Vainio, S. V. Roth, R. Döhrmann, R. Gehrke, R. Gebhardt, M. Burghammer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4230–4236 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wiedemann, L. Sims, A. Abdellah, A. Exner, R. Meier, K. P. Musselman, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, P. Müller-Buschbaum, G. Scarpa, P. Lugli and L. Schmidt-Mende1, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 263109 CrossRef ; X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. Hasko, S. Hüttner, U. Steiner, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Brunetti, R. Kumar and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2934–2948 RSC .
R. Giridharagopal and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1160–1169 Search PubMed ; E. Verploegen, C. E. Miller and M. F. Toney, Synchrotron Radiat. News, 2010, 23, 16–21 Search PubMed .
S. S. van Bavel and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3217–3234 CrossRef CAS .
A. van der Lee, Solid State Sci., 2000, 2, 257–278 CrossRef CAS ; X.-L. Zhou and S.-H. Chen, Phys. Rep., 1995, 257, 223–348 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perlich, J. Rubeck, S. Botta, R. Gehrke, S. V. Roth, M. A. Ruderer, S. M. Prams, M. Rawolle, Q. Zhong, V. Körstgens and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81, 105105 CrossRef CAS ; E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376, 3 CAS ; 
          P. Müller-Buschbaum, in Applications of Synchrotron Light to Scattering and Diffraction in Materials and Life Sciences, ed. T. A. Ezquerra, M. Garcia-Gutierrez, A. Nogales and M. Gomez, Springer, Berlin,  2009, vol. 776, p. 61 Search PubMed .
R. Lazzari, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2002, 35, 406–421 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Roth, R. Döhrmann, M. Dommach, M. Kuhlmann, I. Kröger, R. Gehrke, H. Walter, C. Schroer, B. Lengeler and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 085106 CrossRef .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, L. Schulz, E. Metwalli, J.-F. Moulin and R. Cubitt, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7639–7644 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, M. Koppe, J. Gao, F. Cordella, M. A. Loi, P. Denk, M. Morana, H.-J. Egelhaaf, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, R. Gaudiana, D. Waller, Z. Zhu, X. Shi and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532 CrossRef CAS ; 
          F. Wudl, P.-M. Allemand, G. Srdanov and D. MvBranch, in Materials for Nonlinear Optics: Chemical Perspectives, ed. S. R. Marder, J. E. Sohn and G. D. Stucky, American
Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1991, p. 683 Search PubMed .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Günes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071–1078 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Huang, C. C. Lee, S. G. Wang, Y. K. Han and M. Y. Chang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1336–B1342 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, K. Vandewal, J.-C. Bolsée, S. Bertho, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3300–3306 CrossRef CAS .
B. Friedel, C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3389–3398 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee and A.J. Heeger, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1776–1780 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tong, S. Cho, J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, B. B. Y. Hsu, D. Moses, R. C. Coffi, E. J. Kramer, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3959–3965 CrossRef CAS ; M. Morana, M. Wegscheider, A. Bonanni, N. Kopidakis, S. Shaheen, M. Scharber, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1757–1766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, K. Heo, J. Park, H. Kim, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney, M. Ree and C.-S. Ha, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 117–121 RSC .
C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson, B. J. Kim, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324–16329 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, E. A. Khakina, M. Egginger, A. E. Goryachev, S. I. Troyanov, A. Fuchsbauer, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, V. F. Razumov and N. S. Sariciftci, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 356–366 CAS ; P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryachev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 779–788 CrossRef CAS ; G. Zhao, Y. He, Z. Xu, J. Hou, M. Zhang, J. Min, H.-Y. Chen, M. Ye, Z. Hong, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1480–1487 CrossRef CAS ; I. Riedel, E. von Hauff, J. Parisi, N. Martín, F. Giacalone and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1979–1987 CrossRef ; M. Drees, H. Hoppe, C. Winder, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, W. Schwinger, F. Schäffler, C. Topf, M. C. Scharber, Z. Zhud and R. Gaudiana, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5158–5163 RSC ; D. K. Susarova, E. A. Khakina, P. A. Troshin, A. E. Goryachev, N. S. Sariciftci, V. F. Razumova and D. A. M. Egbe, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2356–2361 RSC ; F. B. Kooistra, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. M. Popescu, D. Kronholm, P. W. M. Blom and J. C. Hummelen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3068–3073 CrossRef CAS ; L. Zheng, Q. Zhou, X. Deng, W. Fei, N. Bin, Z.-X. Guo, G. Yu and Y. Cao, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 489, 251–256 CrossRef CAS ; C.-H. Yang, J.-Y. Chang, P.-H. Yeh and T.-F. Guo, Carbon, 2007, 45, 2951–2956 CrossRef CAS ; L. M. Popescu, P. van Hof, A. B. Sieval, H. T. Jonkman and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 213507 CrossRef ; C. Yang, J. Y. Kim, S. Cho, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6444–6450 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, Y. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4355–4358 CrossRef CAS ; S. A. Backer, K. Sivula, D. F. Kavulak and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2927–2929 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin, R. Koeppe, A. S. Peregudov, S. M. Peregudova, M. Egginger, R. N. Lyubovskaya and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, H. Frohne, J. L. Holdsworth and P. C. Dastoor, Synth. Met., 2004, 147, 101 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Rispens, A. Meetsma, R. Rittberger, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2116–2118 RSC .
A. R. Campbell, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, R. A. Marsh, C. R. McNeill, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3942–3947 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 240–245 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 498–500 ; J. Liu, S. Shao, H. Wang, K. Zhao, L. Xue, X. Gao, Z. Xie and Y. Han, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 775–783 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Yao, J. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783–1789 CrossRef CAS ; F. Zhang, K. G. Jespersen, C. Björström, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, V. Sundström, K. Magnusson, E. Moons, A. Yartsev and O. Inganäs, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619–3623 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2151–2158 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425–434 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
F. Monestier, J.-J. Simon, P. Torchio, L. Escoubas, F. Flory, S. Bailly, R. de Bettignies, S. Guillerez and C. Defranoux, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 405–410 CrossRef CAS ; G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704–043705 CrossRef ; R. De Bettignies, J. Leroy, M. Firon and C. Sentein, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 510–513 CrossRef CAS ; 
          Y. Kim, S. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. Bradley, S. Cook, and J. Durrant, J. Mater. Sci., 40, 1371–1376 Search PubMed; Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502–063503 Search PubMed ; J. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, C. Shim, M. Sim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 480–486 CrossRef .
M. A. Ruderer, E. Metwalli, W. Wang, G. Kaune, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 664–671 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shikler, M. Chiesa and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5393–5399 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, H. Ade, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3263–3270 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. C. Arias, A. C. Morteani, C. Silva and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1353–1357 CrossRef CAS ; 
          A. C. Arias, PhD thesis, University of Cambridge,  2001 .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, N. C. Greenham, P. C. Dastoor and H. Ade, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS .
U. Zhokhavets, T. Erb, H. Hoppe, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 679–682 CrossRef CAS ; K. Inoue, R. Ulbricht, P. C. Madakasira, W. M. Sampson, S. Lee, J. Gutierrez, J. Ferraris and A. A. Zakhidov, Synth. Met., 2005, 154, 41–44 CrossRef CAS ; S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Koetse, J. Sweelssen, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, H. F. M. Schoo, X. Yang, A. Alexeev, J. Loos, U. S. Schubert and M. M. Wienk, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2503–2508 CrossRef CAS ; S. Hüttner, M. Sommer, A. Chiche, G. Krausch, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4206–4211 RSC .
C. R. McNeill, S. Westenhoff, C. Groves, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19153–19160 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, S. Swaraj, H. Ade, L. Thomsen, W. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424015 CrossRef .
C. R. McNeill, A. Abrusci, I. Hwang, M. A. Ruderer, P. Müller-Buschbaum and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3103–3111 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Savenije, J. E. Kroeze, X. Yang and J. Loos, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, S. M. Prams, M. Rawolle, Q. Zhong, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 15451–15458 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CAS ; G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2444–2447 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641–646 RSC .
S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS .
S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, K. Frolic and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7396–7403 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-H. Su, K. S. Liang and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573–2578 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, J. K. J. van Duren, X. Yang, J. Loos, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–232, 274–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, X. Yang, B. deWith and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 218–223 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, A. Alexeev, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4289–4295 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Matthias A. Ruderer	Graduated in Physics from Technische Universität München at the Chair of Functional Materials. In 2008 M. A. Ruderer continued his research in the framework of “Morphology-related functions of Organic Photovoltaics” at the Chair of Functional Materials under the supervision of Prof. P. Müller-Buschbaum and worked as a visiting research student at the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge in the group of Prof. Neil Greenham and at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in the group of Dr. Alexander Hexemer. He is a member of the graduate school “Materials Science of Complex Interfaces” of the “Elite Network of Bavaria”.
Peter Müller-Buschbaum	Graduation in Physics and PhD in Physics at Univerität Kiel were followed by a postdoctoral work at Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. In 1999 Peter Müller-Buschbaum moved to the Physics department of Technische Universität München and joined the Chair of Professor Winfried Petry on a group leader position. In 2002 he finished his habilitation and becomes an assistant professor. Since 2006 he is a full university professor and heading the Chair of Functional Materials in replacement of Professor Petry. He is a member of TUMEnergy and heading the Network of Renewable Energy of the Munich School of Engineering (MSE).

 	Fig. 1  Schematic view of a grazing incidence small/wide angle X-ray scattering setup. The X-ray beam (red line) impinges under a small incident angle (below 1°) onto the sample. A 2D-detector records the scattered intensity. The sample–detector distance sdd defines the resolvable length scales, e.g. for sdd = 10 cm and sdd = 2 m molecular structures (GIWAXS) and mesoscopic structures (GISAXS) are resolved, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  
Grazing-incidence XRD diffraction diagrams of pristine P3AT and P3AT:PCBM blend films as-cast and identically annealed (left) and tapping-mode AFM topography scans of identically annealed blend films (right): (a) P3BT:PCBM, (b) P3HT:PCBM, (c) P3OT:PCBM, (d) P3DT:PCBM, and (e) P3DDT:PCBM. Scans (d) and (e) are taken from a region of the film that was fully depleted of PCBM. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 3  The effects of CF, CB and DCB solvents on film morphology and device performance. TEM images of PCDTBT:PC70BM films spin-cast from CF (a), CB (b) and DCB (c) solvents. The insets show the surface phase images measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM). IPCE spectra (d) and J–V characteristics (e) of the devices fabricated with films cast from CF, CB and DCB. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics,49 copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 4  
SEM side views (cross-sections) of MDMO–PPV/PCBM blend films cast from toluene with various weight ratios of MDMO–PPV and PCBM. For the ratios 1:4, 1:3, and 1:2 (b–d) the nanoclusters, in the form of discs, are surrounded by another phase, called the skin that contains smaller spheres of about 20–30 nm diameter. For the 1:1 film, only these small spheres are found. The magnifications used are 100000 (c and d), 150000 (b), and 200000 (a). Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 5  Detected characteristic lateral length Λ of MEH–PPV:P3HT blended polymer films as a function of the blending ratio ΦMEH–PPV. Λ (A) (solid triangles) was determined by GIUSAXS. The dashed line shows the value of the critical ratio ΦC. The solid line is drawn as a guide for the eyes. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 6  5 µm by 5 µm STXM composition maps (left and center columns) and AFM images (right column) of PFB/F8BT blend films. The left column shows F8BT wt% composition maps while the center column shows PFB wt% composition maps. (a), (b), and (c) are of a 1:1 PFB:F8BT blend film; (d), (e), and (f) are of a 5:1 PFB:F8BT blend film; (g), (h), and (i) are of a 1:5 PFB:F8BT blend film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Calculated efficiencies of xylene-processed blends (squares) based on the distribution of local blend composition compared to the measured efficiencies of xylene-processed devices (circles) and chloroform devices (triangles; data points for pure PFB and F8BT devices taken from Arias and Snaith et al.58), all at a wavelength of 465 nm. The dashed line shows the fit to the chloroform data used to calculate the xylene efficiencies. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Variation in the device characteristics of xylene-processed P3HT:F8TBT photovoltaic devices with annealing. (a) Current–voltage characteristics under simulated sunlight (100 mW cm2 AM1.5G). (b) Spectral dependence of external quantum efficiency. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) 2D GISAXS patterns of as-spun and annealed (100 °C, 140 °C, and 180 °C) P3HT:F8TBT films. The color code represents the scattering intensity. The specular reflection is shielded by a beam stop. (b) Double logarithmic plot of the out-of-plane cuts of the GISAXS data taken at the critical q-value of F8TBT (qz = 0.52 nm−1). The data (black triangles) are fitted (red solid lines) with a mathematical model. The dashed line represents the resolution limit. All curves are shifted along the y-axis for clarity. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 10  The PCBM concentration profiles for the P3HT/PCBM blend films. (a) For the pristine blend film, the solvent annealed film as well as the sample both solvent annealed and thermally annealed for 60 min. (b) All of the PCBM concentration profiles for the six samples measured by NR. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 11  Results of electron tomography: quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanorods distribution through the thickness of the thermally annealed P3HT/PCBM photoactive layer. Images (a) and (b) are original slices taken out of the reconstructed volume of the film, with a slice (a) located close to the bottom of the film and (b) close to the top of the film. Dimensions of the slices are 1700 nm × 1700 nm. (c) Quantification of the crystalline P3HT nanowires distribution through the thickness of the thermally annealed (TA) P3HT/PCBM photoactive layers: 50, 100, and 200 nm thick. The thickness of 0 nm corresponds to the bottom side of the layer, i.e., the one next to the hole collecting PEDOT:PSS/ITO electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 58 and 72. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
