Chemical stability and instability of inorganic halide perovskites  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE03559H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE03559H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1495-1511Chemical stability and instability of inorganic halide perovskites

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Zhou
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yixin 
            Zhao
          
        
      *bc
aSchool of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA. E-mail: yuanyuan_zhou@brown.edu
bCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: yixin.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn
cShanghai Institute of Pollution Control and Ecological Security, Shanghai 200092, P. R. China
Received 
      6th December 2018
    , Accepted 20th February 2019First published on 7th March 2019AbstractInorganic halide perovskites (IHPs) have recently attracted huge attention in the field of optoelectronics. IHPs are generally expected to exhibit superior chemical stability over the prevailing hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites that are widely used in optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and light-emitting devices. This is primarily owing to the elimination of weakly-bonded organic components in the IHP crystal structure. Nevertheless, many recent studies have revealed that IHPs still suffer significant issues in chemical instability, and thus, a lot of effort has been made towards the stabilization of IHPs for high-performance devices. In this context, a great deal of interest in the chemistry and perovskite community has been emerging to understand the chemical (in)stability of IHPs and develop engineering strategies for making more robust perovskite devices. This review will summarize the past research progress in this direction, give insights into the IHP (in)stability, and provide perspectives for the future effort in making stable IHP materials and devices.

Broader context
Halide perovskites (HPs) are a family of new-generation semiconductor materials, which are broadly divided into two types, hybrid organic–inorganic HPs and inorganic HPs. While hybrid HPs have attracted huge attention for application in various (opto)electronics such as solar cells, light-emitting devices, radiation/photo detectors, scintillators, transistors, and memristors, inorganic HPs are also emerging as an intrinsically or thermally more stable alternative to hybrid HPs. Regardless of the promise, inorganic HPs still undergo degradation, which affects the device performance significantly. Therefore, there is an urgent need to gain insights into the chemical stability and instability in inorganic HPs, which will help the development of high-performance perovskite (opto)electronic devices that are sufficiently durable for real-world applications. The chemistry and materials science emerging from the study of inorganic HPs may have a long-lasting impact on other materials with similar behaviors.

1. Introduction
In recent years, halide perovskites have emerged as a new generation of semiconducting materials that are catalyzing a revolution in the field of optoelectronics.1–7 These halide perovskite materials are not only easy to synthesize by using a variety of solution-/vapor-based methods, but also exhibit outstanding optoelectronic properties such as long carrier diffusion-lengths, moderate carrier mobility, high light-absorption coefficients, and tunable optical bandgaps.8–10 Halide perovskites are also exceptional for their intrinsic tolerance to defects as the defect states in these materials are usually within the valence and conduction bands, or very shallow.11–13 Therefore, there is a huge amount of interest in developing high-performance perovskite-based optoelectronic devices including, but not limited to, solar cells, light-emitting devices (LEDs), photo-/radiation-detectors, and scintillators.14–17 Especially, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) has swiftly climbed to a certified 23.7%,18 since Miyasaka et al. reported the first PSC with a 3.8% PCE in 2009.5 The halide perovskites that have been most widely studied in the literature exhibit a 3D crystal structure with a general chemical formula of ABX3, where A is a monovalent cation such as methylammonium (CH3NH3+, MA+), formamidinium (HC(CH2)2+, FA+), and Cs+, B is a divalent cation such as Pb2+ and Sn2+, and X is a halide ion such as I−, Br−, and Cl−. Fig. 1a shows the crystal structure of 3D halide perovskites of ABX3. Empirically, the crystal structure of an ABX3 compound is determined by Goldschmidt's tolerance factor t, defined as,19 (1)where rA, rB, and rX are the ionic radii of the A-cation, B-cation, and X-anion. When t is between 0.8 and 1.0, the crystal favors a 3D perovskite structure. When t > 1.0, a NH4CdI3-type crystal structure is usually favored. When t < 0.8, a CsNiBr3-type crystal structure is most likely to form. Besides t, the octahedral factor μ is another important empirical parameter, which is defined as,20,21 μ = rB/rX,(2)where rB and rX are the radii of the B-cation and X-anion. A μ value of 0.4 to 0.9 contributes to the formation of stable BX6 octahedra.21 Due to these structure restrictions (simultaneous satisfaction of both t and μ conditions), there are actually a very limited number of combinations of A, B, and X ion types that can lead to 3D perovskites. The most popularly studied 3D halide perovskites amongst them are methylammonium lead halide (CH3NH3PbX3, MAPbX3), formamidinium lead halide (HC(NH2)2PbX3, FAPbX3), cesium lead iodide (CsPbX3), and cesium tin halide (CsSnX3). Nevertheless, recent research progress in the HP field has revealed a lot more perovskite-inspired compounds, which show very interesting optoelectronic and chemical properties. These new compounds typically include the layered Ruddlesden–Popper type perovskite phases (A2BX4),22,23 layered Dion–Jocobson type perovskite phases (ABX4),24,25 A3B2X9 compounds,26,27 A2B′B′′X6 or A2BX6 double-perovskite phases,28 and A4BX6 compounds,29,30 all of which have been later embraced in the broad HP family.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the typical ABX3 crystal structure of halide perovskites. The nature (organic or inorganic) of A-site ions determines the types of all-inorganic halide perovskites and hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites. (b) The structural model and simulated projected potential map of the prototypical MAPbI3 HHP based on high-resolution TEM characterization. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission requested from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (c) The structural model and phase image of the prototypical CsPbBr3 IHP based on based on high-resolution TEM characterization. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission requested from the American Chemical Society (ACS). 
Halide perovskites can be broadly divided into two types, hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites (HHPs) and inorganic halide perovskites (IHPs), depending on the chemical nature (organic or inorganic) of A-site ions, as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1b and c shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization results of the prototypical MAPbBr3 HHP and CsPbBr3 IHP, where the structural difference in the A-site ion of ABX3 could be resolved at the atomic scale. The CsPbBr3 IHP contains only symmetric, spherical cations in A-sites, while organic, asymmetric, and polar MA+ cations can be observed in the MAPbI3 HHP in Fig. 1b. The polar MA+ cations could also have varied orientations at specific atomistic sites in the MAPbI3 HHP. Until now, regarding the photovoltaic (PV) applications, the state-of-the-art PSCs have still employed HHPs as light absorbers.33–35 However, it is generally argued that these HHP-based PSCs suffer from low intrinsic or thermodynamic stability issues due to the inclusion of organic MA+ and FA+ cations, which are volatile in nature. This significant issue has stimulated a surge of interest in using IHPs to replace HHPs for some PV applications.36–38 Moreover, for non-PV optoelectronic applications such as LEDs, radiation-detectors, and scintillators, IHPs have shown even more promise due to their suitable optical properties, as well as much more robust stability under external stimuli such as electric bias and radiation.39 Although a lot of attention has been attracted by IHPs for the sake of the superior stability over their HHP counterparts, the chemical stability of IHPs themselves has also become a concern. In this review, first, insights into the origins of IHP stability and instability are provided. Then, the reported strategies in the literature that address the instability issues of IHPs are reviewed. Finally, we present perspectives on promising future directions towards stable IHP materials and devices.
2. Mechanistic origins of stability and instability of inorganic halide perovskites
The low stability of typical HHPs like MAPbI3 has been noticed since the early stage of PSC research.41 Nagabhushana et al.40,42 experimentally measured the formation enthalpies of the MAPbI3 HHP based on acid-solution calorimetry, showing that MAPbI3 is intrinsically/thermodynamically unstable and prone to decomposition to its binary halide components (MAI and PbI2) even in the absence of external stimuli such as moisture, oxygen, heat, and irradiation. This is highly consistent with the theoretical prediction by Zhang et al.40,43 who show the decomposition reaction of MAPbI3, MAPbI3 → MAI + PbI2(3)is exothermic (at 0 K and zero pressure), independent of atmospheric factors (see Fig. 2a). Substitution of A-, B-, and X-site ions with other corresponding ions can tune the formation energies, resulting in more stable compounds. In particular, for these IHPs with A-sites occupied by Cs+, the formation energies become generally higher than those of the HHP counterparts. This is consistent with the experimental observations.40,43–45 Zhang et al.40,43 have further determined the true thermodynamic stability using the Gibbs free energy as shown in Fig. 2b, which takes into account the contributions from internal energy, pressure, and temperature (vibrational and configurational entropy). It is shown that the vibrational contribution is comparable for the reactant and products of reaction (3) and therefore does not influence the MAPbI3 or MASnI3 stability. However, for the configurational entropy, the energy differences for MAI with different MA+ orientations are much smaller than those for MAPbI3 and MASnI3 HHPs.40,43 This suggests that MAI may have higher configurational entropy than MAPbI3 and MASnI3 HHPs, decreasing the stability of the perovskite structure.40,43 Once MA+ ions are fully replaced by Cs+, the vibrational entropy can slightly enhance the stability of the perovskite structure, as the vibrational free energy decreases faster than those decomposition products as a function of temperature as shown in Fig. 2b.40,43 Meanwhile, the configuration entropy becomes less important in the all-inorganic compounds as the Cs+ cation itself is symmetric without multiple configurations.40,43 All these combined experimental–theoretical results basically explain the superior intrinsic or thermodynamic stability of IHPs over HHPs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Calculated formation energies for different HHPs or IHPs with Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) and van der Waals (vdW) exchange–correlation functionals. A positive number indicates that the compound is stable at 0 K. (b) Calculated vibrational free energy of the MAPbI3 HHP, MASnI3 HHP and CsSnI3 IHP as a function of temperature (T). Adapted from ref. 40 with permission requested from Chinese Physical Society. 
There are some other factors contributing to the possibly enhanced stability of IHPs over HHPs. Aristidou et al.47,48 have shown that MAPbI3 HHP degradation under light and oxygen is initiated by the reaction of superoxide (O2−) with the protonated MA+ moiety in HHPs. In this context, inorganic cations such as Cs+ are free of acid protons, which improves the tolerance of perovskites to oxygen under light. Also, many theoretical and experimental studies have shown that IHPs are purely halide-ion conductors while both organic-cations and halide-ions are mobile in HHPs,49–52 implying IHPs have an inherently more rigid crystal structure to resist electrochemical changes under external stimuli.
While the above analyses provide reasonable rationales for considering IHPs as more stable materials than the HHP counterparts, in fact, many important IHPs are found to be not stable enough under external stimuli such as moisture, light, heat, and oxygen. In a recent perspective article by Ju et al.,46 the degradation mechanisms for all kinds of halide perovskites have been well summarized (Fig. 3), which include polymorphic transition, hydration, decomposition, and oxidation. Different from HHPs, IHPs are free of hygroscopic organic cations, in which context the hydration of IHPs may not occur frequently. Thus, the dominating degradation mechanism for IHPs can be either polymorphic transition, decomposition, oxidation, or their combinations. It will also be highly dependent on the specific perovskite composition.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of degradation mechanisms of halide perovskites under key environmental factors (moisture, light, heat, and oxygen). Adapted from ref. 46 with permission requested from Elsevier. 
The most typical lead-based IHP composition is CsPbI3. The CsPbI3 perovskite is usually known as the ‘black’ polymorph (α-phase), and it exhibits a bandgap of 1.8 eV, which is suitable for PV applications. However, the tolerance factor (t) of CsPbI3 is calculated as 0.80 based on the ionic radii of Cs+, Pb2+, and I− (Table 1). The relatively low t results in the structural instability of α-CsPbI3 (space group Pmm; a = 6.201 Å), which can easily transform to its ‘yellow’ nonperovskite polymorph (δ-phase, space group Pnma) that is thermodynamically more stable at ambient temperature. This perovskite-to-nonperovskite polymorphic transition becomes even more facile when moisture is present, although the catalytical role of moisture has not been fully understood. For lead-free IHPs, the most typical compound is CsSnI3. While the CsSnI3 IHP (γ-phase at room temperature) has an ideal bandgap of 1.3 eV for single-junction PSCs, this compound is unstable mainly due to the facile oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in ambient air.6 In this context, the following sections will primary focus on discussing the stabilization protocols for these two materials (lead-based CsPbI3 and lead-free CsSnI3) by addressing the polymorphic transition and oxidation issues, respectively. There are also some emerging IHP materials with relatively complex compositions (e.g. Cs2AgBiI6) which are thermodynamically prone to decompose regardless of the all-inorganic compositions, which will also be involved in the discussion. In order to present a clear overview of the current progress in stabilizing IHPs, the stability results of representative studies by various groups are summarized in Table 2. Nevertheless, these stability results may not be directly compared with each other since there are no standardized test conditions for evaluating perovskite materials and devices.
Table 1 Estimated radii of typical organic and inorganic ions in halide perovskites, which can be used for calculating the Goldschmidt's tolerance factor. The data are adopted from ref. 73–76




Ion type
Radius (Å)




Cs+
1.67


Rb+
1.52


NH4+
1.46


MA+
2.17


FA+
2.53


DMA+
2.72


Pb2+
1.19


Sn2+
1.18


Ge2+
0.73


Sn4+
0.69


Ag+
1.15


In3+
0.80


Eu3+
0.95


Sb3+
0.76


Bi3+
1.03


Ti4+
0.61


Mn2+
0.70


I−
2.20


Br−
1.96


Cl−
1.84




Table 2 The stability results from representative studies on IHPs




Perovskite composition
Stabilization method
Material stability
Device stability
Ref.




Note: the environmental conditions are adopted from the original references, some of which may have not mentioned the exact humidity, temperature, light, and atmosphere conditions (marked as n/a).a The operational stability of the device.




CsPbI3
Nanocrystals
No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: 100 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)
Best PCE: 10.77%; PCE increases after 64 days storage (humidity: n/a, temperature: RT, light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air; unencapsulated)

37



CsPbI3
Crystal dimensionality (‘quasi-2D’)
No obvious degradation for 7 days (humidity: n/a, temperature: 100 °C, light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)
Best PCE: 11.8%; PCE retains ∼90% of the initial performance after 30 days storage (humidity: n/a, temperature: 100 °C, light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)

96



CsPbI3
PVP additive
No obvious degradation for 80 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air)
Best PCE: 10.74%; PCE retaining ∼80% of the initial performance after 21 days storage (humidity: 45–55% RH; temperature: 50 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)

84



CsPbI3
Zwitterion additive
No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air)
Best PCE: 11.4%; PCE retaining ∼85% of the initial performance after 30 days storage (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air; unencapsulated)

105



CsPbI3
Crystal dimensionality (‘quasi-2D’)
No obvious degradation for 40 days (humidity; 20% RH; temperature: 20 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air)
Best PCE: 12.4%

97



PCE retaining 93% of the initial performance after 40 days storage (humidity: 20% RH; temperature: 20 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)


CsPbI3
Processing & microstructure engineering
No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature 300 °C light: n/a; atmosphere: dry N2)
Best PCE: 15.7% (certified)

106



PCE retaining >95% of the initial performance after 500 h continuous operationa (humidity: n/a; temperature: 25 °C; light: one-sun; atmosphere: dry N2; encapsulated)


CsPbI2Br
Eu-element doping
No obvious degradation for 50 h (humidity: 20–40% RH; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)
Best PCE: 13.71%

53



PCE retaining 68% of the initial performance after 370 h continuous operationa (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: one-sun; atmosphere: dry N2; unencapsulated)


CsPbI3
Bi-element doping
No obvious degradation for 7 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)
Best PCE: 13.21%

67



PCE retaining 68% of the initial performance after 7 days storage (humidity: 0; temperature: n/a; atmosphere: dry N2; unencapsulated)


CsSnI3
Grain encapsulation (SnCl2 additive)
No obvious degradation for 3 h (humidity: 25% RH; temperature: RT; light: n/a; atmosphere: air)
Best PCE: 3.56%

107



PCE retention of 80% for 5 h storage (humidity: 25% RH; temperature: 50 °C; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)


CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3
Native-oxide passivation
No obvious degradation for 72 h (humidity: 80% RH; temperature: 45 °C; light: one-sun; atmosphere: air)
Best PCE: 7.11%

108



PCE retention of 90% after 500 h continuous operationa (humidity: 0; temperature: 45 °C; atmosphere: dry N2; light: one-sun; unencapsulated)




3. Stabilization of lead-based inorganic halide perovskites
3.1. Element doping/alloying – tuning the tolerance factor and inducing lattice strain
As described above, the low chemical stability of CsPbI3 is mostly due to the relatively low t (0.80) of this compound,44 compared to that (∼0.91) of its HHP counterpart MAPbI3. The low t is attributed to the small ionic size of the Cs cation. Obviously, t can be tuned by incorporation of new ions in the ABX3 crystal structure, which will lead to a change in the average radii of A-, B-, or X-site ions. Meanwhile, the size difference of the incorporated ions to A-, B-, or X-sites should be small enough to avoid phase segregation. For the A-site, organic cations such as FA+ and MA+ are good candidates for tuning t and stabilizing the perovskite phase. But the resulting stabilized perovskite contains the volatile FA+ and MA+ cations regardless of their small amount, making intrinsic thermal stability a concern. Unfortunately, there is no inorganic cation suitable for increasing t in the CsPbI3-based compound as Cs is the largest-size Group-I element that is nonradioactive. Another way to increase t is to substitute some portion of I anions with the smaller-size Br, which will form CsPbI3−xBrx alloy perovskites and retain the all-inorganic composition. Sutton et al. have reported the enhanced phase stability of CsPbI3−xBrx compared with CsPbI3 for the first time,54,55 which is further confirmed by several following reports.56–61 However, the Br alloying induces an undesired blue shift of the absorption edge and an enlarged bandgap, e.g. the popularly studied CsPbI2Br exhibits an absorption edge of 680 nm and a bandgap of 1.9 eV.62 Note that the bandgap of CsPbI3 is ∼1.8 eV, which is already too large as absorber materials in single-junction solar cells. In this context, there is a need to develop strategies that enhance the perovskite phase stability without increasing the bandgap, and doping/alloying the B-site of CsPbI3 with various smaller-size metal cations such as Sn2+,63–65 Ge2+,66 Bi3+,67 Sb3+,68 Eu3+,53,69 and Mn2+70,71 is employed to achieve this goal (Fig. 4a).72
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of stabilization of CsPbI3−xBrx using a B-site doping/alloying strategy. (b) High-angle annular dark-field imaging (HAADF) TEM image of Eu-doped CsPbI2Br and the corresponding Pb and Eu elemental mapping. (c) Current density–voltage curve of the best-performing Eu-doped CsPbI2Br PSCs. (d) Comparison of the stability of CsPbI2Br PSCs with and without Eu doping. Adapted from ref. 53 with permission requested from Elsevier. 
Sn2+ exhibits the most similar chemical properties to Pb2+ and the radius of Sn2+ is only slightly smaller than Pb and thus CsPb1−xSnxI3 can easily form, which enables effective tuning of the tolerance factor. It is shown that although CsSnI3 is unstable in ambient air due to the oxidation sensitivity of Sn2+, CsPb1−xSnxI3 (in the material form of nanocrystals) with a low Sn2+ content can exhibit high phase-stability in ambient conditions as well as extended absorption in the near-infrared-red region.64 Sn2+ substitution in CsPbI3 could be used in combination with Br− substitution, resulting in stable CsPb1−xSnI3−xBrx alloy perovskite phases with suitable bandgaps.63 Mn2+ incorporation has been shown to be highly effective in stabilizing either CsPbI3 perovskite thin films or nanocrystals.70 Since the size difference between Mn2+ and Pb2+ is relatively large, only a very slight amount of Mn2+ can be possibly accommodated in the CsPbI3 crystal structure with the occurrence of phase separation. Theoretical calculations have revealed that the Mn2+ doping levels are located within the conduction band. Therefore, Mn-doping induces negligible change in the absorption features. In addition, Mn2+ doping has shown a positive effect on thin film formation.71 These combinations lead to the enhancement of the photovoltaic (PV) performance of CsPbI3 or CsPbI3−xBr3 PSCs.71,77 Aliovalent B-site doping with Bi3+, Sb3+, or Eu3+ is also proven to strongly enhance the phase stability of the CsPbI3 or CsPbI3−xBrx perovskites. In addition to tuning the tolerance factor, such aliovalent doping induces slight distortion of the perovskite crystal structure via the naturally coupled formation of iodine vacancies. These additional vacancies could induce lattice strain in the crystal, showing a positive effect in stabilizing the perovskite crystal structure. Energy dispersive spectroscopy studies show a uniform dopant element distribution when less-than-5 mol% Bi3+ or Eu3+ is incorporated (Fig. 4b).53,67,69 In a recent study,53 the Eu-doped CsPbI2Br PSC with a wide bandgap of 1.9 eV show an impressive PCE of 13.71% (Fig. 4c). As seen in Fig. 4d, the high performance could be retained with 93% of the initial efficiency after 350 h operation of the PSC under 100 mW cm−2 continuous white-light illumination using the maximum-power point-tracking measurement, demonstrating much better stability over the doping-free CsPbI2Br PSC. All these studies clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of various doping methods in stabilizing IHPs, and one promising future direction will be to explore co-doping strategies with multiple elements, which may have synergic and optimal effects in stabilizing IHP materials and devices.
3.2. Nanocrystal-induced phase stabilization
While early studies have revealed that CsPbI3 perovskite bulk thin films or large crystals are not stable in the α-phase at ambient temperature,78 the CsPbI3 nanocrystals that are synthesized via solution-phase methods have exhibited an interesting phenomenon of size-dependent phase-stability. Kovalenko and coworkers have found that the α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals with 100 to 200 nm size quickly degrade into the δ-phase, but the α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals with 4 to 15 nm size can stay in the α-phase upon storage for one month at ambient temperature.79 The nanocrystal-induced stabilization of the CsPbI3 perovskite could be reasonably attributed to the high surface energy of nanocrystals or the high surface micro-strain on nanocrystals. Later, Swarnkar et al. have for the first time demonstrated the use of CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals in PSCs as shown Fig. 5a, and reported a high PCE of 10.77% (a record at the time) with a very high open-circuit voltage of 1.23 V.37 A typical TEM image of the as-studied CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals is exhibited in Fig. 5b, showing the perfect perovskite lattice, and these nanocrystals retain their α-phases after 60 days storage in ambient conditions, as indicated from the XRD results in Fig. 5c. Regarding CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystal based PSCs, the surface ligands of the nanocrystals play a double-edged-sword effect. On one hand, the ligands serve as a capping layer that protect the nanocrystals from segregation and then coarsening into large-size nanocrystals or bulk crystals that are intrinsically unstable. On the other hand, the ligands may block the conduction of charge carriers to some extent. To address this dilemma, in a later study by Luther et al., a post-treatment using organic halide salts (e.g. FAX) was employed to enhance the electronic coupling between CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals while maintaining the nanocrystal morphology.36 The mobility of CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystal assembled thin films was increased from 0.23 to 0.50 cm2 V−1 s−1 with retained high chemical stability. The resulting CsPbI3 nanocrystal based PSCs exhibited a certified PCE of 13.43%. While there are a few other excellent studies on developing CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystal based PSCs,36,80–82 existing effort in this direction is still highly limited in the literature. Future effort in tailoring surface defects, ligand–crystal interaction, and the morphology of nanocrystals, as well as understanding and engineering of device structures, will lead to more stable and efficient IHP nanocrystal based solar cells.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 nanocrystal based perovskite solar cells. (b) TEM image of colloidal α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals. (c) XRD patterns of the α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals after storage in ambient conditions for 1 and 40 days. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission requested from AAAS. 
3.3. Additive–crystal interaction
Incorporation of suitable nonvolatile additives in CsPbI3 precursor solutions is an alternative method to crystallize and stabilize CsPbI3 in its perovskite phases, because these additives are able to tailor the surface energy, reduce the grain size, and form nanoscale encapsulation layers of CsPbI3 perovskite grains. The first type of additives is long-chain ammonium cations. As shown in Fig. 6a, Fu et al.83 have shown that the incorporation of oleylammonium (OA+, ∼1.7 nm in length) in the solution processing stabilizes the CsPbI3 perovskite in the cubic α-phase whereas the use of phenylethylammonium (PEA+, ∼0.6 nm in length) additives stabilizes the CsPbI3 perovskite in the tetragonal β-phase where the octahedra are slightly tilted. Note that the exact crystal structure of the β-CsPbI3 perovskite is not fully revealed yet in that study. A plausible mechanism responsible for this method is the strong molecular interaction of the additive phases with as-crystallized CsPbI3, which tunes the surface energy and stabilizes the CsPbI3 perovskite phase kinetically. With either OA+ and PEA+ additives, the CsPbI3 perovskites show no obvious phase degradation after 4 month storage in ambient conditions.83
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the formation of α- and β-CsPbI3 using OA and the PEA ligand additive. Adapted from ref. 83 with permission requested from ACS. (b) Schematic illustration of stabilizing the CsPbI3 perovskite using PVP. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (c) Schematic illustration of stabilizing the CsPbI3 perovskite phase with zwitterions. The zwitterion molecules segregate at grain boundaries during the CsPbI3 perovskite crystallization. Adapted from ref. 85 with permission requested from Elsevier. 
Polymers are another type of effective additives. Li et al.84 have incorporated poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) into the solution-processing of CsPbI3 perovskites. They have claimed that PVP has amide groups with chemical properties similar to –NH3 groups in those ammonium-based additives.84 Therefore, PVP also interacts with CsPbI3via molecular bonding (Fig. 6b). The as-deposited CsPbI3 perovskite thin films with PVP additives are highly stabilized, exhibiting impressively long carrier diffusion lengths of ∼1.5 μm. The resulting PSCs show a PCE of 10.74%, close to that for the CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystal based PSCs. Regarding the device stability, 75% of the initial PCE is retained after the encapsulated PSC is exposed to ambient air with ∼50% relative humidity (RH) for 500 h. In another study by Beomjin et al.,86 the poly(ethylene-oxide) (PEO) polymer has also been used to inhibit the δ-phase formation during the solution processing of CsPbI3 perovskite thin films and promote low-temperature perovskite crystallization. High-performance red-light LEDs (brightness of ∼101 cd m−2; external quantum efficiency of 1.12%; emission bandwidth of 32 nm) are achieved. Although PEO doesn’t have the necessary functional groups to form strong chemical bonds with CsPbI3 like PVP, Beomjin et al.84 have found that PEO scaffolds provide a confined environment for the crystallization of the CsPbI3 perovskite, leading to the formation of CsPbI3 perovskite small-grains that are fully encapsulated. Note that, similar to the case of CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals, the phase stability increases with a decrease in the grain size in the CsPbI3 perovskite bulk thin film. This is partially responsible for the good stability of PEO-incorporated CsPbI3 perovskite thin films. Since polymers are a very large family of materials with highly tunable molecular structures and properties, it may be possible to develop more effective additives for stabilizing IHPs using synthetic polymers with specially-designed functional groups.
Large polar organic molecule additives are also useful for making stable CsPbI3 perovskite thin films. Recently, Wang et al. have shown that sulfobetaine zwitterion additives exhibit an obvious effect in stabilizing CsPbI3 perovskites and achieved a PCE of 11.4% in the resulting PSCs.85 The proposed mechanism for zwitterion-induced CsPbI3 perovskite stabilization is schematically shown in Fig. 6c. It is claimed that the zwitterion not only hinders the rapid crystallization of the CsPbI3 perovskite in the conventional additive-free ‘one-step’ deposition process, but also induces a decrease in the grain size in the resulting thin film.85 The grain size in this perovskite thin film is only ∼30 nm, similar to that of the CsPbI3 perovskite nanocrystals. The grain size decrease could be attributed to the enhanced heterogeneous nucleation sites and the constraint effects induced by the large-molecule polar zwitterion.85
The use of other types of additives such as HI has been also demonstrated for CsPbI3 perovskite stabilization, although the underlying mechanisms may still be under debate. For example, Heo et al. and Xiang et al.87,88 have both observed that HI significantly reduces the processing temperature, resulting in stable α-CsPbI3 perovskite thin films. Tensile lattice strain is observed in such α-CsPbI3 perovskite thin films by Xiang et al.,87 which may contribute to the phase stability. However, it has been recently argued by Ke et al.76 and Noel et al.89 that the HI additive decomposes DMF, in situ forming dimethylammonium (DMA+). Ke et al.76 have claimed that DMA+ with an ionic radius of 0.272 nm could be incorporated in the perovskite structure, forming Cs1−xDMAxPbI3 (x = 0.2 to 0.5) with more ideal tolerance factors.76 In order to elucidate this discrepancy regarding the role of the HI additive, more systematic studies may be valuable in the future. Nevertheless, this HI-additive method has been combined with the PEA+-additive method by Wang et al.,90 leading to CsPbI3-based PSCs with PCEs up to 15.07%. It is promising that this PSC keeps 92% of its initial PCE after two months storage in ambient conditions (20 to 30% RH at ∼25 °C).90
3.4. Surface post-treatment or functionalization
Surface post-treatment of as-deposited thin films, leading to the formation of thin functionalization layers, is another new promising stabilization method for CsPbI3 perovskites. In a recent study by Wang et al.,91 a PEAI layer was solution-deposited on the top of a CsPbI3 perovskite thin film, followed by thermal annealing (see Fig. 7a). This treatment doesn’t produce layered perovskite phases on the film surface, because there is a relatively high energy barrier for the cation-exchange reaction of CsPbI3 to PEA2PbI4. But instead, a PEA+ cation-terminated surface is formed as shown in Fig. 7a. This is actually consistent with the previous report claiming that alkyl-ammonium cations stabilize CsPbI3 nanocrystals through replacement of the surface Cs+ cations.92 Wang et al.91 have further shown this simple PEAI post-treatment not only significantly enhances the phase-stability of the thin film, but also forms a hydrophobic barrier for resisting moisture ingression. The resulting CsPbI3 PSCs show an impressively high PCE of 13.5%. In a later approach by Wang et al.,93 PEABr has been used instead of PEAI, which simultaneously functionalizes the film surface and induces gradient Br-doping into the film bulk. The stabilized PCE output of CsPbI3-based PSCs is further improved to 16.3% and 91% of the initial PCE can be retained when the device is stored in N2 with 500 h continuous white-light LED illumination.93 Beyond PEA+ cations, other organic cations with tailored functional groups such as NH3+C2H4NH2+C2H4NH3+94 may exhibit more beneficial effects on enhancing the stability of lead-based IHPs, which is an interesting research direction in the future.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 perovskite thin film surface terminated with PEAI. (b) XPS spectra of the PEA–CsPbI3 perovskite compared with CsPbI3 and PEAI thin films. (c) Stability of the CsPbI3 and PEAI-treated CsPbI3 thin films upon exposure to ambient conditions (∼85% RH, RT) for 0.5 h. Adapted from ref. 91 with permission requested from Elsevier. 
3.5. Engineering of crystal symmetry and dimensionality
The cubic α-CsPbI3 polymorph (space group Pmm) is the most commonly claimed in the reported CsPbI3 perovskite thin films or nanocrystals. In fact, CsPbI3 also has two other perovskite polymorphs, tetragonal β-CsPbI3 and orthorhombic γ-CsPbI3, with slightly tilted octahedra. Interesting, both β-CsPbI3 and γ-CsPbI3 have been claimed to show better stability than α-CsPbI3.95,98,99 Syntheses of β- and γ-CsPbI3 perovskites can be enabled through incorporating suitable additives or dopants in the solution processes.83,95 In a very recent study, Zhao et al.95 have shown that a small amount of H2O addition in the CsPbI3 precursor solutions facilitates direct crystallization of CsPbI3 perovskite thin films in the γ-phase instead of the α-phase. As shown in Fig. 8a, the crystal structure of the γ-CsPbI3 polymorph is confirmed based on the Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern. The γ-CsPbI3 crystal exhibits a space group of Pbnm (lattice parameters: a = 8.646 Å, b = 8.818 Å, c = 12.520 Å, α = β = γ = 90°). In Fig. 8b, the calculated Gibbs free energy relative to the bulk δ-CsPbI3 as a function of surface area (linear relationship) using density functional theory (DFT) is plotted. The line slope indicates the surface free energy. The bulk free energy difference (when the surface area is zero) of γ-CsPbI3 to δ-CsPbI3 is 20.9 kJ mol−1. From Fig. 8b, Zhao et al.95 have shown that when the surface area is greater than ∼8600 m2 mol−1 (corresponding to a film with roughly 100 nm grain size), γ-CsPbI3 starts to show a lower Gibbs free energy than δ-CsPbI3, suggesting a relatively higher phase stability. By tuning the added amount of H2O, they have successfully prepared phase-pure γ-CsPbI3 thin films with ∼100 nm grain size in ambient conditions, which show a high PCE over 11%. Impressively, almost no efficiency loss is observed when the unencapsulated device is stored in the ambient environment for months or after continuous device operation under one-sun illumination for hours in the ambient environment. In the future, other synthetic methods such as pressure-assisted annealing may be employed to form new γ-CsPbI3 thin films. It is also promising to synthesize surface-functionalized or doped γ-CsPbI3 thin films, which could be even more stable.
 Fig. 8  (a) Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized orthorhombic γ-CsPbI3 perovskite, showing a space group of Pbnm. (b) Calculated Gibbs free energy of γ-CsPbI3 and α-CsPbI3 polymorphs relative to bulk δ-CsPbI3 as a function of surface area using DFT. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission requested from ACS. (c) XRD patterns of CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 before and after storage under environmental conditions (100 °C, dry air) demonstrating its good stability. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission under a Creative Commons License. (d) Schematic illustration of the crystal structures of PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 with various n values. The relative decomposition energies of the PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 crystals based on DFT calculations are also shown. Adapted from ref. 97 with permission requested from Elsevier. 
The crystal dimensionality of CsPbI3 can be altered through incorporation of large organic cations into the crystal structure (instead of on the crystal surface), forming layered Ruddlesdon–Popper or Dion–Jacobson halide perovskite phases, so-called ‘quasi-2D’ perovskites. This is similar to the case of HHPs.100 Note that the terminology of ‘quasi-2D’ or ‘2D’ was adopted in the related original studies and thus used in the discussion here, although such terminology may not be appropriate. The ‘quasi-2D’ approach has early been utilized to stabilize the α-CsPbI3 perovskite for red-color LEDs.101 Here, the 1-naphthylmethylamine cation is introduced to form ‘quasi-2D’ perovskites, contributing to LEDs with a high external quantum efficiency of 3.7% and luminance of ∼440 cd m−2.101 This dimension-engineering method has also been introduced for stabilizing bulk CsPbI3 perovskite thin films for PV applications. Liao et al.102 have shown that BA cations added into CsPbI3 perovskite precursors form a ‘quasi-2D’ BA2CsPb2I7 perovskite, which exhibits a low crystallization temperature (∼100 °C) and enhanced phase stability against humidity and heat. However, the crystal structure of BA2CsPb2I7 has not been fully studied in this study and thus it remains unclear whether BA2CsPb2I7 is a single-phase composition. The PSCs made using BA2CsPb2I7 exhibit a PCE that is lower than 5%, which could be related to the low phase-purity. In a more promising approach by Zhang et al.,96 a ‘quasi-2D’ CsPbI3-based perovskite can be also formed by incorporation of divalent ethylenediaminium or butylenediaminium lead iodides in CsPbI3 perovskite thin films, which leads to very promising film stability for more than one week under environmental conditions (100 °C, dry air), as revealed in Fig. 8c. These new ‘quasi-2D’ CsPbI3-based PSCs show stable PCEs up to 11.8%. In a later study, Jiang et al.97 have systematically mixed PEAI of controlled amounts in the CsPbI3 precursor solution, and claimed the formation of ‘quasi-2D’ PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites with various n values from 1 to ∞. A similar approach using the PEA+ cation is also reported by Li et al.103 Such crystal-dimensionality engineering could be combined with the X-site anion alloying method, contributing to even more impressive perovskite stability. Jiang et al. have shown the PSC device made using the quasi-2D PEA2Csn−1Pbn(I2/3Br1/3)3n+1 perovskite with an optimal n value of 40 exhibits a high PCE exceeding 11%, which has a retention of 93% after 40 days storage (unencapsulated) in ambient conditions. Regardless of the great device performance and stability, one may keep in mind that single-phase high-member Ruddlesdon–Popper phases are generally very difficult to synthesize due to the thermodynamic limit.104 The exact composition and microstructure of the PEA2Csn−1Pbn(I2/3Br1/3)3n+1 (n = 40) perovskite in Fig. 8d will need to be further confirmed. It is highly possible that when n > 5, instead of ‘quasi-2D’ perovskite phases, the perovskite thin films may consist of CsPbI3 perovskite grains that are functionalized by PEA+, thus leading to the apparently enhanced stability. In addition, Zhang et al.96 have also found that in these ‘quasi-2D’ CsPbI3 perovskites, the grain size is usually smaller, which could be another contributing factor to the observed stability. Moreover, the exact crystal symmetry of these claimed ‘quasi-2D’ CsPbI3 perovskites has not been revealed. It is envisioned that a systematic study on the effects of the organic-cation type on both crystal dimensionality and symmetry in CsPbI3 will help discover new phases of stable ‘quasi-2D’ CsPbI3 perovskites.
3.6. Defect and microstructure engineering
Regardless of the high defect tolerance of IHPs in terms of optoelectronic properties, a high concentration of defects (e.g. vacancies, grain boundaries, pinholes) allows fast diffusion of ionic and molecular species within IHPs, affecting the long-term chemical stability. In this context, controlling the defects and microstructures in IHPs becomes important, which can be achieved with new processing methods. In a very recent study, Chen et al.109 have showed a new route to make CsPbI2Br IHP thin films. They have applied gradient thermal annealing to control the grain growth, and then treated as-crystallized thin films with isopropanol antisolvent. This method leads to CsPbI2Br thin films with very low defect densities and thus excellent tolerance of the CsPbI2Br PSC devices to moisture and oxygen (90% of the initial PCE after aging for 120 h under 100 mW cm−2 UV irradiation). In another study, Zhu et al.110 have reported an ‘intermolecular-exchange’ method for CsPbIBr2 films, where a CsPbIBr2 thin film deposited using the conventional ‘one-step’ method was post-reacted with a sequentially-deposited CsI layer. The resulting thin film shows no pinholes, a very low density of grain boundaries, and high crystallinity. PSCs (carbon-electrode) using this thin film yield PCEs up to 9.16% with long-term stability (without encapsulation; 90% of the initial PCE after 60 days storage in 45% RH at 25 °C). Several other methods such as solvent-controlled growth,106 flash annealing,111 dual-source vapor deposition112 and precursor solution engineering113–115 are also demonstrated to fabricate defect-less IHP thin films for stable high-performance IHP solar cells and LEDs. It is expected that accurate manipulation of defects and microstructures in IHPs will complement the other stabilization methods as mentioned before. However, there is still a lack of mechanistic understanding of the exact role of various types of defects and microstructures in the chemical stability of IHPs, calling for theoretical–experimental coupled effort in the future.
4. Stabilization of lead-free inorganic halide perovskites
The development of lead-free IHPs is still in its infancy stage. Especially in PV applications, lead-free IHP based PSCs usually exhibit very low PCEs.46 The other applications of lead-free IHPs such as LEDs and photodetectors are just being developed.116,117 But the restriction of lead use in future devices is not trivial, and there is a pressing need to develop stable lead-free perovskite materials for PV and optoelectronic applications. The following discussion will have a focus on reviewing previous efforts in stabilizing the lead-free CsSnI3 perovskite, which has been the most popularly studied. The reported methods that show great promise are grain encapsulation, native-oxide surface passivation, and B-site cation replacement.
4.1. Grain encapsulation
The lead-free CsSnI3 compound has two polymorphs at ambient temperature: the black γ-CsSnI3 perovskite (space group Pnma; a = 8.6885 Å, b = 8.7182 Å, c = 6.1908 Å) and the yellow δ-CsSnI3 nonperovskite (space group Pnma; a = 10.350 Å, b = 4.7632 Å, c = 17.684 Å).120 More severely, the Sn2+ in CsSnI3 is very sensitive to oxygen in ambient conditions, and easily gets oxidized to Sn4+, forming Cs2SnI6 with a double-perovskite structure (space group Fmm; a = 11.65 Å). Although Cs2SnI6 has a favorable bandgap of ∼1.6 eV, it doesn’t show good PV properties due to the low intrinsic deep-level defects.119 Degradation of the γ-CsSnI3 perovskite occurs via either first conversion to δ-CsSnI3 and then Cs2SnI6, or direct conversion to Cs2SnI6. This has been schematically shown in Fig. 9a. The latter mechanism appears to be the case for thin films,121,122 although the underlying reason remains unclear.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the phase conversion of the γ-CsSnI3 perovskite to the δ-CsSnI3 nonperovskite and Cs2SnI6 double-perovskite. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission requested from the American Physical Society (APS). (b) Top-view SEM image and (c) schematic illustration of the SnCl2-encapsulated CsSnI3 perovskite thin film. Evolution of UV-vis absorption spectra of (d) the SnCl2-free and (e) SnCl2-encapsulated CsSnI3 perovskite thin films with an increase in the exposure time to ambient air. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission requested from Nature Publishing Group. 
To prevent Sn2+ oxidation, Marshall et al.107 have used a SnCl2 additive in the solution processing of γ-CsSnI3 thin films. As illustrated in Fig. 9b and c, the resulting thin film contains γ-CsSnI3 grains with SnCl2 encapsulation layers (on film surfaces, at grain boundaries, or at pinholes). Fig. 9d and e compare the absorption spectra evolution of the SnCl2-free and SnCl2-encapsulated CsSnI3 perovskite thin films with an increase of the exposure time to ambient air. The reduction in the film absorbance (e.g. at 500 nm) slowed down significantly once the SnCl2 additive is added. SnF2123 and SnI2 additives124 have been also reported to stabilize CsSnI3 PSCs, which may work under similar mechanisms. However, Marshall et al.107 have also performed a systematic study on the effect of tin halides (i.e. SnF2, SnCl2, SnI2, SnBr2) on the γ-CsSnI3 stabilization. While all tin halides show positive effects, SnCl2 is claimed to be the best for the following reasons: (i) Cl does not replace/exchange I in the γ-CsSnI3 crystal structure, making SnCl2 easily aggregate on the grain surfaces; and (ii) SnCl2 is much more soluble than SnF2. In this context, the stability of SnCl2-incorporated CsSnI3 PSCs (hole-transporting-layer-free) is claimed to be comparable to these lead-based PSCs with the same device architecture when tested in ambient air at 50 °C under continuous light illumination.
Although the grain-encapsulation method via additives has shown its promise, one of the major challenges associated with this method is the difficulty in achieving full encapsulation of grains with continuous stable secondary phases. Although previous reports have shown the possibility of full grain encapsulation for lead-containing HHP thin films,125–127 suitable additives need to be developed for the CsSnI3 perovskite. In this context, one promising direction is to tailor the chemical properties of additives and perform more accurate engineering of CsSnI3 grain microstructures. The grain-encapsulation layer itself can be further chemically engineered with more antioxidant properties. Such effort may lead to more stable and efficient lead-free CsSnI3 PSCs.
4.2. Native-oxide surface passivation
Recently, Chen et al.108 have shown a unique approach of ‘native-oxide passivation’ for stabilizing CsSnI3 based perovskite thin films. In this method, ultra-sensitive Ge is incorporated in the CsSnI3 crystal structure, forming CsSnxGe1−xI3 perovskite alloys. Such alloys are ultra-sensitive to ambient air due to the existence of Ge. As shown in Fig. 10a, immediately upon the film being exposed to ambient air, a dense surface layer of GeO2 native oxide is formed on the CsSnxGe1−xI3 perovskite thin film, which protects the film bulk from further oxidation. In this work, Chen et al. have demonstrated the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 composition as the proof of concept. It has been shown that the Goldschmidt tolerance (∼0.94) and octahedral (∼0.4) factors in CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 are also ideal for the structural stability of the CsSnxGe1−xI3 alloy crystal in addition to native-oxide passivation. The chemical stability of the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 perovskite thin film is compared with the CsSnI3 IHP, the CsPbI3 IHP, and the prototypical MAPbI3 HHP by monitoring the intensity of the characteristic XRD peak of each phase. It can be seen in Fig. 10b that the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 perovskite retains its phase after exposure to environmental conditions (45 °C, 80% RH) for 72 h, showing significantly better stability than CsSnI3, CsPbI3, and even MAPbI3. Regarding the device performance and stability, CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 PSCs show a maximum PCE of 7.11% and a stabilized PCE output of 7.03%. After 500 h continuous operation in a dry nitrogen atmosphere under one-sun-intensity illumination, 93% of the initial PCE can be retained. Regarding the device stability in air, the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 PSC shows 91% retention of the initial PCE after the device is stored for 100 h under one-sun-intensity illumination. This is the best stability of all lead-free perovskite PSCs reported to date.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 perovskite thin film, which immediately forms a dense surface layer of native oxide (Sn-doped GeO2) upon air exposure. This surface layer stabilizes the film effectively. (b) Monitoring the intensity variation of the characteristic XRD peak of the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3, CsSnI3, MAPbI3, and CsPbI3 thin films with an increase of the exposure time to ambient conditions. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
Native-oxide passivation represents a new direction for stabilizing the lead-free CsSnI3 perovskite. Nevertheless, further improvement would be required. For example, GeO2 is still relatively hydrophilic,128 which renders the surface layer not stable in a humid environment. It may be worthwhile to explore other alternative elements that could replace Ge and form more hydrophobic native-oxide surface layers. This concept may be generic for stabilizing a variety of lead-free IHPs that are not limited to CsSnI3.
4.3. New IHPs with stable B-site cations
The stability of CsSnI3 can be mitigated via replacement of the unstable Sn2+ with other stable metal cations. The B-site cation replacement can lead to different crystal structures with different chemical formulas depending on the valence states of the B-site cation. Bi3+ and Sb3+ have been used to form crystals with a chemical formula of A3B2X9. However, this reduces the crystal dimensionality from 3D to 1D, leading to significantly increased bandgaps and anisotropic properties which are not favorable for solar cell applications.129
In this context, metal cations with +4 oxidation states are explored for B-site replacement, forming special vacancy-ordered double perovskites with A2BX6 compositions. Ju et al.46 have reported a new family of vacancy-ordered double perovskites Cs2TiX6, X = I−, Br−, or Cl−, based on chemically stable titanium(IV) as the B-site cation. Ti is in its +4 oxidation state in Cs2TiX6, making this compound chemically resist further oxidation. The stability of the Cs2TiX6 series has shown clear advantages over HHP compounds with similar bandgaps, which has been proved experimentally. In a parallel study by Chen et al.,130 a thin film of Cs2TiBr6 is processed using a two-step vapor-deposition method. Excellent optoelectronic properties (long carrier diffusion lengths of >100 nm) have been measured in ambient conditions, which could be partially attributed to its high chemical stability. Note that for air-sensitive CsSnI3 perovskites, good optoelectronic properties could be only measured under a vacuum. The stability of Cs2TiBr6 thin films is tested by applying thermal (200 °C, 6 h, N2 atmosphere), light (one-sun, encapsulated), and moisture (23 °C, 80% RH, 6 h) stresses; no degradation is observed and the Cs2TiBr6 PSC shows stable performance (only 6% decay of the initial PCE) after storage in environmental conditions (70 °C, 30% RH, ambient light). Palladium (Pd4+) is another alternative B-site cation, which is reported by Sakai et al.,131 although Pd is a relatively expensive metal. The resulting Cs2PbBr6 double-perovskite compound exhibits good photoluminescence properties and a favorable band gap of 1.6 eV. Like Cs2TiBr6, very strong water-resistance is observed for Cs2PdBr6. Pd is also in its stable +4 oxidation state in Cs2PdBr6, which renders this material in principle not oxygen-sensitive. Nevertheless, Cs2PdBr6-based PSCs have not been reported until now. Another possible method for B-site cation replacement is to form regular double perovskites of A2B′B′′X6, where B′ and B′′ are in their +1 and +3 oxidation states, respectively. Possible compounds may include, but are not limited to, Cs2AgBiX6 and Cs2AgInX6. Especially the Cs2AgBiBr6 double-perovskite has been reported with a long photoluminescence lifetime of 660 ns at room temperature, and it is significantly more thermal- and moisture-stable than the MAPbI3 HHP. One demerit of Cs2AgBiBr6 is that this compound exhibits a relatively large bandgap of 1.91 eV.132 Although exchanging I with Br in Cs2AgBiBr6 invariably reduces the bandgap, Cs2AgBiI6 has been predicted to be thermodynamically unstable in the bulk, and thus, no successful synthesis of bulk Cs2AgBiI6 crystals or thin films has been reported.133 Promisingly, Creutze et al.134 show that Cs2AgBiI6 phases could be made in nanocrystals via an anion-exchange process starting from Cs2AgBiBr6. The successful stabilization of Cs2AgBiI6 in nanocrystals is similar to the case of α-CsPbI3 as discussed in Section 3.2. This nanocrystal approach opens up a new possibility to synthesize or stabilize new lead-free IHPs that are considered as unstable or non-existing in the bulk.
5. Summary and perspectives
IHPs completely eliminate the instability issues associated with volatile and hygroscopic organic cations in their hybrid organic–inorganic counterparts, offering the promise of relatively high intrinsic or thermodynamic stability against decomposition to the binary halide products. Nevertheless, many of the important IHPs (e.g. CsPbI3, CsSnI3) still suffer from severe chemical degradation under environmental conditions, which is mostly caused by either polymorphic transformation, oxidation, or their combination. While the reported stabilization protocols as reviewed above provide feasible solutions to mitigate this outstanding issue to some extent, we envision that the following research directions could be of great importance for further enhancing the stability of IHP materials and devices:
(i) Revealing the exact degradation mechanisms of IHPs via in situ characterization. Advanced synchrotron-based135 and TEM-based characterization136 may find great use here as these techniques offer desirable resolution for understanding nanoscale materials/device behaviors. Roles of ion-types, defects (interstitials and vacancies), crystal morphologies, and microstructures (grain boundaries, orientation, etc.) in the IHP degradation processes could be understood through a combination of conventional and in situ characterization. There have been some pioneering in situ studies revealing the degradation mechanism of HHPs.137 Similar methods could be applied to IHPs for probing the degradation mechanisms of IHPs (oxidation and polymorphic transition) which are usually different from those (hydration and decomposition) for HHPs.
(ii) Precise tailoring of the compositions/microstructures of IHP thin films at the nanoscale. This should be guided by the valuable inputs from in situ and high-resolution diagnostics of the IHP degradation. Continuous grain-boundary functionalization126 using chemically-engineered additives is one promising direction, which will provide a complete encapsulation layer for individual grains in thin films, leading to the most reliable protection. Furthermore, new stabilization methods can be invented by integrating several established methods (additives, nanocrystals, surface/grain boundary functionalization, etc.).
(iii) Rational design and synthesis of new stable IHP materials with the aid of high-throughput computational screening processes. The previous research in this direction has led to the discovery of some good perovskite materials (e.g. Cs2TiX6) potentially with more desired features such as less-toxicity and more ideal bandgaps. In the future, artificial intelligence processes will be required to be developed for rapid prediction of new stable IHP materials that are suitable for optoelectronic applications.
(iv) Design of novel architectures for IHP optoelectronics. Some studies have shown fabrication of new IHP–ETL or IHP–HTL interfaces (e.g. MoOx–CsPbIBr2,138 ZnO/C60–CsPbI2Br59) and electrode materials (e.g. carbon139) that not only allow better charge extraction, but also provide device encapsulation function. But this direction has still been much less explored for IHPs compared with that for HHPs. Therefore, more effort in understanding the surfaces and interfaces of IHPs as well as the degradation of IHPs at the device scale will accelerate the innovation of new IHP device structures where IHPs are highly stabilized.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Zhou is thankful for funding support from the US National Science Foundation (grant no. OIA-1538893). Y. Zhao acknowledges support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51861145101 and 21777096).
References
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 16099,  DOI:10.1038/natrevmats.2016.99 .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel, T. Miyasaka, K. Zhu and K. Emery, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pan, H. Wu, J. Luo, Z. Deng, C. Ge, C. Chen, X. Jiang, W.-J. Yin, G. Niu, L. Zhu, L. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Xie, X. Ke, M. Sui and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 726–732 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/pv-efficiencies-07-17-2018.pdf
        .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646 RSC .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2018 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00318 .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, G. Liu, B. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11638–11641 RSC .
T. Zhang, Y. Hui, L. Chen, G. Li, B. Mao and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 404001 CrossRef .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lou, M. Fang, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3779–3782 RSC .
M. G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Y. Zhou, H. F. Garces, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Padture and X. C. Zeng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 297–304 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Almutlaq, S. Sarmah, I. Dursun, A. A. Zhumekenov, R. Begum, J. Pan, N. Cho, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Ju, J. Dai, L. Ma, Y. Zhou and X. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10456–10463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, X. Ying, C.-E. Hsiung, R. Sougrat, K. Li and Y. Han, Science, 2018, 359, 675–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, D. D. Zhang, C. Kisielowski, L. T. Dou, N. Kornienko, Y. Bekenstein, A. B. Wong, A. P. Alivisatos and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7530–7535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou and K. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 64–67 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Zhou, Y. C. Zhao, X. Zhou, R. Fu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, K. H. Liu, D. P. Yu and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4122–4128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. Y. Chen, P. Xu, H. Xiang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2018, 35, 6 Search PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Yi, J. S. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Gratzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
Z. Li, M. J. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
M.-G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Padture and X. C. Zeng, Joule, 2018, 2, 1231–1241 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mizusaki, K. Arai and K. Fueki, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, W. Ming, H. Shi, L. Zhang and M.-H. Du, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
arXiv:1801.08519v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci].
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Horantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 6 Search PubMed .
G. Q. Tong, H. Li, D. T. Li, Z. F. Zhu, E. Z. Xu, G. P. Li, L. W. Yu, J. Xu and Y. Jiang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702523 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ahmad, J. Khan, G. D. Niu and J. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700048 CrossRef .
H. N. Chen, S. S. Xiang, W. P. Li, H. C. Liu, L. Q. Zhu and S. H. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 23 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Z. Li, C. L. Zhang, Y. P. Ma, J. D. Fan and Y. H. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3825–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Chen, H. Y. Lin, K. M. Chiang, W. L. Tsai, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 8 Search PubMed .
J. K. Nam, M. S. Jung, S. U. Chai, Y. J. Choi, D. Kim and J. H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2936–2940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, F. Xu, Y. Li and Y. Zhao, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700180 CrossRef .
J. Liang, P. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, L. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14009–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. H. Zhang, T. S. Ripolles, T. Kamisaka, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Y. Dai, M. Yanagida, H. Noguchi and Q. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16708–16719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Du, D. F. Fu, T. Yang, Z. Fang, W. N. Liu, F. M. Gao, L. Wang, Z. B. Yang, J. Teng, H. Zhang and W. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6287–6296 RSC .
F. Yang, D. Hirotani, G. Kapil, M. A. Kamarudin, C. H. Ng, Y. H. Zhang, Q. Shen and S. Hayase, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12745–12749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Hu, F. Bai, X. B. Liu, Q. M. Ji, X. L. Miao, T. Qiu and S. F. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2219–2227 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Xiang, W. P. Li, Y. Wei, J. M. Liu, H. C. Liu, L. Q. Zhu and H. N. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9996–10004 RSC .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, D. Meggiolaro, Z. Y. Dang, F. De Angelis and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2183–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Bai, J. R. Zhang, Z. W. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, H. R. Wang, L. Liang, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 970 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Huang and W. R. L. Lambrecht, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 8 Search PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .

          C. H. Yoder, Ionic Compounds: Applications of Chemistry to Mineralogy, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4785 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, Z. Liu, L. Qiu, Z. Hawash, L. Meng, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800504 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Zhang, K. Hills-Kimball, Y. Zhou and O. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2381–2397 RSC .
J. Yuan, X. Ling, D. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhou, J. Shi, Y. Qian, J. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Gao, S. Duhm, Q. Zhang and W. Ma, Joule, 2018, 2, 2450–2463 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zolfaghari, E. Hassanabadi, D. Pitarch-Tena, S. J. Yoon, Z. Shariatinia, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fu, M. T. Rea, J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Z. Zhao, D. X. Pan, L. H. Manger, J. C. Wright, R. H. Goldsmith and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8385–8394 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. A. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. J. Zhou, L. Y. Zhang and L. W. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. P. Zheng, Y. H. Deng, J. J. Zhao, Z. L. Chen and J. S. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jeong, H. Han, Y. J. Choi, S. H. Cho, E. H. Kim, S. W. Lee, J. S. Kim, C. Park, D. Kim and C. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706401 CrossRef .
S. Xiang, Z. Fu, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu, R. Zhang and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1824–1831 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Heo, S. M. Han, N. S. Woo, Y. J. Kim, T.-Y. Kim, Z. Luo and S. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15903–15910 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, M. Congiu, A. J. Ramadan, S. Fearn, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Joule, 2017, 1, 328–343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, T. Wang and Y. Zhao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2065–2075 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, S. K. Dutta, S. Das Adhikari and N. Pradhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9083–9087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, H. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Ma, S. Dai, S. Yang and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18258–18266 RSC .
B. Zhao, S.-F. Jin, S. Huang, N. Liu, J.-Y. Ma, D.-J. Xue, Q. Han, J. Ding, Q.-Q. Ge, Y. Feng and J.-S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11716–11725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. J. Guo, M. Gratzel and Y. X. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, M. T. Rea, J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Zhao, D. Pan, L. H. Manger, J. C. Wright, R. H. Goldsmith and S. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8385–8394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Chen, Y. Sun, J. J. Peng, J. H. Tang, K. B. Zheng and Z. Q. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Zhang, C. Yi, N. N. Wang, Y. Sun, W. Zou, Y. Q. Wei, Y. Cao, Y. F. Miao, R. Z. Li, Y. Yin, N. Zhao, J. P. Wang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606600 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Liao, H. S. Rao, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2066–2072 RSC .
F. M. Li, Y. H. Pei, F. Xiao, T. X. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. J. Xu, J. Sun, B. Peng and M. Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318–6322 RSC .
C. M. M. Soe, G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, F. Melkonyan, D. H. Cao, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Even, T. J. Marks, A. Navrotsky, A. D. Mohite, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 58–66 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Marshall, M. Walker, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, H. F. Garces, A. D. Carl, L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash, Y. Zhang, T. Shen, Y. Qi, R. L. Grimm, D. Pacifici, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 16 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Q. Zhang, D. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Chang, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802080 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, Y. Dong, K. Huang, C. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Wang, J. Shi, H. Xie, H. Huang, S. Xiao, J. He, Y. Gao, R. A. Hatton and J. Yang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4104–4110 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, S. Huang, X. Wen, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502202 CrossRef .
F. Jin, B. Zhao, B. Chu, H. Zhao, Z. Su, W. Li and F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem.
C, 2018, 6, 1573–1578 RSC .
N. Yantara, S. Bhaumik, F. Yan, D. Sabba, H. A. Dewi, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix, H. V. Demir and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4360–4364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Yang, M. Bates and R. R. Lunt, iScience, 2018, 6, 272–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao, Q. Dong, C. Zhao, M. Leng, F. Ma, W. Liang, L. Wang, S. Jin, J. Han, L. Zhang, J. Etheridge, J. Wang, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and J. Tang, Nature, 2018, 563, 541–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, Y.-J. Li, Y.-X. Tang, X. Mao, C. Luo, M.-S. Wang, W.-Q. Deng and K.-L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3087–3092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. da Silva, J. M. Skelton, S. C. Parker and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 144107 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono and T. Kamiya, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18900–18903 RSC .
I. Chung, J.-H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. F. Garces, B. S. Senturk, A. L. Ortiz and N. P. Padture, Mater. Lett., 2013, 110, 127–129 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, B. Cao, S. Yuan, X. Chen, Z. Qiu, Y. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Wang, H. Zeng, J. Liu and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Kontos, A. Kaltzoglou, E. Siranidi, D. Palles, G. K. Angeli, M. K. Arfanis, V. Psycharis, Y. S. Raptis, E. I. Kamitsos, P. N. Trikalitis, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and P. Falaras, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 84–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Song, T. Yokoyama, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zong, Z. Zhou, M. Chen, N. P. Padture and Y. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800997 CrossRef .
Y. Zong, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Zhang, M.-G. Ju, M. Chen, S. Pang, X. C. Zeng and N. P. Padture, Chem, 2018, 4, 1404–1415 CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. Li, L. Zhang, M.-G. Ju, D. Luo, Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. H. Kim, W. Yang, N. P. Padture, M. C. Beard, X. C. Zeng, K. Zhu, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800232 CrossRef .
A. Mura, I. Hideshima, Z. Liu, T. Hosoi, H. Watanabe and K. Arima, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono, T. Kamiya and N. P. Padture, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 2305–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, A. D. Carl, Y. Zong, R. L. Grimm, J. Gu, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, Joule, 2018, 2, 558–570 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, A. A. Haghighirad, M. R. Filip, P. K. Nayak, S. Nayak, A. Ramadan, Z. Wang, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6030–6033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Connor, L. Leppert, M. D. Smith, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5235–5240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2628–2633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-K. Kim, Y. H. Min, S. Noh, E. Cho, G. Jeong, M. Joo, S.-W. Ahn, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, K. Ihm, H. Ahn, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4645 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sternlicht, N. P. Padture and Y. Zhou, Joule, 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.12.011 .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, W. Li, J. Chen, J. Fan, Y. Mai and R. E. I. Schropp, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiang, Z. Fu, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu, R. Zhang and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1824–1831 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Halide perovskites (HPs) are a family of new-generation semiconductor materials, which are broadly divided into two types, hybrid organic–inorganic HPs and inorganic HPs. While hybrid HPs have attracted huge attention for application in various (opto)electronics such as solar cells, light-emitting devices, radiation/photo detectors, scintillators, transistors, and memristors, inorganic HPs are also emerging as an intrinsically or thermally more stable alternative to hybrid HPs. Regardless of the promise, inorganic HPs still undergo degradation, which affects the device performance significantly. Therefore, there is an urgent need to gain insights into the chemical stability and instability in inorganic HPs, which will help the development of high-performance perovskite (opto)electronic devices that are sufficiently durable for real-world applications. The chemistry and materials science emerging from the study of inorganic HPs may have a long-lasting impact on other materials with similar behaviors.

	(1)
μ = rB/rX,	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the typical ABX3 crystal structure of halide perovskites. The nature (organic or inorganic) of A-site ions determines the types of all-inorganic halide perovskites and hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites. (b) The structural model and simulated projected potential map of the prototypical MAPbI3 HHP based on high-resolution TEM characterization. Adapted from ref. 31 with permission requested from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (c) The structural model and phase image of the prototypical CsPbBr3 IHP based on based on high-resolution TEM characterization. Adapted from ref. 32 with permission requested from the American Chemical Society (ACS).	 
MAPbI3 → MAI + PbI2	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Calculated formation energies for different HHPs or IHPs with Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) and van der Waals (vdW) exchange–correlation functionals. A positive number indicates that the compound is stable at 0 K. (b) Calculated vibrational free energy of the MAPbI3 HHP, MASnI3 HHP and CsSnI3 IHP as a function of temperature (T). Adapted from ref. 40 with permission requested from Chinese Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of degradation mechanisms of halide perovskites under key environmental factors (moisture, light, heat, and oxygen). Adapted from ref. 46 with permission requested from Elsevier.	 

Cs+	1.67
Rb+	1.52
NH4+	1.46
MA+	2.17
FA+	2.53
DMA+	2.72
Pb2+	1.19
Sn2+	1.18
Ge2+	0.73
Sn4+	0.69
Ag+	1.15
In3+	0.80
Eu3+	0.95
Sb3+	0.76
Bi3+	1.03
Ti4+	0.61
Mn2+	0.70
I−	2.20
Br−	1.96
Cl−	1.84


CsPbI3	Nanocrystals	No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: 100 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)	Best PCE: 10.77%; PCE increases after 64 days storage (humidity: n/a, temperature: RT, light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air; unencapsulated)	
37

CsPbI3	Crystal dimensionality (‘quasi-2D’)	No obvious degradation for 7 days (humidity: n/a, temperature: 100 °C, light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)	Best PCE: 11.8%; PCE retains ∼90% of the initial performance after 30 days storage (humidity: n/a, temperature: 100 °C, light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)	
96

CsPbI3	PVP additive	No obvious degradation for 80 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air)	Best PCE: 10.74%; PCE retaining ∼80% of the initial performance after 21 days storage (humidity: 45–55% RH; temperature: 50 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)	
84

CsPbI3	Zwitterion additive	No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air)	Best PCE: 11.4%; PCE retaining ∼85% of the initial performance after 30 days storage (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: ambient air; unencapsulated)	
105

CsPbI3	Crystal dimensionality (‘quasi-2D’)	No obvious degradation for 40 days (humidity; 20% RH; temperature: 20 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air)	Best PCE: 12.4%	
97

PCE retaining 93% of the initial performance after 40 days storage (humidity: 20% RH; temperature: 20 °C; light: n/a; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)
CsPbI3	Processing & microstructure engineering	No obvious degradation for 60 days (humidity: n/a; temperature 300 °C light: n/a; atmosphere: dry N2)	Best PCE: 15.7% (certified)	
106

PCE retaining >95% of the initial performance after 500 h continuous operationa (humidity: n/a; temperature: 25 °C; light: one-sun; atmosphere: dry N2; encapsulated)
CsPbI2Br	Eu-element doping	No obvious degradation for 50 h (humidity: 20–40% RH; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)	Best PCE: 13.71%	
53

PCE retaining 68% of the initial performance after 370 h continuous operationa (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: one-sun; atmosphere: dry N2; unencapsulated)
CsPbI3	Bi-element doping	No obvious degradation for 7 days (humidity: n/a; temperature: n/a; light: n/a; atmosphere: dry air)	Best PCE: 13.21%	
67

PCE retaining 68% of the initial performance after 7 days storage (humidity: 0; temperature: n/a; atmosphere: dry N2; unencapsulated)
CsSnI3	Grain encapsulation (SnCl2 additive)	No obvious degradation for 3 h (humidity: 25% RH; temperature: RT; light: n/a; atmosphere: air)	Best PCE: 3.56%	
107

PCE retention of 80% for 5 h storage (humidity: 25% RH; temperature: 50 °C; atmosphere: air; unencapsulated)
CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3	Native-oxide passivation	No obvious degradation for 72 h (humidity: 80% RH; temperature: 45 °C; light: one-sun; atmosphere: air)	Best PCE: 7.11%	
108

PCE retention of 90% after 500 h continuous operationa (humidity: 0; temperature: 45 °C; atmosphere: dry N2; light: one-sun; unencapsulated)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of stabilization of CsPbI3−xBrx using a B-site doping/alloying strategy. (b) High-angle annular dark-field imaging (HAADF) TEM image of Eu-doped CsPbI2Br and the corresponding Pb and Eu elemental mapping. (c) Current density–voltage curve of the best-performing Eu-doped CsPbI2Br PSCs. (d) Comparison of the stability of CsPbI2Br PSCs with and without Eu doping. Adapted from ref. 53 with permission requested from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 nanocrystal based perovskite solar cells. (b) TEM image of colloidal α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals. (c) XRD patterns of the α-CsPbI3 nanocrystals after storage in ambient conditions for 1 and 40 days. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission requested from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the formation of α- and β-CsPbI3 using OA and the PEA ligand additive. Adapted from ref. 83 with permission requested from ACS. (b) Schematic illustration of stabilizing the CsPbI3 perovskite using PVP. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (c) Schematic illustration of stabilizing the CsPbI3 perovskite phase with zwitterions. The zwitterion molecules segregate at grain boundaries during the CsPbI3 perovskite crystallization. Adapted from ref. 85 with permission requested from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPbI3 perovskite thin film surface terminated with PEAI. (b) XPS spectra of the PEA–CsPbI3 perovskite compared with CsPbI3 and PEAI thin films. (c) Stability of the CsPbI3 and PEAI-treated CsPbI3 thin films upon exposure to ambient conditions (∼85% RH, RT) for 0.5 h. Adapted from ref. 91 with permission requested from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern of the as-synthesized orthorhombic γ-CsPbI3 perovskite, showing a space group of Pbnm. (b) Calculated Gibbs free energy of γ-CsPbI3 and α-CsPbI3 polymorphs relative to bulk δ-CsPbI3 as a function of surface area using DFT. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission requested from ACS. (c) XRD patterns of CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 before and after storage under environmental conditions (100 °C, dry air) demonstrating its good stability. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission under a Creative Commons License. (d) Schematic illustration of the crystal structures of PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 with various n values. The relative decomposition energies of the PEA2Csn−1PbnX3n+1 crystals based on DFT calculations are also shown. Adapted from ref. 97 with permission requested from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the phase conversion of the γ-CsSnI3 perovskite to the δ-CsSnI3 nonperovskite and Cs2SnI6 double-perovskite. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission requested from the American Physical Society (APS). (b) Top-view SEM image and (c) schematic illustration of the SnCl2-encapsulated CsSnI3 perovskite thin film. Evolution of UV-vis absorption spectra of (d) the SnCl2-free and (e) SnCl2-encapsulated CsSnI3 perovskite thin films with an increase in the exposure time to ambient air. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission requested from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3 perovskite thin film, which immediately forms a dense surface layer of native oxide (Sn-doped GeO2) upon air exposure. This surface layer stabilizes the film effectively. (b) Monitoring the intensity variation of the characteristic XRD peak of the CsSn0.5Ge0.5I3, CsSnI3, MAPbI3, and CsPbI3 thin films with an increase of the exposure time to ambient conditions. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
