Two- and three-dimensional graphene-based hybrid composites for advanced energy storage and conversion devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA08748A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA08748A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 702-734Two- and three-dimensional graphene-based hybrid composites for advanced energy storage and conversion devices

        
          
            Jalal 
            Azadmanjiri
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vijay K. 
            Srivastava
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Parshant 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mostafa 
            Nikzad
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            James 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Aimin 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a
aFaculty of Science, Engineering and Technology, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia. E-mail: jalal_azad2000@yahoo.com; aiminyu@swin.edu.au;  Fax: +61 3 9214 8264;   Tel: +61 3 9214 8161
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi-221005, India
Received 
      4th October 2017
    , Accepted 27th November 2017First published on 27th November 2017AbstractDue to its superior electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties, graphene is considered to be the most promising candidate for constructing energy storage and conversion devices. One important way to exploit the potential of graphene is to create graphene composites with other functional materials. Graphene-based hybrid composites (GHCs) have been fabricated by incorporating inorganic and/or organic species into graphene through covalent and/or noncovalent interactions. Different methods of fabrication resulted in different properties of GHCs. So far, GHCs have found wide applications in various sectors. In this article, recent progress and achievements in the preparation of two- and three-dimensional GHCs are reviewed, followed by detailed discussions on their physical, chemical, and mechanical properties. The article then focuses on the detailed applications of GHCs in energy storage and conversion devices.Jalal AzadmanjiriJalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD (full scholarships) in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Australia (2012) followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship from Swinburne University of Technology. His current research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, especially focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization and characterization of nanomaterials in zero-, one- and two-dimensional structures. He is also interested in the development and improvement of hybrid materials with thin film and layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.Vijay K. SrivastavaProf. Vijay K. Srivastava has completed B.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering in 1977, M.Tech. in Machine Design in 1979 and Ph.D. in 1987 from the Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, India. He is a Professor in the Mechanical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi, India. He has published more than 165 papers in International Journals. He has supervised more than 40 master's theses and 4 Ph.D. Theses. He has received several Fellowships and awards to visit the US, the UK, Japan, France, Germany, Italy, South Korea, the Czech Republic, and Poland. He has also been awarded the Bharat Gaurav Award, Excellence in Academy, 2014, International Friendship Society, New Delhi India. He is the FOUNDER PRESIDENT OF “ICRACM SERIES CONFERENCE”. Prof. Srivastava, has also been honoured with an Adjunct Professorship in the Faculty of Science, Engineering and Technology at Swinburne University of Technology (SUT), Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia for the period from 1st August 2016 to 30th August 2019. As an Adjunct Professor, Dr Srivastava will determine the range of research activities with the faculty of Swinburne University for the benefit of students. The appointment is not as an employee of Swinburne University but an active collaborator of a bilateral international project and is not entitled to salary from SUT.Parshant KumarParshant Kumar is currently pursuing Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, India. He completed B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering from SMVDU, Katra, India in 2011. Right after completing B.Tech, he joined IIT (BHU) Varanasi, India for M.Tech (Machine Design). After completing M.Tech in 2013, he joined IIT (BHU) Varanasi for Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering) under the supervision of Prof. V. K. Srivastava. He is currently working in the field of “Tribological behavior of ceramic fiber composites”. His research interests include mechanical and tribological behavior of composite materials.Aimin YuDr Aimin Yu received her PhD in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 1997. After being a Lecturer at the same university for three years, Dr Yu took a postdoctoral position at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). Dr Yu moved to Australia in 2003 and currently is an Associate Professor at Swinburne University of Technology, based in Melbourne, Australia. Her research fields include: synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials; preparation of nanostructured thin films; and development of biosensors and assay methods for biomedical applications. Dr Yu has co-authored more than 120 publications in these areas.
1. Introduction
Graphene is one of the hottest topics in the fields of materials science, chemistry and condensed matter physics.1,2 It represents a carbon monolayer packed into a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice with hybridized sp2 bonding orbitals. Defect-free graphene is the basic form of the 2D carbon family. Various graphene configurations have different properties, depending on factors such as morphology, sub-dimensions, the number of layers and defects.1,3,4 Graphene offers unique functionalities and characteristics such as high mechanical properties (∼1 TPa Young's module and ∼130 GPa intrinsic strength),5 high surface area (up to 2675 m2 g−1),6 high electrical and thermal conductivity (0.5–100 S m−1 and 3080–5150 W m−1 K−1, respectively) and high electron mobility at room temperature (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1).7 This makes graphene an extraordinary material of choice that can be used in high performance energy storage devices. Graphene has been used as an active or inactive component in electrochemical energy-storage devices (EESDs). It can be actively involved in electrochemical reactions of EESDs. It can also be an inactive component of EESDs by only providing electrical conductivity and without being actively involved in the electrochemical reaction. Graphene-based EESDs that provide high power density, high temperature resistance, long cycle life and high energy density have gained increasing attention recently. This is, in part also, due to an increase in demand for portable electronic devices, hybrid vehicles, and clean energy storage, which has become a major concern in today's world as population rises globally.
Although graphene is theoretically an excellent material for energy storage, it practically cannot serve this purpose efficiently. The main reason is that graphene nanosheets tend to stack up due to weak van der Waals attractions between individual layers.8 This leads to a reduced specific surface area and as a result, hinders the ion exchange between the electrode and electrolyte. One solution is to synthesise three-dimensional (3D) structures of graphene to facilitate the access and diffusion of ions.9 For instance, intercalation of nano-crystals into the interlayers of graphene or graphene oxide (GO) has been proven to be effective in reducing the re-stacking issue of graphene flakes (Fig. 1).10
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the layer-by-layer formation of a platinum–reduced graphene oxide/silicon carbide (Pt–rGO/SiC) architecture. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 14 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group: Scientific Reports. 
Graphene is able to host Li ions (Li+) two times higher than conventional graphite when used as an anode for lithium (Li) batteries.11,12 Theoretically, graphene can adopt Li+ on both sides. However, this does not occur in the real practical situation because of the repulsion forces between Li+ and graphene.13 One way to improve the storage capacity is to form graphene hybrid composites (GHCs) with other electroactive materials. GHCs have been demonstrated to provide considerably higher storage capacities than that of bare graphene (Table 1).
Table 1 The fabrication method and specific capacitance of graphene-based hybrid composites (GHCs)




Material
Fabrication route
Specific capacitance
Reference




Graphene/manganese dioxide (MnO2)
Hydrothermal process
Specific capacitance of 516.8 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

15



Graphene/MnO2

In situ electrodeposition
Specific capacitance of 328 F g−1 at a charging current of 1 mA in 1 M KCl

16



3D graphene/MnO2

In situ hydrothermal process
Specific capacitance of 560 F g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

17



Graphene/MnO2
Polymer assisted chemical reduction
Specific capacitance of 324 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

18



Graphene/MnO2
Electrostatic interaction
Specific capacitance of 210 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

19



Graphene/iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4)
Solvothermal process
Specific capacitance of 480 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 5000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH

20



rGO/Fe3O4
Hydrothermal process
Specific capacitance of 220.1 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH

21



rGO/Fe3O4
Solution precipitation followed by hydrogen reduction
Specific capacitance of 262.1 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 in 1 mol L−1 Na2SO4 aqueous solution

22



rGO/Fe3O4
Hydrolysis and annealing
Specific capacitance of 350.6 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH

23



Graphene/Fe3O4
Microwave irradiation
Specific capacitance of 72 F g−1 at a current density of 3750 mA g−1 in 1 M H2SO4

24



Graphene/cobalt(II,III) oxide (Co3O4)

In situ hydrothermal process
Specific capacitance of 472 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 2 M KOH

25



3D graphene/Co3O4

In situ synthesis
Specific capacitance of 1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10000 mA g−1 in 0.1 M NaOH

26



Graphene nanosheet/Co3O4
Microwave assisted method
Specific capacitance of 243.2 F g−1 has been obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH

27



rGO/Co3O4
Two-step surfactant-assisted method
Specific capacitance of 159.8 F g−1 can be reached at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH

28



3D rGO aerogel/Co3O4
Solvothermal process
Specific capacitance of 660 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 6 M KOH

29



Graphene/tin dioxide (SnO2)
Chemical reduction
Specific capacitance of 43.4 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 V s−1 in 1 M H2SO4

30



Graphene/SnO2
Solvothermal process
Specific capacitance of 363.3 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

31



Graphene/SnO2
Microwave irradiation
Specific capacitance of 323 F g−1 in 1 M NaCl

32



Graphene/titanium dioxide (TiO2)
Atomic layer deposition method
Specific capacitance of 84 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 V s−1 in 1 M KOH

33



Graphene/TiO2
Microwave assisted technique
Specific capacitance of 165 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4

34



Nitrogen (N)-doped graphene/TiO2
Hydrothermal route followed by hydrogenation
Specific capacitance of 385.2 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH

35





Similar to Li+ batteries, GHCs in sodium ion (Na+) batteries enable a higher specific capacity, better rate capability and longer cycle life than bare graphene.36 Electrochemical capacitors (ECs) or supercapacitors are one type of EESD that are being used in portable electronic devices because of their faster charge/discharge, greater power density, and cyclability.37–40 Typically, ECs are classified into two types: electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudo-capacitors. EDLCs are based on ion adsorption on electrodes whereas the operation of pseudo-capacitors is based on the phenomenon of fast surface redox reactions.41–44 The preferable electrode materials for EDLCs should have a high surface area to maximize ion adsorption. Graphene is considered as an excellent electrode material for EDLCs because of its high surface area, good corrosion resistance, excellent thermal stability, and high conductivity. On the other hand, a hybrid form of graphene-based composites could offer great promise for electrochemical pseudo-capacitors. For example, Zhang et al.45 investigated a 3D hybrid composite of nickel–aluminum layered hydroxide–graphene nanosheets (NiAl-LDH/GNS) as an advanced electrochemical pseudo-capacitor and a high specific capacitance, high rate capability and exceptional cycling ability were achieved.
There are a large variety of techniques available for the preparation of graphene including thermal decomposition of GO followed by chemical reduction, CVD growth, unzipping carbon nanotubes (CNTs), mechanical cleavage of graphite, and electrochemical exfoliation of graphite.46 Different fabrication methods yield different graphene structures with varied layer numbers and types of defects, which indicates a strong correlation between graphene preparation methods and resultant properties.
The physical and chemical properties of graphene-based nanomaterials are also strongly influenced by the presence of defects on graphene. Hence, defects play an important role in graphene's applications. It has been postulated that defects could limit the ultimate performance of graphene in energy storage devices. However, it has been observed that properly engineered defects can increase the performance of graphene for energy storage purposes.47
The aim of this review paper is to discuss the role and importance of graphene in energy storage and conversion devices by introducing different types of 2D and 3D graphene-based hybrid composites (GHCs). In addition, it also aims to outline the recent studies that have been done by various researchers to improve the performance of graphene in EEDs.
2. Graphene-based hybrid composites
2D graphene nanosheets can be fabricated by thermal or chemical reduction of GO. Due to the strong π–π interaction, GO nanosheets have a high tendency to re-stack and form agglomeration.48–53 As a result, the intrinsic surface area of graphene diminishes, which leads to poor performances. To solve this problem, there have been attempts to fabricate GHCs by incorporation of other functional materials into graphene. The new structures of GHCs could effectively inhibit the re-stacking of graphene.
Various GHCs have been prepared by introducing hydroxides, transition metal oxides (TMOs) and conducting polymers.16,54,55 These composites support redox reactions by forming a conducting network. Thus, the electrochemical performance of GHCs is enhanced. Several structures from graphene can be assembled for use as electrode materials in EESDs. Most recently, a significant number of research studies have focused on the manipulation of both 2D and 3D structures of graphene to enhance its electrochemical performance.
2.1. Graphene-based 2D hybrid composites
Graphene with a 2D structure and fascinating physical, mechanical and chemical properties is the most suitable candidate for the next generation of flexible thin-film EESDs. In fact, graphene nanosheets can fulfil the requirement of a flexible thin-film EESD such as being lightweight and functioning well under bending or folding conditions. However, agglomeration is the most significant drawback of graphene nanosheets in such applications. Therefore, graphene should be processed in such a way that it overcomes this problem. To this end, several attempts have been made through modification procedures such as template assisted growth, crumpling of graphene sheets, and intercalation of additives in graphene nanosheets.56–59 Among them, intercalation of additive materials has been shown to be the most effective way to reduce re-stacking of graphene nanosheets. The additive materials that can be integrated into graphene nanosheets to make GHCs could be of an organic or inorganic type. Those additive materials can be incorporated to increase the performance of graphene based EESDs. Furthermore, results indicate that if defects of graphene nanosheets are engineered properly, the performance of graphene-based energy storage devices can be improved even beyond the theoretical limits.47
Hence, increasing the active surface and electrochemical reaction areas by integration of intercalating organic/inorganic materials and/or defects in graphene can enhance the energy and power density of GHCs.60–62

2.1.1. 2D composites of graphene/organic materials. 
Basically, there are three ways to functionalize the surface of graphene and tune its chemical properties including non-covalent, intercalation and covalent functionalization (Fig. 2).63 Graphene-based organic hybrid composites are prepared by covalent or non-covalent cross-linking of graphene or GO nanosheets, using organic cross-linkers.63 Functionalization of redox active organic materials on graphene sheets may lead to unique architectures (Fig. 2). This reduces the diffusion path length, agglomeration and re-stacking of graphene nanosheets. Several covalent and non-covalent routes for functionalization of graphene nanosheets have been reported.64–66 Most of the covalent functionalization routes lead to a decreased conductivity of graphene.67 This is because covalent functionalization creates a strong bond between graphene nanosheets and organic molecules. The carbon bonding site changes from sp2 to sp3 as soon as covalent functionalization occurs (Fig. 2c). This connection results in the removal of π electrons from the carbon atom in graphene and reduction of the carrier density.67 In comparison, non-covalent functionalization does not alter much the graphene π–π bonding system. Hence, graphene conductivity is sustained after non-covalent functionalization.37,65,68
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of non-covalent, intercalation and covalent functionalization of graphene with additive organic cross-linkers. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 69 and 70 Copyrights 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry and Elsevier. 
The organic cross-linkers used in the covalent linking method can be bifunctional such as 1,4-diisocyanato-benzene, 3,3′-diaminobenzidine, and 4-aminobenzene sulfonic acid or multifunctional such as rGO fibers and yarns, and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) molecules.71–75 The functional groups present on bifunctional and multifunctional molecules react with the carbon skeleton and oxygen containing groups of graphene or GO nanosheets. In contrast, there are a number of driving forces for non-covalent linking of GO and organic cross-linkers, namely, electrostatic interaction, hydrophobic interaction, chemisorption, π–π stacking, and hydrogen bonding.76,77
Conducting polymers such as polyaniline (PANI), polystyrene (PS), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) have mostly been explored as organic cross-linkers. The specific capacitance of these hybrid composites lies in the range of 300 to 1500 F g−1. Table 2 shows the electrochemical performance and main findings of some graphene-based polymer hybrid composites.
Table 2 Electrochemical performance and main findings of graphene-based polymer hybrid composites




Material
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Electrolyte
Main findings
Reference




GO/PANI composite synthesized by dilute polymerization in the presence of GO and aniline monomer
Maximum specific capacitance of 555 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 200 mA g−1
1 M sulfuric acid (H2SO4)
Specific capacitance increased with increase in aniline concentration up to 0.05 M due to dominant heterogenous nucleation of PANI on GO nanosheets

78



rGO/PANI composite synthesized by in situ chemical oxidative polymerization of aniline N propane sulfonic acid (AnS) in a rGO dispersion
Maximum specific capacitance of 1019 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, 80% retention after 100 cycles
1 M H2SO4
Increased capacitance due to adequate combination of PANI with a large pseudocapacitance and rGO with a high surface area

79



PANI nanowire arrays on a flexible rG/PSS microsphere film via dilute polymerization
Specific capacitance of 740 F g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1, 87% retention after 1000 cycles
1 M H2SO4
Active surface area was significantly increased due to nanowire arrays and it provided a high interfacial area and shortened the diffusion paths

80



Graphene/PSS nanocomposite synthesized by in situ emulsion polymerization and reduction of GO using hydrazine hydrate
Maximum electrical conductivity of 2.9 × 10−2 S m−1 with 2 wt% graphene concentration


Electrical conductivity increased which was due to the prominent sp3 defects produced during the reduction process for the removal of oxygen-containing functional groups

81



Graphene/PSS composite prepared by solution-phase mixing of exfoliated phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide sheets
0.1 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 1.0 S m−1 at 2.5 vol% graphene loading


Rapid rise in electrical conductivity was described by a bond percolation mode

82



Graphene/(PEDOT:PSS) nanocomposite fabricated by conventional and substrate vibration-assisted spray coating
Maximum electrical conductivity of 298 S cm−1


Twelve-fold increase in conductivity as graphene sheets acted as a bridge or interlinking lattice

83



Graphene/(PEDOT:PSS) composite fabricated by in situ polymerization
Maximum electrical conductivity of 637 S cm−1 with 3 wt% graphene concentration and a power factor of 45.7 μW m−1 K−1 for thermoelectric applications


Electrical conductivity decreased at 3 wt% loading of graphene due to poorer dispersion resulting from the over-loading of graphene

84



rGO/PEDOT nanocomposite synthesized by a template-directed in situ polymerization
Maximum electrical conductivity of 50.8 S cm−1 with 16 wt% graphene concentration and a power factor of 5.2 × 10−6 W m−1 K−1


The enhancement of thermoelectric performance for the nanocomposite was attributed to the pie-like structure which induced improvement of the carrier mobility and the rGO bridging carrier transport, as well as the highly conductive network of the rGO nanosheets

85



rGO/PMMA composite prepared by self-assembly of PMMA latex and GO through electrostatic interaction
0.16 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 64 S m−1 at 2.7 vol% rGO loading


The low percolation threshold and high electrical conductivity of PMMA–rGO were attributed to the formation of a segregated conducting network of rGO in the interstitial space between PMMA particles

86



Graphene/PET nanocomposites prepared by melt compounding
0.47 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 2.11 S m−1 at 3 vol% graphene loading


The low percolation threshold and superior electrical conductivity were attributed to the high aspect ratio, large specific surface area and uniform dispersion of the graphene nanosheets in the PET matrix

87





The fabrication method sometimes could affect the performance of the composite. For instance, a graphene/PANI composite prepared by in situ anodic electropolymerization of aniline monomer on graphene paper exhibited 233 F g−1 gravimetric capacitance and 135 F cm−3 volumetric capacitance,88 whereas a graphene/PANI composite fabricated by coating PANI onto graphene sheets exhibited a specific capacitance of 1046 F g−1. Even when the current density was increased from 10000 to 100000 mA g−1, its capacitance value was maintained at 96% which indicates its superior retention ability.87,89 The electrochemical performance of graphene could also be improved by intercalating polypyrrole (PPy) spheres into graphene layers.90 This created a hollow structure and an increased capacitance value to 500 F g−1 with a charge/discharge current density of 5000 mA g−1.90
PEDOT and its derivatives are well known for their high electrical conductivity, chemical stability, and thermal stability.91 Electropolymerization can be used to combine PEDOT with GO and GO can be further reduced to rGO through electrochemical reduction. The pseudocapacitance of PEDOT and the large accessible surface area of rGO led to a capacitance of 14 F cm−2 of rGO/PEDOT devices.92
Graphene/metal–organic framework (MOF) 2D hybrid composites are one of the most promising electrode materials for a broad range of low-cost and highly efficient energy storage and conversion devices.92,93 Xia et al.93 developed a novel N-doped graphene aerogel (NG-A) assisted method to prepare metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) from bulk cobalt-based MOFs [Co(mIM)2 (mIM = 2-methylimidazole)] (Fig. 3). The synthesized structure served as a robust platinum free electrocatalyst with an excellent activity and stability for the oxygen reduction reaction in an alkaline electrolyte solution. Furthermore, when cobalt was eliminated from the structure, the N-rich porous carbon-graphene composite exhibited extraordinary energy storage with exceptional capacitance and rate capability in a supercapacitor. This novel method can provide a strategy for fabricating advanced nanostructures from MOFs. Moreover, it can provide a new pathway for fabricating high performance electrochemical materials that satisfy the requirements of both energy storage and energy conversion devices with a single MOF/NG-A derived nanostructure.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation process of cobalt oxide/NG-A and carbon/NG-A along with the specific capacitance of carbon/NG-A and oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm. Adapted with permission from data published in ref. 93 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. 
Zhang et al.71 reported that the cross-linking of GO sheets with organic diisocyanates led to the formation of graphite oxide hybrid porous materials with much more porosity compared to powder GO. Therefore, cross-linking can not only increase the porosity, but can also enhance the mechanical stability.94 The cross-linking of GO paper with glutaraldehyde (GA) by exposing GO paper to vapors of GA shows better interlayer adhesion. This effect can increase the elastic modulus and strength of the composite in comparison with GO paper, by 190% and 60%, respectively.95
Conducting polymers have shown to be potential organic cross-linkers for graphene. However, they tend to swell during the charge/discharge process because of ion doping/un-doping.96 As a result of this, the structure of conductive polymers degrades and their lifetime decreases.65,97–99 Therefore, for sustainable energy storage applications, other electrochemically active organic materials that have a longer life span and higher energy density with fast reversible redox reactions are being investigated. For example, a variety of quinone structures were attached to carbon substrates, and good cyclability and high rate performance were obtained.65,100–102 However, it is still a challenge to find the best quinone structure which shows significant redox capacitance, mechanical and thermal stability and adhesion to carbon.
2,5-Dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DMQ) is an electrochemically active organic molecule. It has been reported that DMQ functionalized graphene exhibited the highest capacitance, up to 650 F g−1 (780 F cm−3) at 5 mV s−1 in aqueous 1 M H2SO4.65 It has been shown that 99% of the capacitance could be retained after 25000 cycles at 50 mV s−1.65 Generally, important parameters for enhancing the electrochemical performance of a graphene/organic 2D hybrid composite include the electrode architecture and the selection of electrochemically active organic molecules.


2.1.2. 2D composites of graphene/inorganic materials. 
Metals and metal oxides which fall under the category of inorganic materials have shown great properties for various energy storage and conversion applications when combined with graphene.103,104 This tremendous potential of graphene/inorganic hybrid composites is because of the synergetic effects that can arise in such composites. The synergetic effects in graphene/inorganic hybrid composites work as follows: (i) graphene can facilitate the uniform nucleation, growth of metal oxides and their assembly into a specific size, shape and crystallinity; (ii) intercalation of metal oxides into graphene layers can prevent the re-stacking of graphene nanosheets; (iii) graphene prevents non-metal oxides from agglomeration during the charge/discharge process in energy storage devices; (iv) there will be good interfacial interactions and electrical contacts between graphene and metal oxides due to oxygen-containing functional groups on graphene nanosheets.2 Many innovative synthesis techniques have been developed to fabricate graphene/inorganic 2D hybrid composites. Inorganic nanostructures could be incorporated between graphene sheets through chemisorption interaction.105 Metal sulfide, metal telluride, metal selenide, metal nitride, carbonaceous material and multi-element compound incorporated graphene/inorganic hybrid composites have demonstrated great performance in energy storage and conversion devices.106–108 Wang et al.109 synthesized graphene/cobalt sulfide (CoS2) hybrid composites through a facile solvothermal process which was used for high performance supercapacitors. The graphene/CoS2 nanocomposites displayed a specific capacitance of 314 F g−1 in 6 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution.109 Carbonaceous materials such as carbon black and CNTs that can be used as a spacer in graphene hybrid composites have been extensively investigated. For instance, Qiu et al.110 applied CNTs as a spacer between graphene nanosheets and a specific capacitance of 140 F g−1 was achieved at a current density of 100 mA g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 solution. Carbonaceous materials led to an increase in the specific capacitance of graphene when applied as spacers in graphene hybrid composites. However, these spacers are not pseudocapacitive materials where, for instance, the charge storage mechanism is based on faradaic, redox reactions.111 Hence, pseudo-capacitive materials with high pseudo-capacitance are required to be used as spacers in graphene/inorganic hybrid composites in order to achieve a higher energy density.112 Ruthenium(IV) oxide (RuO2), iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4), copper(II) oxide (CuO), nickel(II) hydroxide [Ni(OH)2], MnO2, and Co3O4 are various inorganic pseudo-capacitive materials that can be used as spacers in graphene.113
MnO2 is the most common pseudo-capacitive material that can be used as a spacer between graphene layers because of its low cost and low environmental impact.114 Graphene/MnO2 hybrid composites fabricated by a filtration method provided a specific capacitance of 389 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4. Table 3 shows the electrochemical/electrical performance and the underlying mechanism of some graphene/inorganic 2D hybrid composites.
Table 3 The electrochemical/electrical performance of graphene/inorganic 2D hybrid composites




Material
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Electrolyte
Main result and phenomenon
Reference




Graphene/MnO2 composite prepared by thermal decomposition
Maximum specific capacitance of 450 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 1000 mA g−1
6 M KOH
High electrochemical performance was attributed to the prevention of graphene aggregation by the MnO2 NPs and the synergistic effects between graphene and MnO2 NPs

115



Graphene/RuO2 composite prepared by combining sol–gel and low-temperature annealing processes
Maximum specific capacitance of 570 F g−1 and 97.7% retention after 1000 cycles
1 M H2SO4
Increase in specific capacitance is due to the positive synergistic effect between graphene nanosheets and RuO2

116



Graphene/Fe3O4 composite synthesized through in situ reductions of iron hydroxide between graphene nanosheets
Reversible specific capacity approaching 1026 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles at 35 mA g−1 and 580 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 700 mA g−1
1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate
Capacity was improved as graphene nanosheets provide a large contact surface for individual dispersion of well-adhered Fe3O4 particles and act as an excellent conductive agent to provide a highway for electron transport

117



rGO/CuO composite synthesized by a hydrothermal method
Maximum specific capacitance of 326 F g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1, no loss of capacity up to 1500 cycles
0.5 M K2SO4
Enhancement in the specific capacitance is attributed to the presence of rGO with CuO, where rGO acts as a conductivity enhancer and provides better pathways for ion intercalation

118



Vertically aligned graphene/Co3O4/cotton fabric composite
Maximum specific capacitance of 580 F g−1 and 86.2% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles
2 M KOH
Excellent electrochemical performances were attributed to the particular structure of vertically aligned graphene nanosheets and the flexibility of the carbon fabric

119



Graphene/NiCo2S4 composite prepared by a hydrothermal route
Maximum specific capacitance of 1040 F g−1 and 89.2% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles
PVA–KOH gel
Very high specific capacitance and greatly improved cycling stability were attributed to the synergistic effect between graphene and NiCo2S4 NPs

120



Graphene/Ni(OH)2 composite synthesized by an electrostatic induced stretch growth method
Maximum specific capacitance of 1503 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
6 M KOH
Specific capacitance decreased with an increase in the scan rate. The enhanced electrochemical performance was attributed to the improved electrical conductivity and facilitated ion transport and diffusion rate

121



N-doped graphene/Mn3O4 synthesized by an in situ hydrothermal method
Specific capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1
1 M LiPF6 dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1:1 volume ratio)
Improvement in the electrochemical properties of the material was attributed to graphene, which acts as both an electron conductor and a volume buffer layer, and N doping allows for fast electron and ion transfer by decreasing the energy barrier

122



N-doped graphene/MoS2 synthesized by a one pot hydrothermal route
Maximum capacity of 1169 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
0.5 M H2SO4
Better electrochemical performance was obtained due to synergism between de-layered MoS2 and N-doped graphene

123



Holey graphene (HG)/Ni(OH)2 composite fabricated by a facile one-step method using HG as a framework structure and Ni(OH)2 as a spacer
Maximum specific capacitance of 1750 F g−1 at 15 wt% loading of HG


The two kinds of pores facilitate the kinetics of processes occurring in an electrode without compromising its conductivity and assured high charge storage capacity and rate capability

124



Graphene/Co(OH)2 composite on few layer graphene synthesized by a solution method
Maximum specific capacitance of 567.1 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1
1 M KOH
High capacitance was attributed to the presence of highly conductive graphene to reduce the resistance of the electrode

125



Graphene/CoS
Maximum charge capacity of 1056 mA h g−1
1 M LiPF6 in a 1:1 w/w mixture of EC and DEC
High capacity is due to disordering of the carbon structure by the insertion of CoS NPs in the graphene layers

126



Graphene/SnO2 composite synthesized by a self-assembly method
A steady specific capacity of 760 mA h g−1 at a current density of 8 mA g−1
1 M LiPF6 in EC and DEC (1:1 volume ratio)
Rise and drop of specific capacity were observed with an increase in the cycle number. This increase and drop was attributed to the poor and effective wetting of the composite with the electrolyte

127



Graphene/CoCO3 composite synthesized by a solvothermal route
A specific charge capacity over 1000 mA h g−1
1 M LiPF6 dissolved in a 1:1:1 mixture of EC, EMC (ethylene methyl carbonate) and DMC (dimethyl carbonate)
Charge/discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency decreased with an increase in the cycle number and current density. The high capacity was attributed to the conversion reactions from Co2+ to Co0 and C4+ to C0

128



Graphene/tin(IV) sulfide (SnS2) composite synthesized by transforming tin oxide NPs into 2D tin disulfide nanoplates directly on/between graphene nanosheets
A reversible specific capacity of 668 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA g−1


Specific capacity is almost stable with the cycle number and 93% retention was obtained after 70 cycles. An increase in the surface area and separation between SnS2 nanoplates and the graphene layers led to an increase in its cycling and rate performance

129



rGO/MnOx composite fabricated by in situ reduction
Maximum specific capacitance value of 202 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 with a mass loading of 2 mg cm−2
0.5 M aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte
71.8% capacitance retention was obtained when the scan rate increased 50 times which was attributed to the excellent electron and ion percolation network in the composite, the co-existence of mixed valence cations (Mn2+, Mn3+, and Mn4+) in manganese oxides and the synergistic effect between the two components of the composite

130



rGO/acid treated SWCNT composite (weight ratio of 1:9) fabricated via a spray coating technique
The specific capacitance value of the flexible supercapacitor (unbent) was 62.4 F g−1, which decreased to 55.7 F g−1 (89.3% retention) and 46.6 F g−1 (74.7% retention) after 1000 galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) and 200 bending with application of 3000 GCD cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1
PVA-based IL polymer electrolyte conducted with an ionic liquid of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4)
High electrochemical performance was attributed to the high surface resistance induced by the cracks on the rGO/ASWCNT film and formation of cracks that lead to an irreversible loss of junctions between the rGO/ASWCNT composite and electrolyte

131



Mesoporous rGO (m-rGO) synthesized by a Zn particle reduction method
Maximum specific capacitance of 106.7 F g−1 at a discharge rate of 0.1 A g−1
1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoro-methylsulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI) ionic liquid electrolyte
The high capacitance performance of the m-rGO in the ionic liquid electrolyte was attributed to the large contribution of mesopores, which facilitates the diffusion of large ions

132



rGO-IL-MWCNTs fabricated by a one pot hydrothermal process and ultrasonication
Maximum specific capacity of 263.9 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1
Pure ionic liquid electrolyte
The superior electrochemical performance of RGO-IL-MWCNTs was attributed to the highest BET surface area and more diffusion pathways

133



Cellulose nanofibril (CNF)–reduced graphene oxide (rGO)–molybdenum oxynitride (MoOxNy) aerogel film synthesized by freeze-drying a CNF/GO/MoO3 aqueous dispersion followed by subsequent in situ hydrazine reduction
Maximum specific capacitance of 680 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1
1 M H2SO4
The specific capacitance increased after the first 400 cycles, which was attributed to the improved ion accessibility in the porous CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel film after repetitive charge–discharge cycles

134



Cellulose nanofibril (CNF)/rGO/CNT hybrid aerogel
Maximum specific capacitance of 252 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.5 A g−1
H2SO4/PVA gel
The supercapacitor retained 70% of its capacitance when the current density was changed from 0.5 to 10 A g−1. This was attributed to the highly continuous porous structure and the strong hydrophilicity of the aerogel electrode that facilitated the diffusion of ions

135



rGO/CNF hybrid aerogel
Maximum specific capacitance of 207 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1
H2SO4/PVA gel
The excellent electrochemical performance was ascribed to the aggregation of graphene nanosheets being effectively prevented by CNFs, and the superior hydrophilic characteristic of CNFs

136



Highly porous Ni–Co–O@RGO/activate carbon synthesized using a surfactant-assisted microwave irradiation technique
Maximum specific capacitance of 1903 F g−1 at 0.8 A g−1
KOH/K3Fe(CN)6
The electrode showed a longer discharge time compared to the charge time. This was attributed to the active material and the redox couple-carrying electrolyte

137



Nitrogen-doped graphene/activated carbon composite synthesized by a method combining vacuum filtration with post-annealing in a NH3 atmosphere
Specific capacitance of 308 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
6.0 M KOH aqueous electrolyte
The high capacitance of the composite paper was ascribed to the electric double-layer behavior and the reversible redox reactions of the nitrogen and oxygen groups

138



NiCoO2/rGO/Ni foam composite nanoarrays synthesized by a simple hydrothermal synthesis method
Specific capacity of 1286C g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
6.0 mol L−1 KOH aqueous electrolyte
NiCoO2/rGO/NF exhibited a better cycle stability with a capacity retention of 89% after 2500 cycles. The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to more electroactive sites for faradaic reaction due to ultrathin NiCoO2/rGO nanoflake arrays on the Ni foam

139



MnO2 (needle-like nanostructure)/rGO hybrid fabricated through an electrostatic coprecipitation procedure
Specific capacitance of 375 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
Aqueous 0.5 M Na2SO4
Capacitance only decreased by 7% of the initial capacitance after 500 cycles which expressed the proper electrochemical stability of such an electrode material. Electrochemical studies showed that this morphology can provide a suitable interface for cation exchange and charge storage

140





Graphene/transition metal oxide (TMO) hybrid composites have great potential in energy storage devices such as batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells and catalysis.2 This is because: (i) TMOs have natural capability to keep charged ions on their surfaces without intermixing;141 (ii) graphene/TMO nanostructures exhibit high conductivity by injecting electrons from graphene into TMOs and increasing the hole concentration in graphene;142 (iii) graphene/TMOs have an extraordinarily high surface area which maximizes the interaction with the electrolyte and further involvement in electrochemical reactions and charge interactions;2 (iv) TMO nanosheets between graphene nanosheets prevent the re-stacking of graphene layers. These are some factors that determine the overall power performance of supercapacitor electrodes, which are suitable for batteries and electrocatalysis as well. Based on these attributes, a layered model of graphene/TMOs has been developed for use in metal-ion battery anodes, cathodes, and supercapacitors.68 Although the specific properties of graphene and TMOs have been revealed and investigated,143–145 we are still far from understanding how we can operate these kinds of materials effectively with high performance in a heterostructured architecture. This is because, (i) it is important in batteries and supercapacitors that whether the layered TMOs change the phase during operation and (ii) how their long- and short-term stability is affected by the intercalation process, besides, (iii) how the properties of new TMOs can be boosted by using graphene substrates. To address these challenges, it is important to carry out physical, chemical, and structural characterizations in detail. In the case of layered heterostructures (Fig. 4), it is also significant to understand the role of the interface structure in the physical, chemical, and mechanical behavior of hybrid nanostructures. Therefore, the study of various 2D heterostructured graphene/TMO hybrid composites and demonstration of their performances are expected to achieve fundamental dimensionality effects on the properties of 2D nanomaterial structures and facilitate their usage in the energy storage field. In fact, the assembly of graphene and TMO nanosheets into heterostructured architectures can open an opportunity to manufacture high performance electrodes, especially for portable electronics and wearable devices, which have gained great attention recently and are growing fast.
 Fig. 4  Schematic structures of (a) some layered TMOs, (b) graphene and (c) graphene/TMO hybrid layered composites for electrochemical energy storage. Panel (a) is adapted with permission from data published in ref. 146 Copyright 2016, Materials Research Society. 


2.1.3. Creation of defects in graphene. 
Various efforts have been made to increase the energy density of graphene. Generally, this can be achieved either by increasing the active surface area or by introducing pseudo-capacitive materials. A new approach is to create defects in graphene. Previously it was thought that defects reduce the graphene performance. Therefore, all endeavors were made to heal the defects in graphene. However, it has been understood that defects on graphene sheets can enhance their electrochemical performance beyond the predictable limits if they are properly engineered.47 Thus, this has turned the attention of researchers towards the creation and enlargement of defects to enhance the electrochemical performance. The creation of defects on graphene sheets can increase their energy density in energy storage devices. However, structural defects like holes, lattice defects, grain boundaries with broken hexagonal symmetry and merged graphene domains may decrease the electrical conductivity and influence the reactivity of graphene.66,147,148
The incorporation of pseudo-capacitive materials into graphene results in an increase of the pseudocapacitance of GHCs. However, the presence of excessive functional groups on the graphene surface can decrease its electrical conductivity. Thus, the distribution and density of these functional groups should be controlled in such a way that it doesn't limit the performance of graphene as an electrochemical device, and it should also increase the charge storage capacity. Commonly, defects in graphene are extrinsic or intrinsic in nature. Stone–Wales defects, vacancies, adatoms, and armchair and zigzag edges are intrinsic defects, whereas doping of graphene with N, boron (B), sulfur (S) or phosphorus (P) atoms falls under the category of extrinsic defects.149
N is the most commonly doped heteroatom in carbon when it comes to energy applications.150 N is a neighbor of carbon; thus, it is relatively easy to bring the two types of atoms together. Doping of carbon materials with N generally leads to an increase in the pore size and pore volume and can also lead to the generation of additional pores.151,152 N atoms provide necessary pseudocapacitance. Thus, its usage in carbon materials for energy storage applications is promising.153 S, B and P can be co-doped with N in carbon for energy applications.150 Graphene co-doped with B and N shows a higher specific capacitance than the one doped with B or N atoms alone.154 Doping of graphene with B (3.95 at%) and N (19.73 at%) resulted in up to 130.7 F g−1 (200 mA g−1, 1 M H2SO4) capacitance and stability up to 2000 cycles.155Fig. 5 shows mechanisms for enhancing the performance of doped graphene in energy storage applications.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of mechanisms for enhancing the efficiency of doped graphene in energy storage applications. (a) In supercapacitors the presence of dopants generally improves the capacitance via faradaic contribution;160 (b) the doped atoms create a charge polarization in the carbon network, which may enhance the wettability of the electrode by the electrolyte and even improve the in-plane electronic conductivity;160 (c) the electropositive character of B enhances the binding energy with Li in Li ion batteries (LIBs), which results in a shorter bond length and smaller volumetric expansion upon intercalation;160 (d) the presence of heteroatoms introduces additional lithiation sites which result in an increase of the specific capacity of an anode. Adapted with permission from data published in ref. 160 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
To increase the accessible surface area of graphene, defect-induced pores are incorporated into graphene. Porous graphene exhibits a capacitance of 200 F g−1 at a current density of 700 mA g−1.156 However, the optimization of the pore size and location is another great challenge. An increase in capacitance was observed by Luo et al.,157 when the hole size of graphene varied from 4.2 Å to 10 Å because of easy penetration of diffused ions.
The formation of holes on and through the thickness of graphene sheets can be achieved by removing a large number of atoms from the graphitic plane that results in holey graphene (HG).158 It should be noted that there is a fundamental difference between HG and porous graphene. The developed pores in HG are because of large structural defects whereas pores in porous graphene are empty spaces between graphene sheets. The pores in HG make the conduction of ions easier and ion transport is highly facilitated (Fig. 6a). Therefore, HG exhibits a higher intrinsic capacitance compared to graphene (Fig. 6b).159Fig. 6c also shows cross-sectional SEM images of HG and graphene films at an equivalent areal mass density of 0.31 mg cm−2. It can be observed that the thickness of HG is almost half that of the graphene film.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of ion diffusion pathways across graphene and HG, (b) specific capacitances versus current densities in graphene and HG, and (c) different colors of graphene and HG solutions, as well as cross-sectional SEM images of HG and graphene at an equivalent areal mass density of 0.31 mg cm−2 and cross-sectional SEM images at identical magnifications of HG and graphene films. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 158 Copyright 2017, Taylor & Francis. 

2.2. Graphene-based 3D hybrid composites
It has been demonstrated that 2D GHCs can provide excellent efficiency in energy storage devices. However, the mass transfer, ion access, conductivity and surface area of 2D graphene are limited due to easy agglomeration, re-stacking and blocking the active sites of graphene nanosheets, which leads to poor electrocatalytic properties.161 Thus, research is getting somewhat inclined towards developing 3D graphene-based network structures to find a way of tackling these issues.9,39,162 In fact, 3D graphene-based network structures exhibit (i) high electrical conductivity, (ii) low diffusion resistance, easy electrolyte penetration to cations or photons, (iii) high electroactive areas, and (iv) improved structural stability, due to high structural porosity and space between graphene sheets.42,161,163 Therefore, this provides opportunities for 3D graphene-based hierarchical architectures to serve as high efficiency energy storage devices with high stability and power density.42 For example, Wang et al.42 fabricated a 3D few layer graphene/CNT foam architecture using an ambient pressure chemical vapor deposition process (Fig. 7a and b). The synthesized composite contained a homogenous and densely packed nanostructure with a large surface area (743 m2 g−1), low density (normally <500 g m−2), high electrochemical stability (∼99% capacitance kept over 8500 cycles), great specific capacitance (286 F g−1), excellent energy density (39.72 W h kg−1) and a superior power density (∼154.67 kW kg−1). A comparison of the obtained energy density and power density between the 3D few layer graphene/CNT foam and some other synthesized composites, including graphene films (Fig. 7c), indicated that this unique 3D architecture was promising for future energy storage devices.42
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a three-step process for the preparation of a 3D graphene/CNT foam architecture; step 1: the pristine nickel foam was treated with oxygen plasma to form a nickel oxide layer on the nickel foam (note: the created oxide layer provides a barrier layer to minimize the diffusion of carbon into the nickel foam and prevent the formation of undesired Ni3C). Step 2: an iron layer with a thickness of 2 nm was deposited on the surface of the nickel foam as a catalyst. Step 3: the sample was loaded into a chemical vapor deposition furnace, and then hydrogen and acetylene were applied to grow the composite nanostructure on the surface of the coated nickel backbone. (b) Optical micrograph and SEM image of the pristine nickel, graphene and graphene/CNT foams (inset displays the high magnification SEM of the nickel foam). (c) Ragone plot, comparing the energy and power densities of the graphene/CNT foam with some other composites. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 42 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
Lin et al.163 synthesized a robust flexible 3D graphene sponge/S NP composite (G/SNPs), through a facile and environmentally friendly reduction method induced by using a self-assembly technique (Fig. 8a). They have demonstrated that the 3D G/SNP structure offered fast Li+ transport, excellent electrolyte absorbability and efficient electrochemical redox reactions. Therefore, 3D G/SNPs provided a stable capacity of 580 mA h g−1, after over 500 cycles at a high rate of 0.0015 mA g−1, corresponding to a high capacity retention of 78.4% and to a low fading rate of 0.043% per cycle (Fig. 8b).163 These results are much better than those of the rGO/S composite cathode. The flexible 3D G/SNP design allows the increase of S mass loading over the whole electrode which can be applied in flexible Li–S batteries.163
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D G/SNPs along with digital images of the precursor, hydrogel, sponge and electrode. (b) Cycling performance of the 3D G/SNP and S/rGO cathodes at over 500 cycles at a high rate of 1500 mA g−1, as well as a schematic display of the 3D G/SNP composite with a continuous electronic transport pathway and stable framework. (c) A schematic of the two-step process flow to fabricate the 3D HG/Nb2O5 hierarchically porous composite architecture. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 163 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC). Panel (c) is adapted with permission from data published in ref. 164 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 
Progress has been made in the design of 3D GHCs for ultrahigh-rate energy storage at practical levels of mass loading (more than 10 milligrams per square centimeter). Sun et al.164 fabricated a 3D HG/niobia (Nb2O5) nanostructure that provided excellent electron transport properties. Fig. 8 shows the demonstration of the two-step process to synthesise a 3D hierarchically porous composite structure. The hierarchical porous structure also facilitated quick ion transport.164 The obtained results indicated that if the porosity in the holey graphene backbone was systematically tailored, then charge transport in the hierarchical structure could be optimized to deliver high areal capacity and high-rate capability at practical levels of mass loading (from 1 to 11 mg cm−2). The 3D HG/Nb2O5 composite displayed a small difference in specific capacity for mass loadings in practical device applications at rates as high as 10C. The high area capacity with high-rate capability achievements in wide range of mass loadings indicates a vital step towards practical EESDs.164
3. Performance and properties of graphene-based hybrid composites
3.1. Thermal conductivity
It has been reported that the thermal conductivity of single layer graphene is in the range of 1500–5800 W m−1 K−1.165,166 This makes graphene an efficient material for thermal management in microelectronic devices, where their electronic components shrink ever more and their usage dramatically increases. However, when the number of atomic planes increases from 2 to 4 in a few layers of graphene then its thermal conductivity decreases from 2800 to 1300 W m−1 K−1.167 This phenomenon is due to the coupling of low energy phonons in cross planes and changes in phonon Umklapp scattering (i.e., scattering results in the transformation of a wave vector to another Brillouin zone).167 On one hand, thermal energy storage is gaining good attention because of increasingly high demand for clean energy due to the depletion of fossil fuels.168 Thermal energy storage is affected by thermal conductivity as low thermal conductivity can prolong charging/discharging periods. Thermal energy storage works on the principle of storing latent and sensible heat. Materials with high thermal energy storage capacity generally possess low thermal conductivity.169 Thus, thermal energy storage materials are composited with graphene to enhance their thermal energy storage efficiency.
Mehrali et al.170 fabricated a palmitic acid (C16H32O2)/GO (PA/GO) composite using a vacuum impregnation method, and tested it as a phase change material in thermal energy storage materials. The prepared composite exhibited a thermal conductivity up to 1.24 W m−1 K−1 in the solid state which was three times higher than that of pure PA.170 Yavari's group also synthesized a nanostructured graphene/1-octadecanol hybrid composite prepared by mixing of graphene with 1-octadecanol.171 Their results show that the thermal conductivity of the prepared composite increased up to 140% which motivates its use in thermal energy storage devices.171 The increase in the thermal conductivity of graphene-based polymer composites is due to the network of graphene fillers which provides lower resistance for phonons to travel, as phonons are the main reason for thermal conduction in polymers. In contrast, the covalent bond between the matrix and filler reduces phonon scattering at the interface of the matrix and filler.172
GHCs are also used in thermoelectric devices.173 In order to improve thermoelectric conversion, low thermal conductivity is required in thermoelectric devices. Graphene has high intrinsic thermal conductivity.174 Thus, graphene is composited with various materials to reduce the thermal conductivity.175,176 GHCs could decrease the thermal conductivity and boost the performance of thermoelectric materials by boundary phonon scattering. For instance, Suh et al.174 developed a graphene/Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 composite and the thermal conductivity of that composite was observed to be 0.7 W m−1 K−1, at room temperature, whilst the Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 ingot had a thermal conductivity of ∼1 W m−1 K−1.174 Also, a decrease in the thermal conductivity was observed in PbTe (graphene/PbTe, ∼0.9 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature), BiSbTe (graphene/BiSbTe, ∼2.1 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature) and CoSb3 (graphene/CoSb3, ∼1.25 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature) incorporated graphene.175–177
3.2. Thermal stability
Thermal stability is one of the outstanding characteristics of graphene which makes it an attractive filler for thermally stable composites.178 The thermal stability of a material is generally determined by its thermal degradation temperature. A good understanding of the thermal stability of GHCs is important to tune their properties for future energy storage and conversion devices. The thermal stability of GHCs is usually assessed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).179 A mass loss may occur due to evaporation of adsorbed water and/or decomposition of oxygen containing groups in graphene or GO,180 when temperature increases, for example during charge/discharge cycles and electrochemical reactions. TGA studies of GO indicate that the thermal stability of GO is stable below 200 °C; however, decomposition of carboxylic and release of CO2 gas could take place at above 200 °C, which lead to reduction of GO thermal stability.181 It has been observed that the mass loss of pure graphene occurs rapidly at around 500 °C.182 This mass loss affects the structural stability (strength and stiffness) and electrochemical performance of GHCs.183–185
Conducting polymers have been composited with graphene for use in energy storage devices. The TGA analysis of a graphene/PANI composite shows a small mass loss up to 100 °C and almost a 43% mass loss at 800 °C.186 A negligible mass loss was observed for a GO/PVA composite up to 250 °C and a mass loss of almost 40% was observed at 300 °C.187 The strong interactions between PVA and graphene suppress the mobility of polymer segments at the interfaces of PVA and GO. Thus, the peak degradation temperature in the case of the GO/PVA composite was higher by 36 °C in comparison with pure PVA. If only 1 wt% of graphene was added to PMMA then its degradation temperature shifts by 10 °C and its degradation rate is slowed down.188 TGA analysis of 10 wt% loaded GO in PET shows no appreciable weight loss up to 200 °C related to the removal of GO's oxygen bearing functional groups whereas a weight loss is observed in pure GO.189 The mass loss of the GO/PET composite is 44.1% at 412.5 °C.
Graphene/inorganic hybrid composites also show a mass loss with an increase in temperature. It has been reported that the degradation temperature of a graphene/MnO2 composite is around 400 °C.182 It also shows a weight loss of about 45.6% at a temperature up to 550 °C. This shift of the degradation temperature to the lower side (in comparison with pure graphene) was due to the catalytic effect of MnO2. A rGO/RuO2 composite displays a degradation temperature at around 200 °C.190 The weight loss at about 274 °C was due to the removal of crystalline water in hydrous ruthenium oxide which suggests the hydrous nature of RuO2 nanoparticles. Beyond 274 °C, the carbon sketch of rGO burns due to the catalytic effect of ruthenium oxides which results in a subsequent weight loss. The thermal stability of some GHCs has been listed in Table 4.
Table 4 Thermal stability of some GHCs




Material
Thermal stability characteristics (in air)
Reference




GO/polystyrene
Thermal degradation temperature increases by 73 °C (in comparison with pure PS) with addition of 2 wt% GO in PS. Negligible mass loss up to 300 °C

191



Graphene/Fe3O4
Thermal degradation temperature is 350 °C with almost a 5% mass loss. There is almost a negligible mass loss beyond 520 °C. The DSC curve indicates a strong exothermal peak at 430 °C which is assigned to decomposition of the carbon skeleton

192



GNS/CuO
Thermal degradation temperature is 250 °C. There is an intense mass loss from 250 °C to 800 °C. Almost 30% mass loss up to 1000 °C

193



rGO/Co3O4
Thermal degradation temperature is 350 °C. Catalytic combustion of nanosized Co3O4 reduces the decomposition temperature of graphene. 51 wt% rGO loaded with Co3O4 to make the Co3O4/rGO composite. This composite shows almost a 43% mass loss at around 500 °C

194



Graphene/MoS2
Initial mass loss is observed at about 250 °C. Rapid weight loss is observed at 700 °C which indicates that MoS2 inhibits the oxidation of underlying graphene and the stability of the composite decreases gradually beyond 800 °C due to the presence of graphene

195



Graphene/SnO2
Mass loss is about 10.9% at 800 °C whereas bare SnO2 doesn't show any appreciable mass loss up to 800 °C. Thus, any weight change in graphene/SnO2 corresponds to the oxidation of graphene

196



GO/TiO2
9% mass loss up to 200 °C. This mass loss is much lower than GO which indicates decreased amount of oxygenated functional groups in GO

197



Graphene/SnS2
Thermal degradation temperature is around 350 °C. 21.6% mass loss was observed up to 1000 °C

129





3.3. Electrochemical performance (specific capacitance)
The electrical properties of GHCs play an important role in depicting their behavior in energy storage devices. An ideal energy storage device requires high power density.198 A single layer of graphene has a theoretical specific capacitance of 550 F g−1.199 However, its full potential cannot be realized due to re-stacking of graphene nanosheets.200 Therefore, graphene is generally composited with pseudo-capacitive materials to enhance its specific capacitance.201 The electrical conductivity of pseudo-capacitive materials is low and they usually exhibit slow electron transport. The electron transport can be accelerated when they are composited with graphene, which results in an enhancement of their electrical conductivity.202 High surface area and electrical conductivity of a material are two factors that contribute to its specific capacitance.203 Graphene has been composited with many metal/metal oxide NPs and conducting polymers to enhance its specific capacitance.202–205 For example, a synthesized graphene/silver hybrid composite exhibits a capacitance of 220 F g−1 in potassium nitrate (KNO3) solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, which is higher than that of a graphene electrode with 140 F g−1.203 This enhancement of capacitance in the synthesized graphene/silver hybrid composite is because of the large pseudo-capacitance (due to residual C–O and CO functional groups), lower aggregation and relatively slow charge/discharge kinetics.203 A graphene/silver sulfide (Ag2S) hybrid composite fabricated by a solvothermal process also exhibited a pseudo-capacitance of 1063 F g−1 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1.206 This increment of capacitance in the graphene/Ag2S hybrid composite is due to redox transitions of Ag2S between a semiconducting and a conducting state. In another study by Chen et al.,205 a graphene/Co(OH)2 hybrid composite was prepared using a water isopropanol mixed solvent which exhibited a specific capacitance of 972 F g−1 in KOH electrolyte. This specific capacitance value was more than those of its individual counterparts [Co(OH)2, 726.1 F g−1 and graphene, 137.6 F g−1], which was due to the effective prohibition of aggregation of graphene nanosheets and the provided much higher surface area by Co(OH)2 NPs.205 The synergistic effect between the components of GHCs also improves the capacitance of the composite system. For instance, a graphene foam/Co(OH)2 composite exhibited an improved specific capacitance of 1139 F g−1 at a current density of 10000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.207 This improvement is due to a synergistic effect between graphene and Co(OH)2 nanorods.207
Some conducting polymers were composited with graphene mainly to leverage their pseudocapacitive effect.199 Polyacrylate, poly(phenylenediamine), PANI, PMMA and PPy are some well-known polymers that have been composited with graphene to increase the specific capacitance of the system.208–211 Some factors like (i) the dispersion state of graphene in the polymer matrix (i.e., how uniformly it is dispersed in the polymer matrix), (ii) interfacial interaction (i.e., weak or strong) and (iii) network structure in the matrix affect the properties of graphene/polymer composites. A high specific capacitance of 1126 F g−1 was observed for a graphene/PANI composite which was synthesized by an in situ polymerization reduction/dedoping–redoping process.212 Also, the power density and energy density of the graphene/PANI composite were ∼140 W kg−1 and ∼35 W h kg−1, respectively, which were higher than those of pure graphene or PANI212 [note: the power density and energy density of pure graphene are ∼15 W kg−1 and ∼5 W h kg−1, respectively.212 Also, the power density and energy density of pure PANI are 42 W kg−1 and 11.4 W h kg−1, respectively213]. A GO/PANI composite prepared by in situ polymerizations of aniline monomer in the presence of GO also exhibited a specific capacitance of 480 F g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1.214 Saswata et al.215 employed an in situ polymerization method to fabricate a GNS/PPy composite. The prepared composite showed a specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at a scan rate of 100 mV S−1 which was higher than those of its individual components (PPy, 137 F g−1 and GNS, 34 F g−1).215 The higher specific capacitance of the graphene/PPy composite even at a very low scan rate was attributed to the synergistic effect between PPy and graphene nanosheets.
3.4. Optical properties
It has been reported that graphene, despite being one atom thick, can be optically visualized and present remarkable optical properties.216 The visual transparency/transmittance of graphene can be defined through the fine structure constant.217 The fine structure constant describes the coupling between relativistic electrons and light which is related to quantum electrodynamics rather than materials science. The linear dispersion of Dirac electrons in graphene causes Pauli blocking which leads to broadband saturable absorption.218 This makes graphene suitable for ultrafast mode blocked lasers. Also, luminescence can be achieved by non-equilibrium carriers and physical or chemical treatment of graphene.219 Hence, this makes graphene an ideal optoelectronic and photonic material.
The transparency of graphene in visible light is given by T = 1 − πα, where α is the fine structure constant.217 Graphene has potential for use in organic photovoltaic solar cells due to: (i) high electrical conductivity, (ii) transparency and (iii) power conversion efficiency.220 The optical bandgap of GO can be changed from 3.5 eV to 1.0 eV during controlling of the reduction process.221 Graphene films prepared from exfoliated graphite oxide followed by thermal reduction display a transparency more than 70%, over the 1000–3000 nm region.222
GHCs could be used in various photovoltaic solar cells.220 Ju et al.223 reported that N-doped graphene nanoplatelets can be used as superior metal-free counter electrodes for organic dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). That composite exhibited an optical transmittance of ∼83%.223 The optical limiting properties (high transmittance at low incident intensities and slight opaqueness at high incident intensities of laser pulses224) of graphene/polymer composites have also been studied.225 For instance, a graphene/triphenyl porphyrin composite fabricated by Xu et al.226 displayed a superior optical limiting effect due to the photoinduced electron and energy transfer mechanism. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that GO/polyacrylonitrile composites could provide a better non-linear optical response than GO/PMMA, GO/PSS and GO/polycarbonate composites, with 59% transmission at the 532 nm wavelength.225
3.5. Chemical properties
The chemical reactivity of graphene depends upon the structural nature of graphene edges.227 Graphene edges can be in states of an arm chair, zigzag or combination of both. Fig. 9a–c show the state of the electron cloud near the graphene nano-ribbon (GNR) edges. Zigzag edges show localization of electrons near the edges due to the enhancement of the local density of states near the Fermi energy level.228 Due to coulombic interactions between different energy states of electrons, the spin polarization of different energy states takes place.229 Each carbon atom of zigzag edges contains one unpaired electron which is active for reacting with other reactants, whilst carbon atoms of the arm chair edge side are more stable in chemical reactivity due to the triple covalent bonds between the two open edge carbon atoms of every edge hexagonal ring (Fig. 9d).230
 Fig. 9  A schematic illustration of electron localization for (a) armchair edged bilayered GNR at graphitic separation, (b) armchair edged GNR at 2.4 Å separation, (c) zigzag edged bilayered GNR at graphitic separation and (d) graphene with zigzag and armchair edges. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 235. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. 
Various defects such as vacancies, Stone Wales defects, adatoms, and pore defects can occur in a graphene sheet.231 Therefore, proper recognition of defects in graphene is very important as an understanding of these defects will be helpful for researchers who are working in the area of graphene. Defects associated with dangling bonds such as vacancies enhance the chemical reactivity of graphene.232 Defects which are not associated with dangling bonds such as Stone Wales defects may increase the local reactivity and can also change the density of π electrons.233 Impurities can be attracted to graphene by defects.234 Thus, if the defects are created controllably with a high spatial selectivity, they can be used for local chemical functionalization of graphene.232
Generally, functionalization is carried out to enhance the potential properties of graphene. Selective addition of functional groups on graphene can prevent agglomeration and re-stacking of graphene nanosheets. For example, the presence of hydrophobic or hydrophilic groups on graphene nanosheets prevents graphene agglomeration due to their bulky size or strong polar interaction.236 Functionalization can be classified into two categories: (i) non-chemical functionalization (i.e., sulfonated graphene/PANI237 and rGO/Ag238) and (ii) chemical functionalization (i.e., N-doped graphene239 and B-doped graphene106). The basis of non-chemical functionalization is π interaction between rGO or GO and guest molecules. New covalent bonds are formed between the atoms of guest functional groups and rGO or GO in chemical functionalization.240
Normal aromatic substitution reactions cannot be applied to graphene since chemical modification of graphene in the basal plane is not straightforward.241 Thus, in this respect, the chemistry of graphene resembles that of carbon nanotubes and fullerenes.242 Due to the atomically flat surface of graphene, the formation of carbon–carbon bonds can be applied to graphene with subsequent creation of sp3 carbon centers in a honeycomb lattice of graphene in place of sp2 carbons.241 The edges of graphene which contain dangling bonds are most reactive,243 and hydrazine (N2H4) is generally used for the chemical reduction of GO.244 Most of the oxygen-containing functional groups on GO are in the form of either epoxide or hydroxyl groups. N2H4 generally opens the rings of epoxides through H abstraction from N2H4 and hydrazino alcohols are formed due to the presence of OH groups bound to the graphene surface.245,246 However, oxygen removal does not result through ring opening of the epoxides. The initially produced derivatives, by epoxide ring opening with hydrazine, react further via the formation of an aminoaziridine moiety and a double bond is formed by thermal elimination of diimide.247
3.6. Mechanical properties
Graphene is considered as a potential candidate for reinforcement in structural composites due to its excellent mechanical properties. The tensile strength and Young's modulus of graphene have been reported to be ∼130 GPa and up to 1 TPa, respectively.147 The interfacial bonding between graphene and the matrix is strong because of its high surface energy and thus, stress transfer occurs more efficiently.248 Hence, graphene has been used as reinforcement in structural composites, due to this remarkable attribute. Recently, graphene has been investigated as a reinforcement filler in polymer and metal matrix composites.249–253 It has been demonstrated that even a very low loading of graphene can enhance the mechanical properties of the matrix to a greater extent.254,255 Graphene deflects the advancing crack very effectively which in turn increases the fracture toughness and strength of GHCs.256 Although graphene has been composited with many metals and polymers, it has limited applications in energy storage and conversion devices. Some metals and metal oxides like nickel (Ni), Pt, palladium (Pd), zinc oxide (ZnO), MnO2, RuO2, and Ca(OH)2 have been composited with graphene for use in energy storage and conversion devices.257–261
It has been reported by Ren et al.262 that a graphene/Ni hybrid composite synthesized through an electrochemical deposition method exhibits an elastic modulus of 240 GPa with a hardness of 4.6 GPa. Modification of GO sheets with a small amount of Mg2+ and Ca2+ ions led to an increase in the mechanical stiffness and fracture strength up to 200% and 50%, respectively.263 Functionalization of rGO with Si rubber enhanced the tensile strength by 198.39% in comparison with neat Si rubber (tensile strength of rGO/Si rubber is 2.46 MPa and for neat Si rubber it is 1.24 MPa).264
The investigation of Liang et al.265 showed that a molecular-level dispersion of graphene (0.7 wt% GO) into polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) led to a 76% increase in the tensile strength and a 62% improvement in the elastic modulus. The elastic modulus of the GO/PVA composite increased by 10 times in comparison with PVA with only 1.8 vol% loading of graphene.266 This rise in the elastic modulus was due to the large aspect ratio and graphene/PVA interaction which restrict the movement of polymer chains. In another report, a rGO/PMMA hybrid composite with 1 wt% rGO loading presented a tensile strength and elastic modulus of 23 and 865 MPa, respectively.267 These enhancements were due to the good filler/matrix interaction between these two components. The above results indicate that the uniform dispersion of the filler and the filler/matrix interaction play an important role in enhancing the mechanical properties of GHCs. However, high filler loading may lead to the formation of agglomeration which can reduce the mechanical properties. For instance, 2 wt% loading of rGO in the rGO/PMMA composite exhibited an elastic modulus of 850 MPa which was less than that of the same composite with 1 wt% rGO loading (elastic modulus of 865 MPa).267
4. Applications of graphene-based hybrid composites
4.1. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors with high charge and discharge rates, high power density and long cycle performance are potential candidates for EESDs used in portable electronic, electrical and hybrid vehicles.37–40,268 Graphene can be used as an electrode for a supercapacitor due to its remarkable physical, chemical and mechanical properties. However, graphene does not serve the purpose efficiently because of π–π stacking of graphene nanosheets during its formation.8 This reduces the pore size and surface area of graphene and makes it difficult for ion exchange between the electrode material and electrolyte. Therefore, in order to boost the electrochemical performance of graphene, researchers are getting inclined towards GHCs.
Graphene has been investigated extensively with metal oxides, conductive polymers and pore structures for supercapacitor applications. Among graphene-based metal oxide hybrid composites, graphene/MnO2 has been investigated extensively.269,270 Research work of Li et al.271 showed a specific capacitance value of 211.5 F g−1 at a potential scan rate of 2 mV s−1 for graphene/MnO2 composite powders. Also, 75% of the initial capacitance value was retained even after 1000 charge/discharge cycles in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte.271 In another research study by Lee et al.,273 mesoporous graphene nanoballs with a specific surface area of 508 m2 g−1 and a mean pore size of 4.27 nm were produced by using a precursor-assisted chemical vapor deposition technique (Fig. 10a). A supercapacitor fabricated using mesoporous graphene nanoballs as electrodes displays a specific capacitance of 206 F g−1 and 96% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles (Fig. 10a).
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) steps for the synthesis of mesoporous graphene nanoballs and (b) steps for the fabrication of 3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy, along with their TEM, specific capacitance and capacitance retention. Panel (a) is reproduced from data published in ref. 273. Copyright 2010, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 274. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Conductive polymers with low density, high mechanical flexibility, low cost and high pseudocapacitance are promising electrode materials for flexible supercapacitors.274 Therefore, in the case of GHCs manufactured with conductive polymers as an electrode for supercapacitors, a graphene/PANI composite with 50% graphene showed a specific capacitance of 408 F g−1.275 The 3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy (Fig. 10b) demonstrates a remarkable enhancement in the supercapacitance efficiency of PPy in terms of (i) high specific capacitance, (ii) great cycling stability and (iii) high rate capability.274 These pioneering research studies on GHCs opened up the possibility of applying graphene hybrid structures in new flexible supercapacitors with long lifetimes, high energy density and power density. Table 5 shows the summary of some GHCs for supercapacitor applications.
Table 5 GHCs for supercapacitor applications




Material
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Electrolyte
Reference




Graphene/MnO2
Specific capacitance value of 211.5 F g−1 at a potential scan rate of 2 mV s−1
1 M Na2SO4

272



GNS/PANI
Specific capacitance value of 408 F g−1 at a potential scan rate of 5 mV s−1
1 M H2SO4

275



3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy
Maximum specific capacitance of 509 F g−1 at a current density of 0.15 A g−1
1 M HClO4

274



Nanohoneycomb-like strongly coupled CoMoO4-3D graphene
Specific capacitance of 2098 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1
2 M KOH

276



Mn3O4/rGO
Specific capacitance of 193 F g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1
Saturated Na2SO4

277



Covalently grafted PANI/GO (6:1)
Specific capacitance of 422 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1
1 M H2SO4

278



Graphene/RuO2
Maximum specific capacitance of 998 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1
0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4

279





4.2. Lithium ion batteries (LIBs)
LIBs have attracted considerable interest because of their high energy density with high cell voltage and low maintenance.271 LIBs can be effectively used in portable electronic devices, electric or hybrid vehicles and renewable energy applications. However, their usage in transportation and stationary power systems remains challenging due to their high cost and inadequate performance (i.e., poor cycling stability and low electrical conductivity).143 Various efforts have been made on LIBs to overcome these challenges.10,49,122 One promising route is to use graphene as a negative electrode. However, the energy storage capacity and cycling behavior of bare graphene are poor. GHCs are able to overcome these shortcomings.68,178
If graphene is composited with electroactive materials (i.e., metal or metal oxide NPs), the fabricated GHC can provide reversible alloying, insertion, or conversion reactions with Li resulting in an increased energy storage capacity of LIBs.44,280 To be the anode of LIBs, it would be ideal that GHCs have high Li storage capability and robust structures for repeated charge/discharge cycles. Materials like tin (Sn), SnO2 and Si have high specific capacities in comparison with carbon-based materials.281–285 However, their capacities degrade with time and huge changes occur in their volume (over 300%).286 Graphene with a large surface area and high conductivity provides a great platform to support these NPs. Graphene can help electron transport between the electrolyte and electrode during the charge/discharge cycle.287 It also decreases the stress of the collective electrode.287
The 3D porous graphene/Sn hybrid composite fabricated by Qin et al.288 was used as the anode for a Li+ battery and displayed a high capacity of 682 mA h g−1 which was achieved at a high rate current density of 2000 mA g−1 (Fig. 11a). It also had excellent cycling stability with 96.3% capacitance retained after 1000 cycles. The 3D hierarchical graphene/SnO2 frameworks synthesized by Huang et al.289 had a high capacity of 830 mA h g−1, achieved for up to 70 charge/discharge cycles at a current density of 0.1 mA g−1 (Fig. 11b). The graphene/SnO2 frameworks also provided a reversible capacity of 621 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.5 mA g−1. These results indicate that the capacity of the graphene/Sn hybrid composite has better performance than its dioxide composite (graphene/SnO2) at high rate current density. The electronic properties and thereby the Li storage capacity of GHCs could be further enhanced by nitrogen doping. Wang et al.290 investigated N-doped graphene/SnO2 sandwich paper for LIBs (Fig. 11c). The results showed that the obtained composite delivered a capacity of 918 mA h g−1 which was higher than those of individual components (the capacity of pure SnO2 is 881 mA h g−1 and that of graphene paper is 548 mA h g−1).290 However, the capacity of the N-doped graphene/SnO2 was retained at values of 683 and 619 mA h g−1, at current densities of 1000 and 2000 mA g−1, respectively. The above results demonstrated that doping graphene with other elements such as nitrogen could generate materials with large capacity and high rate capability as well as excellent cycling stability which have promising usage in LIBs. Some GHCs for LIBs have been summarized in Table 6.
 Fig. 11  Schematic, TEM/HRTEM and cycling performance of (a) 3D porous graphene/Sn (cycle performance is at a current density of 200 mA g−1), (b) 3D hierarchical graphene/SnO2 frameworks (cycle performance is at a current density of 100 mA g−1) and (c) N-doped graphene/SnO2 sandwich paper (cycle performance is at a current density of 50 mA g−1). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 288. Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 289. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 290. Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 6 GHCs for LIB applications




Material
Electrochemical/electrical performance
Reference




3D hierarchical SnO2/GNS
Capacity of 830 mA h g−1 for up to 70 charge–discharge cycles at 0.1 mA g−1

289



3D porous graphene/Sn
Capacity of 682 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1

288



N doped graphene–SnO2 sandwich paper
Capacity of 918 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1

290



Graphene/MoS2
Capacity of 1150 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1

291



Mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystals on graphene aerogels
Capacity of 956.2 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1

292



Tungsten disulphide nanotubes/graphene
Capacity of 318.6 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1

293



Graphene/TiO2
Specific capacity of 122 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1

294





4.3. Fuel cells
Fuel cells that convert the chemical energy of fuels into electricity through chemical reactions with oxidizing agents have been significantly investigated as an emerging alternative energy source.295,296 This is mainly because fuel cells do not generate any pollution or toxic products. Investigations have been focused on efficiency enhancement and cost reduction of fuel cells. A catalyst in a fuel cell that assists in the oxidation of fuels at the anode and reduction of oxidizing agents at the cathode plays an important role in fuel cell performance. Noble metals such as Pt, Ru, and gold (Au) and their alloys are commonly used as catalysts in fuel cells for fuel oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions (ORR).297–299 However, these metals are too expensive and have limited reserves on Earth. Carbon-based materials have been demonstrated to have potential use in high performance fuel cells, due to their excellent catalytic activities.300,301 Among carbon allotropes, graphene has a higher surface area and can be produced at lower cost. Thus, researchers' focus is shifting towards graphene and its hybrid composites.302 For instance, Yoo et al.303 integrated graphene nanosheets with Pt NPs to make a GNS/Pt hybrid composite. Their results indicated an improved catalytic performance in the methanol oxidation reaction. The fabricated GNS/Pt hybrid composite also displayed a current density of 0.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.6 V.303 This current density is about 4% higher than that of a commercially available C/Pt composite. It also has been reported that almost 80 wt% Pt NPs can be deposited on the surface of GNSs without using any surfactant (Fig. 12a).304 Also, Kou et al.305 uniformly loaded Pt NPs (with ∼2 nm diameter size) on the surface of functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs). The fabricated FGS/Pt composite showed a higher current density in comparison with the commercially available C/Pt composite. The electrochemically active surface areas (ECSAs) and ORR activities could be retained at 62.4% for FGS/Pt, 40% for commercial C/Pt, 49.8% for FGS/Pt, and 33.6% for commercial C/Pt, respectively, after 5000 cycles.305 Thus, FSG/Pt was more stable in comparison with the commercial C/Pt composite. A rGO/Pt composite prepared via chemical reduction of GO and H2PtCl6 using sodium borohydride (NaBH4) as the reducing agent showed almost two times higher current density in comparison with the commercial C/Pt composite.306 However, its overall potential was lower than that of the commercial C/Pt composite.
 Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of GNSs from graphite and their structural SEM images, TEM images of C/Pt and GNS/Pt hybrid composites and cyclic voltammetry performance per unit area over the 40 and 80 wt% C/Pt and 80 wt% GNS/Pt electrodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 2.0 M CH3OH electrolyte solution. (b) Procedure to design graphene nanosheet/Pt on Pd bimetallic nanodendrite hybrids, TEM images of TP-BNGN (three-dimensional Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrites supported on graphene nanosheets) at different magnifications and electrocatalytic cycling stability of the E-TEK (commercial C/Pt) catalyst (curve a), PB (Platinum Black) (curve b), and TP-BNGN (curve c). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 304. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 307. Copyright 2010, The American Chemical Society. 
Bimetallic NPs (i.e., Pt-on-Pd bimetallic) supported on graphene have also drawn considerable attention as they show better catalytic properties in comparison with composites that have only one type of NP (Fig. 12b).307 For example, a graphene/Ru–Pt composite could improve methanol oxidation and its catalytic activity was better than that of the C/Pt composite.297 Graphene/Pt3Co and graphene/Pt3Cr could increase the ORR activity to be three to four times higher than that of the graphene/Pt composite.308
Heteroatom doped carbon materials have also been investigated to replace Pt alternatives to enhance ORR activities in fuel cells.309–311 Among various heteroatoms, N has been investigated extensively. The fabricated N-doped graphene composite by Qu et al.312 showed a current density that is almost three times higher than that of the commercial C/Pt composite. The rGO/carbon nitride (CN) composite demonstrates a high selectivity for the ORR in comparison with commercial C/Pt. This phenomenon can indicate that the type of N in carbon frameworks determines the catalytic activity of N-doped graphene.310Table 7 shows some GHCs for fuel cell applications.
Table 7 GHCs for fuel cell applications




Material
Current density
Reference




GNS/Pt
Current density of 0.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.6 V

303



Pd-DNA/graphene
Current density of 140.1 mA mg−1 at a potential of 0.08 V

313



Au/graphene
Current density of 2.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.08 V

314



Ellipsoidal Mn3O4 particles/N-doped graphene
Current density of 11.69 mA cm−2 at −0.60 V

315



Co3O4/graphene
Current density of 52.6 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V

309



Fe3O4/N-graphene aerogel
Current density of −2.56 mA cm−2 at an onset potential of −0.19 V

316



MNCo2O4/N-rmGO
Current density of 151 mA cm−2 at an onset potential of −0.91 V

317





4.4. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)
DSSCs are considered as an alternative to Si based p–n junction photovoltaic devices which are gaining attention due to being a perfect source for renewable energy.318–321 The main components of DSSCs are (i) a dye-sensitized photoanode, (ii) a counter electrode (cathode) and (iii) an electrolyte with a redox mediator. New materials such as carbon materials, conductive polymers and transition metal-based inorganic materials are being investigated to increase the performance and reduce the cost of DSSCs.322–325 Arbab et al.326 synthesized a highly conductive mesoporous carbon structure based on multi-walled carbon nanotubes and activated charcoal via an enzymatic dispersion technique. The proposed carbon structure was employed as a counter electrode for quasi-solid-state DSSCs and an efficiency of 10.05% was obtained.326 The preparation of a flexible electrode for DSSCs by replacing fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) glass with polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) has been tried.327 However, this was not cost-effective. GHCs have recently been explored for use in each section of a DSSC to generate high performance and cost-effective products.328–331 Graphene is a promising candidate for DSSCs due to its high electrical conductivity. Nevertheless, compositing graphene with other material/materials is required to make a cost-effective DSSC. The unique and novel structure of electroconductive textiles such as graphene coated nylon, polyester, and cotton can be flexible and cost effective counter electrodes for DSSCs.332–334 For example, graphene coated cotton fabric (HC-GCF, Fig. 13a) had a surface resistance of 7 ohm per sq. which was lower than that of Pt.335 The HC-GCF composite exhibited a great resistance against electrolytes and water. The voltammetric behavior of both Pt/FTO and HC-GCF composites can be seen in Fig. 13a, as well.335
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis of a DSSC with graphene coated cotton fabric (GCF) as the counter electrode, FE-SEM images of untreated cotton fabric (low and high magnification), Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) treated cotton fabric (low and high magnification) and GNS coated fabric and its cross-sectional view and polarization curves of Pt and HC-GCF counter electrode based cells. (b) Structure of NiSe and Ni3Se2, SEM and TEM images of rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 and photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 series and Pt counter electrode (CE), measured at AM1.5G illumination, 100 mW cm−2. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 335. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 338. Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society. 
It has been demonstrated that hollow nanostructures provide a better electrocatalytic performance compared with homogenous solid nanostructures.336–338 In this regard, Zhang et al.338 synthesized unique hollow nanodisks and a hybrid structure of rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2. The hollow composite exhibited higher electrocatalytic efficiency than rGO/NiSe and solid rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 nanostructures (Fig. 13b). Evidently, such hollow structures can facilitate the interaction between internal active materials and the I−/I3− electrolyte, and would be useful for the electrocatalytic performance.339 The power conversion efficiency of hollow rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 was found to be 7.83% which was higher than that of standard Pt counter electrodes with a power conversion efficiency of 7.28%.339
The integration of 3D graphene with a semiconducting layer (i.e., TiO2 scaffold) in a photoanode could increase the photocurrent density since it enhances (i) dye adsorption, (ii) electron transport and (iii) light scattering.286 A photoanode made of 3D graphene and common photoanode material (TiO2 NPs) provided a power conversion efficiency up to 32.7% which was higher than those of the photoanodes made of TiO2 NPs alone.340 It has also been reported that transparent conductive composite thin films synthesized with metal sulfide NPs such as Ni, Co and 3D graphene also provided better electrocatalytic activity when they were used as a counter electrode in DSSCs. In addition, the photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 3D graphene/metal sulfide NPs has been shown to be 5.25% which was higher than that of the Pt/FTO counter electrode with 5%.286
4.5. Hydrogen storage
Hydrogen is considered as the cleanest fuel source since it produces exhaust without any contaminants and it is the most abundant element.341,342 In order to use hydrogen as an energy carrier, it must be stored by technically sophisticated methods. Common hydrogen storage materials such as sodium aluminium hydride (NaAlH4), amides/imides and borohydrides suffer from limitations such as slow rate kinetics, high dehydrogenation temperature, potential safety issues and side reactions.343–345 CNTs are potential candidates for hydrogen storage due to their high accessible surface area, fast kinetics and reversibility.346 However, the hydrogen storage capacity of CNTs at room temperature and ambient pressures is still very low.346 Besides, toxic residual metallic impurities on CNTs are very difficult to remove and their manufacturing cost is high.178 In contrast, when coupled with graphene they are considered a viable alternative with a large surface area, chemical inertness and light weight, which allows high gravimetric and volumetric densities to be achieved.
Hydrogen can be stored in two forms on the surface of graphene; in the molecular form, i.e. hydrogen gas (H2) or in the atomic form (H). The stored molecular form of hydrogen interacts with graphene through London dispersion forces.46 There is free lateral movement of H2 on the surface of graphene because of the delocalized spatial distribution of hydrogen. The attractive force between H2 and graphene is negligible at room temperature.347 This explains the small gravimetric density of H2 in graphene. Ma et al.348 reported that only 0.4 wt% hydrogen could be adsorbed on the surface of pristine single layer graphene at 77 K under 100 kPa pressure. The adsorbed hydrogen decreased to <0.2 wt% at 298 K under 6 MPa pressure with a BET (Brunauer, Emmett and Teller) specific surface area of 156 m2 g−1.348 Increasing the interlayer distance between graphene nanosheets can increase the gravimetric and volumetric densities by storing more hydrogen molecules between the layers.346,349 It has been observed that when graphene layers were separated by 6 Å, almost 3–4 wt% hydrogen could be accommodated at 298 K and 10 MPa pressure.347 This storage capacity is quite acceptable, but it is only achievable under impractical ambient conditions. Thus, graphene-based hybrid materials have been proposed to increase the hydrogen storage capacity (i.e., gravimetric density).350–352
GO/ or graphene/metal oxide NPs have shown great potential in hydrogen storage.353 The Kubas interaction between hydrogen molecules and transition metals or alkaline metals is strong enough to bind hydrogen molecules.354 The chemically decorated alkali atoms (i.e., Li, Ca and K) can increase the hydrogen storage capacity of graphene.349 Every Li atom attached on the graphene surface can adsorb four H2 molecules which leads to a high gravimetric density of 12.8 wt%.355 Li-doped porous graphene also achieved a gravimetric density of 12%.356 Decorated Ca on graphene can provide a gravimetric density of 8.4 wt%.357
Titanium (Ti) shows strong bonding to oxygen groups of GO sheets and can bind several hydrogen molecules.358 Thus, Ti-decorated graphene showed a hydrogen storage capacity up to 4.9 wt%.358 Doping of graphene with N, B, Si and Al leads to an increase in the binding capacity of graphene for H2 adsorption.359 B-doped graphene can have a hydrogen storage capacity of 10.7 wt%,360 while the hydrogen storage capacity of double sided B-doped graphene can reach 15.1 wt%.361 N doped graphene exhibited a hydrogen storage capacity of 6.73 wt%.353Fig. 14a demonstrates the energy landscape for a graphene layer substituted with 25% B for the convex plane and variations of the average, minimal and maximal energy of H2 interaction with the substituted graphene layer as a function of substitution ratio (in %) for the convex surface. Fig. 14b shows SEM and TEM micrographs of N-doped hydrogen exfoliated graphene (N-HEG) and Pd decorated N-HEG (Pd–N-HEG), and their pressure-composition isotherms in the temperature range of 25–100 °C and pressure range of 0.1–4 MPa.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic view of probing the graphite surface using a hydrogen super-atom with the energy landscape of hydrogen above an ideal layer of graphene, the energy landscape for the graphene layer substituted with 25% boron for the convex plane and variations of the average, minimum and maximum energy of H2 interaction with the substituted graphene layer as a function of substitution ratio (in %) for the convex surface. (b) Schematic diagram shows the possible formation of bonds upon hydrogenation of Pd–N-HEG. SEM and TEM micrographs of N-HEG and Pd–N-HEG and pressure-composition isotherms of N-HEG and Pd–N-HEG in the temperature range 25–100 °C and 0.1–4 MPa pressure. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 351. Copyright 2009, Springer. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 353. Copyright 2012, The American Chemical Society. 
Hydrogen can also be stored in the atomic form, for example, by exposing graphene to hydrogen plasma or by hydrogen spillover.346 Exposing graphene to hydrogen plasma is not economically viable because hydrogen storage and hydrogen plasma is not easy to obtain. Thus, hydrogen spillover is generally used to store hydrogen in the atomic form. In the hydrogen spillover technique, doping of graphene-based materials with metal catalysts is carried out. The metal catalyst dissociates the hydrogen molecule into hydrogen atoms. Some hydrogen atoms migrate to graphene and the rest diffuse into the support.359 Pt, Pd, and Ni (or other transition metals) are commonly used as metal catalysts.362–365 The doping of graphene with Pt can increase the hydrogen storage capacity of graphene by a factor of 2.23 and doping with Pd by a factor of 2.32 as compared to un-doped graphene.363,364Table 8 shows the hydrogen storage capacity of some GHCs mostly at a temperature of 77 K and 1 bar pressure.
Table 8 Hydrogen storage capacity of some GHCs




Material
Hydrogen storage (maximum gravimetric density, wt%)
Reference




Graphene/Li
12.8

355



Li-decorated porous graphene
12

356



Graphene/Ca
8.4

357



Graphene/Ti
4.9

358



Graphene/B
15.1

361



rGO/Mg
6.5

366



N doped graphene
7.23

367



Lithium doped fullerene/graphene
5

368





4.6. Thermoelectric devices
Thermoelectric systems that generate electrical energy through heat can be developed by increasing the performance of available p- and n-type semiconducting thermoelectric materials and enhancing their thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT).369ZT is described as S2σT/κ, where S, σ, T and κ represent the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, absolute temperature and thermal conductivity, respectively. The thermal conductivity κ can be expressed as κ = κp + κe, where κp and κe represent the phonon and electronic contributions, respectively. S2σ also represents the power factor.369 Commercial thermoelectric devices are generally fabricated using bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) based materials. However, the ductility and flexibility of Bi2Te3 are low which makes it difficult to apply in portable devices like laptops, mobile phones, etc. Therefore, there is a demand for highly ductile and flexible thermoelectric materials with high ZT values. Graphene could be a good candidate for thermoelectric devices due to its high electrical conductivity. However, the ZT value of graphene is low because of its high thermal conductivity. In order to increase the ZT value of graphene, its thermal conductivity should be manipulated in such a way that its electrical conductivity does not get affected. According to the Wiedemann–Franz law, the increase of σ leads to the increase of κe and according to the Mott law, the increase of σ leads to the decrease of S.370,371 Therefore, the κp component in the thermal conductivity of graphene is dominated by κe.372
The best strategies for increasing the ZT value of graphene are the (i) suppression of the value of κp and (ii) increase of the value of the power factor. The value of κp can be decreased by introducing heavy atoms, clusters, disorders and edges in the graphene network which minimizes the lattice thermal conductivity by enhancing the phonon scattering at the interfaces.373 Also, the generated phonon scattering doesn't affect the value of σ. Therefore, phonon scattering via inclusions in the graphene network would be an excellent tactic. The power factor can be enhanced by (i) energy filtering such as blocking the energy carriers (electrons) having energy less than a particular value,374 (ii) quantum confinement (i.e., confining the movement of electrons in certain dimensions)375 and (iii) tuning the electronic band structure; bandgap should be large enough to possess a high density of states of a single carrier type (n or p type) for high S and small enough to achieve a high doping level required for high electrical conductivity.373 Graphene is a gapless semi-metal. Thus, its band gap should be opened in such a way so that a high value of S is achieved without decreasing the value of σ.373 This is because the enhancement of S leads to a simultaneous decrease in σ, according to the Mott law,373 decreasing the ZT value.
Carrier mobility also affects the thermoelectric performance by affecting the values of S and σ.376,377σ is directly proportional to carrier mobility and carrier mobility is inversely proportional to the effective mass of density of states, whereas S is directly proportional to the effective mass of density of states.378
Keeping in view the above mentioned points, a few strategies have been pursued to decrease the thermal conductivity and increase the power factor of graphene by generating new GHCs.379 Doping is the most commonly used strategy to decrease the thermal conductivity of graphene by enhancing the phonon scattering at the interfaces.380 Doping also affects the carrier mobility and tunes the band gap to enhance the thermoelectric performance.373 The atomic size, and electron donor and hole acceptor properties of N and B are almost similar to those of carbon.381 This makes B and N the most suitable candidates for doping graphene. A carrier mobility of less than 500 cm2 V−1 s−1 was observed for N-doped graphene which was grown on a copper (Cu) film coated Si substrate by a CVD method.382 This level of carrier mobility is less than that of mechanically exfoliated graphene which was reported to be 5000 cm2 V−1 s−1.383 In addition, N-doping in graphene generally tunes the semiconducting behavior of chemically functionalized graphene from p-type to n-type.384Fig. 15a shows the structure, and SEM and TEM images of N-doped graphene and its semiconducting behavior. N-doped graphene nanoribbons also exhibited n-type semiconducting properties.239 It has been confirmed that different types of N-doping techniques provide different values of carrier mobilities.382,385 In comparison, B-doped graphene generally exhibits p-type semiconducting behavior.386 Monolayer B-doped graphene has shown a high carrier mobility of 800 cm2 V−1 s−1.387
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic view of the N-doped graphene, SEM and TEM image of N-doped graphene and Ids/Vds characteristics at various gate voltages (Vg) for the pristine graphene and the N-doped graphene and their transfer characteristics. (b) The modeling and TEM images of B-doped graphene (BG1) and N-doped graphene (NG1) and electrical conducting data of NG1, BG1 and pristine graphene (HG). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 382. Copyright 2009, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 388. Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. 
The S value of graphene is zero due to its gapless electronic band structure and opposite contributions from holes and electrons.389 The substitutional doping of graphene with B and N atoms can lead to the opening of the band gap with the Fermi level in conduction and valence bands.388Fig. 15b shows the modeling and TEM images of N- and B-doped graphene and variation in their electrical conductivity with the temperature change. B-doping displaces the Fermi level downwards (valence band with holes) whereas N-doping displaces the Fermi level upwards (conduction band with electrons).390 This band gap opening increases the ZT value resulting in an increase of the thermoelectric conversion efficiency.
5. Conclusion and future outlook
The global demand for clean energy makes graphene the most promising candidate for energy storage and conversion devices. Theoretically, graphene is a very good material for energy storage but the restacking problem of graphene nanosheets has limited its use/performance. Thus, research focus has shifted towards GHCs to engineer the architecture of graphene in such a way that its potential for energy storage and conversion devices can be fully utilized. Graphene is generally composited with conducting polymers, organic crystals, metals, metal oxides, hydroxides, etc., for use in various energy storage and device applications. This article summarized recent progress in the design and synthesis of 2D and 3D GHCs. Agglomeration and re-stacking of graphene nanosheets could limit ion transport into its structure, and hence, 3D network macrostructures such as foams, aerogels and sponges were proposed to counter this effect. 3D network macrostructures were shown to possess high electrical conductivity and improved structural stability. Besides GHCs, it has been demonstrated that if defects in graphene were properly engineered, it could also increase the energy density of graphene. In addition, doping graphene with N, B, S or F atoms can enhance its electrochemical performance.
GHCs have been investigated to a great extent, but the relevant underpinning mechanism at the molecular level is still not well understood. To properly engineer the architecture of GHCs for better performance, those underpinning mechanisms at the molecular level should be vigorously examined. GHCs have found applications in various fields. GHCs are also considered as promising candidates for energy storage and conversion applications. However, new fabrication techniques are still needed to meet the demand for commercial applications. Thus, a lot of research is still required to properly manipulate the structure of GHCs at the molecular level and develop new fabrication techniques for commercial production of GHCs. Despite various challenges, graphene proves to be an attractive topic of research in various fields of materials to help realize a number of its promising applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, G. M. Zhou, L. C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, L. F. Cui, Y. A. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Yuan, Y. N. Zhang, L. F. Cheng, H. Wu, L. X. Zheng and D. L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8932–8951 CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Yang, S. Kannappan, A. S. Pandian, J.-H. Jang, Y. S. Lee and W. Lu, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1311.1413,  2013.
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, H. Sun, J. Zhu, H. Bi, Q. Han, X. Liu and X. Wang, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 2843–2849 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Hsieh, C.-Y. Lin and J.-Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8861–8867 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kheirabadi and A. Shafiekhani, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 124323 CrossRef .
X. Chen, D. He, H. Wu, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, K. Cheng, P. Wu and S. Mu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, Z. Yan, N. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Liu, Q. Fan, L. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12818–12825 CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, L. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, C. M. Li and P. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4865–4870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, S. Lu and F. Gao, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 3517–3522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1770–1776 CAS .
W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. H. Sim, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Sharma, M. Srinivasan, H. Zhang and H. H. Hng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3422–3427 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Jiao, H. Du, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Cheng, Q. L. Shou, J. S. Wu, F. Liu, V. P. Dravid and X. B. Zhang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 698, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qi, J. Jiang, H. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and L. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 674–680 CrossRef CAS .
K. Karthikeyan, D. Kalpana, S. Amaresh and Y. S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12322–12328 RSC .
C. Xiang, M. Li, M. Zhi, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973–6978 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Liu, T. Chen, K. S. Tan, X. Jia, Z. Luo, C. Cong, H. Yang, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14462–14465 RSC .
L. Xie, F. Su, L. Xie, X. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Kong, X. Guo, Y. Zhang, L. Wan, K. Li, C. Lv and C. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2917–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fenghua, S. Jiangfeng, Y. Huafeng, G. Shiyu, Z. Qixian, H. Dongxue, I. Ari and N. Li, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Lim, N. M. Huang and H. N. Lim, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 6647–6655 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. El-Deen, N. A. M. Barakat, K. A. Khalil, M. Motlak and H. Yong Kim, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 14627–14634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, M. Xie, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. S. Cavanagh, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, 364–369 CrossRef .
A. Ramadoss and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 63, 434–445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Lin, X. Song, P. Zhang and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17884–17892 CAS .
L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Jiang, L. Z. Sheng, C. L. Long, T. Wei and Z. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500771 CrossRef .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 CAS .
W. Wang, S. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, K. San Hui and K. N. Hui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9046–9053 CAS .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
J. Zhu, A. S. Childress, M. Karakaya, S. Dandeliya, A. Srivastava, Y. Lin, A. M. Rao and R. Podila, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7185–7192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ai, J. H. Zhu, J. Jiang, D. L. Chao, Y. L. Wang, C. F. Ng, X. L. Wang, C. Wu, C. M. Li, Z. X. Shen, W. Huang and T. Yu, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 014005 CrossRef .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, Y. Qiao, X.-S. Wu and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ai, Z. Luo, J. Jiang, J. Zhu, Z. Du, Z. Fan, L. Xie, H. Zhang, W. Huang and T. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6186–6192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ai, J. Jiang, J. Zhu, Z. Fan, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Huang and T. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500559 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Shen, B. Gao, L. Hao, X. Lu, F. Zhang, B. Ding and C. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 395–401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hassan, K. R. Reddy, E. Haque, S. N. Faisal, S. Ghasemi, A. I. Minett and V. G. Gomes, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 98, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ke and J. Wang, J. Materiomics, 2016, 2, 37–54 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, N. Christov and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1866–1873 CAS .
N. An, F. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Li, L. Li, Y. Yang, B. Guo and Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 23942–23951 RSC .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, H. Li and G. Yu, Small, 2016, 12, 6183–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sridhar, H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Jung, C. Lee, S. Park and I.-K. Oh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10562–10570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, Q. Liu, Q. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Cui, T. Wang and B. Han, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 3059–3064 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, A. Uysal, D. M. Anjos, Y. Cai, S. H. Overbury, M. Neurock, J. K. McDonough, Y. Gogotsi and P. Fenter, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500277 CrossRef .
M. Boota, C. Chen, M. Bécuwe, L. Miao and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2586–2594 CAS .
S. Eigler and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7720–7738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sreeprasad and V. Berry, Small, 2013, 9, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhou, E. Zhu, J. Tang, X. Liu and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1011–1017 RSC .
L. Ji, Y. Wu, L. Ma and X. Yang, Composites, Part A, 2015, 72, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Zhang, S.-Z. Zu and B.-H. Han, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2993–3000 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q.-Y. Cheng, H. Wu, Z. Wei and B.-H. Han, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8367–8374 RSC .
J. Shen, M. Shi, H. Ma, B. Yan, N. Li, Y. Hu and M. Ye, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 352, 366–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Aboutalebi, R. Jalili, D. Esrafilzadeh, M. Salari, Z. Gholamvand, S. Aminorroaya Yamini, K. Konstantinov, R. L. Shepherd, J. Chen, S. E. Moulton, P. C. Innis, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2456–2466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, F. Gong, S. T. Nguyen and H. M. Duong, Carbon, 2015, 81, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S.-Z. Zu, B.-H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Solonaru and M. Grigoras, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2017, 11, 127–139 CrossRef .
S. Wang, L. Ma, M. Gan, S. Fu, W. Dai and T. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 347–355 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, X. Wang, J. Wang, L. Wan, F. Liu, H. Zheng, R. Chen and C. Xu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 484, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Soltani-kordshuli, F. Zabihi and M. Eslamian, Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol., 2016, 19, 1216–1223 CrossRef .
D. Yoo, J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 717–730 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, G. Chen and D. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12395–12399 CAS .
V. H. Pham, T. T. Dang, S. H. Hur, E. J. Kim and J. S. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2630–2636 CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z.-G. Chen, J. Tan, Z.-S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, K. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Yu, L. Liu and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3052–3057 RSC .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, H. Wang, S. Braun, D. R. Evans, M. Fabretto, P. Hojati-Talemi, D. Dagnelund, J.-B. Arlin and Y. H. Geerts, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao, J.-X. Yang and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14487–14495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, C. Qu, Z. Liang, B. Zhao, S. Dai, B. Qiu, Y. Jiao, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Guo, D. Dang, R. Zou, D. Xia, Q. Xu and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2788–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, J. Yuan, J. Li, D. Chen, Y. Kong, F. Chu, Y. Tao and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5171–5175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, L.-Q. Liu, S.-Z. Zu, K. Peng, D. Zhou, B.-H. Han and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2134–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang, X. Shen and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. Schrieffer and W.-P. Su, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 781 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Comte, G. Pognon, T. Brousse and D. Belanger, Electrochemistry, 2013, 81, 863–866 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Anjos, J. K. McDonough, E. Perre, G. M. Brown, S. H. Overbury, Y. Gogotsi and V. Presser, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 702–712 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lin, Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, L. Tong, S. B. Kim, L. Eisenach, A. W. Valle, D. Hardee, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Science, 2015, 349, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhenyuan, S. Xiaoping, L. Minzhi, Z. Hu, Z. Guoxing and C. Kangmin, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 115603 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, H. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, L. Wang, L. Gu, H. Xu, P. Han, S. Dong and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11916–11922 RSC .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. Chu, M. Wu, Z. Ye, Z. Cai, Y. Chang, S. Wang, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. Jin, I. G. Jung, J. M. Kim, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5241–5243 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Park, D. Su, C. Wang, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15750–15756 RSC .
L. Qiu, X. Yang, X. Gou, W. Yang, Z. F. Ma, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Chem.–Eur J., 2010, 16, 10653–10658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Dong, B. Ding, Y. Wang, X. Hao, H. Dou, Y. Xia and X. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2016, 4, 71–90 Search PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
A. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, B. Zeng, J. Liu, Y. Long, N. Li, Z. Wen and Y. Jiang, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2016, 20, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Purushothaman, B. Saravanakumar, I. M. Babu, B. Sethuraman and G. Muralidharan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23485–23491 RSC .
Q. Liao, N. Li, S. Jin, G. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5310–5317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. Lin, G. Zhong, Y. Fu and X. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 704, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, X.-L. Huang, Z.-L. Wang, J.-J. Xu, H.-G. Wang and X.-B. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3669 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-K. Park, A. Jin, S.-H. Yu, J. Ha, B. Jang, S. Bong, S. Woo, Y.-E. Sung and Y. Piao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, Z. Yu, W. Chen, Q. Chen, S. Xu and R. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 107, 711–722 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9409–9413 CAS .
J. P. Cheng, L. Liu, K. Y. Ma, X. Wang, Q. Q. Li, J. S. Wu and F. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 486, 344–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, Y. Xu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 801–806 CAS .
D. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Su, Z. Zhou, X. Qin, Q. Tang, D. Wu and P. Shen, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, Y. Fang, B. Wang, J. Zhou, H. Song and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5226–5230 CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Lai, N. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, P. Zou, Z. Lin, H. J. Fan, F. Kang, C.-P. Wong and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 941–949 CAS .
H. T. Jeong, J. F. Du and Y. R. Kim, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6057–6061 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jeon, J. H. Han, D. M. Yu, J. Y. Lee, T.-H. Kim and Y. T. Hong, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 45, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Guo, J. Chen, J. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, A. Kvit, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12528–12541 CAS .
Q. Zheng, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3263–3271 CAS .
K. Gao, Z. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Peng, W. Wang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 63–67 CAS .
C. Lamiel, Y. R. Lee, M. H. Cho, D. Tuma and J.-J. Shim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 507, 300–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-f. Li, Y.-z. Liu, Y. Liang, X.-h. Guo and C.-m. Chen, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2017, 123, 566 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, H. Huang, G. Li, X. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Guo, W. Wei and S. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghasemi, S. R. Hosseini and O. Boore-talari, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 40, 675–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 253–254 CrossRef .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt, A. Kapoor, D. M. Zhu, A. S. Ang and V. K. Srivastava, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 56, 434–439 CrossRef .
J. Azadmanjiri, C. C. Berndt, J. Wang, A. Kapoor, V. K. Srivastava and C. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3695–3708 CAS .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt, A. Kapoor, D. M. Zhu, A. S. M. Ang and V. K. Srivastava, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11881–11891 RSC .
V. Augustyn, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 32, 2–15 CrossRef .
C. Soldano, A. Mahmood and E. Dujardin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2127–2150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Y. Bao, C. L. Su and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8350–8357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Zhu, Defects in graphene: electrochemical, magnetic, and optical properties, Clemson University,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 CAS .
D. Geng, S. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Liu, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9193–9198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Castro-Muñiz, Y. Hoshikawa, T. Kasukabe, H. Komiyama and T. Kyotani, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 2127–2135 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lota, B. Grzyb, H. Machnikowska, J. Machnikowski and E. Frackowiak, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dou, X. Huang, Z. Ma, J. Wu and S. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 045402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Luo, L. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Li, B. Wang and J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11184–11193 CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Liao, Z. Chen and J. W. Connell, Mater. Res. Lett., 2017, 5, 209–234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, X. Han, C. J. Campbell, J. W. Kim, B. Zhao, W. Luo, J. Dai, L. Hu and J. W. Connell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2920–2927 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. T. F. Rodrigues, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6239–6246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shi, Y. Cha, Y. Song, J.-I. Lee, C. Zhu, X. Li, M.-K. Song, D. Du and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15414–15447 RSC .
J. Chen, K. Sheng, P. Luo, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, C. Niu, X. Xu, K. Li, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Qu, Y. Xu and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 22146–22153 RSC .
H. Sun, L. Mei, J. Liang, Z. Zhao, C. Lee, H. Fei, M. Ding, J. Lau, M. Li and C. Wang, Science, 2017, 356, 599–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-U. Lee, D. Yoon, H. Kim, S. W. Lee and H. Cheong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 081419 CrossRef .

          S. Ghosh, W. Bao, D. L. Nika, S. Subrina, E. P. Pokatilov, C. N. Lau and A. A. Balandin, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1003.5247,  2010.
H. Yang, S. A. Memon, X. Bao, H. Cui and D. Li, Materials, 2017, 10, 391 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhou, C.-Y. Zhao and Y. Tian, Appl. Energy, 2012, 92, 593–605 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mehrali, S. T. Latibari, M. Mehrali, T. M. I. Mahlia and H. S. C. Metselaar, Energy, 2013, 58, 628–634 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yavari, H. R. Fard, K. Pashayi, M. A. Rafiee, A. Zamiri, Z. Yu, R. Ozisik, T. Borca-Tasciuc and N. Koratkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8753–8758 CAS .
J. R. Potts, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Heremans, V. Jovovic, E. S. Toberer, A. Saramat, K. Kurosaki, A. Charoenphakdee, S. Yamanaka and G. J. Snyder, Science, 2008, 321, 554–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Suh, S. Lee, H. Mun, S.-H. Park, K. H. Lee, S. Wng Kim, J.-Y. Choi and S. Baik, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 67–76 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhai, S. Yang and G. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3071–3074 CAS .
J. Dong, W. Liu, H. Li, X. Su, X. Tang and C. Uher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12503–12511 CAS .
B. Feng, J. Xie, G. Cao, T. Zhu and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13111–13119 CAS .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Pati, P. Pattojoshi and G. S. Roy, J. Nanotechnol., 2016, 2016, 9 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
F. Najafi and M. Rajabi, Int. Nano Lett., 2015, 5, 187–190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, G. Shao, M. Ji and G. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 215, 160–166 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Kim, A. Magasinski, K. Jacob, G. Yushin and R. Tannenbaum, Carbon, 2013, 52, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, H. Li, Y. Liu and S. Song, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 7, 201–211 CrossRef .
D. G. Papageorgiou, I. A. Kinloch and R. J. Young, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 75–127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, K. Zhang, H. S. O. Chan and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 80–85 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. Hong, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Villar-Rodil, J. I. Paredes, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3591–3593 RSC .
P. Gonzalez Morones, S. Fernandez Tavizon, E. Hernandez Hernandez, C. Alberto Gallardo Vega and A. De Leon Santillan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 18413–18418 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Li and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4009–4015 CAS .
Y.-H. Yu, Y.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Lin, C.-C. Chan and Y.-C. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 535–550 RSC .
Y. Yao, S. Miao, S. Liu, L. P. Ma, H. Sun and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 184, 326–332 CrossRef CAS .
S.-D. Seo, D.-H. Lee, J.-C. Kim, G.-H. Lee and D.-W. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 1749–1755 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Park, H.-K. Kim, K. C. Roh and K.-B. Kim, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2015, 11, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thangappan, S. Kalaiselvam, A. Elayaperumal, R. Jayavel, M. Arivanandhan, R. Karthikeyan and Y. Hayakawa, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 2637–2646 RSC .
C. Zhong, J. Wang, Z. Chen and H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25115–25120 CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, P. Wang, L. Xing, Y. Fang, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7148–7150 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23192–23197 CAS .
D. A. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. M. Zaid and N. H. Idris, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Guo and Z. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 376–381 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Anwar, A. Majeed, N. Iqbal, W. Ullah, A. Shuaib, U. Ilyas, F. Bibi and H. M. Rafique, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 699–707 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11829–11834 CAS .
Z. Mo, P. Liu, R. Guo, Z. Deng, Y. Zhao and Y. Sun, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 416–418 CrossRef CAS .
U. Patil, S. C. Lee, J. Sohn, S. Kulkarni, K. Gurav, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 334–342 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Kuwahara, T. Oi, K. Hashimoto, S. Tamesue, T. Yamauchi and N. Tsubokawa, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2015, 293, 1635–1645 CAS .
A. Saha, S. K. Basiruddin, S. C. Ray, S. S. Roy and N. R. Jana, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2777–2782 RSC .
S. K. Mishra, S. N. Tripathi, V. Choudhary and B. D. Gupta, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 199, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du and H. M. Cheng, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1060–1077 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2164–2170 RSC .
Z. Lei, Z. Chen and X. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19867–19874 CAS .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saswata, K. Nam Hoon, K. Tapas, L. Kin-tak and L. Joong Hee, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 369502 CrossRef .
P. Blake, E. Hill, A. Castro Neto, K. Novoselov, D. Jiang, R. Yang, T. Booth and A. Geim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 063124 CrossRef .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Tang, R. Knize, L. Zhao, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 111112 CrossRef .
T. Gokus, R. Nair, A. Bonetti, M. Bohmler, A. Lombardo, K. Novoselov, A. Geim, A. Ferrari and A. Hartschuh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3963–3968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mathkar, D. Tozier, P. Cox, P. Ong, C. Galande, K. Balakrishnan, A. Leela Mohana Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 986–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Ju, J. C. Kim, H.-J. Choi, I. T. Choi, S. G. Kim, K. Lim, J. Ko, J.-J. Lee, I.-Y. Jeon and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5243–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Feng, H. Zhan and Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 033107 CrossRef .
R. Pan, J. Guo, T. Wang, J. Shao, D. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Tang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 3632–3635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Tian, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1275–1279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Acik and Y. J. Chabal, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 070101 CrossRef .
Z. Klusek, Z. Waqar, E. Denisov, T. Kompaniets, I. Makarenko, A. Titkov and A. Bhatti, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 161, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujita, K. Wakabayashi, K. Nakada and K. Kusakabe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 65, 1920–1923 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu and P. D. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10505–10511 CAS .

          J. L. Tandabany and C. Dinadayalane, in Handbook of Computational Chemistry, ed. J. Leszczynski, Springer Science,  2012, ch. 22, pp. 793–867 Search PubMed .
F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski and A. V. Krasheninnikov, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 26–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Boukhvalov and M. I. Katsnelson, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4373–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. M. Tabakman and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8152–8153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saxena and T. A. Tyson, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, Y. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667–1669 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Pu, Y. Jiang, L. Cheng and Z. Jiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 570–575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. Wang, J. Guo and H. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Hu and X. Sun, in Advances in Graphene Science, ed. M. Aliofkhazraei, InTech,  2013 Search PubMed .

          S. Sarkar, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1409.5849,  2014.
S. Niyogi, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, B. Zhao, P. Bhowmik, R. Sen, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1105–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, E. Bekyarova and R. C. Haddon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4901–4904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zalan, L. Lazar and F. Fulop, Curr. Org. Chem., 2005, 9, 357–376 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Kim, G. S. Hwang and R. S. Ruoff, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 064704 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Chen, W. Liu, W. Li, Y. Wang, D. Zhao and X. Liu, Mater. Des., 2016, 109, 256–263 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
J. Wang, Z. Li, G. Fan, H. Pan, Z. Chen and D. Zhang, Scr. Mater., 2012, 66, 594–597 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, X. Shi, W. Zhai, J. Yao, S. Song and Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 67, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Che, X. Liu, S. Liang and H. Xie, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 3725–3731 CrossRef CAS .
D. Verma, P. Gope, A. Shandilya and A. Gupta, Trans. Indian Inst. Met., 2014, 67, 803–816 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Wang, C. Xu, M. Zhang and X. Shang, Polym. Int., 2011, 60, 816–822 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Tang, Y.-J. Wan, D. Yan, Y.-B. Pei, L. Zhao, Y.-B. Li, L.-B. Wu, J.-X. Jiang and G.-Q. Lai, Carbon, 2013, 60, 16–27 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atif, I. Shyha and F. Inam, Polymers, 2016, 8, 281 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. Fu, B. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Deng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7279–7281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, Y. B. Pyun, J. Yi, J. W. Choung and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19134–19138 CAS .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wu, Q. Han and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2822–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, N. Meng, K. Shehzad, Y. Xu, S. Qu, B. Yu and J. Luo, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 065706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, K.-S. Lee, G. Bozoklu, W. Cai, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Zong, D. Gui, S. Li, G. Tan, W. Xiong and J. Liu, Preparation and thermo-mechanical properties of functionalized graphene/silicone rubber nanocomposites, Electronic Packaging Technology (ICEPT), 16th International Conference, Changsha, China,  11–14 August 2015 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, T. Guo and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2297–2302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Q. Zhang, D. Chen and P. Lu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2357–2363 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Tripathi, P. Saini, D. Gupta and V. Choudhary, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 6223–6232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Wang, S. Liu, X. Liu and S. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8160–8165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kumagai, IEEE Spectrum, 2012, 49, 45–46 CrossRef .
J.-S. Lee, S.-I. Kim, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6047–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kashani, L. Chen, Y. Ito, J. Han, A. Hirata and M. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5004–5006 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiangying, G. Feng, Z. Quan, W. Zhiyu, H. Han, L. Beibei, W. Wubo, W. Xuzhen and Q. Jieshan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2999–3005 RSC .
Z.-F. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Stanciu and J. Xie, Carbon, 2014, 71, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, J. Wang, G. Zhu, L. Kang, Z. Hao, Z. Lei, Z. Yang and Z.-H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 407–415 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
B. Boukamp, G. Lesh and R. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 725–729 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Courtney and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2045–2052 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhang, C. Feng, Y. C. Zhai, K. L. Jiang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2299–2304 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chan, R. Patel, M. O'Connell, B. Korgel and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. Wu, J. Wang, S. Han, L. Lv, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2014, 10, 2226–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, G. H. Lu and J. H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6924–6943 RSC .
T. Bhardwaj, A. Antic, B. Pavan, V. Barone and B. D. Fahlman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12556–12558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, C. He, N. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Shi, E.-Z. Liu and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1728–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. Wu, S. Han, S. Li, L. Xiao, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1510–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. Chen, Y. Zhong, D. M. Tang, H. Li, T. Zhai and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2682–2690 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, H. He, Q. Song, B. Wang, W. Lv, Q.-H. Yang and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3320–3325 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
T. Hu, X. Sun, H. Sun, M. Yu, F. Lu, C. Liu and J. Lian, Carbon, 2013, 51, 322–326 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dong, R. R. S. Gari, Z. Li, M. M. Craig and S. Hou, Carbon, 2010, 48, 781–787 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Wang and Z.-P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10996–11004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Periana, D. J. Taube, S. Gamble, H. Taube, T. Satoh and H. Fujii, Science, 1998, 280, 560–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Qiu, Z. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–551 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, J. H. Kwak, J. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, C. Wang, Y. Lin and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 954–957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Tang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 547–555 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2011, 49, 931–936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, D. Yu, S.-Y. Bae, H.-J. Choi, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, L. Y. Zhang, J. Miao, J. Zhang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Govindhan and A. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 928–936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2072–2078 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Sun, S. H. Yun, C. H. Yoon, H. H. Ko, S. Yi and S. H. Jeong, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 7938–7943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
H. Kim, G. Veerappan and J. H. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 164–168 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takada, Y. Obana, R. Sasaki, M. Kuribayashi, M. Kanno, C. Zhu, T. Bessho, Y. Takagi, K. Hinokuma and K. Noda, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1276–1282 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Lee, K. Do, Y. W. Lee, S. S. Jeon, C. Kim, J. Ko and S. S. Im, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21624–21629 RSC .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, A. A. Memon, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1495–1505 CAS .
A. A. Arbab, K. C. Sun, I. A. Sahito, M. B. Qadir, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7471–7482 CAS .
S. I. Cha, Y. Kim, K. H. Hwang, Y.-J. Shin, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6071–6075 CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9777–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L.-S. Li and X. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shateri-Khalilabad and M. E. Yazdanshenas, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 96, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Yun, W. G. Hong, W. J. Kim, Y. Jun and B. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5701–5705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Molina, J. Fernández, A. Del Rio, J. Bonastre and F. Cases, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 279, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Sahito, K. C. Sun, A. A. Arbab, M. B. Qadir, Y. S. Choi and S. H. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra, K. Song, K. C. Ghosh and M. Nath, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2077–2086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2236–2237 RSC .
X. Zhang, M. Zhen, J. Bai, S. Jin and L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17187–17193 CAS .
Y. Xia, Z. Xiao, X. Dou, H. Huang, X. Lu, R. Yan, Y. Gan, W. Zhu, J. Tu and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7083–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang, G. Hu, H. Gao and Z. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lian, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Cui and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7072–7080 CAS .
S. Nachimuthu, P.-J. Lai and J.-C. Jiang, Carbon, 2014, 73, 132–140 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Hamilton, R. T. Baker, A. Staubitz and I. Manners, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 279–293 RSC .
F. H. Stephens, V. Pons and R. Tom Baker, Dalton Trans., 2007, 2613–2626,  10.1039/B703053C .
M. A. Wahab, H. Zhao and X. D. Yao, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2012, 6, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and Z. Chen, Graphene Chem., 2013, 371–391 Search PubMed .
S. Patchkovskii, S. T. John, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine and G. Seifert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10439–10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-P. Ma, Z.-S. Wu, J. Li, E.-D. Wu, W.-C. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2329–2332 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tozzini and V. Pellegrini, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 80–89 RSC .
P. Reunchan and S.-H. Jhi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 093103 CrossRef .
L. Firlej, B. Kuchta, C. Wexler and P. Pfeifer, Adsorption, 2009, 15, 312 CrossRef CAS .
E. Beheshti, A. Nojeh and P. Servati, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1561–1567 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Parambhath, R. Nagar and S. Ramaprabhu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7826–7833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, S.-H. Jhi, S. Lim and N. Park, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 155437 CrossRef .
C. Ataca, E. Aktürk, S. Ciraci and H. Ustunel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043123 CrossRef .
A. Du, Z. Zhu and S. C. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2876–2877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ataca, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 041406 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. Lee, Y.-Y. Sun, M. Lucking, Z. Chen, J. J. Zhao and S. B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2995–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ao, Q. Jiang, R. Zhang, T. Tan and S. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 074307 CrossRef .
S. l. Er, G. A. de Wijs and G. Brocks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18962–18967 CAS .
D. Li, Y. Ouyang, J. Li, Y. Sun and L. Chen, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 422–425 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Wu, X. Fan, J.-L. Kuo and W.-Q. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9241–9249 CAS .
L. Wang and R. T. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 268–279 CAS .
Y. Lin, F. Ding and B. I. Yakobson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 041402 CrossRef .
A. K. Singh, M. A. Ribas and B. I. Yakobson, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1657–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Cho, A. M. Ruminski, S. Aloni, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo and J. J. Urban, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ao, A. Hernandez-Nieves, F. Peeters and S. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1463–1467 RSC .
Z. Ozturk, C. Baykasoglu and M. Kirca, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6403–6411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azadmanjiri, C. C. Berndt, J. Wang, A. Kapoor and V. K. Srivastava, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 109361–109385 RSC .
M. J. Graf, S. Yip, J. Sauls and D. Rainer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 15147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaveh and N. Mott, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1981, 14, L177 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Balandin, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1106.3789,  2011.
P. Dollfus, V. H. Nguyen and J. Saint-Martin, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 133204 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Humphrey, M. O'Dwyer and H. Linke, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hicks and M. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 16631 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Pei, H. Wu, D. Wu, F. Zheng and J. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13902–13908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sun, B. Wei, J. Zhang, J. M. Tomczak, A. Strydom, M. Søndergaard, B. B. Iversen and F. Steglich, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang and L.-D. Zhao, J. Materiomics, 2015, 1, 92–105 CrossRef .
D. Dragoman and M. Dragoman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 203116 CrossRef .
S. H. Park, J. Chae, M.-H. Cho, J. H. Kim, K.-H. Yoo, S. W. Cho, T. G. Kim and J. W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 933–939 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7496 RSC .
B. Guo, L. Fang, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Insci. J., 2011, 1, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lazar, R. Zbořil, M. Pumera and M. Otyepka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14231–14235 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Zhou, D. Wu, L. Liao, S. Zhao, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Small, 2013, 9, 1316–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Panchakarla, K. Subrahmanyam, S. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. Krishnamurthy, U. Waghmare and C. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
A. Kundu, M. A. Alrefae and T. S. Fisher, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 125113 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Z. Shen, A. Liu and J.-L. Kuo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2157–2165 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Jalal Azadmanjiri	Jalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD (full scholarships) in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Australia (2012) followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship from Swinburne University of Technology. His current research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, especially focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization and characterization of nanomaterials in zero-, one- and two-dimensional structures. He is also interested in the development and improvement of hybrid materials with thin film and layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.
Vijay K. Srivastava	Prof. Vijay K. Srivastava has completed B.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering in 1977, M.Tech. in Machine Design in 1979 and Ph.D. in 1987 from the Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, India. He is a Professor in the Mechanical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Varanasi, India. He has published more than 165 papers in International Journals. He has supervised more than 40 master's theses and 4 Ph.D. Theses. He has received several Fellowships and awards to visit the US, the UK, Japan, France, Germany, Italy, South Korea, the Czech Republic, and Poland. He has also been awarded the Bharat Gaurav Award, Excellence in Academy, 2014, International Friendship Society, New Delhi India. He is the FOUNDER PRESIDENT OF “ICRACM SERIES CONFERENCE”. Prof. Srivastava, has also been honoured with an Adjunct Professorship in the Faculty of Science, Engineering and Technology at Swinburne University of Technology (SUT), Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia for the period from 1st August 2016 to 30th August 2019. As an Adjunct Professor, Dr Srivastava will determine the range of research activities with the faculty of Swinburne University for the benefit of students. The appointment is not as an employee of Swinburne University but an active collaborator of a bilateral international project and is not entitled to salary from SUT.
Parshant Kumar	Parshant Kumar is currently pursuing Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, India. He completed B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering from SMVDU, Katra, India in 2011. Right after completing B.Tech, he joined IIT (BHU) Varanasi, India for M.Tech (Machine Design). After completing M.Tech in 2013, he joined IIT (BHU) Varanasi for Ph.D. (Mechanical Engineering) under the supervision of Prof. V. K. Srivastava. He is currently working in the field of “Tribological behavior of ceramic fiber composites”. His research interests include mechanical and tribological behavior of composite materials.
Aimin Yu	Dr Aimin Yu received her PhD in Chemistry from Nanjing University (China) in 1997. After being a Lecturer at the same university for three years, Dr Yu took a postdoctoral position at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). Dr Yu moved to Australia in 2003 and currently is an Associate Professor at Swinburne University of Technology, based in Melbourne, Australia. Her research fields include: synthesis and functionalization of nanomaterials; preparation of nanostructured thin films; and development of biosensors and assay methods for biomedical applications. Dr Yu has co-authored more than 120 publications in these areas.

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the layer-by-layer formation of a platinum–reduced graphene oxide/silicon carbide (Pt–rGO/SiC) architecture. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 14 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group: Scientific Reports.	 

Graphene/manganese dioxide (MnO2)	Hydrothermal process	Specific capacitance of 516.8 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
15

Graphene/MnO2	
In situ electrodeposition	Specific capacitance of 328 F g−1 at a charging current of 1 mA in 1 M KCl	
16

3D graphene/MnO2	
In situ hydrothermal process	Specific capacitance of 560 F g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
17

Graphene/MnO2	Polymer assisted chemical reduction	Specific capacitance of 324 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
18

Graphene/MnO2	Electrostatic interaction	Specific capacitance of 210 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
19

Graphene/iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4)	Solvothermal process	Specific capacitance of 480 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 5000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH	
20

rGO/Fe3O4	Hydrothermal process	Specific capacitance of 220.1 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH	
21

rGO/Fe3O4	Solution precipitation followed by hydrogen reduction	Specific capacitance of 262.1 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 in 1 mol L−1 Na2SO4 aqueous solution	
22

rGO/Fe3O4	Hydrolysis and annealing	Specific capacitance of 350.6 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH	
23

Graphene/Fe3O4	Microwave irradiation	Specific capacitance of 72 F g−1 at a current density of 3750 mA g−1 in 1 M H2SO4	
24

Graphene/cobalt(II,III) oxide (Co3O4)	
In situ hydrothermal process	Specific capacitance of 472 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 2 M KOH	
25

3D graphene/Co3O4	
In situ synthesis	Specific capacitance of 1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10000 mA g−1 in 0.1 M NaOH	
26

Graphene nanosheet/Co3O4	Microwave assisted method	Specific capacitance of 243.2 F g−1 has been obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH	
27

rGO/Co3O4	Two-step surfactant-assisted method	Specific capacitance of 159.8 F g−1 can be reached at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH	
28

3D rGO aerogel/Co3O4	Solvothermal process	Specific capacitance of 660 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 in 6 M KOH	
29

Graphene/tin dioxide (SnO2)	Chemical reduction	Specific capacitance of 43.4 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 V s−1 in 1 M H2SO4	
30

Graphene/SnO2	Solvothermal process	Specific capacitance of 363.3 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
31

Graphene/SnO2	Microwave irradiation	Specific capacitance of 323 F g−1 in 1 M NaCl	
32

Graphene/titanium dioxide (TiO2)	Atomic layer deposition method	Specific capacitance of 84 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 V s−1 in 1 M KOH	
33

Graphene/TiO2	Microwave assisted technique	Specific capacitance of 165 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4	
34

Nitrogen (N)-doped graphene/TiO2	Hydrothermal route followed by hydrogenation	Specific capacitance of 385.2 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 in 1 M KOH	
35


 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of non-covalent, intercalation and covalent functionalization of graphene with additive organic cross-linkers. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 69 and 70 Copyrights 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry and Elsevier.	 

GO/PANI composite synthesized by dilute polymerization in the presence of GO and aniline monomer	Maximum specific capacitance of 555 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 200 mA g−1	1 M sulfuric acid (H2SO4)	Specific capacitance increased with increase in aniline concentration up to 0.05 M due to dominant heterogenous nucleation of PANI on GO nanosheets	
78

rGO/PANI composite synthesized by in situ chemical oxidative polymerization of aniline N propane sulfonic acid (AnS) in a rGO dispersion	Maximum specific capacitance of 1019 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, 80% retention after 100 cycles	1 M H2SO4	Increased capacitance due to adequate combination of PANI with a large pseudocapacitance and rGO with a high surface area	
79

PANI nanowire arrays on a flexible rG/PSS microsphere film via dilute polymerization	Specific capacitance of 740 F g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1, 87% retention after 1000 cycles	1 M H2SO4	Active surface area was significantly increased due to nanowire arrays and it provided a high interfacial area and shortened the diffusion paths	
80

Graphene/PSS nanocomposite synthesized by in situ emulsion polymerization and reduction of GO using hydrazine hydrate	Maximum electrical conductivity of 2.9 × 10−2 S m−1 with 2 wt% graphene concentration	
	Electrical conductivity increased which was due to the prominent sp3 defects produced during the reduction process for the removal of oxygen-containing functional groups	
81

Graphene/PSS composite prepared by solution-phase mixing of exfoliated phenyl isocyanate-treated graphite oxide sheets	0.1 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 1.0 S m−1 at 2.5 vol% graphene loading	
	Rapid rise in electrical conductivity was described by a bond percolation mode	
82

Graphene/(PEDOT:PSS) nanocomposite fabricated by conventional and substrate vibration-assisted spray coating	Maximum electrical conductivity of 298 S cm−1	
	Twelve-fold increase in conductivity as graphene sheets acted as a bridge or interlinking lattice	
83

Graphene/(PEDOT:PSS) composite fabricated by in situ polymerization	Maximum electrical conductivity of 637 S cm−1 with 3 wt% graphene concentration and a power factor of 45.7 μW m−1 K−1 for thermoelectric applications	
	Electrical conductivity decreased at 3 wt% loading of graphene due to poorer dispersion resulting from the over-loading of graphene	
84

rGO/PEDOT nanocomposite synthesized by a template-directed in situ polymerization	Maximum electrical conductivity of 50.8 S cm−1 with 16 wt% graphene concentration and a power factor of 5.2 × 10−6 W m−1 K−1	
	The enhancement of thermoelectric performance for the nanocomposite was attributed to the pie-like structure which induced improvement of the carrier mobility and the rGO bridging carrier transport, as well as the highly conductive network of the rGO nanosheets	
85

rGO/PMMA composite prepared by self-assembly of PMMA latex and GO through electrostatic interaction	0.16 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 64 S m−1 at 2.7 vol% rGO loading	
	The low percolation threshold and high electrical conductivity of PMMA–rGO were attributed to the formation of a segregated conducting network of rGO in the interstitial space between PMMA particles	
86

Graphene/PET nanocomposites prepared by melt compounding	0.47 vol% percolation threshold with an electrical conductivity of 2.11 S m−1 at 3 vol% graphene loading	
	The low percolation threshold and superior electrical conductivity were attributed to the high aspect ratio, large specific surface area and uniform dispersion of the graphene nanosheets in the PET matrix	
87


 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the formation process of cobalt oxide/NG-A and carbon/NG-A along with the specific capacitance of carbon/NG-A and oxygen reduction reaction polarization curves at 10 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm. Adapted with permission from data published in ref. 93 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society.	 

Graphene/MnO2 composite prepared by thermal decomposition	Maximum specific capacitance of 450 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 1000 mA g−1	6 M KOH	High electrochemical performance was attributed to the prevention of graphene aggregation by the MnO2 NPs and the synergistic effects between graphene and MnO2 NPs	
115

Graphene/RuO2 composite prepared by combining sol–gel and low-temperature annealing processes	Maximum specific capacitance of 570 F g−1 and 97.7% retention after 1000 cycles	1 M H2SO4	Increase in specific capacitance is due to the positive synergistic effect between graphene nanosheets and RuO2	
116

Graphene/Fe3O4 composite synthesized through in situ reductions of iron hydroxide between graphene nanosheets	Reversible specific capacity approaching 1026 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles at 35 mA g−1 and 580 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 700 mA g−1	1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate	Capacity was improved as graphene nanosheets provide a large contact surface for individual dispersion of well-adhered Fe3O4 particles and act as an excellent conductive agent to provide a highway for electron transport	
117

rGO/CuO composite synthesized by a hydrothermal method	Maximum specific capacitance of 326 F g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1, no loss of capacity up to 1500 cycles	0.5 M K2SO4	Enhancement in the specific capacitance is attributed to the presence of rGO with CuO, where rGO acts as a conductivity enhancer and provides better pathways for ion intercalation	
118

Vertically aligned graphene/Co3O4/cotton fabric composite	Maximum specific capacitance of 580 F g−1 and 86.2% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles	2 M KOH	Excellent electrochemical performances were attributed to the particular structure of vertically aligned graphene nanosheets and the flexibility of the carbon fabric	
119

Graphene/NiCo2S4 composite prepared by a hydrothermal route	Maximum specific capacitance of 1040 F g−1 and 89.2% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles	PVA–KOH gel	Very high specific capacitance and greatly improved cycling stability were attributed to the synergistic effect between graphene and NiCo2S4 NPs	
120

Graphene/Ni(OH)2 composite synthesized by an electrostatic induced stretch growth method	Maximum specific capacitance of 1503 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	6 M KOH	Specific capacitance decreased with an increase in the scan rate. The enhanced electrochemical performance was attributed to the improved electrical conductivity and facilitated ion transport and diffusion rate	
121

N-doped graphene/Mn3O4 synthesized by an in situ hydrothermal method	Specific capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1	1 M LiPF6 dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1:1 volume ratio)	Improvement in the electrochemical properties of the material was attributed to graphene, which acts as both an electron conductor and a volume buffer layer, and N doping allows for fast electron and ion transfer by decreasing the energy barrier	
122

N-doped graphene/MoS2 synthesized by a one pot hydrothermal route	Maximum capacity of 1169 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	0.5 M H2SO4	Better electrochemical performance was obtained due to synergism between de-layered MoS2 and N-doped graphene	
123

Holey graphene (HG)/Ni(OH)2 composite fabricated by a facile one-step method using HG as a framework structure and Ni(OH)2 as a spacer	Maximum specific capacitance of 1750 F g−1 at 15 wt% loading of HG	
	The two kinds of pores facilitate the kinetics of processes occurring in an electrode without compromising its conductivity and assured high charge storage capacity and rate capability	
124

Graphene/Co(OH)2 composite on few layer graphene synthesized by a solution method	Maximum specific capacitance of 567.1 F g−1 at 1000 mA g−1	1 M KOH	High capacitance was attributed to the presence of highly conductive graphene to reduce the resistance of the electrode	
125

Graphene/CoS	Maximum charge capacity of 1056 mA h g−1	1 M LiPF6 in a 1:1 w/w mixture of EC and DEC	High capacity is due to disordering of the carbon structure by the insertion of CoS NPs in the graphene layers	
126

Graphene/SnO2 composite synthesized by a self-assembly method	A steady specific capacity of 760 mA h g−1 at a current density of 8 mA g−1	1 M LiPF6 in EC and DEC (1:1 volume ratio)	Rise and drop of specific capacity were observed with an increase in the cycle number. This increase and drop was attributed to the poor and effective wetting of the composite with the electrolyte	
127

Graphene/CoCO3 composite synthesized by a solvothermal route	A specific charge capacity over 1000 mA h g−1	1 M LiPF6 dissolved in a 1:1:1 mixture of EC, EMC (ethylene methyl carbonate) and DMC (dimethyl carbonate)	Charge/discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency decreased with an increase in the cycle number and current density. The high capacity was attributed to the conversion reactions from Co2+ to Co0 and C4+ to C0	
128

Graphene/tin(IV) sulfide (SnS2) composite synthesized by transforming tin oxide NPs into 2D tin disulfide nanoplates directly on/between graphene nanosheets	A reversible specific capacity of 668 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA g−1	
	Specific capacity is almost stable with the cycle number and 93% retention was obtained after 70 cycles. An increase in the surface area and separation between SnS2 nanoplates and the graphene layers led to an increase in its cycling and rate performance	
129

rGO/MnOx composite fabricated by in situ reduction	Maximum specific capacitance value of 202 F g−1 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 with a mass loading of 2 mg cm−2	0.5 M aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte	71.8% capacitance retention was obtained when the scan rate increased 50 times which was attributed to the excellent electron and ion percolation network in the composite, the co-existence of mixed valence cations (Mn2+, Mn3+, and Mn4+) in manganese oxides and the synergistic effect between the two components of the composite	
130

rGO/acid treated SWCNT composite (weight ratio of 1:9) fabricated via a spray coating technique	The specific capacitance value of the flexible supercapacitor (unbent) was 62.4 F g−1, which decreased to 55.7 F g−1 (89.3% retention) and 46.6 F g−1 (74.7% retention) after 1000 galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) and 200 bending with application of 3000 GCD cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1	PVA-based IL polymer electrolyte conducted with an ionic liquid of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4)	High electrochemical performance was attributed to the high surface resistance induced by the cracks on the rGO/ASWCNT film and formation of cracks that lead to an irreversible loss of junctions between the rGO/ASWCNT composite and electrolyte	
131

Mesoporous rGO (m-rGO) synthesized by a Zn particle reduction method	Maximum specific capacitance of 106.7 F g−1 at a discharge rate of 0.1 A g−1	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoro-methylsulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI) ionic liquid electrolyte	The high capacitance performance of the m-rGO in the ionic liquid electrolyte was attributed to the large contribution of mesopores, which facilitates the diffusion of large ions	
132

rGO-IL-MWCNTs fabricated by a one pot hydrothermal process and ultrasonication	Maximum specific capacity of 263.9 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1	Pure ionic liquid electrolyte	The superior electrochemical performance of RGO-IL-MWCNTs was attributed to the highest BET surface area and more diffusion pathways	
133

Cellulose nanofibril (CNF)–reduced graphene oxide (rGO)–molybdenum oxynitride (MoOxNy) aerogel film synthesized by freeze-drying a CNF/GO/MoO3 aqueous dispersion followed by subsequent in situ hydrazine reduction	Maximum specific capacitance of 680 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1	1 M H2SO4	The specific capacitance increased after the first 400 cycles, which was attributed to the improved ion accessibility in the porous CNF/RGO/MoOxNy aerogel film after repetitive charge–discharge cycles	
134

Cellulose nanofibril (CNF)/rGO/CNT hybrid aerogel	Maximum specific capacitance of 252 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.5 A g−1	H2SO4/PVA gel	The supercapacitor retained 70% of its capacitance when the current density was changed from 0.5 to 10 A g−1. This was attributed to the highly continuous porous structure and the strong hydrophilicity of the aerogel electrode that facilitated the diffusion of ions	
135

rGO/CNF hybrid aerogel	Maximum specific capacitance of 207 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1	H2SO4/PVA gel	The excellent electrochemical performance was ascribed to the aggregation of graphene nanosheets being effectively prevented by CNFs, and the superior hydrophilic characteristic of CNFs	
136

Highly porous Ni–Co–O@RGO/activate carbon synthesized using a surfactant-assisted microwave irradiation technique	Maximum specific capacitance of 1903 F g−1 at 0.8 A g−1	KOH/K3Fe(CN)6	The electrode showed a longer discharge time compared to the charge time. This was attributed to the active material and the redox couple-carrying electrolyte	
137

Nitrogen-doped graphene/activated carbon composite synthesized by a method combining vacuum filtration with post-annealing in a NH3 atmosphere	Specific capacitance of 308 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	6.0 M KOH aqueous electrolyte	The high capacitance of the composite paper was ascribed to the electric double-layer behavior and the reversible redox reactions of the nitrogen and oxygen groups	
138

NiCoO2/rGO/Ni foam composite nanoarrays synthesized by a simple hydrothermal synthesis method	Specific capacity of 1286C g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	6.0 mol L−1 KOH aqueous electrolyte	NiCoO2/rGO/NF exhibited a better cycle stability with a capacity retention of 89% after 2500 cycles. The excellent electrochemical performance was attributed to more electroactive sites for faradaic reaction due to ultrathin NiCoO2/rGO nanoflake arrays on the Ni foam	
139

MnO2 (needle-like nanostructure)/rGO hybrid fabricated through an electrostatic coprecipitation procedure	Specific capacitance of 375 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	Aqueous 0.5 M Na2SO4	Capacitance only decreased by 7% of the initial capacitance after 500 cycles which expressed the proper electrochemical stability of such an electrode material. Electrochemical studies showed that this morphology can provide a suitable interface for cation exchange and charge storage	
140


 	Fig. 4  Schematic structures of (a) some layered TMOs, (b) graphene and (c) graphene/TMO hybrid layered composites for electrochemical energy storage. Panel (a) is adapted with permission from data published in ref. 146 Copyright 2016, Materials Research Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of mechanisms for enhancing the efficiency of doped graphene in energy storage applications. (a) In supercapacitors the presence of dopants generally improves the capacitance via faradaic contribution;160 (b) the doped atoms create a charge polarization in the carbon network, which may enhance the wettability of the electrode by the electrolyte and even improve the in-plane electronic conductivity;160 (c) the electropositive character of B enhances the binding energy with Li in Li ion batteries (LIBs), which results in a shorter bond length and smaller volumetric expansion upon intercalation;160 (d) the presence of heteroatoms introduces additional lithiation sites which result in an increase of the specific capacity of an anode. Adapted with permission from data published in ref. 160 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of ion diffusion pathways across graphene and HG, (b) specific capacitances versus current densities in graphene and HG, and (c) different colors of graphene and HG solutions, as well as cross-sectional SEM images of HG and graphene at an equivalent areal mass density of 0.31 mg cm−2 and cross-sectional SEM images at identical magnifications of HG and graphene films. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 158 Copyright 2017, Taylor & Francis.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of a three-step process for the preparation of a 3D graphene/CNT foam architecture; step 1: the pristine nickel foam was treated with oxygen plasma to form a nickel oxide layer on the nickel foam (note: the created oxide layer provides a barrier layer to minimize the diffusion of carbon into the nickel foam and prevent the formation of undesired Ni3C). Step 2: an iron layer with a thickness of 2 nm was deposited on the surface of the nickel foam as a catalyst. Step 3: the sample was loaded into a chemical vapor deposition furnace, and then hydrogen and acetylene were applied to grow the composite nanostructure on the surface of the coated nickel backbone. (b) Optical micrograph and SEM image of the pristine nickel, graphene and graphene/CNT foams (inset displays the high magnification SEM of the nickel foam). (c) Ragone plot, comparing the energy and power densities of the graphene/CNT foam with some other composites. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 42 Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D G/SNPs along with digital images of the precursor, hydrogel, sponge and electrode. (b) Cycling performance of the 3D G/SNP and S/rGO cathodes at over 500 cycles at a high rate of 1500 mA g−1, as well as a schematic display of the 3D G/SNP composite with a continuous electronic transport pathway and stable framework. (c) A schematic of the two-step process flow to fabricate the 3D HG/Nb2O5 hierarchically porous composite architecture. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 163 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC). Panel (c) is adapted with permission from data published in ref. 164 Copyright 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).	 

GO/polystyrene	Thermal degradation temperature increases by 73 °C (in comparison with pure PS) with addition of 2 wt% GO in PS. Negligible mass loss up to 300 °C	
191

Graphene/Fe3O4	Thermal degradation temperature is 350 °C with almost a 5% mass loss. There is almost a negligible mass loss beyond 520 °C. The DSC curve indicates a strong exothermal peak at 430 °C which is assigned to decomposition of the carbon skeleton	
192

GNS/CuO	Thermal degradation temperature is 250 °C. There is an intense mass loss from 250 °C to 800 °C. Almost 30% mass loss up to 1000 °C	
193

rGO/Co3O4	Thermal degradation temperature is 350 °C. Catalytic combustion of nanosized Co3O4 reduces the decomposition temperature of graphene. 51 wt% rGO loaded with Co3O4 to make the Co3O4/rGO composite. This composite shows almost a 43% mass loss at around 500 °C	
194

Graphene/MoS2	Initial mass loss is observed at about 250 °C. Rapid weight loss is observed at 700 °C which indicates that MoS2 inhibits the oxidation of underlying graphene and the stability of the composite decreases gradually beyond 800 °C due to the presence of graphene	
195

Graphene/SnO2	Mass loss is about 10.9% at 800 °C whereas bare SnO2 doesn't show any appreciable mass loss up to 800 °C. Thus, any weight change in graphene/SnO2 corresponds to the oxidation of graphene	
196

GO/TiO2	9% mass loss up to 200 °C. This mass loss is much lower than GO which indicates decreased amount of oxygenated functional groups in GO	
197

Graphene/SnS2	Thermal degradation temperature is around 350 °C. 21.6% mass loss was observed up to 1000 °C	
129


 	Fig. 9  A schematic illustration of electron localization for (a) armchair edged bilayered GNR at graphitic separation, (b) armchair edged GNR at 2.4 Å separation, (c) zigzag edged bilayered GNR at graphitic separation and (d) graphene with zigzag and armchair edges. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 235. Copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) steps for the synthesis of mesoporous graphene nanoballs and (b) steps for the fabrication of 3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy, along with their TEM, specific capacitance and capacitance retention. Panel (a) is reproduced from data published in ref. 273. Copyright 2010, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 274. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

Graphene/MnO2	Specific capacitance value of 211.5 F g−1 at a potential scan rate of 2 mV s−1	1 M Na2SO4	
272

GNS/PANI	Specific capacitance value of 408 F g−1 at a potential scan rate of 5 mV s−1	1 M H2SO4	
275

3D interconnected nanotubular graphene/PPy	Maximum specific capacitance of 509 F g−1 at a current density of 0.15 A g−1	1 M HClO4	
274

Nanohoneycomb-like strongly coupled CoMoO4-3D graphene	Specific capacitance of 2098 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1	2 M KOH	
276

Mn3O4/rGO	Specific capacitance of 193 F g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1	Saturated Na2SO4	
277

Covalently grafted PANI/GO (6:1)	Specific capacitance of 422 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1	1 M H2SO4	
278

Graphene/RuO2	Maximum specific capacitance of 998 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1	0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4	
279


 	Fig. 11  Schematic, TEM/HRTEM and cycling performance of (a) 3D porous graphene/Sn (cycle performance is at a current density of 200 mA g−1), (b) 3D hierarchical graphene/SnO2 frameworks (cycle performance is at a current density of 100 mA g−1) and (c) N-doped graphene/SnO2 sandwich paper (cycle performance is at a current density of 50 mA g−1). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 288. Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 289. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 290. Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

3D hierarchical SnO2/GNS	Capacity of 830 mA h g−1 for up to 70 charge–discharge cycles at 0.1 mA g−1	
289

3D porous graphene/Sn	Capacity of 682 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1	
288

N doped graphene–SnO2 sandwich paper	Capacity of 918 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1	
290

Graphene/MoS2	Capacity of 1150 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	
291

Mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystals on graphene aerogels	Capacity of 956.2 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	
292

Tungsten disulphide nanotubes/graphene	Capacity of 318.6 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	
293

Graphene/TiO2	Specific capacity of 122 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1	
294


 	Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of GNSs from graphite and their structural SEM images, TEM images of C/Pt and GNS/Pt hybrid composites and cyclic voltammetry performance per unit area over the 40 and 80 wt% C/Pt and 80 wt% GNS/Pt electrodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 2.0 M CH3OH electrolyte solution. (b) Procedure to design graphene nanosheet/Pt on Pd bimetallic nanodendrite hybrids, TEM images of TP-BNGN (three-dimensional Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrites supported on graphene nanosheets) at different magnifications and electrocatalytic cycling stability of the E-TEK (commercial C/Pt) catalyst (curve a), PB (Platinum Black) (curve b), and TP-BNGN (curve c). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 304. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 307. Copyright 2010, The American Chemical Society.	 

GNS/Pt	Current density of 0.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.6 V	
303

Pd-DNA/graphene	Current density of 140.1 mA mg−1 at a potential of 0.08 V	
313

Au/graphene	Current density of 2.6 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.08 V	
314

Ellipsoidal Mn3O4 particles/N-doped graphene	Current density of 11.69 mA cm−2 at −0.60 V	
315

Co3O4/graphene	Current density of 52.6 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V	
309

Fe3O4/N-graphene aerogel	Current density of −2.56 mA cm−2 at an onset potential of −0.19 V	
316

MNCo2O4/N-rmGO	Current density of 151 mA cm−2 at an onset potential of −0.91 V	
317


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis of a DSSC with graphene coated cotton fabric (GCF) as the counter electrode, FE-SEM images of untreated cotton fabric (low and high magnification), Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) treated cotton fabric (low and high magnification) and GNS coated fabric and its cross-sectional view and polarization curves of Pt and HC-GCF counter electrode based cells. (b) Structure of NiSe and Ni3Se2, SEM and TEM images of rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 and photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with rGO/NiSe–Ni3Se2 series and Pt counter electrode (CE), measured at AM1.5G illumination, 100 mW cm−2. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 335. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 338. Copyright 2016, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic view of probing the graphite surface using a hydrogen super-atom with the energy landscape of hydrogen above an ideal layer of graphene, the energy landscape for the graphene layer substituted with 25% boron for the convex plane and variations of the average, minimum and maximum energy of H2 interaction with the substituted graphene layer as a function of substitution ratio (in %) for the convex surface. (b) Schematic diagram shows the possible formation of bonds upon hydrogenation of Pd–N-HEG. SEM and TEM micrographs of N-HEG and Pd–N-HEG and pressure-composition isotherms of N-HEG and Pd–N-HEG in the temperature range 25–100 °C and 0.1–4 MPa pressure. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 351. Copyright 2009, Springer. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 353. Copyright 2012, The American Chemical Society.	 

Graphene/Li	12.8	
355

Li-decorated porous graphene	12	
356

Graphene/Ca	8.4	
357

Graphene/Ti	4.9	
358

Graphene/B	15.1	
361

rGO/Mg	6.5	
366

N doped graphene	7.23	
367

Lithium doped fullerene/graphene	5	
368


 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic view of the N-doped graphene, SEM and TEM image of N-doped graphene and Ids/Vds characteristics at various gate voltages (Vg) for the pristine graphene and the N-doped graphene and their transfer characteristics. (b) The modeling and TEM images of B-doped graphene (BG1) and N-doped graphene (NG1) and electrical conducting data of NG1, BG1 and pristine graphene (HG). Panel (a) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 382. Copyright 2009, The American Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 388. Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
