Harnessing hierarchical architectures to trap light for efficient photoelectrochemical cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE02986A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE02986A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 660-684Harnessing hierarchical architectures to trap light for efficient photoelectrochemical cells

        
          
            Songtao 
            Tang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Weitao 
            Qiu†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Shuang 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yexiang 
            Tong
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *ac
aGuangdong Key Lab of Nano-Micro Material Research, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China. E-mail: chsyang@pku.edu.cn
bMOE of the Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, The Key Lab of Low-Carbon Chemistry & Energy Conservation of Guangdong Province, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou, China. E-mail: chedhx@mail.sysu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
Received 
      15th September 2019
    , Accepted 13th January 2020First published on 13th January 2020AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) cells including dye-sensitized solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting devices are a promising approach to effectively harvesting and storing solar energy, but the contradictory requirements on the device design with sustainable materials between charge collection and light absorption hinder their development. An ideal material possessing simultaneously wide and strong photo-absorption and high electrical conductivity is hard to come by, but these features can be built into hierarchical structures by rationally combining materials with multiple dimensions and multiple functions, thereby solving the contradiction between charge collection and light absorption. In this article, we review recent progress in the design and utilization of hierarchical architectures here, specifically referring to structures with a combination of 0–3D entities, for PEC cells. Inspired by the natural photosynthesis system, which divides the overall task among chloroplasts, foliages, trunks and branches, we split the hierarchical structure into three functional parts, a surface coating layer for anti-reflection and charge transfer, a light absorbing block and a support structure good in anti-transmittance and charge transport. In this way, the above-mentioned contradiction in solar energy conversion can be solved by decoupling the charge collection from optical propagation. The design ideas and the underlying mechanisms of each part of the hierarchical structure are discussed in detail. In general, appropriately designing each individual unit to control light absorption and charge transport is the main strategy to trap light and to direct charge carriers. Finally, the prospects and future directions are presented.
Songtao Tang
Songtao Tang received his BS degree in chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 2017. He is a PhD student at Sun Yat-Sen University. Currently, he is an exchange student in Peking University, Shenzhen. His research is focused on the development of nanostructured materials for solar water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction.
Weitao Qiu
Weitao Qiu received his BS degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2014. He is currently a PhD student at Sun Yat-Sen University, under the joint supervision of Prof. Yexiang Tong and Prof. Hongbing Ji. He is now an exchange student in Peking University, Shenzhen. His research is focused on the development of nanostructured materials for Li ion batteries, electrocatalytic water splitting and solar water splitting.
Shuang Xiao
Shuang Xiao received his BS degree (2012) from the School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology in China and his PhD degree (2017) from the Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Research Associate Professor at the School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University. His current research is focused on perovskite solar cells, photoelectrochemical cells and catalysts.
Yexiang Tong
Prof. Yexiang Tong received his BS in General Chemistry in 1985, MS in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He joined Sun Yat-Sen University as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 1988. His current research is focused on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications in energy conversion and storage.
Shihe Yang
Shihe Yang is a Professor at the Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, and The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He has contributed to cluster science, fullerenes and metallofullerenes, soft molecular interfaces and nanomaterials. His current research interests include the understanding, manipulation and applications of low-dimensional nanosystems and multiscale materials for energy conversion, particularly solar energy harvesting.

Broader context
The utilization of fossil fuels has advanced human society to where we are now, but has also inflicted serious global warming and environment pollution problems on the earth. Replacing fossil fuels with solar fuels from artificial photosynthesis is an enticing option. Toward this end, dye sensitized solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting devices as close mimics of the natural photosynthesis system have been developed, aiming to efficiently trap solar energy and convert it into storable energy. Such an efficient light trapping system requires strong light absorption and fast charge transport in the bulk and rapid injection of the surface reaching charge carriers at the relevant interfaces. However, the traditional design is inevitably stranded in an absorption–collection dilemma wherein it is almost impossible to achieve full absorption and complete charge collection simultaneously. As a promising solution to this conundrum, light trapping with hierarchical architectures, which are inspired by natural green plants evolved for eons to harvest sunlight, is brought up to optimize light harvesting without compromising the charge carrier transport. The hierarchical architectures are advantageous for their distinctive light scattering behaviors, so that they can redistribute light intensity and eventually permit nearly full light absorption and complete charge collection at the same time. This review summarizes the recent progress in this area, clarifies the concept and implications of light trapping with the hierarchical architectures, and finally, pictures the future challenges and opportunities in light trapping for solar fuels with hierarchical architectures.

1. Introduction
The current global energy consumption still mainly relies on fossil fuels such as coal, crude oil, natural gas, etc.1 The energy release from fossil fuels upon their combustion is inevitably accompanied by the discharge of a large quantity of CO2 into the atmosphere, resulting in global warming and climate changes.2,3 One of the grand challenges facing humanity is to develop clean and sustainable energy resources to meet the increasing energy demand and to remedy the deteriorating global environment.4 For the earth, solar energy is considered the most sustainable energy source with zero environmental pollution. Since solar energy is spatially diffuse and temporally intermittent, it is necessary to economically convert solar energy into a storable and clean form, known as solar fuel, by approaches such as photocatalysis,5 photoelectrochemistry,6 photovoltaics7 and photothermal conversion.8,9
In transitioning from fossil fuel to solar fuel, a photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell is arguably one of the most prospective methods for solar energy utilization, including PEC water splitting and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).6,10 PEC water splitting is aimed at splitting water to produce O2 and the storable and transportable fuel gas H2 as the chemical energy carrier by the sunlight-generated electron–hole pairs.11,12 On the other hand, DSSCs directly accomplish the solar to electric energy conversion.13 Although the final products of the two types of PEC cells are different, they share similar working principles and main device structures.14 Notably, both of these solar conversion strategies are based on the photovoltaic effect,15,16 and the original driving force for the electrical energy and hydrogen energy generation comes from the electron–hole pairs generated by solar photons. Thus, they all face the same contradictory requirements of the active layer thickness between light absorption (αL) and charge transport (μ/L), especially for materials with either a low absorption coefficient or a short carrier diffusion length, such as organic dyes, polycrystalline silicon, hematite, bismuth vanadate, etc.10,17–19 Extensive works have been done to improve the intrinsic properties of photo-sensitizers (carrier lifetime, diffusion length, band gap, etc.) by means of doping, surface passivation, synthesis of new dyes, etc.20–24 These alone appear to be difficult to solve the problem, and a higher level design is required beyond the intrinsic material properties for an efficient management of photons, charges and other participating species in artificial photosynthesis.25,26
As a high level structural form, hierarchical architectures have the ability to bring together many seemingly incompatible attributes to a single entity,26 such as high packing density, high load, high specific surface area, high charge collection efficiency and strong light trapping. Hierarchical structures can be prepared, for example, by mixing nanoparticles of different sizes or by introducing a secondary microstructure into a scaffold, such as polydisperse nanoparticle stacks or branched sub-wavelength films, nanowires and nanotubes.27,28 Over the past decade, more and more architectures with well-designed individual units and order arrangement among them have been reported, such as photonic crystals; in those structures, metal nanoentities with plasmonic effects have also been incorporated, such as an Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array.29,30 Some representative hierarchical architectures are shown in Fig. 1. With the rapid advance of nanotechnologies, we believe that the hierarchical architectures will be more and more sophisticated, and the composition distribution and the underlying organizational principles for light trapping will become more complex. Notwithstanding the many hierarchical structures reported to date, there is a lack of coherent and systematic development converging to a framework. To better design hierarchical architectures for applications in PEC cells in a more rational way, it is necessary to comb through the synthesis methods for different materials, the smart combination of materials for efficient charge collection, and the control of their size, morphology, and spatial arrangement for optimal light trapping. In fact, some review articles have already been published, which summarized the synthesis and application of the hierarchical architectures.26,31,32 Our purpose here is rather to provide an in-depth analysis and panoramic view on the hierarchical architectures applied in PEC cells, and round up the principles and design ideas concerning the hierarchical architectures for light trapping.
 Fig. 1  Some representative artificial architectures reported in the literature for light trapping. 
Considering the intricacy of hierarchical architectures, e.g., even the same material with a similar size and shape but located at different positions in a given hierarchical architecture may have very different light trapping properties as in plasmonics,33,34 a thorough analysis of the operating mechanisms of each hierarchical structure necessitates properly breaking it down into different functioning parts. Thus, in this review, we will pose the dilemma between the elementary processes of light conversion, and then summarize some common concepts and principles of light trapping through analysis of the literature work on hierarchical architectures published over the past decades. This will be followed by a review and analysis of some representative structures and the corresponding three fundamental light trapping functions they perform in light-trapping photoelectrodes: anti-reflection, anti-transmission and light absorption. We wish to emphasize that the three functions are not necessarily totally separated, and they may interact with each other, reinforcing the overall performance. In the section of light-absorbing structures, we will further discuss the synergy between the absorber material and assistant light-absorbing substructures. This review is distinctively aimed at putting the diverse literature on hierarchical light trapping structures in context through our own analysis, synthesis and conceptualization.
2. Hierarchical architecture for PEC solar energy conversion
The superiority of hierarchical architectures in light trapping can be exposed by analysing the relationship and the trade-off between the four sequential processes in PEC solar energy conversion, including light absorption, charge separation, charge transport to the interface, and charge transfer to the electrolyte.
2.1 Introduction of the hierarchical architecture
Looking into the mother nature, green plants effectively convert sunlight into chemical energy and feed most life forms. The key to such high-efficiency light utilization lies in the light trapping architecture naturally developed by green plants. As shown in Fig. 2, the chloroplasts with layers of stacked micro-granum enable multiple absorption of light, the rough foliage surfaces reduce the reflection of incoming light and more importantly, serve as the support layer, and the three-dimensional macro-trunks and branches ensure adequate sensitizer-loading, spatial light-trapping and anti-transmittance. Notably, not only is such an open hierarchical structure good for photon management, the foliage, trunks and branches also dexterously perform material exchange and transport of CO2, O2, water, inorganic salt, organic matter, etc., which are also vital to the plant's photosynthesis. Although the mass fraction of chloroplasts in the total system is very low, the strong synergistic effect of each part guarantees high photosynthesis efficiency inside the chloroplasts. All these show that the multi-functional and multi-dimensional structures are vital to efficient light conversion.
 Fig. 2  The hierarchical light trapping system of green plants in natural photosynthesis. 
The natural photosynthesis system has enlightened scientists on constructing hierarchical architectures to trap light efficiently within PEC photoelectrodes for artificial photosynthesis. Starting from the above relationships among micro-chloroplasts, foliage, macro-trunk and branches, an artificial hierarchical light trapping system can be divided into three parts depending on the functions it performs: the light-absorbing main structure, the anti-transmission and charge transport structure, the anti-reflection and charge transfer structure. The latter two are referred to as the assistant light-absorbing substructures in this review. For the PEC photoelectrodes, semiconductors with a narrow band gap or an organic dye often acts as the main photon absorber, while the surface structure performs anti-reflection and charge transfer at the electrode–electrolyte interface, and the support structure acts as an anti-transmittance substrate and charge transport highway, both in a way to serve as the assistant light-absorbing substructures.
Referring to the consensus from previous studies in the field, a hierarchical architecture can be regarded as the one created by a systemic combination of low-dimensional nanostructures, including 0-D (nanoparticles), 1-D (nanowires), 2-D (nanoflakes), and 3-D.26,31,35 Here we venture to go a step further to treat a thin film as an independent low-dimensional (pseudo-2D) architecture, because some interesting phenomena, such as destructive or constructive interference in a thin film, could emerge when the film thickness falls into the incident light wavelength range, from dozens to hundreds of nanometers.29,36–39 It is important to add that the hierarchical architecture for light trapping in PEC cells was meant to not only embody the combination of different low-dimensional structures and materials but, equally importantly, also emphasize the combination of different functions.
2.2 The light absorption in block and structured materials
Incident light with a suitable wavelength can penetrate the semiconductor to a certain depth α−1(λ), allowing electron–photon interactions to form excitons (bound electron–hole pairs).40 Here, α(λ) is the absorption coefficient of the semiconductor at wavelength λ. According to the Lambert–Beer law, light intensity is exponentially attenuated as it travels through a medium, but the actual thickness required to achieve full absorption of the solar spectrum is much larger than the estimated attenuation length. Among the photosensitive materials of current interest many are indirect semiconductors, such as silicon, bismuth vanadate and hematite,17–19 for which the absorption process needs to be assisted by phonon emission to conserve momentum and thus typically holds a low light absorption coefficient α, especially in the long light wavelength region.41,42Fig. 3 shows light absorption of hematite and Si at different wavelengths and different film thicknesses.17,19 As the thickness of the hematite film increases, the light absorption in the short-wavelength region (350–450 nm) with high photon energy increases significantly, but such an increase is small in the long-wavelength region (550–590 nm) near the band edge (Fig. 3A).17 Shown in Fig. 3B is a plot of the thickness required for full light absorption at each single wavelength in a-Si:H thin film.19 It can be seen that as the wavelength gets longer (the photon energy gets lower), the required absorption length α−1 of photons for a-Si:H silicon increases sharply. Therefore, the practical absorption length α−1 for sufficient light absorption is very large, which, in addition to increasing the cost of material usage, contradicts the effort to expedite the subsequent charge collection process.
 Fig. 3  (A) The UV-vis absorption spectra of hematite with different film thicknesses exhibited a similar shape. (B) Absorption length of photons as a function of wavelength for a-Si:H with a band gap Eg = 1.6 eV. The band edge wavelength is indicated by the arrow. A and B are reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 19, respectively. 
The common charge collection processes consist of charge separation and transport. For different photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells, the driving force of electron–hole pair separation may come from different sources. For example, in PEC water splitting, the driving force of charge separation is the barrier height due to band bending in the space charge layer (SCL, Wsc), which comes from the Fermi level difference between the semiconductor and electrolyte (Fig. 4). In a somewhat different way, the driving force in a dye-sensitized solar cell is the energetic and entropic difference demarcated at the dye/electron conductor interface. The built-in field in the SCL is the key to separating the photo-induced electron–hole pairs. In the ideal case (e.g., Fig. 4) wherein minority carriers reaching the edge of the SCL are transferred across the interface to the solution redox species without recombination loss and majority carriers move downhill into the conductor layer, the light absorption-charge collection problem in the system can be formulated in terms of three characteristic lengths. These are the width of the space charge layer, Wsc, the penetration depth, α−1(λ), of the incident light to the electrode and the minority carrier diffusion length, LD.40 Here we define Le = Wsc + LD as the effective charge collection length, and only the photogenerated electron–hole pairs within Le can be separated and collected. Unfortunately, since Wsc is about 10 nm to 1 μm and LD of sustainable semiconductors is commonly small (only a few nanometers for hematite), Le is typically much thinner than the necessary absorption length α−1 (several to dozens of microns), meaning that a large proportion of the absorbed photons are wasted, as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Potential distribution (built-in electric field) of an n-type semiconductor electrode in contact with electrolyte under equilibrium conditions. The three characteristic lengths: Wsc – the width of the space charge layer; LD – the minority carrier diffusion length; α−1(λ) – the penetration depth of light. 
Given the incongruity between light penetration length and the charge collection length, there are two schemes to solve this problem. One is to resort to nanomaterials engineering. Take rod arrays as an example. The superiority of such structured materials is the greatly extended and dispersive SCL region along the rods as opposed to bulk materials.40 These disperse SCL regions provide the necessary driving force for separating the electron–hole pairs deep into the rods. In other words, here the charge-carrier separation is essentially decoupled from the light absorption (Fig. 5). What is more, the structured materials, such as nanopores, nanorods and nanotube structures, also provide an additional effect of enhancing light trapping by increasing light scattering between individual micro-units.43,44 On the flip side, however, these gaps between individual units may increase the possibility of photons passing through without being absorbed, especially for normal incidence.
 Fig. 5  Traditional bulk semiconductor geometries (left) require the minority-carrier diffusion length, Lmin (equivalent to the LD discussed above), comparable to the characteristic light-absorption length. In contrast, structured devices such as wire arrays (right) enable the orthogonalization of light absorption and carrier collection. Decoupling Lmin from light absorption reduces quality constraints of certain materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. 
Another alternative is to design hierarchical architectures by coupling assistant light-absorbing substructures and the anti-reflective and anti-transmittance structures into the photoactive material to shorten the necessary light penetration depth. The aim of the assistant light-absorbing substructure is to reduce the surface reflection and to increase the optical path length inside the material. A simple and typical assistant light-absorbing substructure is a back metallic reflector. Dotan et al. have designed an optical cavity by coupling a back reflector with a planar hematite film with a precisely calculated thickness, as shown in Fig. 6.38 Interference between the forward- and backward-propagating waves can enhance the light absorption in quarter-wavelength or, sometimes, in thicker subwavelength films, amplifying the light intensity close to the surface. Note, however, that the excessively concentrated light intensity on the material surface may also have a negative effect on the total charge separation, as we will discuss in Section 2.3.
 Fig. 6  Resonant light trapping in quarter-wavelength films. Schematic illustration of light propagation in a quarter-wavelength (d = λ/4, for normal incidence) absorbing film on a back-reflector substrate. The different colours represent the light intensity distribution across the film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. 
2.3 The distribution of light intensity and hierarchical architectures
Although the works reviewed above about assistant substructures and structured semiconductors in PEC cells have achieved great improvements in light absorption and charge separation, the actual photoelectrochemical performance still lags far below the theoretical photocurrent calculated by integrating the absorption spectrum of each material. This performance gap comes from the slow interfacial kinetics of minority carrier transfer, the long collection time of majority carriers and the accumulation of the two types of charge carriers.40 In order to overcome these problems, other than finding efficient co-catalysts and improving the majority carrier conductivity, we may also need to further consider the distribution of light intensity in the SCL regions.
To facilitate discussion, we take an n-type photoanode for PEC water splitting as an example. The decoupled photo-induced electron–hole pairs will migrate across the SCL region in opposite directions and further accumulate at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and the SCL/neutral region boundary, respectively (see Fig. 4). The accumulated holes need to further transfer to the electrolyte through the surface catalytic sites; while the corresponding electrons will cross the neutral region and be collected by the electron sink. However, the relatively slow rate constant (ms−1 to s−1) of the surface redox reaction compared with that of photo-excitation (<ns−1) is likely to result in a significant accumulation of photo-induced minority carriers at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface under continuous irradiation.45 On the other hand, a slow majority carrier collection time may also contribute to charge accumulation in the SCL/neutral boundary region.46 Such charge accumulation results in a diminished band bending of the SCL, which will decrease the separation efficiency of the photo-induced charge carriers and aggravate the charge recombination in the SCL. In other words, the charge separation capacity of the SCL regions is limited by the interface barrier height and the slow surface reaction and majority carrier collection. This can be confirmed directly by observing the decreasing absorbed photon to current conversion efficiency (APCE) with increasing incident light intensity.46 Thus, converging all the incident light (1 sun) into the narrow SCL region of the bulk, planar material by assistant light-absorbing substructures may result in fateful charge recombination and a wider SCL is significant for achieving efficient PEC cells. On the other hand, under illumination and without an applied potential, the driving force for the minority carrier transfer into the electrolyte comes from the difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the minority carrier in the SCL and the redox potential of the electrolyte, which is known as the open circuit photovoltage (Voc). Voc is proportional to the concentration of photo-induced minority carriers; thus, a too dispersive distribution of light may diminish the open circuit photovoltage and delay the onset potential of photocurrent. The direct proportional relationship between the photocurrent onset and light intensity can be found in many reports in the literature.47 Thus, it is necessary to control and optimize the distribution of light intensity in the SCLs to design efficient photoelectrochemical cells.
Aside from the influence of the attenuated band bending, optimizing the distribution of light intensity in the SCL region also should consider the charge collection length of majority carriers. As shown in Fig. 4, before reaching the sink, majority carriers (electrons for photoanode) need to overcome the resistance of the SCL and the neutral region; considering the poor conductivity of most sustainable semiconducting photoelectrodes, the loss in these regions can’t be ignored. An example at hand is the distinctly different photocurrent obtained when a relatively thick nanocrystalline photoelectrode is illuminated from two opposite directions: the side of the semiconductor/electrolyte and the side of the semiconductor/majority carrier conductor. In our previous works, we have investigated this phenomenon with nanocrystalline BiVO4 and TiO2.48,49 Due to the small size of the nanostructure, the migration path of minority carriers is almost the same for both of the illumination directions. However, the short penetration depth of high energy photons results in attenuated absorption along the incident direction. Clearly, the illumination direction from the semiconductor/majority carrier conductor side is superior for the majority carrier collection to that from the semiconductor/electrolyte side. Given that the common tandem scheme of PV and PEC devices for unbiased water splitting is to join them back to back, achieving a higher photocurrent with the semiconductor/electrolyte side illumination is necessary. Thus, the majority carrier collection needs to be improved, and this may be achieved by, aside from enhancing the majority carrier conductivity, regulating the distribution of light intensity along the incident light direction and shorten the distance between the major absorption region and the majority carrier conductor.
In particular, we propose three extreme modes of light intensity distribution as shown in Fig. 7A. When all of the incident light (1 sun) is focused on the narrow bottom region of the rod (Fig. 7A-1), the maximal concentrated photon flux with a high quasi-Fermi level of minority carriers, the shortest majority carrier collection distance, and the minimal bulk resistance will allow achieving the best onset. However, an excessively concentrated light intensity may also decrease the charge separation and lower the saturation photocurrent, resulting in a possible final current–voltage curve (J–V) (1 in Fig. 7B). By contrast, in another extreme situation, the incident light is focused on the narrow top region of the rod (Fig. 7A-2). Now the overlong collection distance of majority carriers may delay the onset and lower the saturation photocurrent. A possible final J–V performance is curve 2 in Fig. 7B. Meanwhile, one can expect an optimized light intensity distribution with a trade-off between the onset and saturation photocurrent, as shown in Fig. 7A-3. This light intensity distribution attenuated from bottom to top of the rod and its J–V performance is curve 3. The dotted curve in Fig. 7B is the J–V curve of PV in a back-to-back PEC–PV system, and a, b and c are the three working points. Obviously, the working point c corresponding to the optimized light intensity distribution has the best solar conversion efficiency of all. Therefore, it is clear that a sufficient space charge layer and a reasonable distribution of light intensity are the key to achieve simultaneously efficient light absorption and charge collection.
 Fig. 7  (A) Three extreme modes of light intensity distribution. (B) The three respective working points in a PEC–PV tandem cell. 
In the previous section, we showed the extended SCL region of the structured material and the great ability of assistant light-absorbing substructures in reducing the light penetration depth, α−1(λ). Actually, these assistant substructures, including antireflective and anti-transmittance substructures, also have a great power to regulate the distribution of light intensity in active materials, e.g., by changing the reflective index of the back reflector,38 transforming the shape of the transparent or plasmonic metallic conductive substrate and adjusting the array layout of surface structures.29,50 In addition, the anti-transmittance substructure can be not only a planar film, but also a 3D structure providing extended accessible surface to form the SCL. Thus, many reports have shown that combining the assistant light-absorbing substructures with structured materials to construct hierarchical structures could simultaneously attain optimized distribution of light intensity as well as sufficient SCL. Recently, our group reported a series of works about regulating the distribution of light.51–54 For example, we introduced a bowl-like light converging structure into conventional hematite nanorod arrays to trap a considerable amount of incident light inside the hematite rods close to the FTO (F doped SnO2 as electron conductor),52 and found that the focus of the converging light can be moved by changing the diameter of the bowl-like structure. Compared with single nanorod arrays with a longer length, the as-prepared nanorod@nanobowl hierarchical structure shows stronger light absorption and lower resistance of bulk charge collection due to the converging effect of the nanobowl and the shorter distance between the major light absorption region and the electron conductor. The modulated distribution of light intensity in the active material with assistant light-absorbing substructures also widely appears in many other reports.52,53
Somewhat differently, in photoelectrochemical solar cells, such as DSSCs, due to the fast redox reactions and short collection distance of majority carriers, the predominant advantage of the hierarchical architecture is the large surface area for dye loading.13,55 However, considering the length of these hierarchical architectures in DSSCs is often dozens of microns and the mass transport may be a limiting factor for charge transfer, the distribution of light intensity may also be very significant.56,57 It is worth mentioning that the hierarchical structure with the optimized surface antireflective substructure also shows omnidirectional light absorption,28,58 which is equally important to practical application due to the diffuse nature of sunlight. Despite the complex synthesis process and the potentially additional charge recombination at the interfaces between the light absorbing structure and assistant substructure, hierarchical structures still show huge potential in future photoelectrochemical devices. In the following, we will summarize the characteristics and principles of some typical light capturing structures, and further discuss intensity distribution for some specific structures. Here we tabulate and summarize in Tables 1–3 partially properties of some representative functional sub-structures and light-absorbing structures discussed in this review, including the morphology, requirements, light trapping features, applicable photoactive materials, and hope to facilitate discussion and enlighten the future development of hierarchical structures.
Table 1 Some representative anti-transmittance substructures




Example materials
Morphology
Requirements
Light trapping features
Applicable photoactive materials




TiO2/ZnO27,75
Polydisperse nanoparticles
Transparent, conductive, work function matching
Submicrometer-sized for Mie scattering and disordered structure for Anderson light localization
Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor


TiO2/ZnO28,80–82
Branched and hyperbranched column-like structure
Transparent, conductive, work function matching
Great surface area enhances the interaction between incident light and photoactive material
Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor


TiO2/ZnO/SnO289–91
Multi-shelled hollow microspheres
Transparent, conductive, work function matching
Multiple intra-cavity reflections
Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor


TiO2/ZnO/SnO299
3D inverse opal
Transparent, conductive, work function matching
Scattering depends on the degree of structural size and order
Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor


Au29
3D pillar/truncated-pyramids array
Plasma effect, conductive, work function matching
A continuous IPCE enhancement by the synergism of pillar and truncated-pyramids
Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor


Au101
3D nanohole array
Plasma effect, conductive, work function matching
Synergistic enhancement of SPR and SPP effect
Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor




Table 2 Some representative anti-reflective substructures




Example materials
Morphology
Requirements
Light trapping features
Applicable photoactive materials




NiOx37
Thin film
Transparent; conductive; energy band matching
Thickness and refractive index crucially determined the light trapping efficiency
Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor


TiO2108
Nanowire arrays
Transparent; conductive; energy band matching
Gradient refractive index
Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor


ZnO/InP50,107
Discontinuous and periodic patterns
Transparent; conductive; energy band matching
Multiple intra-cavity reflections
Thin film




Table 3 Some representative light absorbing structures




Example materials
Morphology
Requirements
Light trapping features
Applicable photoactive materials




CdS38,72
Thin film
Narrow band gap
Thickness and refractive index crucially determined final absorption efficiency
—


Hematite52
Nanobowls
Narrow band gap and low surface state
The absorption edge can be regulated by diameter
—


CdS/SnS2129,130
Nanoflakes
Narrow band gap and low surface state
Light scattering depends heavily on its own orientation
—


ZnO132
Periodic nanorod cluster
Narrow band gap and low surface state
The period of cluster provides additional light scattering
—




2.4 Some basics of light trapping in PEC cells
Before we get into the design of hierarchical architectures for light trapping, it is necessary to classify some elementary concepts about light trapping which will be mentioned in the following section. The first is the concept of light trapping. Although light trapping (or light harvesting) is widely applied in many literature studies, few of them have clearly defined the concept of light trapping.38,52,59–61 Sometimes we may get confused about the two concepts of light trapping and the light absorption enhancement. Looking into previous literature studies involving light trapping especially in the PEC field, one may find that they emphasize not only the enhancement of light absorption but also the efficiency of charge collection. Thus, we refer to light trapping as the effective enhancement of light absorption at least without compromising the efficiency of charge separation, transport and transfer. On the other hand, the light absorption enhancement, for example, by directly increasing the thickness of the photosensitizer film, which would inevitably lower charge collection efficiency, should not be classified as light trapping here. In many literature reports on PEC and solar cells, light trapping is usually attributed to the increased optical path length in the medium according to geometric optics.62–65 However, from a more general perspective of wave optics, when a piece of photoelectrode, especially when it is nanostructured, is placed in a uniform and stable electromagnetic field, the field intensity distribution immediately becomes uneven due to the interaction between the electromagnetic field and the material. In this sense, the essence of light trapping is to preferentially redistribute electromagnetic energy by strengthening the field intensity inside the photosensitive material and weakening the field intensity outside.
To better manage the distribution of incident light from a wave-optics perspective, recent literature studies32,36,66,67 have also reported management strategies applied in PEC cells including a multi-scatter structure, gradient refractive index (RI) structure, resonant structure, and plasmonic structure. For these optical management procedures applied in PEC cells, the essential mechanism to trap light is the regulation of light scattering. It is worth noting that many reports in the literature are ambiguous about the boundaries among scattering and reflection, refraction and diffraction. In fact, many phenomena that are not specifically attributed to the scattering mechanism are ultimately the result of scattering. These include68,69 (A) diffuse reflection by rough surfaces; (B) diffraction by slits, gratings, and edges; and (C) specular reflection and refraction at optically smooth interfaces. Meanwhile, multiple optical phenomena may occur simultaneously in a hierarchical architecture, so the ultimate enhancement from scattering is a combination of all these phenomena. Thus, if we reinforce the back scattering of the support structure located under the photosensitizer, the transmittance is decreased and the optic path inside the photosensitizer multiplied; if we intensify the forward scattering of the cladding structure located above the photosensitizer, then less reflection and more absorption. Such back-/forward- directional scattering can be controlled by regulating the shape, size, arrangement, and surrounding permittivity of the material;68–70 in addition, the scattered light can be further coupled to photonic modes by constructing some highly ordered nanostructures with well-designed discrete units arranged in a certain periodicity.29,71,72
3. The design of anti-transmittance support structures
In DSSCs or PEC water splitting devices, the support structure beneath the photosensitizer layer bears two functions including light anti-transmittance and charge collection. Since the PEC water splitting and DSSC devices share similar working principles and structure, we put them together for discussion on a similar footing. Generally speaking, no matter what kind of support structure is, the way to increase light trapping is to enhance back light scattering. Here we discuss some major factors that determine the back light scattering ability of each specific supporting structure, including modification of each individual unit, distribution of size, packing density, and degree of order. For this, we will present some representative support structures applied in DSSCs and PEC water splitting, such as nanoparticle stacking, column-like nanostructures, sphere-like nanostructures. By surveying the development of these materials, we attempt to sift out, in brief, the design philosophy of several particular classes of support structures and their special strategies for enhancing light trapping (Table 1).
3.1 Polydisperse nanoparticles and balanced scattering
A remarkable characteristic of a nanoparticle stacking layer is its huge surface-to-volume ratio. Among various support structures, the specific surface area of a small nanoparticle staking layer is the largest at the same thickness and is inversely proportional to the particle size.73,74 However, the light scattering ability of nanoparticles is proportional to its size. Therefore, the light scattering effect is usually imperceptible in typical mesoporous TiO2 electrodes consisting of nanocrystallites smaller than 50 nm, a size far away from the wavelengths in the visible and near-infrared regions.75 Thus, finding a balance between the specific surface area and scattering strength by constructing hierarchical stacking layers with multi-size nanoparticles is the key to achieve efficient light trapping for this kind of support structure.
Yang et al. developed a novel double-layer DSSC photoanode consisting of highly crystalline nanooctahedral TiO2 blocks as the upper layer and partially agglutinated hierarchical microspherical ones as the bottom.27 In addition to providing a large adsorption area, the lower mesoporous hierarchical microspheres can serve as a bifunctional material to enhance light scattering and photo-induced electron injection/transport. To further lift the specific surface area, Zhang et al. reported that the aggregation of ZnO nanocrystallites with different degrees is an effective approach to generate light scattering while retaining the desired specific surface area.75 Since the polydisperse ZnO aggregates are closely packed from nanocrystallites, such an architecture does not cause any loss in the internal surface area.75 The enhanced scattering could originate from two sides. On the one hand, the ZnO aggregates reach submicrometer-sized, which are particularly efficient scatterers of visible light according to the Mie theory.68,75 On the other hand, according to Anderson localization of light,76 polydisperse aggregates are supposed to form a highly disordered structure in the photoelectrode film. Such structures give rise to random multiple scattering of the light traveling through the aggregate film and, possibly, lead to light localization because of the formation of traps for optical confinement.
3.2 Hyperbranched column-like structure with enhanced light scattering
Column-like support structures, including nanowires, nanorods and nanotubes, arranged vertically to the substrate with a few grain boundaries along their axial directions, feature extraordinary charge collection.12,31,77 However, a great deal of incident light penetrates directly into the support structure through the huge space between the individual units with only weak light scattering;78 at the same time, the vacant space also results in poor packing density. Samer et al. theoretically studied the effect of column size (length and diameter) and packing density on bulk light scattering.79 They found that as the length increased, so did the bulk scattering; the scattering intensity is an inverse quadratic function of the packing density so that it will increase with the packing density within a certain range. This relationship is easy to understand since the extended length and the enhanced packing density resulting from reduced voids between the column-like units increase the interactive path of the incident light through the photoelectrode. However, when the void size is further reduced to much less than the wavelength of the incident light such that the nanostructured film composed of the column-like units gradually becomes dense and smooth, the scattering effect is reduced. Thus, there is a limit to multiple decorations of the original column-like scaffold to extend its length or enhance the packing density. Wu et al. fabricated an ultra-long anatase TiO2 nanowire array with a film thickness of up to 47 μm on transparent conductive FTO via a multi-step hydrothermal route.80 The diffuse reflection intensity of this support structure is stronger than that of the P25 TiO2 nanoparticle layer even after only the first hydrothermal treatment, highlighting the significance of wire length in light reflectivity.
The common method for reducing the vacant space contained in the scaffold is to introduce smaller microstructures by branching or hyperbranching treatment. The introduced microstructures could be nanowires or nanodisks. Chen et al. fabricated a hierarchical ZnO nanorod/nanodisk array to enhance significantly the performance of PEC water splitting.81 The epitaxial growth of laminated ZnO nanodisks on ZnO nanowires results in a hierarchical structure with enhanced absorption cross section, which dramatically enhances the light scattering capacity of the NW arrays, especially when the concentration of sodium citrate is optimal and in the wavelength region around 400 nm. Meanwhile, embedded nanowires can also act as electric wires to connect each loading area.14 Kuang et al. presented a solution-based strategy for the components in a hierarchical structure and reported additional fabrication strategies for well-aligned TiO2-based nanowire–nanosheet–nanorod hyperbranched arrays on transparent conducting oxide substrates, as shown in Fig. 8A.28 They found that step-by-step branching treatments enlarged the overall feature size of the samples to realize more effective scattering, as evidenced by the increased portion of diffuse component in the reflection by TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets and TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets–nanorods (Fig. 8B). For these hyper-branched arrays, they observed a twofold increment in dye adsorption amount and enhanced light trapping capability compared with the pristine titanium dioxide nanowires with a power conversion efficiency of 9.09%.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustrations and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of various TiO2 nanoarrays on a FTO glass substrate. Scale bar, 10 μm. (B) Diffused reflectance spectra of light reflecting and scattering within the simplified network of TiO2 nanowires (TNW), TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets (TNW–NS) and TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets–nanorods (TNW–NS–NR) array architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. 
3.3 Multiple intra-cavity reflections enabled by hollow nanospheres
Besides the effects of size distribution and packing density, factors that are extrinsic to the building units, some features intrinsic to the individual units can also be exploited for improving light trapping. As one of the most common shapes of nanostructures, sphere-like support structures have gone through a series of evolution, including decorations of their surface and internal structure. Kim et al. first prepared a solid nanosphere structure with a highly monodisperse and smooth surface without any pores.83 By a subsequent hydrothermal reaction at 240 °C for 6 h, the smooth spherical structures were converted to spheres with porous surfaces and more crystallized structures.83 Such mildly deformed spherical structures achieved a considerably higher photocurrent value due to better interconnection and stronger surface light scattering. Although modified surface may better expose adsorption sites, improve charge transport or increase scattering intensity, there is still plenty of dead space within the solid spheres.84,85 Hollowing out the interior of the spheres turns out to be an effective route to further explore the potential of the spherical structures, due to their multiple intra-cavity reflections, as shown in Fig. 9A and B.
 Fig. 9  (A) The schematic diagram of multiple scattering in multi-shell hollow nanospheres. (B) The SEM images of SnO2 hollow nanospheres with increasing shells. (C) Comparison of light scattering properties in two types of SnO2 hollow microsphere morphologies by FDTD simulation. (D) Diffused reflectance spectra (R %) of SnO2 hollow sphere films with increasing shells: (i) single shell, (ii) double shells, (iii) triple shells, (iv) quadruple shells, (v) quintuple shells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. 
As has been mentioned above, it is crucial to achieve a balance between the dye adsorption surface area and structural scattering in DSSCs. Internal voids of micro-metered spheres not only introduce double surfaces ensuring dye adsorption but also retain a sufficiently large size allowing Mie scattering and a unique intra-cavity for multiple reflection.86 Hierarchical multi-shell hollow nanoparticles (MS-HNPs), composed of inner and outer shells, have been highlighted as promising materials for DSSC applications, since they have a beneficial configuration offering a higher surface area, stronger light inner-scattering and faster redox reactions with the electrolyte than single-shell nanoparticles. Various multi-shell hollow nanoparticles have been developed, such as multi-layer SnO2 hollow microspheres coated on TiO2,87 quintuple-shelled SnO2 hollow microspheres,88 multi-shelled ZnO hollow microspheres,89 and shell-in-shell TiO2 hollow microspheres.90 Many researchers found that the scattering ability of these MS-HNPs lies on the number of layers and distance between each layers. Dong et al. performed an optical simulation to investigate the scattering ability of multi-shell hollow spheres by the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method, as shown in Fig. 9C.91 They uncovered that the distance between the inner and outer shells of the double-shell hollow nanoparticles determined their light-scattering efficiency; close double shells presented stronger light scattering capability than the normal double shells. UV-vis reflectance spectroscopy further clearly displayed that the reflectance of multi-shell SnO2 photoanodes increase significantly as the number of SnO2 shells grows (Fig. 9D).
Considering the excellent scattering ability of larger spherical or hollow nanoparticles, the outstanding charge transporting ability of hyperbranched nanosheet@nanorod arrays, and the extraordinary load capacity of nanoparticle stacking layers, combining the advantages of these structures will further promote light trapping. For instance, a single TiO2 layer contains small-sized nanocrytallites and a 2–5 μm hazy scattering top layer (submicrometer beads, microspheres, spherical voids, etc.); the dense layer at the bottom functions as the main dye adsorption region and the large particle layer on the top functions as the main scattering region of visible and near-infrared light.27,82 To further fill up the vacant space and increase the scattering capability, the hyperbranched and multi-shell hollow nanostructure is further introduced to the above structure combination. Kuang et al. presented an operable and versatile approach to fabricating a multi-stack photoanode composed of hyperbranched and hollow substructures, as shown in Fig. 10A.82 The resulting hierarchical electrode is constructed via the layer-by-layer assembly of anatase hierarchical TiO2 nanowires (underlayer), submicrometer macroporous TiO2 hollow spheres (intermediate layer), and hierarchical TiO2 microspheres (top layer). Compared with the control sample, the dye loading amount is increased by 130% and reflectance ability is enhanced by 30%. The device based on this novel photoanode shows markedly higher incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) values than that of the nanoparticle layer over the whole spectral range from 380 to 800 nm (Fig. 10B).
 Fig. 10  (A) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of three-layer stacking of TiO2 photoanodes. (B) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of DSSCs fabricated using different combinations of TiO2 stacked layer. Anatase hierarchical TiO2 nanowires denoted as AHTNW; macroporous TiO2 denoted as MPT; hierarchical TiO2 microspheres denoted as HTS; the branches represent further branching by hydrothermal treatment. TiO2 nanoparticle layer photoanode with the same film thickness denoted as TNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. 
3.4 Coupling disorder guest units with a periodic host backbone
In the stack layer and simple nanostructure arrays, the degree of order is poor and the scattering intensity depends on the size distribution, packing density and modifications of the building units. In comparison to random or low-ordered structures, the monospecific and highly ordered periodic structures allow for more facile and precise control of light-absorption distribution. Interestingly, for some highly ordered support structures, such as an opal and inverse opal (IO) photonic crystal, light trapping can also be regulated by the degree of structural order.92–95 The periodic modulation of refractive index (RI) in a photonic crystal leads to a photonic stop band that forbids the propagation of light within a certain frequency range. However, introducing defects or microstructures into the periodic scaffold will form abnormal dielectric regions, which are analogous to doping in a physical crystal, thus changing the photonic stop band of the photonic crystal. 3D opal and IO, as a group of common periodic structures, possesses highly ordered interconnected shells, superior electron transport and photonic crystal light localization. There are two schemes to increase its disorder. First, a mixture of microspheres with different sizes is used as the opal template. Jennifer et al.92 presented a systematic study on the effect of disorder with relation to scattering ability of opals by introducing different fractions and sizes of guest spheres into the opal scaffold (Fig. 11A). With increasing fraction of the 180 nm spheres (x) in the final opal crystal, the stop-band position red-shifts, the transmission dips become weaker and broader, and the total transmission reaches a minimum at an intermediate fraction of the guest spheres. Plausibly, the weaker and broader transmission dips could originate from the partially destructive interference. The red-shifted stop-band position and the decreased total transmission can be explained by Mie theory. Given the fact that effective Mie scattering originates from particles with a size comparable to the wavelength of the incident light, the scattering of visible and near-infrared light can be increased by magnifying appropriately the void of the IO.96–98 Neale et al. also demonstrated that the disordered 500 nm pore size IO exhibited the greatest near-infrared light scattering, which increases the path length of light by a factor of ∼10, approaching the theoretical limit.93
The second scheme of introducing disorder is to grow smaller microstructures into the micropores of IO structures. Unlike the introduction of defects, the addition of microstructures not only increases the dielectric index of IO but also preserves the long-range structural order to a great extent, since the main IO scaffold is unchanged. Fan et al. prepared a novel photoelectrode consisting of 3D ordered hierarchical nanobushes, using TiO2 IOs as the host template for the facile solution growth of a ZnO nanowire array.99 The TiO2 IO/ZnO nanowire hybrid nanostructure was sensitized with CdS QDs and investigated as a PEC photoanode. After the growth of ZnO nanowires, the increased dielectric index redshifted the stop gap (Fig. 11B). However, the modified IOs with the overall preserved long-range structural order retained a comparable bandwidth and higher order photonic bands. The enhanced packing density from supplementary ZnO nanowires and the higher order photonic bands both are beneficial for stronger light scattering. The UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra before (Fig. 11C) and after (Fig. 11D) CdS QD sensitization are shown here for the sake of comparison. In the absence of CdS coating, the highest diffuse reflection was found in the nanobush structure, followed by the TiO2 IO and the ZnO nanowire array. After sensitization, all the photoanodes showed decreased diffuse reflectance in the wavelength range up to 550 nm, owing to light absorption by CdS (Fig. 10C). More importantly, the hierarchical CdS photoanode shows very low diffuse reflection in comparison to the TiO2 IO CdS photoanode, which further proves that the scattered light increased by the hierarchical structure can indeed be successfully captured by the sensitizer.
 Fig. 11  (A) Transmission spectra of (1 − x)150 − x180 polystyrene opal templates, which are displaced vertically for clarity, with the dashed lines marking the 0 transmission level for each spectrum. The value of x represents the fraction of 180 nm spheres. (B) The photonic stop bands of (i) TiO2 IO, (ii) CdS QD-sensitized TiO2 IO, (iii) nanobushes, and (iv) CdS QD-sensitized nanobushes are shown in the UV-vis-NIR specular reflectance spectra. (C) and (D) are UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of different photoanodes before and after CdS QD sensitization, respectively. A and B, C, D are reproduced with permission from ref. 92 and 99, respectively. 
3.5 Integrating metal substructures into hierarchical architectures
High conductivity and reflectivity make metals one of the excellent candidate materials for supporting structures.61,72,100,101 Original metallic support structures are simply a planar film reflector, but the poor specific surface area and the dominant single scattering for incident light limited its application. The emerging metallic nanoarray structure characterized by high orientation and periodicity greatly solved these deficiencies. In general, the metallic nanoarray structure could be prepared by coating an ultrathin metal film on a nanoarray template or by directly etching a metal film.19,38,61,72 Similar to other support structures mentioned above, the features of the individual units and the space among them also have a great influence on the light trapping effect of metallic nanoarray structures. More importantly, the orientation and periodicity of these nanoarray substrates provide more controllable handles to control the spatial and intensity distributions of scattering light.
The light absorption enhancement resulting from the efficient redistribution of incident light in these periodic nanostructures can be named photonic-mode coupled light trapping.29,61 Qiu et al. fabricated three-dimensional regular nanospike arrays on a conductive substrate by a unique imprint nanoengineering approach in conjunction with scalable Al anodization. An ultrathin hematite film was deposited on this conductive substrate.51 In this device structure, the purpose-built 3D architectures helped to trap incident light efficiently, the ultrathin hematite films were used as active materials to produce photo-carriers, and the conductive NSPs acted as an efficient carrier collector. Significantly, the core/shell structure coming from the NSP PEC devices possess high charge collection efficiency due to the ultrathin hematite film. The FDTD simulated pattern of the electric field distribution for the 3D sample with different pitches revealed that the incident light indeed had strong and regular interactions with these metallic nanoarrays. Each pattern of the electric field distribution at a particular wavelength corresponds to a photonic mode, which is greatly dependent on the pitch and height of the nanoarrays. Thus, in these related reports about reflective nanoarray structures with metallic coating, it was pointed out that the best light trapping efficiency can be acquired by optimizing the height and pitch of the nanoarrays to regulate the light intensity distribution.
A full metal support, especially when it is made of Au, Ag and Cu, also affords an obvious surface plasmon resonance effect (SPR), which induces additional effects of local field enhancement besides the photonic mode coupling. A comprehensive description about the principles of SPR can be found in many classical textbooks70 and review articles.102,103 Surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) and localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) are two unique forms of coupling of light with collective oscillations near the metallic surfaces. In LSPR, the time varying electric field associated with the light exerts a force on the gas of conduction electrons of a metal nanoparticle and drives them to oscillate collectively. At a certain excitation frequency, this oscillation will be in resonance with the incident light, resulting in an even stronger oscillation of the conduction electrons.34,104 Contrary to stationary LSPR, SPPs, or propagating surface plasmons, are travelling charge oscillations resonantly excited on the surface.34,104–106 Due to the requirement for propagation, the SPP usually appears on some consecutive nanostructures made of metal; while LSPR generally takes place in isolated nanostructures such as metal nanoparticles, and varies flexibly with the structural and environmental parameters, making it more widely applicable to PEC cells than SPP.34
In a highly ordered metal nanostructure, photonic modes (from the periodic nature) and plasmonic effects (from the metallic nature) may work in synergy to achieve a better and wider light utilization.34,101,106,107 Gao et al. showed that a periodic Au nanopillar arrays substrate coated with thin-film hematite achieved an enhanced photocurrent.72 In this case, coupling between the plasmonic local field enhancement and photonic light-trapping effect can be identified. At wavelengths other than the plasmonic resonances (e.g., 451 nm), photonic mode trapping guides more light into the absorber material (Fe2O3), and no local field enhancement is present; while for resonance wavelengths of 624 nm and 681 nm, only evanescent plasmonic patterns at the Fe2O3/Au interface can be observed (Fig. 12A). Of note, the simple surface profile of nanostructures only supports SPR modes at discrete wavelengths and leads to poor tunability of the photonic modes. In order to further intensify the SPR and photonic-mode induced light trapping region, plasmonic hierarchical structures are designed. Xu et al. construct a hierarchical 3D array of pillar/truncated-pyramids (PTPs) Au plasmonic nanostructures as a support for the CdS absorber.29 In this periodic supporting layer, each unit is composed of a pillar (P) sitting on a truncated-pyramid (TP) (see Fig. 12B). Theoretical FDTD simulations were employed to elucidate the optical difference between the CdS/Au PTPs and pillars. By extracting the absorption in the Au region, the EM energy dissipated at the top P (180 nm) and bottom TP (180 nm) of Au PTPs was obtained (Fig. 12C). It shows that the top P part has two distinct absorption peaks at 500 and 550 nm, whereas the bottom TP part has one major peak at 525 nm and one shoulder at 550 nm. For comparison, the FDTD simulation concerning the Au pillar was also studied (Fig. 12B). The top part of Au pillars shows two absorption peaks at 500 and 525 nm, which are quite similar to those of the Au PTPs (top P = 180 nm). However, no absorption peak from the bottom part of the Au pillars (bottom P = 180 nm) was observed, which explains the loss of the normalized IPCE peak at 550 nm for CdS/Au pillars compared with CdS/Au PTPs. As a result, compared to the CdS/Au plane and nanopillars, a broader and consecutive IPCE enhancement from 300 to 600 nm was observed for the CdS/Au PTPs.
 Fig. 12  (A) FDTD simulation patterns at wavelengths of 451 nm, 624 nm and 681 nm for iron oxide on gold nanopillars. (B) Tilted SEM view of an Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array, including a top pillar and a bottom truncated-pyramid. (C) FDTD simulated absorption curves of an Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array and a simple Au pillar array with the same height. The blue and green curves represent the top (pillar 180 nm) and bottom (truncated-pyramids 180 nm) parts of the CdS/Au PTPs, respectively; the black and red curves represent the top (pillar 180 nm) and bottom (pillar 180 nm) parts of the CdS/Au pillar, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72 and 29. 
Compared with metal nanoparticles or metal nanoarrays, the special consecutive metal nanostructures with extraordinary optical transmission of SPP make it more efficient for the plasmonic structures to transfer the absorbed energy to the semiconductor. Li et al. reported that the incorporation of a hematite nanorod array into a plasmonic gold nanohole array significantly improves the photoelectrochemical water splitting performance, as shown in Fig. 13.101 The SPP and LSPR plasmonic fields are combined to intentionally concentrate dispersive incident light into hematite nanorods to manage incident light, realizing a broad-wavelength light collection enhancement that spanned the full ultraviolet-near-infrared wavelength range. Compared with the previous plasmonic structures, the continuity of the nanohole array of this structure allows the incident light to couple to the SPP mode, a specific travelling charge density wave in the metal film. The travelling SPP mode can re-radiate into the far field when interrupted by a nanohole (Fig. 13C). As the nanoholes are filled with the hematite nanorods, the increased photon flux from the extraordinary optical transmission will be directly launched into the nanorods instead of being re-radiated from the nanohole. The high contrast in dielectric constant between the semiconductor and the surrounding environment, coupled with the subwavelength nature of the plasmon emission, will therefore allow the SPP to excite a guided mode in the nanorod, increasing absorption in hematite. In addition, in the 550–750 nm region, the absorption of the LSPR creates an intense local field at the walls of the nanoholes in the metal film (Fig. 13D).
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram and (B) SEM image of the Au nanohole array with the hematite nanorods (the scale bar is 500 nm). The local plasmonic field in Au nanoholes of SPP (C) and LSPR (D). The local field enhancement is concentred at the edges of the hole and the interface between the metal and dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. 
4. The design of anti-reflection surface structures
In addition to the anti-transmittance structure, installing the anti-reflection structure above the absorption layer is also an effective strategy to trap light. Unlike directly shaping sensitizers to fit into the nanostructures, the anti-reflection layer can enhance light absorption by reducing reflected light at the interface without further increasing the film thickness or surface roughness. It is widely used in materials with strong surface reflection, such as Si, InP, GaAs, etc.108–110 However, the front surface, at which incident light first enters, may also serve as a charge collection interface in some scenarios. In order to undertake the tasks of anti-reflection and charge transfer synchronously, some requirements for the inherent properties of an anti-reflective material are put forward:37,108,110,111 (1) as the first layer to be penetrated by the sunlight, the band gap of the anti-reflective material should be wide enough to avoid the parasitic absorption in the ultraviolet region. (2) As the charge transfer site from the photosensitizer to the electrolyte, this layer should be relatively conductive and have an energy band matching with the photosensitizer. (3) High chemical stability is also necessary since this layer generally needs to contact the electrolyte directly. (4) Finally, an excellent catalytic property is also needed for charge transfer. In this section, we will go through some of the structures with different features and anti-reflective mechanisms, including thin films, gradient RI nanostructures, surface patterned nanostructures and metallic nanoparticles.
4.1 Continuous thin films for anti-reflection
In this section, the significance of a thin film as an independent nanostructure is emphasized when its thickness is close to the wavelength of incident light. One of the interesting phenomena of a thin film is the destructive interference between its upper surface reflected light and lower back contact reflected light. What needs illustration is that stacked layers with different thicknesses or compositions also can be regarded as hierarchical architectures under the definition of hierarchical architectures in this paper. The first application of a thin film with destructive interference is an anti-reflection substructure. The layers of the thin film antireflection coating could be one, two or multiple;36,110 the simplest single-layer coating is most widely used in practice. A brief illustration of the involved principle is given here. The phase angle φ1 of normal incident light in the anti-reflection structure is expressed as φ1 = 2πn1d1/λ. The necessary and sufficient conditions for the single-layer coating to produce minimum reflection are the following equation:36 (1)where n0, n1, ns, and λ are the RI of the surrounding, antireflective material and photoactive material, and wavelength of the incident light, respectively, as shown in Fig. 14A. In practice, the value of m is usually chosen to be one, and the optical thickness n1d1 is one-quarter wavelength. Thus, the thickness of the antireflective film crucially determined the wavelength of the incident light at which the surface reflection reaches the minimum. In addition, since the upper layer undertakes the process of charge transfer from the photosensitizer to the electrolyte at the same time, the high conductivity of the antireflective coating applied in PEC cells is also necessary.
 Fig. 14  (A) The schematic diagram of a thin-film anti-reflection structure. (B) Measured total reflectance spectra of NiOx-coated n+-InP substrates as a function of the thickness of NiOx (0, 50, 70, 80 nm). The inset shows the experimentally measured photocurrent (red curve) in 1 M KOH (aq.) and the integrated theoretical photocurrent density on a p+n-InP|NiOx photoelectrode versus the thickness of NiOx, as calculated in either water (inset, orange curve) or air (blue curve); the irradiated light intensity in both cases is AM1.5 100 mW. A and B are reproduced with permission from ref. 110 and 37, respectively. 
Lewis et al. demonstrated that a functional NiOx film is able to protect a III–V semiconductor that would otherwise corrode, while maintaining excellent photoanode performance during extended operation (>48 h) under water-oxidation conditions.37 More importantly, after loading NiOx the surface reflection of the modified InP photoanode greatly decreased down to 10% compared with the clean and polished photoelectrode with 32.7% in the wavelength range of 350–930 nm (Fig. 14B). The deposition of 50, 70 and 80 nm thick NiOx films greatly decreased the reflection in the range of 350–930 nm. Due to the dependence of one-quarter wavelength on the film thickness, the minimum reflectance wavelength shifted from 500 nm to 650 nm with increasing film thickness. According to eqn (1), the final antireflection of NiOx is also related to the surrounding RI. Thus, they also calculated the integrated theoretical photocurrent density in two surrounding media, water and air, for crystalline InP with NiOx films, and measured experimentally the actual photocurrent in water, as shown in Fig. 13B inset. The maximum theoretical photocurrent density in water (32.47 mA cm−2) is higher than that in air (31.47 mA cm−2) at a NiOx thickness of 70 nm, due to the higher refractive index (RI) of water than air. With increasing NiOx layer thickness, the theoretical photocurrent floats slightly, but the measured value drops considerably, which results from the blocked charge transfer from InP to the electrolyte. Thus, in the monolayer antireflection structure, the thickness of the film crucially determined the final light-absorption efficiency.
4.2 Gradient refractive index nanostructures for anti-reflection
The stringent thickness requirement and the narrow working range of wavelength for anti-reflection limited the application of thin films.111,112 Researchers observed that the outer surface of corneal lenses of moths is covered with a regular array of conical protuberances, which effectively suppressed reflection in a wide wavelength range.113,114 The principle in nanoarrays for anti-reflection is that incident light tends to bend gradually as if the anti-reflective surface adopts a gradient RI (Fig. 15A and B).110,113,114 In general, such a gradient RI originates from the gradient change of areal density from bottom to top in the sub-wavelength nanostructure since the regional effective RI is approximately equal to the average RI of the material and its surrounding when the size of the arrayed structures are smaller than the wavelength of incident light. According to this, nanostructured surfaces in sub-wavelength or combined with well-designed nanoarrays, such as nanowires and nanotips, are efficient ways to achieve anti-reflection.115–117
 Fig. 15  The schematic diagram of anti-reflection for sub-wavelength nanostructure arrays (A) and a gradient refractive index structure (B). (C) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of TiO2 NRs (the scale bar is 500 nm) and (D) optical image of hydrothermally grown TiO2 NRs on a 4 inch silicon wafer (right) and bare p-silicon (left). (E) Optical reflectance vs. wavelength at 40° incident angle. (F) Reflectance vs. incident angle at 550 nm irradiation. A, B and C, D, E, F are reproduced with permission from ref. 110 and 108, respectively. 
Compared to the ultrathin quarter-wavelength coating, texturing the absorber surface is an effective method to realize the RI gradient with no additional interfaces and accordingly no abrupt change of RI.112,115,118,119 Huang et al. reported that an aperiodic nanoarray of silicon nanotips of sub-wavelength size on a 6 inch wafer structure greatly suppresses the reflection of light in an incredible range of wavelengths from the ultraviolet, through the visible part of the spectrum, to the terahertz region.114 However, this technology towards nanostructure surfaces costs a lot and it may also bring more surface states at the same time,120,121 which seriously aggravates the surface recombination. A facile and cheap alternative to suppress the surface reflection is to grow accessional nanoarray materials on top of the sensitizer through common chemical methods like hydrothermal treatment. Jang et al. reported the synthesis of solution-processed TiO2 nanowire arrays on a 4 inch p-silicon wafer with controllable heights and diameters for highly efficient water splitting photocathodes, as shown in Fig. 15C and D.108 They used a hydrothermal method to achieve the desired density gradient in TiO2 NRs. At the very beginning of the nucleation process, the concentrations of the precursors are high enough for dense growth of TiO2 NRs, and thus the areal density of TiO2 NRs at the bottom is large. As the nanowire growth proceeds, the precursor concentration decreases and so does the areal density, resulting in a smooth transition of effective RI. Since energy bands between p-Si and n-TiO2 matched well, an n-TiO2/p-Si heterojunction is formed. As the work function of p-Si is slightly higher than that of TiO2, the offset between the conduction band minima and the downward band bending is in favor of the transfer of photo-induced electrons from p-Si through TiO2 to the site where hydrogen is produced. Fig. 15E and F show the optic reflectance of bare p-Si, TiO2 seed layer/p-Si, and TiO2 NR/p-Si samples at different wavelengths (from 400 to 1200 nm) and incident angles (from 10° to 70°), respectively. The reflectance values of TiO2 NR/p-Si (less than 5%) are constantly far lower than the p-Si and TiO2 seed layer/p-Si samples (higher than 20%) regardless of the incident angle and wavelength, indicating a broadband and quasi-omnidirectional anti-reflection.
4.3 Discontinuous patterns for anti-reflection
Another alternative anti-reflection strategy is to construct a discontinuous and patterned nanostructure with efficient Mie resonance to reduce the surface reflection and meanwhile expose a sufficiently accessible area.112–114,122 The Lorenz–Mie solution to Maxwell's equations reveals that dielectric structures with a high RI and a sub-wavelength size, such as nanobeams made of ZnO, NiO, SnO2, etc., support strong optical resonances, known as Mie or leaky-mode resonances.107,123 The excitation of such resonances can lead to strong optical scattering and local field enhancements in and near the structure. In addition to exposed accessible surface area, the superiority of the patterned nanostructure over other structures is the precise design and rational arrangement of the individual structure units, which make the resultant Mie resonance more controllable and favorable for reducing reflection.32,107 Brongersma et al. first proposed this concept in a study of patterning a ZnO over-layer on a thin Si film into an array of subwavelength beams that support optical (Mie) resonances.107 By regulating the size of the ZnO nanobeam, these resonances can be exploited to concentrate randomly polarized sunlight or to couple it to guided and diffracted modes.
On the other hand, replacing metal oxide with materials possessing better conductivity and better matched energy band structure will further improve the efficiency of light trapping and charge collection. Hensen et al. deposited a periodic array of n+-InP nanopillars on a planar p-InP film to obtain an excellent InP-based photoelectrode for water reduction.50 This device displays an unprecedented photocathodic power-saved efficiency of 15.8% for single junction water reduction. The incredible progress is attributed to two factors. First, the buried p–n junction shifts the surface photovoltage and the valence band edge favorably with respect to the hydrogen redox potential. Second, the periodic array of InP nanopillars at the surface of the photoelectrode reduced the optical reflection losses substantially. Fig. 16A is the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a typical surface structure of the obtained nanopillar array. These nanopillars are approximately 250 nm in diameter, 100 nm in height and arranged in a square lattice with a center-to-center pitch of 500 nm. Fig. 16B is the UV-vis spectrum of the experimental measurement and the simulated result from the FDTD simulation. The sharp drop in the reflectance around 570–580 nm is due to the Mie resonance of the InP nanopillars. According to the electric field distributions (Fig. 16C and D), compared with the planar substrate (Fig. 16D), the field distribution of the cylindrical pillar at resonance introduces a leaky channel of confined light in the pillar and enhances forward scattering into the substrate.
 Fig. 16  (A) 45° tilt SEM images of the NP array on n+/p-InP (the scale bar is 500 nm); (B) measured reflection spectra of planar (n+/p-InP, black solid line) and nanopillar-modified samples (n+/p-InPNP, red solid line), and simulated reflection spectrum of n+/p-InP nanopillars (n+/p-InP, red dash line), with an incident angle of 8°. Simulated electric field intensity distribution in a cross section of cylindrical NPs on (C) substrates and (D) planar substrates (λ = 580 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. 
5. The design of light-absorbing structures
The common and simple types of light-absorbing microstructures applied in a hierarchical light trapping system can be nanoparticles, sub-wavelength thin-films, nanowires, nanoflakes and nanobowls. These structures are advantageous in that almost the entire bulk phase of the photosensitizer is in the region of the space charge layer, which is significantly beneficial for charge transport. However, since the size of nanoparticles is far smaller than the wavelength of incident light, the influence of its shape and dispersion on light trapping in hierarchical structures is not obvious. In contrast, thin films, nanobranches and nanoflakes are quantum confined in certain dimensions but span a sub-wavelength distance in the others, providing sufficient light–matter interactions without sacrificing the dominant influence of the space charge region. Considering the anisotropy of such light absorbing structures, the thickness, orientation and periodicity will significantly affect the final effect of light trapping in the hierarchical architecture. In what follows, we will take some previous works as examples to illustrate the interaction/synergy between light-absorbing microstructures and assistant light-absorbing structures for light trapping and some interesting light-trapping phenomena.
5.1 Thickness of photosensitizer ultrathin films
In order to ensure the sufficient separation and transfer of photo-induced charge, the absorption layer should be as thin as possible. Thus depositing a thin film on the anti-transmission layer is an efficient and common approach in a hierarchical light-trapping system. Due to the poor charge transfer between two dye molecules, the DSSC absorbing layer is usually at the single-molecule thickness level, which is too thin compared with the wavelength of incident sunlight. However, for PEC water splitting, the thickness of the photo-absorbing film could be varied from nanometers to micrometres. When the thickness of the thin film is on the sub-nanometer scale, it will possess some special optical properties which may significantly affect the final efficiency of light trapping. Considering the afore-mentioned anti-reflective layer, destructive interference owing to the specially controlled thickness leads to the anti-reflection function. For single-layer anti-reflective coatings, the thickness of the coating should equal the optical thickness of one-quarter wavelength. Under this quarter-wavelength condition, there is a π phase shift between the light reflected from the front surface and the light reflected from the interface between the antireflective layer and sensitizer. If we consider an absorber layer of similar thickness, the same phenomenon will be observed between the front surface and the back surface of the thin film of the photosensitizer, and it will be a dominated effect especially when the photosensitizer is deposited on a back reflector substrate.38
Rothschild et al. applied this principle into PEC water splitting by depositing a hematite film with various thicknesses onto a metal back contact.38 They investigated the effects of metal film reflectivity and hematite thickness on the overall absorbed photon flux. The calculated absorbed photon flux for metallized substrates coated with a hematite thin film is shown in Fig. 17. When the reflectivity of the substrate is 0, the increment of the optical absorption of the electrode slows down as the material becomes thicker, showing a typical indirect bandgap optical absorption. However, when the reflectivity of the substrate is greater than 0, the total light absorption exhibits multiple peaks with the increase of sensitizer thickness. The first resonance mode, reaching the maximal absorption for photons, is predicted to occur at a film thickness of 20, 20, 24, 30 and 47 nm for silver, gold, platinum, aluminium or ideally reflective coatings, respectively; and there are the second and more high order resonance modes with increasing thickness of the hematite film, which demonstrated the existence of interference for the quarter-wavelength condition. It should be noted that this thickness-dependent light trapping does exist not only in planar reflection structures, but also in many nanostructures. To further magnify the effect of light-trapping capability, efforts have been made to incorporate more effective 3D back reflectors with an ultrathin film absorber. Yang et al. fabricated 3-D nanocone-like arrays as a back reflector to replace the 90° V-shaped configuration. The curved surface of the nanocone allows incident angle diversified and so did the optical path distance.51,100 Compared to the aforementioned flat quarter-wavelength film allowing only the resonant light trapping of single wavelength light, the various optical path distances enable a range of wavelength to establish a π phase shift between front-surface-reflected and back-surface-reflected light.39 Therefore, for any hierarchical structure consisting of a support structure and an ultrathin photosensitizer, the overall light capture efficiency is generally affected by the thin film interference effect. When the reflection of the substrate is not high or the thickness of the film is uneven, the effect can be ignored, but the increase of the reflectivity of the substrate will aggravate the effect.
 Fig. 17  Light absorption in hematite thin-films on several back-reflector substrates, including Ag, Au, Al, Pt, ideal reflective (R = 1) and transparent (R = 0) substrates. The left and right ordinates represent absorbed photon flux and the corresponding photogenerated current density, respectively. Black squares and blue circles represent the photogenerated current of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films on platinized and FTO-coated substrates, respectively. The error bars is the range of (estimated) systematic errors in the measurements. The dashed curves show the predicted absorption photon flux in the entire specimen, comprising contributions from both film and substrate; the solid line curves show the predicted net absorption in the α-Fe2O3 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. 
As we discussed in Section 3.5, two effects may arise from light trapping in the nanostructured metallic substrate: one is surface plasmon resonances (SPR) and the other is photonic mode. First, we will discuss the influence of thickness on SPR. The SPR effect partly depends upon the electric permittivity of the environment surrounding the metallic nanostructures.29,34,72 Sometimes, in order to acquire high charge transport efficiency, the absorbing structure is usually on the subwavelength scale; in this case, the plasmon resonances of the metal experience an effective RI, which is an average of the RIs of the absorbing layer and the aqueous solution.29,34,72 The wavelength of trapped light can be tuned by changing the thickness of the absorbing layer to regulate the effective RI. Gao et al. prepared Au nanopillar arrays covered with different thicknesses of hematite thin-films for use as photoanodes, and investigated the influence of the hematite thickness on the plasmon resonance and light absorption of nanopillar arrays.72 The results are shown in Fig. 18.72 As shown in Fig. 18A and B, by reducing the hematite thickness from 140 to 50 nm, the average surrounding RI is decreased (due to the higher RI of hematite than the aqueous electrolyte) and the major absorption region of the Au nanopillar array due to plasmon resonance is blue-shifted (dashed line and grey oval in Fig. 18A and B). As a result, the corresponding absorption in the hematite thin film at around 450 to 600 nm is greatly increased (red solid curve). Although the absorption amplitude around the longer wavelength (670 nm) is reduced, the final IPCE is still significantly increased, owing to the broader absorption region and the shorter charge collection length (for the thinner hematite film).
 Fig. 18  (A) and (B) represent the optical performance of the Au nanopillar array photoanode with 50 and 140 nm hematite thin films, respectively. The dashed line is the simulated absorption spectrum of the Au nanopillar; the solid line is the absorption enhancement of the hematite thin film; the triangle line is the IPCE enhancement factor of Au nanopillars coated with the hematite thin film compared with a planar structure with the same thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. 
Second, in addition to the influence on SPR, the controlled thickness of the coated absorbing layer is also critical to the photonic modes of the metallic nanostructure, which contributes to the enhanced light absorption as well. When the thickness of the absorbing layer is very thick, it may conceal the surface-profile of the 3-dimensional substrate and the surface-profile-induced photonic modes may fade away at the same time.
Xu et al. simulated the electric field distribution of the CdS/Au pillar/truncated-pyramid arrays by the FDTD method.29 They found that the coverage of the strong electric field in the CdS layer becomes broader with the CdS thickness increasing from 60 to 120 nm. However, when the CdS layer is merged with a planar film with increasing thickness, surface-profile-induced photonic modes vanish, resulting in a sharp shrinking of the strong electric field in the CdS layer.29
5.2 Orientation of photosensitizer nanoflakes
Nanoflakes here refer to the material with one dimension confined within 100 nm.126–130 The ability of a nanoflake to scatter light depends heavily on its own orientation, whether in a single layer or a stacked layer.129,130 In order to improve the reactivity and light scattering, photosensitizers are often designed as two-dimensional structures and combined with a highly conductive support structure. The special advantage of 2D materials is that it can increase the reaction kinetics by maximally exposing the active crystal. There are some reports that the predominant (110) facet of the hematite structure has been considered to be the preferred orientation with good conductivity and is beneficial for PEC application.131 The scattering of planar materials is highly dependent on the growth orientation. Du et al. synthesized unilaminar CdS nanoflake arrays (NFAs) and calculated the absorption profiles and electric field distribution of the CdS films and nanoflakes using the FDTD method, respectively.130 For the thin-film sample, the maximum intensity appears over the surface of only the sample, indicating an intensive surface reflection. In contrast, the electric field in nanoflakes distributes along the full depth; especially, the highest intensity is found in the cavity enclosed by nanoflakes, indicating that the NFAs can trap the incident light efficiently. Moreover, the FDTD simulation illustrates that the reflection is prohibited and the absorption decreases remarkably when the surface of nanoflakes is parallel to incident light.
In fact, the effect of plane orientation on light scattering is more obvious in stacking. Hu et al. for the first time synthesized two SnS2 NFAs with vertical (SnS2⊥FTO) and parallel orientation on FTO (SnS2‖FTO) by modified chemical vapor deposition and spin-coating, respectively.129 To demonstrate the enhancement of light absorption by the vertical SnS2 architecture, comparative UV-visible extinction measurements are carried out on the two samples. The light absorption of SnS2⊥FTO is significantly improved in the whole visible spectrum compared with SnS2‖FTO with a similar deposition amount, which confirmed experimentally that there is multiple light scattering between vertical nanoflakes. Thanks to better light trapping and shorter hole transport distance, in PEC measurements, these SnS2⊥FTO nanosheet photoelectrodes exhibit two times higher IPCE than SnS2‖FTO.
5.3 Periodicity of patterned photosensitizers
Recently, some works have shown that the patterned absorbing structure with specific periodicity could induce light trapping beyond the band gap and precisely regulate the absorption edge. The patterned absorbing layer shows wider and stronger light trapping due to the introduction of periodicity. Jang et al. fabricated a hierarchical patterned metal/semiconductor (gold nanoparticles loaded on ZnO nanowires) photoelectrode with an optimized photon trapping effect for solar water splitting, as shown in Fig. 19A.132 Compared with the unpatterned ZnO nanowires (denoted as ZnO NWs), the patterned ZnO NW array shows wider and stronger light trapping especially in the range of 400 to 600 nm, which is beyond the band gap of ZnO, as shown in Fig. 20B. The enhancement of light absorption above the band gap comes from the photonic mode, which is induced by the periodicity of the patterned nanowire cluster. After depositing Au nanoparticles, the UV-vis absorption spectra of ZnO NWs and patterned ZnO NWs are both further enhanced. Interestingly, compared with the unpatterned ZnO NWs, even though the number of Au/ZnO nanowires and the load of Au nanoparticles in the hierarchical patterned sample are smaller, the absorption is much higher than the unpatterned Au/ZnO NW especially at a wavelength of 527 nm, which is the characteristic plasmon resonance of Au nanoparticles. Considering that one of the advantages of photonic modes is the local enhancement of the electromagnetic field intensity, the enhanced excitation of the plasmonic resonances may result from the enhanced light intensity around these Au nanoparticles, which, in turn, will enhance and broaden the light absorption of ZnO. Thus, the additional periodicity of the absorbing structures in hierarchical architectures can further improve light trapping due to the synergy between the absorbing structures and the assistant light-trapping substructures.
 Fig. 19  (A) The SEM views of Au/ZnO NW (right) and hp-Au/ZnO NW (left). (B) The UV-vis spectra of ZnO nanowires (ZnO NW), ZnO nanowires with gold nanoparticles (Au/ZnO NW), hierarchical patterned ZnO nanowires (hp-ZnO NW), and hierarchical patterned ZnO nanowires (hp-Au/ZnO NW). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. 
 Fig. 20  The measured absorption edge of the Fe2O3 nanobowl array photoanode with diameters of 0.5, 0.8, and 1.0 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. 
Nanobowl arrays are one of the common periodic structures widely used in structural colour, solar cells and PEC fields.52,64,65,124,125 Yi et al. reported a kind of TiO2 nanobowl array with a tunable structural colour through the periodic modulation of the diameter of air cavities; the principle of colour generation followed the Bragg diffraction theory.124 Coupling the nanobranches into nanobowls to construct nanorods@nanobowl hierarchical structures is an efficient approach to achieve light trapping.64,65 Based on Yi's research, Tang et al. prepared a hierarchical nanorod@nanobowl (NR@NB) array photoanode with a tunable light-trapping cut-off.52 They found that the cut-off of this structure can be regulated by changing the diameter of the nanobowl (see Fig. 20); this phenomenon is similar to Yi's work124 and can be analyzed with Bragg diffraction.
6. Challenges and opportunities
In the above discussion, we have highlighted the competence of light trapping, hierarchically structured photoelectrodes over their conventional nanostructured counterparts. Owing to the unique optical properties of these substructures functioning at different scales and positions, incident light is less reflected and transmitted, and thus essentially trapped in the desired regions of the photoelectrode. Powerful as the light trapping strategies are in terms of tuning optical properties, there are still challenges ahead. Opportunities toward better hierarchical architectures also lie in overcoming these challenges.
6.1 Synthesis cost
As we know from the above discussion, light trapping properties of hierarchical architecture depend on, but are not limited to, the shape, size, arrangement or dispersion of each individual unit. Precisely designed nanostructures by controlled synthesis is of great significance, but often at a cost. In this context, solution methods, including hydrothermal and solvothermal, are preferred and thus used widely to fabricate various hierarchical architectures due to their low cost and low equipment requirement.26,133,134 For some hierarchical nanostructures, however, e.g., branched and hyperbranched, one need to refresh or replace the hydrothermal solution and execute multiple hydrothermal cycles.82 To control the facet growth, additional ligands can be added to adjust the surface energies, and thus control the morphology of the as-obtained nanostructures to some extent.133 For example, sodium citrate has been used as a capping agent to block the growth of ZnO along the [0001] direction in favor of the ZnO nanodisk product.81 The final ZnO nanodisk@nanowire hierarchical structure showed enhanced light scatting especially in the wavelength region around 400 nm. However, the size and arrangement of each nanodisk are still difficult to optimize by only the ligand addition strategy. In order to further increase the controllability of synthesis, template-assisted synthesis was developed, such as a template-assistant electrodeposition and imprinting approach.51,52,61,64,65 However, this synthesis approach still suffers from the low yield and high cost arising from the complex and multiple synthesis processes and the requirement of additional sacrificial templates, such as monodisperse polystyrene and SiO2 microspheres and porous anodic aluminum oxide, hindering its practical application and production.51,52,61,64,65 Therefore, more facile and lower-cost synthesis methods to construct high performance hierarchical structures remain to be developed.
6.2 Structure complexity and related issues
To be fair, the studies conducted so far have not shown overwhelming advantages of light trapping hierarchical photoelectrodes in PEC applications over the currently more prevailing structured photoelectrodes. It is frequently claimed that light trapping strategies may reduce cost by using a smaller amount of absorber materials. This may be a strong drive for PV cells but less so for PEC devices wherein relatively more earth-abundant materials are preferentially used. This claim also neglects the above complicated fabrication procedure generally required for the hierarchical structure with good light trapping capability. Therefore, unless a substantial efficiency gain (exceeding the benchmark efficiency with the conventional structured photoelectrodes) is enabled by the strategy, it will be questionable for light trapping hierarchical architectures to dominate PEC cells. But the hard fact is that it still makes less efficient PEC cells despite the ever more elaborate preparation protocols.
Although the light trapping concept largely originated from the PV research, there are some different situations to tackle with when it is applied to the PEC field. To establish a closed circuit in a PEC cell involves multi-electron transfer processes coupled with reaction intermediate formation at the solid–electrolyte junctions, which are kinetically much slower than electron transport in a PV cell. Besides, limited by the relatively poorer carrier transport and transfer kinetics of PEC absorber materials, complex nanostructured photoelectrodes are predominantly adopted in PEC devices instead of flat films that prevail in PV cells. These intricacies have laid obstacles to achieve higher performance and better understanding of performance–structure relationships in PEC research than in the PV field. More elaborations on this aspect will be given below.
Firstly, the design of light trapping electrodes (from an optical perspective) for hierarchical PEC cells is complicated by nanostructures and combinations among different substructures. The light trapping effect can be visualized by the mapping of electric field amplitude distribution (namely light intensity or photon density) so that the hot spot where light is concentrated and the dark zone where light is depleted can be identified. It is emphasized in this review and a feature article published before that the paramount task of light trapping is not only to trap light but also to redistribute most of the light intensity to match with the charge collection feature of a specific structure. However, the choice of absorbers and various combinations of different substructures for a hierarchical architecture can result in a diversity of electric field distribution patterns depending on their shape, optical properties and arrangements, making it a difficult task to identify the most efficient structure combination with the best collection-feature-compatible light trapping characteristics.
Secondly, a systematic consideration including mass transport and other relevant factors is desirable as well to further improve the efficiency gain achieved by hierarchical architectures. In an operating PEC cell, photocurrent is realized by solid–liquid electron transfer inevitably controlled by electrode surface reaction kinetics and diffusion of reactants from bulk solution to the surface. For sufficiently high reaction rates and sufficiently small feature size of cavity/trench/pores, reactant diffusion could be the rate determining step and would result in concentration polarization and high overpotential required for the surface reaction to take place. A typical PEC solar cell depends on the reversible regeneration of a redox pair, e.g., I3−/I− in DSSCs, to sustain the photocurrent, making its efficiency likely limited by the diffusion process.135,136 A representative study reported by Xiang et al. demonstrated the mass transport limitation (diffusion) in a silicon-nanowire-based PEC solar cell with a traditional two-electrode setup (Fig. 21).137 The concentration profile (by COMSOL simulations) revealed a region depleted of oxidized species (CoCp2+ in this case), which covers a large portion of the silicon nanowire. Furthermore, the existence of abundant cavities, trenches and pores in hierarchical architectures could aggravate the situation and cause undesirable voltage losses. PEC water splitting represents a very different scenario, wherein the “redox” specimen (namely water) is almost everywhere, and bubble formation becomes a problem.
 Fig. 21  (A) Diffusion and convection movement of electrochemically active species in an electrolyte (νconv. and νdiff.) and in a nanostructured electrode (νdiff.′) for a conventional two-electrode set-up. (B) Oxidized species concentration profiles (calculated by COMSOL Multiphysics) due to the oxidation reaction at the non-flat surface of silicon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. 
Hernández et al. discussed in detail and illustrated, with a numerical model considering bubble surface occupation, how bubble formation influences the photocurrent density under constant bias.138 They observed in a stability test an apparent drop in photocurrent density when no stirring was applied. It can be envisaged that hierarchical structures will only exacerbate this problem for PEC water splitting due to the evolution of gas phase products at pores and trenches (Fig. 22). If the electrode surface is not sufficiently aerophobic (or hydrophilic) and the current density is sufficiently high, numerous bubbles will grow attached to the surface, blocking catalytic sites and preventing access to the solution. In addition, understanding the relation between the surface area and the efficiency of a light trapping electrode also appeals to researchers for photoelectrode design. In designing photonic structures, patterning and nanostructuring inevitably result in a larger surface area. The extraordinarily large specific surface area of the hierarchical structure could, on the one hand, offer abundant active sites for the surface reaction to compensate for the relatively slow electron transfer process; but it may also increase the possibility of surface defect formation, facilitating the unwanted surface recombination. Qiu et al. have designed a nanophotonic Fe2O3 electrode with the active material layer less than 100 nm thick and achieved a much higher photocurrent than a flat structure with an identical thickness.51 Interestingly, the photoelectrode that traps light most efficiently was not found to perform the best for PEC water splitting. After normalizing the photocurrent to the specific surface area, it was found that the best performance was delivered by the photoelectrode with a moderate light trapping capability and a relatively high surface area. This complication makes the design of light trapping hierarchical PEC cells even more challenging.
 Fig. 22  Bubbles formed at a BiVO4 surface during photoelectrochemical water splitting. They grow large and adhere to the electrode under a constant bias, blocking the electrolyte from accessing the inner surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. 
Structure-related challenges could be multi-faceted, and so far few research studies have fundamentally unlocked the inner workings via stringent comparison and modelling. In the discussion above, we could have also overlooked some important aspects. However, opportunities may be just lying ahead in the middle of these uncertainties. Nevertheless, the above-mentioned obstacles are not definitely invincible. First, the difficulty arising from using sustainable materials in hierarchical architecture for searching optimal optical design could be possibly overcome by artificial intelligence and high through-put machine learning. Secondly, bubble formation could be alleviated by making the electrode surface superaerophobic, a strategy that has proved able to fasten bubble release but so far has not drawn much attention in the PEC water splitting field. To move a step even further towards solving the bubble problem, Yu et al. brought up an interesting idea, albeit not particularly for PEC application, to collect hydrogen bubbles by using several millimetre long cone-shaped stainless steel spikes protruding from the electrode.139 Gas bubbles produced at the surface of these spikes were driven by Laplace pressure gradient (due to the radius gradient of the spikes) and transported along the cone axis to a collecting gas-affinitive sponge embedded at the base of the gas-collecting “antennas”. This intriguing idea may provoke future research to adopt a similar mechanism to uncouple the bubble accumulation process from the PEC water splitting reaction.
6.3 Device consideration
Putting PEC cells into real application requires a broader consideration of, for instance, devices, modules and integration. Particularly for water splitting, photovoltage of only one electrode is generally insufficient to support self-powered solar fuel production. One must fill the voltage gap by connecting two PEC photoelectrodes (anode and cathode) in tandem or use a PV cell in series with a photoelectrode. This raises the question on how photoelectrodes and PV cell should be placed in relation to each other for optimal output. So far, mainly two categories of cell configuration are proposed: side-by-side and back-to-back setups (Fig. 23).140 Photoanode and photocathode are placed shoulder to shoulder with front surfaces facing the same directions for side-by-side configuration; while the in back-to-back setup, electrodes are placed together with the front surfaces facing away from each other. The back-to-back configuration for PEC fuel production is analogous to tandem solar cells with a compact design, and are recently very frequently adopted for tandem PEC or PV-PEC cells. The purpose of this setup is to achieve an optimal utilization of sunlight – the wideband gap absorber is placed afront for high energy photon absorption while the narrow one at the rear for the absorption of the remaining photons.141 In such a case, the substrate of the front absorber should be as transparent as possible so as to allow the long wavelength light to pass through. The hierarchical structure inevitably introduces additional scattering of light, and the metal back reflector commonly used in light trapping electrodes often causes parasitic absorption. To cope with this issue, the scattering effect of the front electrode for light below the band gap energy should be taken into account. Using a back reflector with selective reflectivity and transmittance for the front electrode in this configuration will be a challenging but interesting option and warrants further exploration. In the side-by-side setup, which is relatively less studied, implementation of hierarchical architectures for light trapping seems to be less restricted from the device standpoint. This configuration does not require a match between band gap energies of the anode and cathode, and the balance of cathodic current and anodic current can be achieved by simply adjusting the electrode area in accordance to their geometric photocurrent density. Therefore, non-transparent substrates, though with a much larger required area, can be used, offering much more flexibility to the electrode architectural and light trapping design. In addition to optical factors, Xiang, Weber and Lewis have also considered how configuration and components (e.g. transparent conducting oxide, membrane/frit and electrolyte) affect surface kinetics, ohmic losses and product crossover in PEC fuel production devices and solar cells, motivating the device design based on the overall optical, electrical and electrochemical properties.140,142–144 One of their successes is evidenced by a brilliantly designed two-electrode set-up for PEC solar cell, as shown in Fig. 23c and d.137 Here the counter electrode is embedded beneath the working electrode to overcome the mass transport limitation of the silicon nanowire PEC solar cell as depicted in Fig. 21.
 Fig. 23  Representative schematics of basic designs in (A) back-to-back and (B) side-by-side configurations. (C) A novel two-electrode set-up with an embedded counter-electrode. (D) The concentration profile of oxidized species in the vicinity of the silicon nanowire when the counter electrode is embedded at the basis of the nanowire. Concentration polarization is largely alleviated in comparison to Fig. 21B. (C) and (D) are reprinted with permission from ref. 140. 
6.4 Novel photonics structure
Many of the light trapping substructures introduced in this review are largely derived from the PV and photonic device studies reported in the literature. For instance, surface patterning (Fig. 16) has been extensively studied in PV cell studies for enhancing forward scattering or randomizing incident light before it propagates into the absorber layer; and plasmonic effect and periodic photonic structure too (Fig. 12 and 13) have long been implemented in other fields for light harvesting. Therefore, it would be beneficial for PEC researchers to look into the latest nanophotonic studies (e.g. metamaterials and plasmonic materials) and explore the possibility to combine nanophotonic structures with PEC devices.
The novel photonic structures may also provide a new dimension to solve some of the aforementioned limitations in the current PEC designs. Metamaterials are artificially designed multi-material systems to give an effective response to a particular light frequency range, which stems from the assembly into a functional periodic meso-structure from the component, originally inactive materials.145 By carefully designing the unit cell structure of metamaterials, one can reap a responsive system with properties rare or unfound in nature. These properties include selective reflection and transmission, which could be potential solutions to the parasitic absorption issue we discussed in Section 6.2. Beyond optical capabilities, the photo-heating issue (generally detrimental to PV modules) under concentrated sunlight may be alleviated by employing a proper photonic cooler, which selectively couples reflection with strong thermal emission.146,147 In the PEC field, however, photo-heating seems to be less an issue since a relatively large quantity of flowing electrolyte solution could act as a cooler. In fact, it has been demonstrated by Zhang et al. that mild heating (up to 40 °C) of a BiVO4 PEC water splitting system could enhance the photocurrent by two-to-three fold. This result could provoke the possible application of new photonic structures intentionally designed for harvesting long wavelength light, which remains unused by the absorbers, to heat up the photoelectrode for higher output efficiencies.148
7. Conclusions
Light trapping with hierarchical architectures is an ingenious scheme to solve the contradiction between intense light absorption and high efficiency of charge collection. Although material compositions and shapes used in a hierarchical light trapping system can be diverse, we simply divide it into three parts: a light-absorbing structure and assistant light-absorbing substructures including an anti-reflection structure and an anti-transmittance structure. The function of assistant substructures is to redistribute as intense electromagnetic field as possible into the photosensitizer regions to achieve maximal absorption. We have surveyed a series of representative architectures and analysed them according to the functions they perform. Different from the conventional and often vague discussion of light trapping, this review attempts to reveal more specifically the principle of light trapping and more clearly assign different structures with different light trapping functions. Besides the promising future we picture, the challenges of light trapping hierarchical architectures we are confronted with are also discussed in brief. Despite the elaborate electrode preparation protocols, the efficiency of light trapping hierarchical PEC cells is currently still low. Nevertheless, we are optimistic that further efficiency gain will be achieved by the implementation of light trapping hierarchical structures based on the more comprehensive design considerations such as the ones presented in this review article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support from the Shenzhen Peacock Plan (KQTD2016053015544057), the Nanshan Pilot Plan (LHTD20170001), the Guangdong Science and Technology Program (2017B030314002), the NSFC/Hong Kong RGC Research Scheme (N_HKUST610/14), NSFC (21972006, 5181101551, 51905006, 51961165105, 21461162003, 21773315, and 21706295), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0202604), the Science and Technology Plan Project of Guangzhou (201804020025 and 2018A030310300), and the Shenzhen & Hong Kong Joint Research Program (SGLH20180622092406130). Songtao Tang thanks Dr Guoyu Qian for the help in figure drawing.
References
P. Nejat, F. Jomehzadeh, M. M. Taheri, M. Gohari and M. Z. Muhd, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 843–862 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. L. Jang, R. Gläser, M. Dong and C. J. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 253 RSC .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 RSC .
K. Wenderich and G. Mul, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14587–14619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
K. Branker, M. J. M. Pathak and J. M. Pearce, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4470–4482 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, T. Ming, Z. Sun, C. Zhao, B. Yang and J. Wang, Small, 2010, 6, 2272–2280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, J. Liang and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5848–5860 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, C. Li and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1862–1864 RSC .
Z. Luo, C. Li, D. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9013–9015 RSC .
S. Shalini, R. Balasundara Prabhu, S. Prasanna, T. K. Mallick and S. Senthilarasu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 51, 1306–1325 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10872–10881 RSC .
B. Parida, S. Iniyan and R. Goic, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1625–1636 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1763–1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Cooper, S. Gul, F. M. Toma, L. Chen, Y. S. Liu, J. Guo, J. W. Ager, J. Yano and I. D. Sharp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2969–2974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou and R. Biswas, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 093102 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Büuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 818–841 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2603–2636 RSC .
K. Yan, Y. Qiu, W. Chen, M. Zhang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2168–2176 RSC .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, D. Bin Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. Xu, L. Wen, Z. Wang, H. Zhao, S. Xu, Y. Mi, Y. Xu, M. Sommerfeld, Y. Fang and Y. Lei, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7382–7389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
W. Wang and L. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–29 Search PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–25 CAS .
I. G. Kavakli and K. Kantarli, Turk. J. Phys., 2002, 26, 349–354 CAS .
K. Sun, Y. Kuang, E. Verlage, B. S. Brunschwig, C. W. Tu and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402276 CrossRef .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(31), 18753–18770 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-J. Lewerenz and L. Peter, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting: material, process and architecture,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, J. L. Lyons, D. Yan and M. S. Hybertsen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 219–225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y. T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H. T. Jeng, S. K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Diedenhofen, G. Vecchi, R. E. Algra, A. Hartsuiker, O. L. Muskens, G. Immink, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, W. L. Vos and J. G. Rivas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 973–978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 2–8 Search PubMed .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
F. F. Abdi and R. Van De Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398–9404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, J. Yang, M. Boloor, N. A. Melosh and W. C. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10801–10810 RSC .
S. Xiao, H. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Long, Z. Wang, Z. Zhu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23350–23357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, K. Yan, Y. Bai and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2890–2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Cui, R. H. J. Vervuurt, D. Van Dam, R. P. J. Van Veldhoven, J. P. Hofmann, A. A. Bol, J. E. M. Haverkort, P. H. L. Notten, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and E. J. M. Hensen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, S. F. Leung, Q. Zhang, B. Hua, Q. Lin, Z. Wei, K. H. Tsui, Y. Zhang, S. Yang and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2123–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, M. Li, D. Huang, W. Qiu, S. Xiao, Y. Tong and S. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Xiao, C. Hu, H. Lin, X. Meng, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Qu, K. Yan, J. Xu, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19091–19097 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Qiu, Z. Wei, Q. Lin, Q. Zhang, K. Yan, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Z. Fan and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3651–3658 RSC .
V. Sugathan, E. John and K. Sudhakar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 54–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalaignan and Y. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lee, G. M. Coia and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5269–5281 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, D. Kong, B. Liu, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22953–22957 RSC .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Next Gener. Photonic Cell Technol. Sol. Energy Convers., 2010, 7772, 77720Z Search PubMed .
F. J. Beck, A. Polman and K. R. Catchpole, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 114310 CrossRef .
Y. Qiu, S. Fan, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
E. D. Kosten, E. L. Warren and H. A. Atwater, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 3316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. Jin and L. Qi, Small, 2018, 14, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, J. Dong, X. Ye, Y. Li, Y. Ma and L. Qi, Small, 2016, 12, 1469–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Haug and C. Ballif, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 824–837 RSC .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. F. Bohren, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles,  1998 Search PubMed .

          R. G. Newton, Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1982 Search PubMed .

          U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1995, vol. 25 Search PubMed .
S. J. Kim, I. Thomann, J. Park, J. H. Kang, A. P. Vasudev and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1446–1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shakeel Ahmad, A. K. Pandey and N. Abd Rahim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 89–108 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Wolf and G. Maret, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2696–2699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, G. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4686–4691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kassam, A. Duparré, K. Hehl, P. Bussemer and J. Neubert, Appl. Opt., 1992, 31, 1304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, C. Y. Su and D. Bin Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 RSC .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, K. Yan, B. Yang, Z. Zhu, T. Zhang and S. Yang, Small, 2014, 10, 4760–4769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. Bin Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N. G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668–3673 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Cui and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801993 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang and X. W. (David) Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1900281 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, X. Lai, J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Ren, Y. Yang, Q. Jin, L. Zhang, R. Yu, G. Ma, Z. Su, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6749–6773 RSC .
Z. Dong, X. Lai, J. E. Halpert, N. Yang, L. Yi, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Z. Tang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1046–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, P. Ruan, Z. Bao, L. Chen and X. Zhou, Solid State Sci., 2015, 40, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, H. Ren, C. M. Hessel, J. Wang, R. Yu, Q. Jin, M. Yang, Z. Hu, Y. Chen, Z. Tang, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 905–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. L. Chen, G. Von Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Neale, B. G. Lee, S. H. Kang and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14341–14346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, H. Bin Wu, J. Bao, L. Liang, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8579–8583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094–3103 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N. C. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karuturi, C. Cheng, L. Liu, L. Tat Su, H. J. Fan and A. I. Y. Tok, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karuturi, J. Luo, C. Cheng, L. Liu, L. T. Su, A. I. Y. Tok and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4157–4162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Qiu, Z. Wei, Q. Lin, Q. Zhang, K. Yan, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Z. Fan and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3651–3658 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 CAS .
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link and P. Nordlander, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3913–3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Vasudev, J. A. Schuller and M. L. Brongersma, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Andoshe, S. Choi, Y. S. Shim, S. H. Lee, Y. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, T. Kim, H. K. Park, M. G. Lee, J. M. Jeon, K. T. Nam, M. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Oh and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9477–9485 RSC .
J. W. Leem, J. S. Yu, Y. M. Song and Y. T. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 669–676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai and L. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 37–53 RSC .
L. Ji, H. Y. Hsu, X. Li, K. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. C. Lee, A. J. Bard and E. T. Yu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 127–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kats, R. Blanchard, P. Genevet and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Clapham and M. C. Hutley, Nature, 1973, 244, 281–282 CrossRef .
Y. F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y. J. Jen, C. Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y. K. Hsu, C. L. Pan, H. C. Lo, C. H. Hsu, Y. H. Chang, C. S. Lee, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Huang, D. Y. Wang, C. H. Wang, Y. T. Chen, Y. T. Wang, Y. T. Jiang, Y. J. Yang, C. C. Chen and Y. F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5849–5854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Srivastava, D. Kumar, P. K. Singh, M. Kar, V. Kumar and M. Husain, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1506–1511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, D. S. Ruby, D. W. Peters, B. B. McKenzie and J. W. P. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Ding, D. He, H. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Lei and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3113–3119 RSC .
S. Sun, Q. He, S. Xiao, Q. Xu, X. Li and L. Zhou, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 426–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dan, K. Seo, K. Takei, J. H. Meza, A. Javey and K. B. Crozier, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2527–2532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Isabella, J. Krč and M. Zeman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 1–4 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Wang, R. J. Zhang, S. Y. Wang, M. Lu, X. Chen, Y. X. Zheng, L. Y. Chen, Z. Ye, C. Z. Wang and K. M. Ho, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
P. Spinelli, M. A. Verschuuren and A. Polman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 692–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Umh, S. Yu, Y. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee and J. Yi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15802–15808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, Y. Qiu, S. Xiao, J. Gong, S. Zhao, J. Xu, X. Meng, S. Yang and J. Xu, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 6, 128–135 CrossRef .
L. Hu, J. Yan, M. Liao, H. Xiang, X. Gong, L. Zhang and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2305–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, P. Wee, Y. Lai, X. Wang, D. Gong, P. D. Kanhere, T. T. Lim, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, C. Li, M. Zheng and J. J. Delaunay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22355–22363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Z. Li, T. Hasan, X. Chen, W. Zheng, W. Feng, D. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1989–1995 RSC .
P. F. Yin, T. Ling, Y. R. Lu, Z. W. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Du, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 740–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J. H. Yun, H. Chen, M. Lyu, T. Butburee and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 6405–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Thiyagarajan, H. J. Ahn, J. S. Lee, J. C. Yoon and J. H. Jang, Small, 2013, 9, 2341–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5492–5513 RSC .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. Y. Chen, D. Bin Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12699–12717 RSC .
G. Kron, U. Rau, M. Dürr, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and J. H. Werner, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, E11 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiang, A. C. Meng and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15622–15627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hernández, G. Barbero, G. Saracco and A. L. Alexe-Ionescu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9916–9925 CrossRef .
C. Yu, M. Cao, Z. Dong, K. Li, C. Yu, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6830–6835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984 RSC .
J. Jin, K. Walczak, M. R. Singh, C. Karp, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3371–3380 RSC .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605 RSC .
C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber, S. Ardo, A. Berger, Y. Chen, R. Coridan, K. T. Fountaine, S. Haussener, S. Hu, R. Liu, N. S. Lewis, M. A. Modestino, M. M. Shaner, M. R. Singh, J. C. Stevens, K. Sun and K. Walczak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12974–12988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fleury, F. Monticone and A. Alù, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 037001 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y. Shi, K. Chen, L. Zhu and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 774–782 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, A. P. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12282–12287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ye, M. Boloor, A. Poletayev, N. A. Melosh and W. C. Chueh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2044–2052 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Songtao Tang
	Songtao Tang received his BS degree in chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 2017. He is a PhD student at Sun Yat-Sen University. Currently, he is an exchange student in Peking University, Shenzhen. His research is focused on the development of nanostructured materials for solar water splitting and carbon dioxide reduction.

Weitao Qiu
	Weitao Qiu received his BS degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2014. He is currently a PhD student at Sun Yat-Sen University, under the joint supervision of Prof. Yexiang Tong and Prof. Hongbing Ji. He is now an exchange student in Peking University, Shenzhen. His research is focused on the development of nanostructured materials for Li ion batteries, electrocatalytic water splitting and solar water splitting.

Shuang Xiao
	Shuang Xiao received his BS degree (2012) from the School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology in China and his PhD degree (2017) from the Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Research Associate Professor at the School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University. His current research is focused on perovskite solar cells, photoelectrochemical cells and catalysts.

Yexiang Tong
	Prof. Yexiang Tong received his BS in General Chemistry in 1985, MS in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He joined Sun Yat-Sen University as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry in 1988. His current research is focused on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications in energy conversion and storage.

Shihe Yang
	Shihe Yang is a Professor at the Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, and The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He has contributed to cluster science, fullerenes and metallofullerenes, soft molecular interfaces and nanomaterials. His current research interests include the understanding, manipulation and applications of low-dimensional nanosystems and multiscale materials for energy conversion, particularly solar energy harvesting.

Broader context
The utilization of fossil fuels has advanced human society to where we are now, but has also inflicted serious global warming and environment pollution problems on the earth. Replacing fossil fuels with solar fuels from artificial photosynthesis is an enticing option. Toward this end, dye sensitized solar cells and photoelectrochemical water splitting devices as close mimics of the natural photosynthesis system have been developed, aiming to efficiently trap solar energy and convert it into storable energy. Such an efficient light trapping system requires strong light absorption and fast charge transport in the bulk and rapid injection of the surface reaching charge carriers at the relevant interfaces. However, the traditional design is inevitably stranded in an absorption–collection dilemma wherein it is almost impossible to achieve full absorption and complete charge collection simultaneously. As a promising solution to this conundrum, light trapping with hierarchical architectures, which are inspired by natural green plants evolved for eons to harvest sunlight, is brought up to optimize light harvesting without compromising the charge carrier transport. The hierarchical architectures are advantageous for their distinctive light scattering behaviors, so that they can redistribute light intensity and eventually permit nearly full light absorption and complete charge collection at the same time. This review summarizes the recent progress in this area, clarifies the concept and implications of light trapping with the hierarchical architectures, and finally, pictures the future challenges and opportunities in light trapping for solar fuels with hierarchical architectures.


 	Fig. 1  Some representative artificial architectures reported in the literature for light trapping.	 

 	Fig. 2  The hierarchical light trapping system of green plants in natural photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The UV-vis absorption spectra of hematite with different film thicknesses exhibited a similar shape. (B) Absorption length of photons as a function of wavelength for a-Si:H with a band gap Eg = 1.6 eV. The band edge wavelength is indicated by the arrow. A and B are reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 19, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Potential distribution (built-in electric field) of an n-type semiconductor electrode in contact with electrolyte under equilibrium conditions. The three characteristic lengths: Wsc – the width of the space charge layer; LD – the minority carrier diffusion length; α−1(λ) – the penetration depth of light.	 

 	Fig. 5  Traditional bulk semiconductor geometries (left) require the minority-carrier diffusion length, Lmin (equivalent to the LD discussed above), comparable to the characteristic light-absorption length. In contrast, structured devices such as wire arrays (right) enable the orthogonalization of light absorption and carrier collection. Decoupling Lmin from light absorption reduces quality constraints of certain materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 6  Resonant light trapping in quarter-wavelength films. Schematic illustration of light propagation in a quarter-wavelength (d = λ/4, for normal incidence) absorbing film on a back-reflector substrate. The different colours represent the light intensity distribution across the film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Three extreme modes of light intensity distribution. (B) The three respective working points in a PEC–PV tandem cell.	 

TiO2/ZnO27,75	Polydisperse nanoparticles	Transparent, conductive, work function matching	Submicrometer-sized for Mie scattering and disordered structure for Anderson light localization	Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor
TiO2/ZnO28,80–82	Branched and hyperbranched column-like structure	Transparent, conductive, work function matching	Great surface area enhances the interaction between incident light and photoactive material	Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor
TiO2/ZnO/SnO289–91	Multi-shelled hollow microspheres	Transparent, conductive, work function matching	Multiple intra-cavity reflections	Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor
TiO2/ZnO/SnO299	3D inverse opal	Transparent, conductive, work function matching	Scattering depends on the degree of structural size and order	Dye; quantum dot, ultra-thin film and nanobranch semiconductor
Au29	3D pillar/truncated-pyramids array	Plasma effect, conductive, work function matching	A continuous IPCE enhancement by the synergism of pillar and truncated-pyramids	Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor
Au101	3D nanohole array	Plasma effect, conductive, work function matching	Synergistic enhancement of SPR and SPP effect	Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor

NiOx37	Thin film	Transparent; conductive; energy band matching	Thickness and refractive index crucially determined the light trapping efficiency	Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor
TiO2108	Nanowire arrays	Transparent; conductive; energy band matching	Gradient refractive index	Thin film and nanostructured semiconductor
ZnO/InP50,107	Discontinuous and periodic patterns	Transparent; conductive; energy band matching	Multiple intra-cavity reflections	Thin film

CdS38,72	Thin film	Narrow band gap	Thickness and refractive index crucially determined final absorption efficiency	—
Hematite52	Nanobowls	Narrow band gap and low surface state	The absorption edge can be regulated by diameter	—
CdS/SnS2129,130	Nanoflakes	Narrow band gap and low surface state	Light scattering depends heavily on its own orientation	—
ZnO132	Periodic nanorod cluster	Narrow band gap and low surface state	The period of cluster provides additional light scattering	—

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustrations and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of various TiO2 nanoarrays on a FTO glass substrate. Scale bar, 10 μm. (B) Diffused reflectance spectra of light reflecting and scattering within the simplified network of TiO2 nanowires (TNW), TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets (TNW–NS) and TiO2 nanowires–nanosheets–nanorods (TNW–NS–NR) array architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) The schematic diagram of multiple scattering in multi-shell hollow nanospheres. (B) The SEM images of SnO2 hollow nanospheres with increasing shells. (C) Comparison of light scattering properties in two types of SnO2 hollow microsphere morphologies by FDTD simulation. (D) Diffused reflectance spectra (R %) of SnO2 hollow sphere films with increasing shells: (i) single shell, (ii) double shells, (iii) triple shells, (iv) quadruple shells, (v) quintuple shells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of three-layer stacking of TiO2 photoanodes. (B) Incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of DSSCs fabricated using different combinations of TiO2 stacked layer. Anatase hierarchical TiO2 nanowires denoted as AHTNW; macroporous TiO2 denoted as MPT; hierarchical TiO2 microspheres denoted as HTS; the branches represent further branching by hydrothermal treatment. TiO2 nanoparticle layer photoanode with the same film thickness denoted as TNP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Transmission spectra of (1 − x)150 − x180 polystyrene opal templates, which are displaced vertically for clarity, with the dashed lines marking the 0 transmission level for each spectrum. The value of x represents the fraction of 180 nm spheres. (B) The photonic stop bands of (i) TiO2 IO, (ii) CdS QD-sensitized TiO2 IO, (iii) nanobushes, and (iv) CdS QD-sensitized nanobushes are shown in the UV-vis-NIR specular reflectance spectra. (C) and (D) are UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of different photoanodes before and after CdS QD sensitization, respectively. A and B, C, D are reproduced with permission from ref. 92 and 99, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) FDTD simulation patterns at wavelengths of 451 nm, 624 nm and 681 nm for iron oxide on gold nanopillars. (B) Tilted SEM view of an Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array, including a top pillar and a bottom truncated-pyramid. (C) FDTD simulated absorption curves of an Au pillar/truncated-pyramid (PTP) array and a simple Au pillar array with the same height. The blue and green curves represent the top (pillar 180 nm) and bottom (truncated-pyramids 180 nm) parts of the CdS/Au PTPs, respectively; the black and red curves represent the top (pillar 180 nm) and bottom (pillar 180 nm) parts of the CdS/Au pillar, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72 and 29.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram and (B) SEM image of the Au nanohole array with the hematite nanorods (the scale bar is 500 nm). The local plasmonic field in Au nanoholes of SPP (C) and LSPR (D). The local field enhancement is concentred at the edges of the hole and the interface between the metal and dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 14  (A) The schematic diagram of a thin-film anti-reflection structure. (B) Measured total reflectance spectra of NiOx-coated n+-InP substrates as a function of the thickness of NiOx (0, 50, 70, 80 nm). The inset shows the experimentally measured photocurrent (red curve) in 1 M KOH (aq.) and the integrated theoretical photocurrent density on a p+n-InP|NiOx photoelectrode versus the thickness of NiOx, as calculated in either water (inset, orange curve) or air (blue curve); the irradiated light intensity in both cases is AM1.5 100 mW. A and B are reproduced with permission from ref. 110 and 37, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 15  The schematic diagram of anti-reflection for sub-wavelength nanostructure arrays (A) and a gradient refractive index structure (B). (C) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of TiO2 NRs (the scale bar is 500 nm) and (D) optical image of hydrothermally grown TiO2 NRs on a 4 inch silicon wafer (right) and bare p-silicon (left). (E) Optical reflectance vs. wavelength at 40° incident angle. (F) Reflectance vs. incident angle at 550 nm irradiation. A, B and C, D, E, F are reproduced with permission from ref. 110 and 108, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) 45° tilt SEM images of the NP array on n+/p-InP (the scale bar is 500 nm); (B) measured reflection spectra of planar (n+/p-InP, black solid line) and nanopillar-modified samples (n+/p-InPNP, red solid line), and simulated reflection spectrum of n+/p-InP nanopillars (n+/p-InP, red dash line), with an incident angle of 8°. Simulated electric field intensity distribution in a cross section of cylindrical NPs on (C) substrates and (D) planar substrates (λ = 580 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 17  Light absorption in hematite thin-films on several back-reflector substrates, including Ag, Au, Al, Pt, ideal reflective (R = 1) and transparent (R = 0) substrates. The left and right ordinates represent absorbed photon flux and the corresponding photogenerated current density, respectively. Black squares and blue circles represent the photogenerated current of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 films on platinized and FTO-coated substrates, respectively. The error bars is the range of (estimated) systematic errors in the measurements. The dashed curves show the predicted absorption photon flux in the entire specimen, comprising contributions from both film and substrate; the solid line curves show the predicted net absorption in the α-Fe2O3 films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) and (B) represent the optical performance of the Au nanopillar array photoanode with 50 and 140 nm hematite thin films, respectively. The dashed line is the simulated absorption spectrum of the Au nanopillar; the solid line is the absorption enhancement of the hematite thin film; the triangle line is the IPCE enhancement factor of Au nanopillars coated with the hematite thin film compared with a planar structure with the same thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) The SEM views of Au/ZnO NW (right) and hp-Au/ZnO NW (left). (B) The UV-vis spectra of ZnO nanowires (ZnO NW), ZnO nanowires with gold nanoparticles (Au/ZnO NW), hierarchical patterned ZnO nanowires (hp-ZnO NW), and hierarchical patterned ZnO nanowires (hp-Au/ZnO NW). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132.	 

 	Fig. 20  The measured absorption edge of the Fe2O3 nanobowl array photoanode with diameters of 0.5, 0.8, and 1.0 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Diffusion and convection movement of electrochemically active species in an electrolyte (νconv. and νdiff.) and in a nanostructured electrode (νdiff.′) for a conventional two-electrode set-up. (B) Oxidized species concentration profiles (calculated by COMSOL Multiphysics) due to the oxidation reaction at the non-flat surface of silicon nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 22  Bubbles formed at a BiVO4 surface during photoelectrochemical water splitting. They grow large and adhere to the electrode under a constant bias, blocking the electrolyte from accessing the inner surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138.	 

 	Fig. 23  Representative schematics of basic designs in (A) back-to-back and (B) side-by-side configurations. (C) A novel two-electrode set-up with an embedded counter-electrode. (D) The concentration profile of oxidized species in the vicinity of the silicon nanowire when the counter electrode is embedded at the basis of the nanowire. Concentration polarization is largely alleviated in comparison to Fig. 21B. (C) and (D) are reprinted with permission from ref. 140.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
