Steering charge kinetics in photocatalysis: intersection of materials syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00064E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00064E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2893-2939Steering charge kinetics in photocatalysis: intersection of materials syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations

        
          
            Song 
            Bai
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yujie 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      *
      Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information and Quantum Physics, and School of Chemistry and Materials Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: yjxiong@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-551-63606657
Received 
      26th January 2015
    First published on 23rd April 2015AbstractCharge kinetics is highly critical in determining the quantum efficiency of solar-to-chemical conversion in photocatalysis, and this includes, but is not limited to, the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, utilization of plasmonic hot carriers and delivery of photo-induced charges to reaction sites, as well as activation of reactants by energized charges. In this review, we highlight the recent progress on probing and steering charge kinetics toward designing highly efficient photocatalysts and elucidate the fundamentals behind the combinative use of controlled synthesis, characterization techniques (with a focus on spectroscopic characterizations) and theoretical simulations in photocatalysis studies. We first introduce the principles of various processes associated with charge kinetics that account for or may affect photocatalysis, from which a set of parameters that are critical to photocatalyst design can be summarized. We then outline the design rules for photocatalyst structures and their corresponding synthetic approaches. The implementation of characterization techniques and theoretical simulations in different steps of photocatalysis, together with the associated fundamentals and working mechanisms, are also presented. Finally, we discuss the challenges and opportunities for photocatalysis research at this unique intersection as well as the potential impact on other research fields.
Song Bai
Song Bai received his BS and MS degrees from the Jiangsu University in 2009 and 2012, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate under the tutelage of Professor Yujie Xiong at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests focus on design and synthesis of novel hybrid nanomaterials for photocatalysis.
Jun Jiang
Jun Jiang received his BS in physics in 2000 at Wuhan University, China, a PhD in theoretical chemistry in 2007 (with Professor Yi Luo) at the Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, and a PhD in solid state physics in 2008 (with Professor Wei Lu) at the Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After three-years of postdoctoral training with Professor Shaul Mukamel at University of California Irvine, he joined the University of Science and Technology of China in 2011 as a Professor in theoretical chemistry. His research interests focus on the development and employment of multi-scale modeling methods for electron kinetics in complex systems.
Qun Zhang
Qun Zhang received his PhD in chemical physics from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1999. After seven-years of postdoctoral training with Professor Moshe Shapiro at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel (2000–2003), and Professors Moshe Shapiro and John W. Hepburn at the University of British Columbia, Canada (2003–2007), he joined the USTC as an Associate Professor of Chemical Physics. He has published more than 70 peer-reviewed papers in the fields of laser spectroscopy and molecular reaction dynamics. His current research interests focus on ultrafast spectroscopy and dynamics in nanomaterials and condensed-phase molecular systems.
Yujie Xiong
Yujie Xiong received his BS in chemical physics in 2000 and PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2004 (with Professor Yi Xie), both from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). After four-years of training with Professors Younan Xia and John A. Rogers, he joined the NSF-NNIN at Washington University in St. Louis as the Principal Scientist and Lab Manager. Starting from 2011, he is a Professor of Chemistry at the USTC. He has published 101 papers with over 8000 citations (H-index 47). His research interests include synthesis, fabrication and assembly of inorganic materials for energy and environmental applications.
1. Introduction
Photocatalysis is a process in which catalysts absorb photons so as to create energetic electrons and holes, which can in turn initiate reduction and/or oxidation (redox) reactions.1,2 Since the discovery of photocatalytic water splitting on TiO2 electrodes by Fujishima and Honda in 1972, photocatalysis has experienced four decades of hard struggle, and nowadays, it has been developed into a multidisciplinary research field for solar-to-chemical energy conversion at the intersection of semiconductor physics, surface/interface science, materials science, computational chemistry and many others.3–7 In the past decade, numerous types of photocatalysts have been synthesized and used for a wide range of applications such as water splitting and CO2 reduction for clean energy, as well as wastewater treatment and air purification for environment rescue.8–11 With the development of photocatalysts and photocatalytic reactions, research in deeply understanding the principles and processes of photocatalysis has also been carried out synchronously.1,2
The overall photocatalysis process basically involves three key steps related to charge kinetics, i.e. charge generation, transfer and consumption,12 and it also resembles many other solar energy-conversion processes such as those which take place in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells, in terms of charge kinetics.13,14 The three sequential steps are complementary and indispensable, and only when all the three are accomplished with the desired efficiencies can the overall performance of a photocatalyst be optimized. For this reason, improving the efficiency of each step in the charge kinetics is the fundamental way to develop new, highly efficient photocatalysts. To this end, various efforts have to be made to overcome the bottlenecks of each step accordingly.
In efforts to harness each step in the charge kinetics, some basic models have been developed for the synthesis and fabrication of photocatalytic materials with the related principles and processes proposed. For instance, the plasmonic effect of noble metals has been employed to extend the light-absorption spectral range of a wide-bandgap semiconductor for charge generation, whereas a metal–semiconductor Schottky junction can facilitate the electron–hole separation for charge transfer.15,16 The emergence of these models moves the photocatalytic systems forward from single-component catalysts to multi-component hybrid structures. As a result, the charge kinetics become more complicated with this development, because charge generation as well as charge consumption may simultaneously take place on different components and charge transfer generally occurs from one component to another. Though the energized electrons and holes could be better generated, separated and used for reactions by implementing these newly developed models, the improvements were often judged only by the overall amounts of photocatalytic products. The difficulty in capturing the detailed charge-kinetics information has long been a great obstacle toward understanding the sophisticated mechanisms responsible for improvement in performance, which is essentially needed to further instruct us in designing highly efficient photocatalysts.
Acquiring the charge-kinetics information requires a deeper understanding of the fundamentals behind each step. For a photocatalytic system, there are many critical parameters, which may impact the charge kinetics in three key steps. For example, charge generation is largely determined by the energy band configuration of the light-harvesting semiconductor, whereas the crystal structures and defects inside a catalyst and those on the surface can affect charge transfer and consumption, respectively. Thus, establishing the relationships between these parameters within each step is an important procedure in gaining the charge kinetics information of a photocatalytic system. Based on the relationships, one can identify which parameter is the bottleneck to limit the performance of an existing system and then rationally design a new photocatalytic system by adjusting the parameter.
To establish the relationships, three tools are needed to perform multidisciplinary research with a focus on charge kinetics: materials syntheses, characterization techniques, and theoretical simulations. First, when one intends to analyze the charge kinetics inside a synthesized catalytic system, control samples have to be presented to reflect the modification of a parameter while the others are kept the same. This stringent requirement urges people to develop synthetic protocols with high precision and controllability over the parameters so that uniform and well-defined models can be provided for mechanistic studies. Second, upon the synthesis of desired structures, charge kinetics should be resolved through characterization techniques in addition to catalytic activity measurements. With the developments of characterization techniques in the past decade, the research community has been able to acquire the information for the charge kinetics in all the three steps from different angles. Third, despite the great success mentioned above, unfortunately not all the kinetic information can be obtained directly or indirectly from characterizations. Moreover, some expensive, high-end characterization equipment cannot be afforded by most photocatalysis researchers. In this case, one should take advantage of theoretical simulations to learn the relationships between charge kinetics and material parameters in a given catalytic system. As a matter of fact, the theoretical simulations can deepen our understanding of the fundamentals and enable us to better analyze the characterization data.
It is worth pointing out that the three tools are often indispensable when a new photocatalytic system is designed and fabricated. In general, controlled synthesis, according to the rationally designed models and selected parameters, is always one of the most important and challenging works for the researchers. A good design that cannot be experimentally realized has no practical value. Characterization techniques are useful in checking whether the synthesized materials have met the design requirements, whereas the role of theoretical simulations mainly lies in formulating design rules for material parameters and evaluating the feasibility of a design. Overall, the three tools should be synergistically used in both the charge kinetics studies in exciting systems and charge kinetics modulations in new designs.
From the overview mentioned above, one can envision the relationship between the charge kinetics and the three tools as illustrated in Fig. 1. In analyzing charge kinetics for an existing photocatalytic system, three tools should be integrated to understand the relationships between the critical parameters and the charge kinetics based on the principles, models and processes behind photocatalysis. On the route to the design and fabrication of a new photocatalytic system, the three tools can help us to achieve our design or to test whether the design meets our requirements for charge kinetics, based on the correlation of the charge kinetics with the parameters of catalytic structures, which are bridged by the principles, models and processes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for probing charge kinetics in existing photocatalytic systems as well as steering the kinetics via the design and fabrication of new photocatalytic systems at the intersection of materials syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations. 
In this review article, we will focus on the charge kinetics in photocatalysis and demonstrate how the combination of controlled synthesis, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations is used to analyze an existing catalytic system as well as to design a new system around the theme of charge kinetics. In the first part of this review, we will introduce a series of principles, models and processes with regard to the charge kinetics in the common photocatalytic systems, in order to understand the steps of charge generation, transfer and consumption in various types of models. Second, we will discuss a set of critical parameters that account for or may affect each step of the charge kinetics. Third, once the parameters are analyzed, we will highlight the design rules for photocatalytic structures and their corresponding synthetic approaches. Fourth, we will elucidate the working mechanisms of various techniques that have been utilized to characterize the charge kinetics information. Fifth, we will demonstrate the implementation of theoretical simulations in different steps of charge kinetics, from which meanwhile the readers can have a deeper understanding of the fundamentals. Finally, the remaining challenges and future prospects will be discussed. Although many review articles have been published on photocatalysis, they are mainly focused on different aspects such as specific photocatalytic reactions,17,18 photocatalyst designs or structures,19,20 and photocatalytic applications.21,22 We do hope that this review article can highlight the research methodology and in turn facilitate the research in photocatalysis.
2. Principles, models and processes
As mentioned above, three stages are involved in a typical photocatalytic process: (i) photoexcitation of catalysts to generate electron–hole pairs, (ii) separation of excited charges (i.e., electron–hole pairs) and their diffusion to the surface of the catalysts, and (iii) use of charges on the surface for redox reactions. To maximize the number of photons converted into electron–hole pairs, developing catalysts which absorb a broader spectrum of solar energy is the main pursuit for researchers to optimize the charge-generation step. For the charge-transfer step, it is imperative to suppress detrimental electron–hole recombination so as to allow more electrons and holes to arrive at the catalyst surface. Certainly, having a sufficient number of charge carriers on the surface does not necessarily ensure high efficiency of ongoing redox reactions. The emphasis for the charge-consumption step is to enhance the surface adsorption and activation on the catalyst surface, thereby efficiently coupling more surface charges into a specific reduction or oxidation reaction. As such, the catalytic activity and selectivity can be enhanced at the molecular level.
Conventional photocatalysis is based on semiconductor materials, although other materials such as plasmonic metals and organic molecules alone have been also occasionally reported for photo-driven reactions.23,24 Semiconductor materials are particularly attractive in harvesting light and generating electron–hole pairs. However, bare semiconductors cannot satisfy the demand for high-performance photocatalysis in terms of charge kinetics. For this reason, different new models based on semiconductors, which use a metal–semiconductor junction or a semiconductor–semiconductor junction, or combine the semiconductor with other materials to form hybrid catalytic systems, have been developed. With the development of these models, related principles and processes of charge kinetics have been proposed accordingly. In this section, starting from the bare semiconductor, the principles and processes responsible for different models are discussed from the viewpoint of charge kinetics. It should be noted that a model does not necessarily correspond to a photocatalytic system. Multiple models may co-exist in a photocatalytic system, whereas one photocatalytic system can undergo reactions through different models, depending on the reaction conditions.
2.1 Bare semiconductors
The unique electronic structure of a semiconductor is mainly characterized by its valence band (VB), conduction band (CB), band gap (Eg), and Fermi level (Ef).25 The CB is formed by the interaction of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), whereas the VB of a semiconductor is formed by the interaction of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). The Eg is the energy range between the bottom of the CB (conduction band minimum, CBM) and the top of the VB (valance band maximum, VBM), and the Ef corresponds to the energy level having a probability of 1/2 of being occupied by electrons. The band structure is very important for a semiconductor-based photocatalyst, as it determines the light absorption properties as well as the redox capability of the semiconductor. As shown in Fig. 2a, the photon energy (hν) required for the electron–hole photoexcitation depends on the Eg of the semiconductor. A semiconductor can only absorb the photons with energy equal to or greater than its Eg. During this process, the electrons in the VB are excited to the CB, leaving holes in the VB and generating electron–hole pairs. Once the electrons and holes transfer to the semiconductor surface, two half redox reactions can occur. The electrons in the CB may initiate a reduction reaction with electron acceptors (A), and the holes in the VB participate in oxidation reactions with electron donors (D). The reduction and oxidation capabilities of photogenerated electrons and holes in a semiconductor are mainly determined by the edge positions of the CB and VB, respectively. Only when the energy levels of the CBM (Ec) and the VBM (Ev) of a semiconductor are more negative and positive than the redox potential of reduction and oxidation half reactions, respectively, can an overall photocatalytic reaction occur.25 If one of the band edges (CBM or VBM) does not satisfy the requirement, sacrificial agents have to be used as substituted electron acceptors or donors to make the other half reaction happen. In the case that the reactions take place on the surface, the rates of the charge consumption are still greatly influenced by the differences between the band-edge positions and the reaction redox-potential levels without band bending being considered. The larger the differences, the higher are the rates.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration for the basic mechanism of a bare semiconductor photocatalytic process; (b, c) schematic illustrations for the band bending near the n-type semiconductor surface: (b) upward bending; (c) downward bending. 

2.1.1 Basic photocatalytic systems. 
When a bare semiconductor is used as a simple photocatalytic model, all the three charge-kinetics steps can occur on the same semiconductor catalyst. Most bare semiconductors cannot offer high photocatalytic activities even in the presence of sacrificial agents due to a few different reasons. First, in the charge photogeneration step, some large-bandgap semiconductors that have demonstrated promising photocatalytic performance (e.g., TiO2) can only absorb light in the ultraviolet (UV) region (wavelength (λ) < 400 nm).1,2,12 Nevertheless, the solar spectrum has a very small fraction of UV light (ca. 5%) in comparison with those of visible light (400 < λ < 800 nm, ca. 43%) and near-infrared (NIR) light (800 < λ < 2500 nm, ca. 52%); therefore, the total solar energy conversion efficiency is too low for practical applications. In comparison, small-bandgap semiconductors such as CdS and Fe2O3 can harvest visible light;26,27 however, their photocatalytic activities are relatively low. Given the smaller band gap, the position of either the CBM or the VBM may become less negative (CBM) or positive (VBM), thereby reducing the redox ability of photocatalysts. This problem turns out to be more apparent for the NIR-active semiconductor with a narrower band gap. As a result, the relationship between light absorption and charge redox ability is always an irreconcilable contradiction for bare semiconductor photocatalysts.
Second, charge transfer and migration take place via random paths in the bare semiconductor, and as such, the photo-generated electrons and holes have a high probability of recombining with each other, reducing photocatalytic efficiency. In the absence of a driving force for charge separation and transport, only a small number of electrons and holes can be separated by chance, among which a limited fraction of charges eventually arrives at the semiconductor surface. Thus, a vast majority of carriers are consumed by charge recombination prior to surface reactions.
Third, the semiconductor surface does not possess as high activation ability for redox reactions as it does for metals in many cases, so the surface reactions are too slow to efficiently consume the charges to achieve high photocatalytic activities. Instead, the remaining free electrons and holes are recombined on the catalyst surface. More importantly, the accumulation of charges on the surface may induce undesired degradation of the semiconductor owing to the highly reductive or oxidative nature of electrons and holes, reducing the stability of photocatalysts.28
Nevertheless, we have to point out that some external environments and surface properties may lead to band bending near the semiconductor surface in practical photocatalytic reactions. The factors causing the band bending include surface states (mainly due to the termination of bonding networks in lattice periodicity at the surface and an electronic state formed by the interactions of unpaired electrons in the dangling bonds of surface atoms), surface adsorption of electron donor and acceptor molecules (due to the electron transfer between the semiconductor surface and the molecules), as well as interactions with electrolytes (discussed in Section 2.1.3).1,29 As shown in Fig. 2b and c (taking the n-type semiconductor as an example), the band bending can be considered as an outcome resulting from the potential difference between the surface and the bulk of a semiconductor. To align their potentials (Ef), charge transfer occurs between the surface and the bulk material. This charge redistribution region is known as the space charge region. After the charge transfer, the accumulation of electrons on the semiconductor surface leads to upward band bending (Fig. 2b), whereas excessive holes on the surface would bend the bands downward (Fig. 2c). An internal electric field can be formed due to the redistribution of charges, which may in turn facilitate the separation of electrons and holes for reactions. The upward bending can drive the holes to run up for an oxidation reaction, whereas the downward bending attracts electrons to the surface for a reduction reaction. Thus, the surface with upward band bending offers higher oxidation but lower reduction activities, whereas the surface with downward band bending leads to the reverse outcome.30 Certainly, surface band bending also occurs in the semiconductor-based junction structures and is discussed in Sections 2.2–2.4. To simplify the cases, the surface band bending will not be elaborated again.


2.1.2 Spatial charge separation. 
Despite the drawbacks of bare-semiconductor design, the development of novel synthetic methods has opened a new window for improving its performance. To date, many semiconductor structures enclosed with certain crystal facets have been synthesized.31 The facet engineering makes bare semiconductors achieve enhanced photocatalysis. As mentioned above, the surface of a semiconductor may have different electronic states in comparison with the bulk due to the presence of surface states and surface adsorption. For the same reason, the different crystal facets of a semiconductor having varied surface states, due to variations in atomic arrangements and termination of bonding networks, may show differentiated potentials. Different adsorption abilities of various facets for donor and acceptor molecules is another reason for this potential difference.32 When a semiconductor is exposed with two or more different crystal facets, charge redistribution takes place to equilibrate the Ef of the two facets and the bulk due to their different electronic states. When the Ef of the two facets is higher or lower than that of the bulk, electrons can be transferred to the facet with the lower Ef, whereas holes migrate to the facet with the higher Ef. Then the two band bendings in the opposite direction can happen near the two facets, forming the corresponding internal electric field (Fig. 3a).33 Upon excitation of the semiconductor, the internal electric field facilitates the separation of the charges and drives the photoexcited electrons and holes to different crystal facets. Thus the sites for oxidation and reduction reactions have been spatially separated in the bare semiconductor.
 Fig. 3  (a, b) Schematic illustration for spatial charge separation in a bare n-type semiconductor between different facets: (a) driven by surface band bending and (b) driven by different band structures of facets. (c, d) Schematic illustration for spatial charge separation in a bare semiconductor between the two sides of the semiconductor (but with the same surface facet): (c) driven by a ferroelectric field and (d) driven by a dipole field. 
It is worth mentioning that the band bending of two surface facets in the opposite direction is not the only factor resulting in the spatial charge separation. In addition to the surface band bending, different surface facets may possess varied electronic structures, leading to differences in the energy levels of their CBM, VBM and Ef. In the case that the band levels of the bulk are accordingly positioned between those of the facets, the bands would be bent when the Ef is aligned between the facets and the bulk. The resulting internal electric field helps to separate electrons from holes, whereas the different CB and VB alignments drive the photoexcited electrons to one facet and the holes to another (Fig. 3b).34,35 In addition to the facet-dependent charge separation, other reasons may induce spatial charge separation between the two sides of a semiconductor within the same facet. A representative example is the ferroelectric oxide semiconductor, in which spontaneous electric polarization builds up an intrinsic ferroelectric field. This ferroelectric field drives the photo-generated electrons and holes to diffuse in two opposite directions under light irradiation (Fig. 3c).36 Another case is the polar surface terminations of a semiconductor, in which the facet is not electrically neutral due to the presence of different numbers of cations and anions.37 The two sides are of the same facet but have different terminations and opposite charges, and as such, the dipolar fields arising from charged surface domains can promote the separation of photogenerated charge carriers for spatially selective oxidation and reduction (Fig. 3d). It should be noted that the spatial charge separation effects are quite weak in bare semiconductors. More efficient electron–hole separation should refer to the formation of junctions as discussed in the following sections.


2.1.3 Bare semiconductors in photoelectrochemical processes. 
In addition to what we discussed above, bare semiconductors in a PEC system behave differently in a direct photocatalytic system. A PEC process is a system that integrates photocatalysis with electrochemistry, thus showing different charge kinetics from a direct photocatalytic process.14,38–40 The PEC system consists of a semiconductor electrode, a metal counter electrode and an electrolyte between the two electrodes (Fig. 4a). A reference electrode with a well-known electrode potential is often used in the PEC measurements. By measuring the potential of the semiconductor with respect to that of the reference electrode, one can assess the reduction or oxidation power of the semiconductor electrode. As the two electrodes are in contact with the electrolyte, the Ef of the semiconductor and the metal should be kept in an equilibrium state with the Ef of the electrolyte (also the Eredox) (Fig. 4b). Due to the presence of two redox couples in the electrolyte, the Eredox or Ef of the electrolyte is somewhere between the potentials of the redox couples, depending on the relative concentrations of reduction and oxidation products in the electrolyte. For the semiconductor (basically for n-type) with Ef higher than Eredox, the charge redistribution would lead to the bend-up of the semiconductor surface, forming a space charge layer on the semiconductor side.14 When the semiconductor is excited by light, the internal electric field formed in the space charge layer can facilitate the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes. The separated electrons can flow to the counter electrode through conducting wires, whereas the holes migrate toward the electrolyte. As a result, an internal photovoltage is formed, and the Ef levels of the semiconductor and the metal rise up to form a quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor (Ef*). The band bending would decrease until the Ef* becomes higher than the potential of the reduction half reaction. Then the electrons on the counter electrode and the holes on the semiconductor can participate in reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively (Fig. 4c). This condition is designated for the semiconductor with a large band gap, whose flat-band potential (Ufb) lies above the reduction potential of the electrolyte. The Ufb is the potential that needs to be applied to the semiconductor to reduce the band bending to zero. In other words, this potential denotes the Ef of the semiconductor with respect to the Eredox of the electrolyte before the contact and is the maximum Ef* possible for the semiconductor. For the semiconductor with Ufb below the electrolyte reduction potential, an external positive bias (Eb) must be applied to raise the Ef of the metal above the reduction potential for the overall redox reactions (Fig. 4d).41 In the meantime, the Ef* of the semiconductor declines, increasing the band bending and enhancing electron–hole separation.
 Fig. 4  Schematic band diagrams illustrating PEC processes: (a) before contact for an n-type semiconductor; (b) after contact for an n-type semiconductor in the dark; (c) n-type semiconductor under light irradiation without external bias; (d) n-type semiconductor under light irradiation with external bias; (e) after contact for a p-type semiconductor in the dark; and (f) p-type semiconductor under light irradiation with external bias. 
In the PEC system with a semiconductor band bending up, as described above, the semiconductor electrode is the photoanode for the oxidation reaction, whereas the counter electrode is the cathode for the reduction reaction.41 For the semiconductor (basically for p-type) with Ef lower than Eredox, instead the band bends down after the contact (Fig. 4e).42 The charge transport directions driven by the formed internal electric field are thus contrary to the case of Ef > Eredox (i.e., n-type). As a direct outcome, the Ef evolution by photovoltage and the locations for reduction and oxidation reactions are also reversed. When Ufb is higher than the electrolyte oxidation potential, a negative Eb has to be applied to lower the Ef of the metal electrode to carry out the overall redox reactions (Fig. 4f).
Generally, the VBM of the n-type semiconductor and the CBM of the p-type semiconductor can satisfy the demands on oxidation and reduction potentials of the electrolyte, so only the maximum reduction potentials for n-type semiconductors and oxidation potentials for p-type semiconductors are considered here. It is worth noting that the applied Eb should be smaller than the potential difference between the reduction and oxidation reactions in the electrolyte, such as 1.23 eV for water splitting. Otherwise, the Eb itself can drive the reactions without a photocatalytic process. Moreover, we also need to take overpotentials into account in practical PEC reactions. The overpotential is defined as the difference between the thermodynamically determined reduction or oxidation potential of a half reaction and the potential at which the reaction is experimentally observed. The overpotential in a PEC reaction is a similar parameter to the activation energy in direct photocatalysis.12

2.2 Metal–semiconductor junctions
Integration with metal (mainly noble metal) is a commonly used configuration to harness the charge kinetics of a semiconductor. The metal may play a variety of roles in the improvement of photocatalytic performance. In terms of interfacial charge or energy transfer, there are mainly two mechanisms involved in metal–semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts: the Schottky junction and the plasmonic effect. Depending on the photocatalytic systems (e.g., types of metals and semiconductors, and wavelengths of incident light), the two mechanisms may work together or separately. Only when a metal is in direct contact with a semiconductor can the Schottky junction be formed. Conversely, the plasmonic effect can affect the charge kinetics of a semiconductor even when an insulating interlayer is added between metal and semiconductor. The noble metals, including Au, Ag and Cu, have strong plasmonic properties with bands located in the visible or the NIR region.43 In comparison, some other metals, such as Pt and Pd, possess very small excitation cross sections for surface plasmon, and their plasmonic bands are mainly located in the UV region at small particle sizes (although they can be shifted to the visible light region by increasing the particle sizes).44 In the photocatalytic research field, without being particularly pointed out, only Au, Ag and Cu are commonly identified as plasmonic metals, whereas the others are considered as nonplasmonic metals. In addition to the metal type, the plasmonic properties of metal nanoparticles depend on their sizes and shapes as well as the dielectric properties of the surrounding media. This influence includes not only the wavelengths at which the plasmonic effect takes place but also the cross sections and field intensities. For instance, to make the plasmonic effect predominant, the sizes of metals should be controlled from tens to hundreds of nanometers in most cases.45 Lastly, the surface plasmon can be excited only when the wavelengths of incident light fit the plasmonic bands of metals. Thus the plasmonic effect can only be operated under certain conditions, whereas the Schottky junction is naturally formed as long as the metal and semiconductor have appropriate work functions and are in contact with each other.

2.2.1 Schottky junction. 
A Schottky junction is a type of junction resulting from the intimate contact of a metal with a semiconductor. Both metal and semiconductor have work functions (W), which mean the minimum energy needed to remove an electron from the Ef to the vacuum level (Vac).25 For most noble metals, their work functions are larger than those of an n-type semiconductor but smaller than those of a p-type semiconductor. When the semiconductor is n-type (Fig. 5a), its Fermi level (Efs) is close to the Ec and is higher than the Fermi level (Efm) of the metal before their contact (i.e., Wm > Ws). When they come into contact, to build up an equilibrium state between the Efs and Efm, the electrons of the semiconductor diffuse to the metal at the lower energy level (leading to accumulation of negative charges), whereas the holes are left on the semiconductor (accumulating positive charges) (step 1). As a result of the diffusion process, the free electrons in the semiconductor near the metal–semiconductor interface are depleted as compared with the bulk, and a space charge region (also called the depletion layer) is formed on the side of the semiconductor. This makes the energy band bend upward, going from semiconductor to metal, thus forming the Schottky barrier.1 It should be noted that due to the high density of free electrons in metal, the electron flow can hardly alter the Efm. Instead, only the band level of the semiconductor is reduced because of the increased concentration of holes (minority charge carriers). Moreover, the charge redistribution creates an internal electric field in the space charge region. The internal electric field can drive the electrons in the depletion layer to migrate towards the bulk semiconductor, whereas the holes are expelled to the metal. This carrier drift, enhanced by the internal electric field, will form a dynamic equilibrium with the carrier diffusion. In a photocatalytic reaction, electrons are elevated to the CB and holes are left on the VB under the photoexcitation of the n-type semiconductor (step 2). Once the electron–hole pairs enter the space charge region, the photogenerated electrons on the CB and the holes on the VB will migrate to the bulk semiconductor and the metal under the effect of the internal electric field, respectively (step 3). This process essentially separates the electrons and holes and attenuates the Schottky barrier and breaks the dynamic equilibrium. Under the successive photoexcitation of the semiconductor, a large number of electrons will be accumulated in the semiconductor, making them “hot” enough to transfer to the metal (step 4).16 The formed Schottky barrier in turn prevents the electron drift from the metal back to the semiconductor. Along with the electron transfer from the semiconductor to the metal, a new equilibrium state between the Efs and Efm is established. Moreover, the electrons accumulated on the metal surface will be consumed by reduction reactions, whereas the holes on the semiconductor surface participate in oxidation reactions (step 5). Further photocatalytic reactions would take place based on the new charge equilibrium state established after light irradiation.40
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer driven by the Schottky junction between a metal and an n-type semiconductor; (b) schematic illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer driven by the Schottky junction between a metal and a p-type semiconductor. 
When the semiconductor switches to p-type, the situation of band alignment and charge transfer would fall into a different scheme (Fig. 5b). The Efs of a p-type semiconductor is close to the Ev. In the case that Efs is lower than Efm (i.e., Ws > Wm), the free electrons on the metal will flow to the semiconductor after their contact, accumulating positive and negative charges on the metal and the semiconductor, respectively. Note that unlike the electrons, the holes tend to transfer to the component at a higher energy level. As a result, the energy band bends downward in the formation of the space charge region, and the direction of the internal electric field follows from the metal side to the semiconductor side.25 When the p-type semiconductor is photoexcited, a charge carrier migration process similar to that in the n-type semiconductor takes place, except that charge flows in the opposite direction.34 In this case, the holes instead of the electrons are accumulated on the metal, making the metal the location for the oxidation reaction. However, as the metal is often considered as active components for reduction sites (which will be discussed in Section 2.4.2), not all the electron donors can be easily activated and oxidized on the metal to consume the accumulated holes.46 As an alternative route, the metal may also act as a conductive channel for transferring the holes from the semiconductor to other active components for oxidation reactions.
Overall, the Schottky junction may promote charge separation, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. Certainly, it occasionally happens that the work function of a metal is smaller than that of an n-type semiconductor (Wm < Ws) or larger than that of a p-type semiconductor (Wm > Ws). In this case, an accumulation layer rather than a depletion layer will be formed after charge redistribution because free electrons (or holes for p-type semiconductors) are gathered in the space charge region of n-type semiconductors. The direction of band bending would be opposite to that of the Schottky junction, in which no barrier is formed between metal and semiconductor. In special cases (e.g., high annealing temperature for reducing the surface states at interface), the metal–semiconductor interface in the absence of a barrier gives ohmic contact with low resistance. On the other hand, even when the work functions of the metal and the semiconductor do not satisfy the requirement for ohmic contact, an alternative tunneling contact can be realized through ultra-high semiconductor doping by reducing the depth of the space charge layer, in which the charge carriers can tunnel across the barrier. Upon the excitation of the semiconductor, the photogenerated electrons in an n-type semiconductor or holes in a p-type semiconductor can migrate to the metal through the ohmic contact (Fig. 6b). The charge transfer in ohmic contact should be smoother in comparison with that of the Schottky junction, given that the charges do not need to overcome a barrier.47 From the discussions mentioned above, one can see that the charge separation and transfer by both the Schottky junction and ohmic contact work at the expense of the redox ability of carriers. The carriers lose energy during their transfer from semiconductor to metal due to the difference in the energy levels of Efm and the CB of an n-type semiconductor (or the VB of a p-type semiconductor).
 Fig. 6  Schematic band diagrams illustrating: (a) charge transfer driven by the Schottky junction and the plasmonic hot carrier effect in the hybrid structures between metal and n-type or p-type semiconductor; (b) charge transfer driven by the ohmic contact and the plasmonic hot carrier effect in the hybrid structures between metal and n-type or p-type semiconductor. 


2.2.2 Plasmonic effect. 
Unlike the Schottky junction, the metal rather than the semiconductor is excited in the plasmonic-induced process. For a plasmonic metal under light irradiation, when the frequency of photons matches the natural frequency of its surface free electrons oscillating against the restoring force of positive nuclei, it will eventually form resonance, giving rise to intense and highly localized electromagnetic fields. This collective oscillation of free electrons is called localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).48,49 In a metal–semiconductor structure, LSPR plays many different roles in adjusting the charge kinetics of the semiconductor. A direct benefit from the integration of surface plasmon into photocatalysis is that the spectral range of light absorption by a wide-bandgap semiconductor can be extended for better charge generation. By tailoring the size, shape and surrounding environment, the plasmonic bands of metal nanoparticles can be tuned from visible to NIR regions. Integrated with plasmonic metal, the semiconductor absorbing UV light can render an optical response over visible and NIR spectra.49 A few other factors also make the surface plasmon attractive to photocatalysis: an LSPR scattering effect may enhance the light absorption of a semiconductor corresponding to its band gap through light trapping;50 the strong local electromagnetic field created by plasmonics can excite more electron–hole pairs on the adjacent semiconductor; the semiconductor is heated up by the LSPR photothermal effect to accelerate charge transfer and redox reactions; reactant adsorption might be enhanced through dipole–dipole interactions.51,52
In terms of charge kinetics, however, charge and energy transfer deserve more attention. Three non-mutually exclusive mechanisms are mainly involved in plasmon-induced charge and energy transfer and can explain the effects of plasmonic metal on the charge kinetics: (1) direct injection of hot carriers from metal to semiconductor;49,53 (2) electromagnetic field mediated energy transfer;49,54 (3) resonant photon-scattering energy transfer.49,55 The direct charge-transfer mechanism can only operate when a metal directly contacts a semiconductor to form a Schottky junction (Fig. 6a) or ohmic contact (Fig. 6b). Under the direct electrical contact between a metal and an n-type semiconductor, a Schottky barrier bending-up can be formed. When only the metal is excited, the induced surface plasmon can transfer the accumulated energy to free electrons through the excitation of electrons from the thermal equilibrium to a high-energy state, thereby making them highly energetic (which are thus known as “hot electrons”). As long as the hot electrons have energy higher than the flat-band CB potential (CB level before the band bending) of the neighboring semiconductor, they can escape from the plasmonic metal and transfer to the CB of the semiconductor directly.45,56 The hν does not need to match the band gap of the semiconductor, but it is necessary to have hν ≥ Ec0 − Ef, where Ec0 is the flat-band CB potential of the semiconductor. Ec0 − Ef may have considerably smaller value than Ec − Ev, so it is feasible to harvest the light at longer wavelengths for photocatalysis. The transferred hot electrons cannot flow back to the metal due to obstruction by the Schottky barrier. When the hot electrons are injected into the CB of the semiconductor, energetic holes (“hot holes”) will remain on the metal for oxidation reactions.57 In the case of a p-type semiconductor, a bending-down Schottky barrier can be formed at the direct contact with the metal. Upon resonance with incoming photons, the hot electrons can still escape from the plasmonic metal, however, they cannot transfer to and stay in the CB of the semiconductor as no Schottky barrier blocks their backflow. Instead, the deep hot holes left on the metal can be one-way injected into the VB of the semiconductor due to the downward barrier.45,58 In addition, it has been reported that hot carriers can transfer to the semiconductor through tunneling across the Schottky barrier with a significantly lower probability.59
In sharp contrast, the plasmonic effect cannot operate well with the ohmic contact between the semiconductor and the plasmonic metal. The hot electrons or holes, which are injected into the n-type or p-type semiconductor, respectively, will flow back to the metal in the absence of an effective barrier (Fig. 6b). It should also be noted that unlike the Schottky junction, the hot carriers possess higher energy than the photoexcited electrons in the CB of an n-type semiconductor or the holes in the VB of a p-type semiconductor and thus should bring about higher activity to a reduction or oxidation reaction, respectively.
In comparison to charge transfer directions between the Schottky junction and the plasmonic effect, it is not difficult to recognize their competing relationship in the cases of n-type and p-type semiconductors (Fig. 6a).60 To circumvent this situation, thin and non-conductive spacers are often used to separate the metal from the semiconductor and prevent the formation of a Schottky barrier and the occurrence of direct charge transfer. As a result, the surface plasmon of the metal can still transfer energy to the semiconductor through local electromagnetic field enhancement and resonant photon-scattering mechanisms.49,54,55 The local electromagnetic field enhancement is based on the interaction of the semiconductor with the strong field induced by the surface plasmon of the metal (Fig. 7a).49 The field enhancement increases the formation of electron–hole pairs in the localized region of the semiconductor close to the metal, as their formation rate is proportional to the local intensity of the electric field. The closer the semiconductor is located to the metal, the higher is the rate of plasmonics-induced electron–hole pair formation in the region.61 The non-homogenous formation of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor can also be realized through efficient scattering of resonant photons accompanied by metal LSPR. The plasmonic metal nanoparticles (typically larger than ∼50 nm in diameter) as nanomirrors can scatter incident light, which cannot be absorbed by the semiconductor on the first pass. This multiple scattering increases the average photon path length and the cross section of light absorption in the nearby semiconductor, thus causing an increased rate of electron–hole pair formation (Fig. 7b).62,63
 Fig. 7  Schematic band diagrams illustrating two mechanisms of plasmonic effects for energy transfer between metal and semiconductor: (a) local electromagnetic field enhancement and (b) resonant photon scattering. 
The three electron- or energy-transfer mechanisms may co-exist in a photocatalytic system, or it may be that only one mechanism is responsible for a specific photocatalytic system, largely depending on the light-absorption spectra of the metal and the semiconductor as well as the structure configuration of the photocatalytic system. In the direct charge injection mechanism, the metal–semiconductor direct contact is a prerequisite. In most cases, the plasmonic metal is used to absorb light with a lower hν than the semiconductor band gap, broadening the light absorption spectral range. For electromagnetic field enhancement and resonant photon-scattering mechanisms, the illumination source should be in the spectrum covering the LSPR band and the semiconductor absorption band as both the metal and the semiconductor need to absorb photons. In the time that some photons are absorbed by surface plasmon for local electric field amplification or resonant photon scattering, the semiconductor-harvested photons or metal-scattered photons still have to possess sufficient energy to overcome the semiconductor band gap for producing electron–hole pairs. Recently, a new nonradiative resonant energy-transfer mechanism has been proposed: electron–hole pairs are generated in the semiconductor by the dipole–dipole interaction between the plasmonic metal and the semiconductor, even when the incident light hν does not match the band gap of the semiconductor.64 It is worth noting that not only metals can induce LSPR effects. The use of new plasmonic materials such as some reported semiconductors and conducting oxides in photocatalysis may call for the development of new mechanisms.65,66

2.3 Semiconductor–semiconductor junctions
Semiconductor–semiconductor junctions are another class of commonly used hybrid structures used for steering the charge kinetics. As mentioned above, various semiconductor materials have characteristic band structures, which enable them to absorb light in diversified spectral regions and offer different capabilities in charge separation and transfer. The combination of different semiconductor materials may have complementary properties and create new materials with optimal performances. For instance, forming unique semiconductor–semiconductor junctions can extend the spectral range for light absorption and enhance electron–hole separation. Depending on the band structure alignments of semiconductors and light excitation conditions, the charge dynamic models vary case by case.
Looking into the working mechanisms, one can identify that four different models of semiconductor–semiconductor junctions have been utilized to enhance the charge kinetics, including semiconductor sensitization,67 Type II,68 phase junction,69 and Z-scheme.20,70 When only one semiconductor component is excited in a semiconductor–semiconductor junction, photogenerated charges may transfer to the other unexcited semiconductor. In this case, a semiconductor sensitization process takes place. In comparison, both semiconductor components are excited in the other three models. In the Type II structure, the electrons that are photogenerated from the semiconductor with a higher CB edge migrate to the one with a lower CB edge. Moreover, the photogenerated holes are transported from the low VB to the high VB between the semiconductors. The same charge flow works for the semiconductors with a phase junction, with the only difference being that the junction is formed by two different phases of a single semiconductor compound.
The three mechanisms, semiconductor sensitization, Type II and phase junction, are all based on direct electrical contact between two semiconductors. Similar to the metal–semiconductor contact in a Schottky junction, the interfacing of two semiconductors with different band structures leads to the charge redistribution equilibrating Ef (Fig. 8). As a result, band bending has to occur in the space charge region, which creates an internal electric field and thus facilitates the separation of electrons and holes in the region. The directions of charge transfer depend on the relative edge positions of the CB and the VB of the two semiconductors. The electrons flow to the more positive position, whereas the holes diffuse to the more negative position. It should be noted that band discontinuity of the CB (ΔEc) and the VB (ΔEv) might be present after the Ef equilibration due to the difference in the flat-band CB and VB potential of the two semiconductors (Fig. 8). However, to simplify our discussion, this band discontinuity will not be particularly taken into account in the following sections.
 Fig. 8  Schematic band diagrams illustrating the formation of a semiconductor–semiconductor junction. 
The model elaborated in this section is the Z-scheme structure. In this model, a conductor or a large number of defects exists at the contact interface of the two semiconductors, which may form ohmic contact with low contact resistance.20 The photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor with a lower CB edge can directly recombine with the photogenerated holes from the other semiconductor with a higher VB edge through the ohmic contact. In addition, the electrons in the higher CB edge and the holes in the lower VB edge will be preserved for the reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively.

2.3.1 Semiconductor sensitization. 
The motivation for semiconductor sensitization is very similar to that for surface plasmon-mediated direct charge injection – extending the light absorption of wide-bandgap semiconductors to the visible or the NIR region. The junction is often constituted by the combination of a narrow-bandgap semiconductor with visible light absorption with a wide-bandgap semiconductor with UV light absorption. The visible light absorption excites the narrow-bandgap semiconductor to generate electron–hole pairs, and the electrons or holes are in turn transported into the wide-bandgap semiconductor. Certainly, whether the electrons or holes are injected greatly depends on the band structures of the two semiconductors.
In the case of injecting sensitized electrons, the CB and VB edges of the narrow-bandgap semiconductor should be higher than those of the wide-bandgap component after their contact and band alignment (Fig. 9a).71 When the narrow-bandgap semiconductor is solely excited by visible light, the photogenerated electrons will migrate to the CB of the wide-bandgap semiconductor. Moreover, the holes should stay in the original VB (i.e., the narrow-bandgap semiconductor), simply because they are not energetic enough to enter the VB of the wide-bandgap semiconductor. As such, the electron–hole pairs are well separated, and the UV-excitable wide-bandgap semiconductors can offer reaction sites for photocatalysis under visible-light irradiation. For the sensitized hole injection, the CB and VB alignments of two semiconductors should be opposite to the electron injection (Fig. 9b).72 The excitation of the narrow-bandgap semiconductor leads to the transfer of photogenerated holes to the VB of the wide-bandgap semiconductor for oxidation reactions. The efficiency of charge injection in a semiconductor sensitization structure should be positively correlated with the magnitude of the built-in electric field as well as the relative CB or VB edge positions between the sensitizer and the semiconductor. These two parameters determine the electron–hole separation and the charge transfer ability.
 Fig. 9  Schematic band diagrams illustrating semiconductor sensitization: (a) injection of sensitized electrons and (b) injection of sensitized holes. 


2.3.2 Type II. 
A Type-II structure with a staggered alignment is a common structure for electron–hole separation when both semiconductors are excited by the incident light.68,73 The band alignment of semiconductors is analogous to that for a semiconductor sensitization structure (i.e., one has higher VB and CB than the other, Fig. 10a). When both semiconductors are excited to generate electron–hole pairs, the photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor with a higher CB edge (semiconductor 1) can migrate to the one with a lower CB edge (semiconductor 2). Moreover, the photogenerated holes from the semiconductor with a lower VB edge (semiconductor 2) are transported to the one with a higher CB edge (semiconductor 1). This leads to the accumulation of electrons and holes on semiconductor 2 for a reduction reaction and semiconductor 1 for an oxidation reaction. In this way, the electrons and holes are spatially separated to effectively suppress charge recombination. In addition to the charge separation, the different band structures of the two semiconductors extend the light absorption of the junction: a Type-II junction composed of two semiconductor materials with complementary band gaps brings about the simultaneous usage of UV and visible light. In comparison, only visible light can be utilized in the semiconductor sensitization structure. The nomenclature of “Type II” originates from the presence of the other two types of semiconductor–semiconductor junctions: Type I (straddling alignment, Fig. 10b) and Type III (broken alignment, Fig. 10c).73 The Type I structure can also separate charges with the existence of an internal electric field; however, both the separated electrons and holes in semiconductor 1 are transferred to semiconductor 2 due to their band alignment, leading to electron–hole recombination in semiconductor 2. For this reason, a Type I structure has been widely used in luminescent materials resulting from radiative charge recombination.74 Nevertheless, considering the different transfer rates of electrons and holes from semiconductor 1 to semiconductor 2, their recombination might be slightly alleviated. Apparently, a Type III structure cannot be used for photoenergy conversion, and thus is not discussed here. Moreover, a p–n junction is also in the Type II band alignment (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  Schematic band diagrams illustrating semiconductor–semiconductor junctions: (a) Type II, (b) Type I, (c) Type III, and (d) p–n junction. Schematics illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer in (e) n–n junction with consistent directions of charge separation and transfer, (f) p–n junction, and (g) n–n junction with opposite directions of charge separation and transfer. 
Similar to the charge injection for the semiconductor sensitization structure, the electron–hole separation in the Type II semiconductor junction is also highly dependent on the built-in electric field at the interface. A strong internal electric field would lead to enhanced electron–hole separation. As described above, the internal electric field is generally formed due to the charge redistribution upon the contact of different materials. In the Type II structure, the semiconductor with high Ef (i.e., low work function) gives up electrons, whereas the one with low Ef (i.e., high work function) loses holes, equilibrating the Ef. The internal electric field drives the electrons to move towards the high-Ef semiconductor and the holes towards the low-Ef one. Under this mechanism, the photo-generated electrons and holes are separated at the interface, followed by further charge transfer towards bulk semiconductors, driven by their potential difference. When a Type-II junction is formed by two n-type or two p-type semiconductor materials, the difference in their work functions (or Ef) is not large enough to induce a significant charge redistribution and a strong internal electric field for charge separation (Fig. 10e, a junction of two n-type semiconductors for example).75 Needless to say, the potential difference in both Ec and Ev between the two semiconductors is also small, and is not in favor of further electron and hole transfer. In stark contrast, a Type-II junction that consists of an n-type and a p-type semiconductor (p–n junction) can offer a better performance, due to the large difference in work functions and potentials between the different types of semiconductors (Fig. 10f).76,77 Thus a p–n junction has been widely used in photocatalysis among various Type-II structures. Along with the charge transfer, the Ef equilibrium would be broken, which can be recovered once the transferred charges are consumed by redox reactions.
It is worth clarifying that, in both a metal–semiconductor junction and a semiconductor–semiconductor junction, the internal electric field only determines the electron–hole separation in the space charge region. On the other hand, the charge transfer from interface to bulk or inside the bulk should be governed by potential difference. In the case of Fig. 10e and f, the CB and VB alignment relationships are opposite to the relative Ef energy levels before the two semiconductors get into contact. Under this situation, the electron and hole migration directions for the charge separation in the space charge region can be in accordance with the charge transfer direction outside the region. Only when the two processes follow the same direction, can the charge kinetics be enhanced. Another situation is that these two take opposite directions and mutually suppress each other as shown in Fig. 10g, mainly due to the consistent alignments of CB, VB and Ef. As a matter of fact, the same situation happens in a Type I structure.


2.3.3 Semiconductors with a phase junction. 
Some semiconductor compounds have multiple crystal phases with different band structures and electronic properties, despite having the same compositions. Thus a single semiconductor material with two different phases forming a junction may work by the mechanisms similar to that of Type II semiconductor junction. As such, it can promote the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, thereby leading to enhanced photocatalytic performance. The phase junction has been regarded as a supplementary structure to a Type II structure in terms of efficient charge separation. One of the representative examples is P25 (Degussa TiO2), a common photocatalyst that is actually composed of anatase and rutile TiO2. In fact, P25 exhibits a higher photocatalytic activity than either anatase or rutile TiO2 alone.78
At the interface between two phases, the established internal electric field separates charge carriers due to their different work functions, and the difference in their band structures drives the separated electrons or holes towards the phase with the lower CB edge or the higher VB edge, respectively. When the band alignment of two phases falls into the scope of a Type II junction, the charge recombination can be suppressed given the consistent charge migrations inside and outside the space charge region (Fig. 11a).79 In another case, when the CB and VB edges of one phase are completely contained in the band gap of the other, a Type I-like phase junction would take place (Fig. 11b).80 Certainly, we can also imagine a scenario with a low probability: the two phases have nearly equivalent levels of CB or VB. In this case, only holes or electrons would migrate from one phase to the other, whose outcome resembles the semiconductor sensitization structure (Fig. 11c).81 From the viewpoint of crystal structures, both sides of the phase junction are of the same composition, which provides bonding across the boundary in favor of cross-interface charge transfer. The major limitation of this design comes from the fact that the difference in work function between the phases is too limited to significantly enhance charge separation as compared with a p–n junction.
 Fig. 11  Schematic band diagrams illustrating the semiconductor with a phase junction: (a) Type II-like phase junction; (b) Type I-like phase junction; and (c) semiconductor sensitization-like phase junction. 


2.3.4 Z-scheme. 
In all the semiconductor–semiconductor junctions described above, photogenerated electrons and/or holes migrate from one component to the other and lose energy during the process due to the band alignment. In this sense, their capabilities for redox reactions would be weakened. In other words, those junctions are designed to enhance the charge-separation efficiency at the expense of charge redox ability. To circumvent this situation, a Z-scheme system has been developed, by mimicking the natural photosynthesis system, in recent years. The Z-scheme structure is typically composed of two semiconductors with staggered alignment of band structures. The CB and VB of the two semiconductors do not satisfy the redox potential requirements for an overall reaction alone, but they can separately perform reduction or oxidation half reactions. In the Z-scheme, the photogenerated electrons from semiconductor 1 with a lower CB edge would recombine with the holes from semiconductor 2 with a higher VB edge. Moreover, the photogenerated electrons left in the CB of semiconductor 2 and the holes remaining in the VB of semiconductor 1 can be used for reduction and oxidation half reactions, respectively, constituting an overall redox reaction (Fig. 12a).20,82 Apparently, the spatial separation of electrons from holes in this scheme will greatly contribute to charge recombination reduction. More importantly, the Z-scheme possesses an advantage that can be hardly attained by other designs: the remaining electrons and holes well maintain their energy levels so that the reaction activities will not be compromised. Furthermore, the semiconductors used in this design often have narrow band gaps for visible-light absorption. Thus the Z-scheme structure can harvest visible light to achieve an overall reaction, whose performance resembles that of a wide-bandgap semiconductor under UV illumination. In a Z-scheme system, the balance of catalytic rates for the two semiconductors is very important to the overall performance, as the overall reaction rates should be determined by the slower one. Moreover, its maximum efficiency for solar-energy conversion is half of that of a single-photon system, because a two-photon process is required to initiate the overall Z-scheme reactions.83
 Fig. 12  Schematic band diagrams illustrating a Z-scheme structure: (a) indirect Z-scheme structure mediated by redox pairs; (b) semiconductor–conductor–semiconductor all-solid-state Z-scheme structure; and (c) semiconductor–semiconductor all-solid-state Z-scheme structure. 
In the early stage of the development of the Z-scheme, two separate semiconductors with electron acceptor–donor (A–D) pair as mediators in solution constitute a typical indirect Z-scheme structure (Fig. 12a).82 Upon the light excitation of the two semiconductors, the A is reduced to the D by accepting a photogenerated electron from the CB of semiconductor 1, whereas the produced D is oxidized back to the A by the holes from the VB of semiconductor 2. A + e− → D (CB of semiconductor 1)(1) D + h+ → A (VB of semiconductor 2)(2) Then the photogenerated electrons in the CB of semiconductor 2 and the holes in the VB of semiconductor 1 participate in the photocatalytic reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively. However, in this indirect Z scheme, backward reactions may also occur when the A and D react with the designated electrons and holes, respectively. This feature would reduce the amount of electrons and holes preserved for photocatalytic redox reactions, and reduce the photocatalytic activity.
To solve this problem, an A–D pair free all-solid-state Z-scheme structure has been developed by employing a conductor as the electron mediator (Fig. 12b).20,70 The conductor is inserted between the two semiconductors and forms ohmic contact with the semiconductors with low contact resistance. As a result, the electrons from the CB of semiconductor 1 can directly recombine with the holes from the VB of semiconductor 2 when they come across the conductor. The reported conductors include metals (Au, Ag, and Cd),70,84–86 metal oxides (ITO),87 and nonmetal materials (reduced graphene oxide, rGO).88
Certainly, the electron mediator of conducting materials is not indispensable in the Z-scheme design. It has been reported that the direct contact between two semiconductor components may also formulate the all-solid-state Z-scheme model (Fig. 12c).89,90 The key fact is the large number of defects existing at the solid–solid interface. It is known that interfacial defects are often the centers for charge recombination and thus can play a similar role to the metal–semiconductor ohmic contact.
It should be noted that in the all-solid-state Z-scheme structure, the band bending (i.e., bending upward for semiconductor 1 and downward for semiconductor 2, from interface to surface) or other driving forces (e.g., co-catalysts) are often needed to facilitate the arrival of electrons (in semiconductor 2) and holes (in semiconductor 1) at the surface for redox reactions; otherwise, they may undergo recombination through the ohmic contact.70,84 In general, as compared with the indirect Z scheme, the all-solid-state Z-scheme structure greatly reduces the path length of charge transfer as well as the shielding effect caused by the A–D pair, offering better-harnessed charge kinetics.

2.4 Other semiconductor-based hybrid structures
In addition to the cases mentioned above, semiconductors have been combined with other materials, such as carbon materials (carbon nanotubes and graphene),21,91–93 organic molecules,94,95 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),2,96 to harness the charge kinetics. Among these newly developed hybrid structures, a few examples have been demonstrated to improve reaction activation and charge corrosion resistance – two aspects that the aforementioned metal–semiconductor and semiconductor–semiconductor structures have not incorporated. For instance, co-catalysts have been developed to provide reduction or oxidation active sites to enhance photocatalytic reactions.12,19 In addition to free energy for the reactions (which is generally determined by redox potentials), the reactions often need to overcome energy barriers (i.e., activation energy, Ea) when reactants are adsorbed on the surface and pick up electrons or holes to initiate the reactions.12 The use of co-catalysts aims to reduce the Ea and utilize electrons or holes for photocatalysis more efficiently.

2.4.1 Other additives to semiconductor. 
In the literature, there are reports of many other additives used to enhance the photocatalytic performance of a semiconductor. For instance, carbon materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNT) and graphene have been widely used as supports for semiconductors in various photocatalytic reactions. The major role of carbon materials in this case is to serve as the charge-transfer channel to facilitate charge separation and transfer owing to the high mobility of their charge carriers (Fig. 13a).97,98 In certain cases, they can also promote the adsorption of specific reactants, taking advantage of their large specific surface area, as well as extend the spectral range of light absorption as photosensitizers.99,100
 Fig. 13  Schematic band diagrams illustrating (a) semiconductor–carbon material hybrid structure; (b) dye-sensitized semiconductor structure; and (c) semiconductor-based co-catalyst structure. For illustration simplicity, band bending is not depicted here. 
Modifying semiconductor surfaces with organic molecules is another widely explored strategy for harnessing the charge kinetics. First, organic molecules can function as a passivation layer, which not only reduces the number of surface recombination sites but prevents the photo-corrosion of the semiconductor.101 Second, similar to carbon materials, organic molecules, including metal and non-metal complex dyes, have been employed as photosensitizers for wide-bandgap semiconductors (Fig. 13b).102 Under light irradiation, the photoexcited electrons, from the dyes anchored on the semiconductor surface, are injected into the CB of the semiconductor, whereas the oxidized dye molecules can be recovered by accepting the electrons from electron donors (D). Third, as discussed in the following section, the organic complexes can serve as co-catalysts for reduction reactions such as photocatalytic H2 production and CO2 reduction.103
Recently, MOF materials have also been used to integrate with semiconductors for photocatalysis. The integration of MOF into the photocatalytic system demonstrates the advantage of fine-tuning a system at the molecular level through combinations of metal-oxo clusters with bridging organic linkers. On one hand, the organic linkers act as light-harvesting units.104 The harvested photon energies can be transferred through the synthesized chromophore network and relayed to the semiconductor for charge generation. On the other hand, the porosity of the MOFs facilitates the capture of reactants as well as the diffusion of products through their open channels.105 In terms of reactions, some molecular components or metal sites in the MOF can enhance the selectivity of specific reactions. Under this consideration, different molecular components can be organized in an ordered manner to achieve tandem reactions or artificial photosynthesis.106


2.4.2 Co-catalysts. 
A co-catalyst is a component that can only work together with a semiconductor. In this system, the photoexcited semiconductor is the only source of charges. As the co-catalysts are not involved in light absorption, their sizes generally should be considerably smaller than that of the light-harvesting semiconductor for reducing the shielding effect. The co-catalysts can make contact with the semiconductor directly, or in another case, conductive materials such as graphene serve as the charge bridge between the co-catalyst and the semiconductor.12,107 The co-catalysts mainly play two roles in the enhancement of photocatalytic performance. One is to promote the charge separation and transport through the formation of junctions/interfaces between the co-catalyst and the light-harvesting semiconductor, whereas the other is to serve as the reaction sites to consume the separated charges for surface reactions (Fig. 13c). For both proton reduction and proton oxidation reactions, the corresponding co-catalysts have been developed. Among the proton reduction co-catalysts, noble metals (particularly Pt) have been commonly used. They can not only trap electrons through the formation of a Schottky junction with the semiconductor, but also provide effective proton reduction sites due to their low Ea for H2 evolution.108,109 However, the high cost of noble metals limits the realistic applications of the catalysts. More importantly, some noble metal co-catalysts can also initiate the back reaction and thus reduce the photocatalytic activity. For instance, Rh as a H2 evolution co-catalyst has been reported to activate the back reaction of H2 with O2 into H2O in the photocatalytic water splitting reaction.110,111 As a more competitive design, metal-free co-catalysts such as metal sulfides and biomimetic complexes have also been developed for photocatalytic H2 production.103,112 For proton reduction co-catalysts, their band levels should be lower than the light-harvesting semiconductor so that electrons can flow from the semiconductor to the co-catalysts.
For proton oxidation co-catalysts, metal oxides (IrOx, CoOx, MnOx and RuOx) as well as phosphates (cobalt–phosphate, CoPi) have been widely explored and shown to extract holes from a semiconductor for the water oxidation reaction.35,113,114 To extract the holes, their band levels have to be higher than the light-harvesting semiconductor. For this reason, p-type structures are often preferentially selected as oxidation co-catalysts. Given the lower mobility of hole carriers compared to electrons, the oxidation half reaction is generally considered as the rate-determining step in overall redox reactions. Thus, developing proton oxidation co-catalysts is more important to balance the migration rates of electrons and holes and to achieve high efficiency for overall photocatalytic reactions. Certainly, proton reduction and oxidation co-catalysts can be co-loaded on the same semiconductor for reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively.115

3. Critical parameters to the charge kinetics in photocatalysis
Section 2 has elucidated the processes of charge kinetics involved in various models of photocatalytic systems, including the mechanisms for generating electron–hole pairs, the driving forces for separating electrons from holes, the directions of electron and hole transfer, and the locations where the electrons and holes participate in reactions. To facilitate reading, the charge-kinetics models discussed in Section 2 are summarized in Table 1, which briefly outlines the mechanism, motivation and specific examples for each model. Based on this information, we can further analyze the charge kinetics of the existing photocatalytic systems by resolving the implemented models or design a new photocatalytic system by choosing or modifying the models to meet our expectations. However, the information gathered from the charge kinetics models is too insufficient to completely understand the detailed mechanisms. More information, such as the populations of the generated electron–hole pairs, the rates of separation and transportation of the electrons and holes, and the detailed mechanisms by which electrons and holes participate in surface reactions, is also required. To acquire further information, the critical parameters that determine or influence the efficiency of each charge kinetics step should be clarified in advance. In this section, the critical parameters to a catalytic system, related to the processes of charge generation, transfer and consumption, will be overviewed. These parameters will guide us to maneuver the efficiency of each step through energy-band engineering, interface engineering, surface engineering and many others.
Table 1 Summary of charge kinetics models evolved in photocatalysis




Charge kinetics models
Charge kinetics mechansima,b,c
Motivationd
Fig.
Samples
Ref.





a The □ is the component absorbing incident light for charge photo-generation in the model.
b The arrows depict the migration directions of electrons (e−) and holes (h+) in the model.
c The green and red colors represent the locations for reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively.
d The motivation shows the step in charge kinetics which the model is mainly used to improve: step I-charge generation, step II-charge transfer, and step III-charge consumption.





Bare semiconductor
Basic photocatalytic systems
No surface band bending



None

Fig. 2a

Fe2O3

27







Surface band bending up



Step II

Fig. 2b

n-type GaN

30







Surface band bending down



Step II

Fig. 2c

p-type GaN

30





Spatial charge separation
Driven by surface band bending



Step II

Fig. 3a

Cu2O

33







Driven by different band structures of facets



Step II

Fig. 3b

BiVO4

35







Driven by ferroelectric field



Step II

Fig. 3c

PbTiO3

36







Driven by dipole field



Step II

Fig. 3d

SrTiO3

37





PEC process
n-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 4c

Ta3N5

41







p-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 4f

Cu2O

42







Metal–semiconductor junction
Schottky junction
n-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 6a

TiO2–Au

16







p-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 6a

Cu2O–Pd

34





Ohmic contact
n-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 6b

ZnO–Ag

47







p-type semiconductor



Step II

Fig. 6b

—
—




Plasmonic hot charge injection
n-type semiconductor



Step I

Fig. 6a

Au–TiO2

56







p-type semiconductor



Step I

Fig. 6a

Au–TiO2 (p-type)

45





Plasmonic energy transfer
Local electromagnetic field enhancement



Step I

Fig. 7a

Ag–TiO2

61







Resonant photon scattering



Step I

Fig. 7b

Au–CdS

63







Semiconductor –semiconductor junction
Semiconductor sensitization
Electron sensitization



Step I

Fig. 9a

CdS–Zn1−xCdxS

71







Hole sensitization



Step I

Fig. 9b

CdSe–GaP

72





Semiconductor–semiconductor junction
Type II



Step II

Fig. 10a

ZnO–SnO2

75







Type I



None

Fig. 10b

ZnSe–InP–ZnS

74







p–n junction



Step II

Fig. 10d

BiOCl–BiVO4

77





Phase junction
Type II like



Step II

Fig. 11a

α-β Ga2O3

79







Type I like



Step II

Fig. 11b

Anatase–TiO2(B)

80







Semiconductor sensitization-like



Step II

Fig. 11c

Anatase–rutile TiO2

81





All-solid-state Z-scheme
Semiconductor–conductor–semiconductor



Step I

Fig. 12b

TiO2–Au–CdS

70







Semiconductor–semiconductor



Step I

Fig. 12c

ZnO–CdS

89







Other semiconductor-based structure
Semiconductor–carbon material structure



Step II

Fig. 13a

Ag3PO4–rGO

97





Dye-sensitized semiconductor structure



Step I

Fig. 13b

OTARu–TiO2

102





Co-catalyst
Reduction co-catalyst



Step III
—
C3N4–Pd

109







Oxidation co-catalyst



Step III
—
ZnO–CoPi

114







Reduction/oxidation dual co-catalysts



Step III

Fig. 13c

Rh/Cr2O3–GaN:ZnO–Mn3O4

115





3.1 Light absorption and band structure
The light absorption and band structure of a photocatalytic system play a critical role in the generation of electron–hole pairs. For a catalytic system in which only the semiconductor components are photoexcited, the band structures of the semiconductors determine the light absorption of the system. The band structure of a semiconductor is not only determined by its own crystal phase and vacancies, but can also be modified by the introduction of foreign elements into the bulk or surface of the semiconductor (i.e., exotic structural factors).116 By adjusting these factors, the band gap of the semiconductors can be narrowed to extend the spectral range of light absorption. Certainly, without altering the band gap, the light absorption can still be tuned by light sensitizers, in which light is absorbed initially by the sensitizers instead of the semiconductors. Then the photogenerated electrons or holes are injected from the sensitizers into the CB or VB of the semiconductors for reduction or oxidation reactions, respectively.94 In addition to sensitizers, upconversion ions or materials can enlarge the absorption range through converting non-absorbable light into the frequencies that fall into the band gap of a semiconductor.117 It is worth pointing out that light absorption cross sections are another key parameter, other than wavelengths (or frequencies). Surface texturing and photonic crystal design offer the capabilities of enhancing the light absorption of a semiconductor by reducing light reflection on the semiconductor surface or increasing the effective optical path lengths inside the semiconductor.118

3.1.1 Crystal phase and vacancies. 
Similar to the discussions on phase junctions, the electronic structure of a semiconductor is greatly determined by its crystal structure, regardless of whether it is a monocrystalline or polycrystalline material. Different crystal phases have their unique periodic arrangements of atoms or ions and corresponding coordination environments and chemical bonding, resulting in characteristic band structures. For instance, there are three types of crystal phase of TiO2, rutile, anatase, and brookite, in nature, whose band alignments are different from one to another as indicated by both theoretical simulations and experimental measurements. The band gaps of rutile, anatase, and brookite TiO2 are 3.03, 3.20, and 3.40 eV, respectively.119 Both light absorption and electron–hole pair generation are correlated with the band structure of a semiconductor. The rutile TiO2 extends its light absorption to longer wavelengths in comparison with its anatase and brookite counterparts due to the narrower band gap. However, the photocatalytic activity of the rutile phase is lower than that of anatase, mainly because the anatase TiO2 possesses a slightly stronger redox driving force and a higher surface adsorption capability.120
The defects in the semiconductor also influence the band structure and light absorption. For example, the electronic structure of TiO2 can be changed through the introduction of oxygen vacancies and related Ti3+ ions.121–123 The energy levels of introduced localized oxygen vacancy states are 0.75 to 1.18 eV below the CB edge of TiO2 (Fig. 14a).123 When the concentration of oxygen vacancies is high enough, the localized states are widened into a sub-band, which can overlap with the CBM of the TiO2. As a result, the narrower band gap between the localized vacancy states and the VB enables an additional light absorption band in TiO2−x (also called “reduced TiO2”) covering the visible and near-infrared range. Due to the absorption of low-energy photons, the color of the reduced TiO2 turns to blue (Fig. 14b).124 Similar phenomena have been observed for blue MoO3−x,54 blue W18O49,125 and black Nb4+ self-doped K4Nb6O17.126 In these cases, the oxygen vacancies are generally created by introducing a small proportion of metal ions with low valence state in a reductive atmosphere. Alternatively, the development of atomically thick nanosheets provides another new platform to tune band structures through vacancy engineering.127,128 For instance, reducing the thickness of BiOCl to atomic scale can make predominant defects evolving from isolated  to triple vacancy associates , leading to a narrowed band gap with both up-shifted VBM and CBM (Fig. 14c).127 In parallel, other vacancies such as nitrogen vacancy and sulfur vacancy have also been reported to narrow the band gaps of nitride and sulfide semiconductors, respectively.129,130
 Fig. 14  (a) A proposed band structure model for the anatase TiO2 with oxygen vacancies (adapted with permission from ref. 123, Copyright 2000 Elsevier); (b) image of a blue TiO2 dispersion (adapted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration for the band structure of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 


3.1.2 Exotic structural factors. 
In addition to the artificial vacancy production (also named self-doping), doping with foreign elements is another method to adjust the band structure of a semiconductor. Doped with different metal or nonmetal impurities, the CBM and/or VBM of semiconductor can be tuned.131,132 The presence of dopants may cause lattice expansion and distortion, thereby leading to different electronic structures. Nevertheless, the major mechanism for doping is quite similar to that of vacancy creation – inserting an intermediate energy level into the original band gap. This new energy level can act as either an electron acceptor or a donor, lowering the CB level or raising the VB level. A representative case is the doping of TiO2 with transition metal ions. Substitution of Ti4+ with V induces a doping level close to the CB edge of TiO2 with a function of electron acceptor, whereas the level caused by Fe doping of Fe near the VB edge of TiO2 can serve as an electron donor. For Cr-doped TiO2, the doping level between the CB and the VB edges plays a dual function as both electron acceptor and donor (Fig. 15a).133
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram illustrating the band structures of doped TiO2: (a) metal-doped TiO2: (a1) V-doped TiO2; (a2) Fe-doped TiO2; (a3) Cr-doped TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2002 Elsevier); (b) N-doped TiO2 in comparison with pure TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 134, Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry); (c) C,N co-doped TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2006 The Chemical Society of Japan); (d) black TiO2 in comparison with white TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
As doped metals are thermally unstable and often appear to be electron–hole recombination centers, there have also been a few attempts to adjust the band structure of TiO2 by doping oxygen vacancy sites with nonmetal elements such as N, C, F, P and S. However, the nonmetal anions can hardly affect the CB and only narrow the band gap of TiO2 by shifting the VB upward (Fig. 15b).134 To further tune the electronic structure of a semiconductor, co-doping with different elements has been demonstrated as a versatile tool. It has been reported that N-doping can create new energy levels to connect C-doping states with the TiO2 VB, which allows further narrowing of the band gap through C–N co-doping (Fig. 15c).135 Certainly, the doping effects are not limited to energy level engineering. Dopant incorporation can engineer the surface disorder of a semiconductor and improve its light absorption. The black TiO2 reported by Chen et al. falls into this theme, in which the disorder on the TiO2 surface, induced by hydrogenation, breaks lattice periodicity and generates two tails from the VBM and the CBM, thus narrowing its band gap (Fig. 15d).136


3.1.3 Light sensitizers and upconversion. 
As demonstrated earlier, surface sensitization is mainly used to change the light absorption of wide-bandgap semiconductors. The sensitizer, rather than the semiconductor, is photoexcited to generate electrons and holes, either of which are then transferred to the semiconductor for reduction or oxidation reactions. Thus, the light sensitizer is the source of electron–hole pairs, and only a half reaction occurs on the semiconductor surface. The developed light sensitizers include the semiconductor sensitizer, the carbon material sensitizer, and the dye sensitizer that have been summarized in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.4.1. Certainly, some other light sensitizers and related mechanisms have also been developed. For instance, in Cu(II)-grafted TiO2 photocatalysts, visible light initiates electron transfer from the TiO2 VB to surface Cu(II), so the holes produced in the VB can participate in oxidation reactions.137 The sensitizers do not alter the band gaps or modify the redox abilities of semiconductors.
Another newly developed approach is to incorporate upconversion luminescent ions into a semiconductor or upconversion materials into photocatalytic systems. Photon upconversion is a process where two or multiple photons are sequentially absorbed to emit light at wavelengths shorter than the excitation wavelength.138 As such, when the absorption edge of the semiconductor is beyond the spectral range of incident light (especially for a wide-bandgap semiconductor with UV light excitation), upconversion can serve as a useful frequency converter to transform visible or NIR light into UV light. As upconversion works through the excitation of ions in host materials, the upconversion process can be combined with semiconductor photocatalysis either through semiconductor doping with upconversion ions or by forming composites between the semiconductor and the upconversion materials. For instance, Yb3+ and Tm3+ co-doped ordered mesoporous TiO2 has achieved NIR photocatalytic activity in dye degradation.139 Similar NIR-excitable photocatalysis has been accomplished on TiO2 by composing a YF3:Yb,Tm@TiO2 core–shell structure. The YF3 core can absorb the NIR light and produce upconverted emission in the UV range for the excitation of the TiO2 shell (Fig. 16a).140
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration for the upconversion mechanism of YF3:Yb,Tm@TiO2 photocatalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry); (b, c) SEM image (b) of InP nanopillar arrays (NPLs), as well as the specular reflectance (c) and the visual inspection (inset of c) of the NPLs (blue) compared with that of planer InP (red) (adapted with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (d, e) SEM image (d) of WO3 inverse opals, and the absorbance enhancement spectra (ratio to unpattern WO3) (e) of the WO3 inverse opals with different diameters and a disordered porous WO3 (adapted with permission from ref. 145, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 


3.1.4 Surface texturing and photonic crystal design. 
Without changing the light absorption range, the light absorption can still be enhanced through surface texturing or optical coupling assembly. Surface texturing is a route to minimize light reflection on the semiconductor or metal surface through roughening the surface with arrays of nanostructures such as nanocones, nanopillars, and nanopyramids, which have been widely used in various solar energy applications such as photovoltaics.141 The arrays bounce back the reflected light onto the surface, and as a result, the reflected light can be reused for electron–hole generation. To date, different antireflection arrays have been fabricated for semiconductors and plasmonic metals.142,143 For instance, nanotextured InP nanopillar arrays have been demonstrated to show drastically reduced optical reflectivity in comparison with planar structures, leading to significantly improved solar-driven hydrogen generation on the arrays (Fig. 16b and c).142
In a different approach, the light absorption can be facilitated inside the 3D semiconductor of periodic photonic-crystal structures. As the light in a photonic crystal undergoes strong coherent multiple scattering and travels with a very low group velocity near the photonic band edges (i.e., slow-light effect), the effective optical path length within the photonic crystal can be increased, trapping light in the semiconductor.144 A typical case is the WO3 inverse opals fabricated with polystyrene spheres as colloidal templates. It has been demonstrated that the slow-light effect in the WO3 inverse opals enables a remarkable enhancement in the light absorption as well as photoelectric conversion, as compared with the disordered porous WO3 and unpatterned WO3 (Fig. 16d and e).145 This light trapping technique can be integrated with plasmonic effects: in a plasmonic Au nanocrystals coupled TiO2 photonic crystal structure, the LSPR intensity of Au in the visible band has been significantly increased by light trapping, thereby improving the hot electron injection and boosting the visible-light catalytic performance.146

3.2 Charge transfer and separation
Upon the generation of electron–hole pairs, the charge transfer and separation process becomes an important method of delivering electrons and holes to their destinations. Large numbers of electrons and holes may lose their lives during this process: they recombine on the route and release the energy in the form of heat or photons. Efficient charge separation is the most important factor that determines the activity of a photocatalytic system. There are many parameters influencing the efficiency of the charge transfer and separation. The sooner the electrons and holes reach their destinations after their photogeneration, the lower the probability that the electrons and holes may recombine. Thus, the carrier diffusion route, rate and distance hold the key to the process. On the other hand, the defects in the bulk or on the interface and surface of the semiconductor may serve as the recombination centers for the photogenerated electrons and holes, limiting the efficiency of charge transfer. Certainly, in hybrid structures, effective charge transfer between components also relies on the electronic coupling at their interface. The last key parameter is the driving force for the charge separation and flow, in which both built-in electric field and potential difference play important roles. It is also worth mentioning that both electrons and holes should be efficiently transported in a photocatalytic system; otherwise, strong charge recombination or slow reaction rates would be observed.

3.2.1 Diffusion route, rate and distance. 
Carrier diffusion is a dynamic and complex process, so the carrier diffusion parameters can only be appreciated as general directions and average values in a photocatalytic system. First of all, the photocatalytic system has to provide effective channels for electron and hole diffusion so that they can arrive at the reaction sites for redox reactions. For instance, in the Pd–Cu2O core–shell structure, the metal Pd can extract the holes from p-type Cu2O through the formation of Schottky junctions. However, the holes on the Pd core have no channel to reach the surface for oxidation reactions (Fig. 17a).147 As a result, the holes accumulated on the Pd can only recombine with the photoexcited electrons on the Cu2O at their interface. Ideally, we would anticipate that different diffusion routes can be designated for electrons and holes to prevent their recombination. As discussed earlier, the spatial charge separation in the bare semiconductor and the formation of junctions both facilitate the transportation of both electrons and holes in different directions.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustrating the limited charge diffusion path in metal–semiconductor core–shell structures (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b) schematic illustrating the enhanced charge diffusion rate of BiVO4 by rGO in PEC (adapted with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration showing the different charge diffusion distance of BOC-001 and BOC-010 due to the direction of internal electric field (adapted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (d) schematic illustrating the charge transfer behavior of TiO2 with metallic and semiconducting MoS2 nanosheets as co-catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2015 Springer). 
Given the limited average lifetimes of electrons and holes, reducing the average diffusion time would facilitate charge transfer so that they can arrive at the reaction sites before losing their energy. This goal can be achieved by either increasing the diffusion rate or decreasing the diffusion distance. To increase the diffusion rate, a semiconductor can be designed with particular structures or added with new conductive components. For instance, shaping the semiconductor into nanosheets with few atomic layers can greatly enhance the charge diffusion rate.148 As the thickness is reduced down to the atomic level, the two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets will possess electronic structures distinct from their bulk counterparts. Specifically, their density of state (DOS) is significantly increased due to surface distortion, facilitating the charge transport in the semiconductor. Alternatively, some high-mobility conductors (e.g., rGO) can be incorporated into the semiconductor system, providing channels for faster charge transport (Fig. 17b).149
To reduce the diffusion distance, the structures of catalytic systems should be optimized so that one or more dimensions of the semiconductor in the directions of charge transfer can be small enough. In this sense, nanoparticles of smaller sizes should favor the charge transfer; however, too small sizes may bring about side effects to charge separation (which will be discussed in Section 3.2.3). It has been demonstrated that nanosheets or nanoplates with a planar structure have advantages in shortening the distance from semiconductor interior to surface reaction sites.150 For example, BiOCl single-crystalline nanosheets with exposed (001) facets (BOC-001) show higher photocatalytic activity in comparison with BiOCl nanosheets with exposed (010) facets (BOC-010).151 According to the proposed mechanism, an internal electric field assists the charge separation and transfer along the [001] direction in the BiOCl crystal structures. As such, the BOC-001 becomes more favorable to charge separation and transfer given its smaller dimension in the [001] direction than the BOC-010 (Fig. 17c).
The diffusion rate and distance in co-catalysts are also critical to lowering the charge recombination loss in hybrid structures. For instance, differentiated photocatalytic H2 production ability has been observed when semiconducting and metallic MoS2 nanosheets are used as co-catalysts for TiO2. The semiconducting MoS2 nanosheets with a trigonal prismatic (2H) phase have limited charge mobility, and their active sites are only located along the edges. In comparison, the metallic MoS2 with an octahedral (1T) phase possesses a higher charge transfer ability and a basal plane full of catalytically active sites. Thus with TiO2 sitting on the MoS2 basal plane, 2H-MoS2 can offer both higher rates and a shorter distance from TiO2 to MoS2 reaction sites for the carrier diffusion (Fig. 17d).152


3.2.2 Defects and interfacial coupling. 
Given the role of defects as charge recombination centers, the defect sites either in the bulk or at the interface of the semiconductor would be detrimental to charge separation and transfer.120 On the other hand, the defects may break the electronic structure of an originally perfect periodic crystal as well as act as scattering centers for electron and hole traveling, thus disfavoring the charge diffusion.153 In bulk semiconductors, a higher degree of crystallinity generally means a smaller number of defects. For this reason, the preparation or calcination of semiconductor materials at high temperatures can enhance photocatalytic activity. In hybrid structures, the defects in other components such as co-catalysts and conductive charge carriers have a significant impact on their performance as well. It has been reported that minimizing the defects in graphene can enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction ability of TiO2–graphene composite catalysts. A low density of defects can ensure efficient electron diffusion on the graphene.154
While the creation of “junctions” can favor the charge separation and transfer, the inevitably existing defects at the interface of junctions would induce interfacial electron–hole recombination, thus reducing the efficacy of junction design. As the interface is the function location for charge separation and transfer, it is imperative to reduce the number of defects at the interface through interface engineering. Many factors may influence the formation of interfacial defects, including the lattice mismatch between two components, the interfacial distortion caused by mechanical strain, and the defects and impurities on the surface of each component prior to forming the interface. Increasing interfacial atomic contact between the two components is an effective way to largely avoid interfacial defects. In materials synthesis, an epitaxial growth model generally induces fewer interfacial defects in comparison with non-epitaxial growth and self-assembly methods; however, lattice mismatch is often an obstacle to forming a single crystal-single crystal interface via epitaxial growth. High-temperature treatment can also facilitate atomic rearrangements to form more intimate interfacial contact. In terms of structure configurations, it has been found that the face-to-face contact between two single-crystal components helps to reduce the number of interfacial defects.147 With defects at the interface, corrosion of an exposed interface by the surrounding medium would become more severe. Taking this into consideration, core–shell structures represent a better structure configuration than semiconductors loaded or decorated with other materials.155 In terms of compositions, having the same or similar anions or cations in two components can largely reduce the probability of forming interfacial defects.112 To date, there have been many examples of enhancing the charge transfer by eliminating defects from various interfaces such as metal–semiconductor interfaces,147 semiconductor–graphene interfaces,156 and semiconductor–semiconductor interfaces.157
In addition to the bulk and interfacial defects, there is a certain proportion of other defects present on the surface. As for the defects on the surface, they may act as the centers that trap charge carriers for recombination or provide the sites for reactant adsorption and activation. Depending on specific cases, one of these two effects may predominate the photocatalysis process. Having reaction species adsorbed on the defects aforehand, the trapped electrons or holes might react with the species before they undergo recombination with the holes or electrons, spatially achieving charge separation. Representative cases are the works by Kong and Yan et al., in which decreasing the relative concentration ratio of bulk defects to surface defects improves the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes.158,159 As shown in Fig. 18a,159 on one hand, the holes can be trapped by the bulk defects, where they become unavailable for photocatalytic reactions so as to recombine with electrons. On the other hand, when the holes are trapped by surface defects, they will be ready to react with the electron donors adsorbed there so that the photocatalytic reactions can be promoted. We assume that the success in this case relies on the rates of species adsorption and activation versus charge recombination. To play safe, we aim to reduce surface defects in most cases. In a typical example, the formation of surface defects can be largely avoided by surface state passivation with a very thin coating, which enhances the electron–hole separation.101 Overall, the roles of surface defects may differ a lot in various cases, and the degree of defects should be controlled to optimize charge kinetics in a particular catalytic system.
In terms of interface, another important parameter is the electronic coupling between two components. Due to crystal lattice mismatch and surface DOS variation, the electronic structure of each component in the interface region may differ from that of the bulk, leading to formation of new electrostatic potentials. This will in turn influence the migrations of charge carriers across the interface. In general, a good lattice match or chemical bonding between the components would enable strong electronic coupling and favor interfacial charge transfer. A typical case is the influence of interfacial electronic coupling on the photoexcited charge transfer from K2La2Ti3O10 to Ni in the hybrid structure composed of a Ni–NiOx core–shell co-catalyst and a K2La2Ti3O10 photocatalyst, based on different facet contacts.160 From the electron density contour maps for the CBM of K2La2Ti3O10 (Fig. 18b), it is clear that the Ni3d + Ti3d hybrid orbitals spread from the interface region to the Ni bulk in the K2La2Ti3O10(101)–Ni(111) interface, whereas for the K2La2Ti3O10(002)–Ni(111) interface, the electron density is only localized within K2La2Ti3O10. This suggests the electron transfer is smoother through the K2La2Ti3O10(101)–Ni(111) interface in comparison with the K2La2Ti3O10(002)–Ni(111) interface.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustrating the recombination pathways of photogenerated electrons and holes on TiO2 with surface and bulk defects (adapted with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) electron density contour maps for the CBM of K2La2Ti3O10 in K2La2Ti3O10(101)–Ni(111) and K2La2Ti3O10(002)–Ni(111) interfaces (adapted with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2007 The Chemical Society of Japan); (c) schematic illustrating the band structure of an n-type semiconductor in solution with different particle sizes: (left) radius (R) is greater than the space charge width and (right) R is smaller than the space charge width (adapted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry); (d) schematic band diagrams illustrating that charge accumulation attenuates the driving force for charge separation and transfer; (e) schematic band diagram illustrating the coordination of driving force directions for charge separation and transfer. 


3.2.3 Driving force for charge transfer and separation. 
As discussed in Section 2, two types of driving forces generally work for charge transfer and separation: (1) the internal electric field driving electrons and holes into the region of band bending to move along eternal opposite directions, which enhances the separation of electron–hole pairs; (2) the potential difference driving the flow of separated electrons and holes towards the locations with lower energy. The essential mechanism responsible for the formation of an internal electric field is that electrons and holes are unevenly distributed in the photocatalytic system. The uneven distribution charge can be induced by many factors, and a major factor in the photocatalytic system is the difference in work functions (also Ef) between different regions (e.g., two components in hybrid structures, bulk and surface, two different facets). The different work functions cause charge redistribution to balance the Ef, thus forming the internal electric field. The electrons can be accumulated on the side with the larger work function (i.e., lower Ef), whereas the holes stay on the side with the smaller work function (i.e., higher Ef). Thus the direction of the internal electric field points from the regions with smaller to larger work functions. In the case of nanocatalysts, when the particle size is smaller than twice the width of the surface space charge region (present for the bulk material), the band bending cannot completely relax to the bulk level. As a result, the internal electric field across the space charge region is significantly smaller (Fig. 18c).161 For this reason, the charge recombination rate increases with the shrinkage of particle size at the nanoscale. Another related case is that photocatalytic performance can be tuned through adjusting the pH value of the solution, partially because the different charge species chemisorbed on the surface (H+ or OH−) may lead to varied surface band bending on the semiconductor and internal electric fields for charge separation.162
For the migrations of separated electrons and holes, the potential difference can drive the electrons towards a more positive energy level and the holes towards a more negative energy level from the viewpoint of the energy principle. However, both the internal electric field and the potential difference are influenced by the consumption of electrons and holes in reactions. The accumulations of charges on the two sides of a system weaken the intensity of the internal electric field as well as reduce the potential difference, harmful to further transfer and separation of electrons and holes (Fig. 18d). Once the accumulated charges are consumed in reactions, the internal electric field and potential difference can be recovered. On the other hand, if not consumed in time, the accumulated electrons or holes may recombine with newly generated holes or electrons, limiting photocatalytic performance. Thus surface catalytic reactions for charge consumption in the next step are influential to charge transfer and separation.
In a hybrid photocatalytic system, when two or more internal electric fields or potential differences are present simultaneously due to different charge kinetics models, their synergetic use or mutual suppression would become more complicated. If well harnessed, their interplay may further elevate the system performance. As discussed before, the electrons and holes can be spatially separated towards different sites, due to various effects such as the spatial charge separation effect inside a semiconductor and the junction effect between two components. To synergize the two effects, reduction and oxidation co-catalysts can be selectively photodeposited on different sites of the semiconductor by taking advantage of the surface electrons and holes accumulated by spatial charge separation. In this case, the photocatalytic performance can be enhanced by the synergetic utilization of spatial charge separation in semiconductor and charge extraction effects by co-catalysts, given their consistent driving directions (Fig. 18e).35 Here, we can also name an example to demonstrate that two driving forces in opposite directions reduce the efficacy of each other: co-excitation of two components in plasmonic metal–semiconductor junction with direct contact. As the plasmonic hot charge injection follows the opposite direction to the charge flow in forming a Schottky barrier, these two effects constitute a severe competition with each other, lowering photocatalytic performance. This assumption has been verified by UV light excitation on TiO2–Pd hybrid structures in a photocatalytic organic oxidation reaction.163 Under UV illumination, a TiO2 semiconductor is photoexcited to generate electron–hole pairs, whereas injection of hot electrons has been observed from the Pd to the TiO2 conduction band, reducing the efficacy of the Schottky junction.

3.3 Surface molecular activation and reactions
Charge separation and transfer are typically followed by surface catalytic reactions. Either in the gas or the liquid phase, photocatalytic reactions take place only on the surface of catalysts. The reaction locations include the photoexcited semiconductor, the co-catalyst or the light sensitizer depending on the models of photocatalytic systems. In this process, the reactants firstly diffuse to and become adsorbed on the catalyst surface, from which the adsorbed reactants can accept electrons or holes to undergo reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively. After the completion of chemical transformation, the formed reduction and oxidation products would be desorbed from the surface and diffuse to the environment. Thus the behaviors of species adsorption–desorption and molecular activation essentially govern the catalytic activity in terms of surface reactions. The reaction kinetics can be enhanced by increasing adsorption energy or lowering activation energy (or overpotential) of a catalyst surface. When two or more reduction/oxidation reactions occur synchronously, one would pay attention to catalytic selectivity. Apparently, high adsorption energy or low activation energy for a specific reactant or reaction would lead to high selectivity with exclusion of the others. Many surface factors, including surface area and pores, surface facets, surface composition, and surface vacancies, have impact on the activity and selectivity in a photocatalytic system.

3.3.1 Surface area and pores. 
It is well known that only surface atoms can participate in catalytic reactions. For this reason, boosting the surface-to-volume ratio, which allows more atoms to be exposed to reaction species, would help to increase the probability of catalytically active sites to interact with reaction species. Many novel structures have been developed to increase the surface area of photocatalysts, among which a two-dimensional structure and a mesoporous structure are two widely used examples. The two-dimensional structures have higher surface-to-volume ratios than their bulk counterparts, and the ratios increase with the reduction of the atomic layers. For instance, free-standing graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets possess a significantly higher surface area (384 m2 g−1) and thus exhibit over 9 times the average photocatalytic hydrogen production rate in comparison with bulk g-C3N4 (Fig. 19a).164 Porous or mesoporous structures are another class of unique models that not only possess high surface-to-volume ratio but provide porous frameworks to facilitate the adsorption and capture of reactants. In particular, the sizes of pores or channels can be adjusted to tune the selectivity according to the molecular sizes of reactants or products. By selecting appropriate sizes, large-sized reactants can be prevented from entering pores/channels and undergoing reactions. Semiconductor materials can be directly fabricated into porous structures. For instance, mesoporous black TiO2 materials have a high surface area of ∼124 m2 g−1 and exhibit a very high photocatalytic hydrogen production rate of 136.2 μmol h−1 (Fig. 19b and c).165 Alternatively, semiconductors can be integrated with porous materials to form hybrid structures. A typical case is the fabrication of Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 (BTC = benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate) core–shell structures. The Cu3(BTC)2 is a MOF structure that can capture CO2 gas molecules and provide Cu sites for CO2 activation. As a result, the core–shell structures have shown a significantly improved photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance in terms of both activity and selectivity, compared with bare TiO2 (Fig. 19d).105
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of g-C3N4 nanosheets (adapted with permission from ref. 164, Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b, c) TEM images along (b) [100] and (c) [110] planes of ordered mesoporous black TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society); (d) TEM image of Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell structures (adapted with permission from ref. 105, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 


3.3.2 Surface facets. 
It has been commonly recognized that catalytic activity and selectivity are strongly dependent on crystal facets exposed on a catalyst surface. Multiple effects are potentially implicated in the catalytic process with different exposed facets. For instance, it is believed that internal electric fields can induce differentiated efficiencies in separating and transporting photoinduced charges along different crystal orientations, making the facets perpendicular to the high-efficiency directions more reactive in photocatalysis.151 In parallel, as mentioned earlier, spatial charge separation of semiconductors can gather electrons and holes on their different facets, causing varied catalytic activity and selectivity.35,166
In addition to charge behavior, the variation in atomic arrangements on different surface facets maneuvers the adsorption and activation of reaction molecules from the viewpoint of catalysis and surface science. The facets with higher absorption energies and lower activation barriers would become ideal candidates for photocatalytic reactions with enhanced activity and selectivity. In the pursuit of covering a large portion of highly reactive facets on a semiconductor, two approaches, characterized with different structures, have been widely used. The first type of structure is present in symmetric polyhedral micro/nanocrystals synthesized by employing capping agents (polymers, small molecules, or ions). The capping agents can be selectively absorbed to the specific facets that are eventually exposed on the surface, thereby suppressing growth along their axes. For instance, single crystals of Ag3PO4 in two forms were synthesized with CH3COOAg and [Ag(NH3)2]+ complex as silver precursors, Ag3PO4 rhombic dodecahedrons enclosed by 12 (110) facets (Fig. 20a), and cubes bounded by 6 (100) facets (Fig. 20b).167 As the (110) facets are more reactive, the dodecahedrons exhibit superior photocatalytic activity to the cubes in dye degradation. However, symmetric polyhedral structures have only been reported for several semiconductors, mainly with a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure. Moreover, the presence of residual capping agents might prevent the adsorption of reactant molecules onto surface facets, thus influencing the photocatalytic reaction. Semiconductor nanosheets are another class of structures rich in highly reactive facets. For instance, TiO2 nanosheets with a high percentage of exposed high-energy (001) facets have been synthesized with HF and show photocatalytic efficiency far exceeding that of P25 (Fig. 20c and d).168 The development of 2D nanosheets would greatly overcome the limitations of symmetric polyhedral structures in facet control for photocatalysis, though some 2D structures have also been obtained through the use of capping agents that are selectively adsorbed to the top and bottom facets.127
 Fig. 20  (a, b) SEM images of Ag3PO4 sub-microcrystals with the morphology of (a) rhombic dodecahedrons and (b) cubes (adapted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (c, d) TEM and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of TiO2 nanosheets (adapted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (e, f) TEM images of (e) C3N4–Pd nanocubes with Pd(100) facets and (f) C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedrons with Pd(111) facets (adapted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In the case of hybrid structures, the facets of co-catalysts can also serve as knobs to tune the activity and selectivity of photocatalysis. A typical case is the hybrid structure in which Pd nanocubes enclosed with (100) facets and Pd nanotetrahedrons with (111) facets are supported on g-C3N4 nanosheets (Fig. 20e and f).109 Under the effect of a Schottky junction, the electrons photogenerated on the C3N4 are transferred to the Pd surface for reduction reactions. Pd(111) facets offer a higher CO2 adsorption energy and a lower CO2 activation barrier, so that C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedrons prefer to reduce CO2 with H2O into carbon products. In comparison, C3N4–Pd nanocubes mainly undergo H2O reduction to produce H2, as Pd(100) facets show considerably higher H2O adsorption energy.


3.3.3 Surface compositions. 
There is no doubt that photocatalytic activity and selectivity can be tuned by altering surface compositions as this allows maneuvering interactions with reaction species. As the light absorption of semiconductors is correlated with their surface compositions, it would be more straightforward to tune catalytic performance by tailoring the surface compositions of co-catalysts so that the effect of light absorption can be excluded. For instance, it has been reported that use of a Pt–Sn alloy as a co-catalyst on graphene can better enhance photocatalytic H2 production activity in comparison with pure Pt.169 The generated H atoms are interfacially transferred from Pt to Sn sites, and the H atoms can be readily desorbed from Sn sites, favoring H2 production. Another work has demonstrated that coating the surface of a Pt co-catalyst with Cu2O can significantly promote the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4 and CO (Fig. 21a).170 In this case, the Cu2O favors the activation of CO2, whereas Pt accelerates the activation of H2O to produce H2. In these reactions, the Pt core extracts photogenerated electrons from TiO2 and delivers them to the Cu2O shell, which provides sites for the preferential activation and conversion of CO2 molecules. In addition to tuning the activation ability, the surface composition control is also an approach to prevent the occurrence of back reaction and thus to enhance the catalytic activity. As discussed in Section 2.4.2, the Rh as a H2 evolution co-catalyst in photocatalytic water splitting may activate the back reaction of H2 with O2 to form H2O (Fig. 21b). To resolve this problem, Rh–Cr2O3 core–shell co-catalysts have been widely used to prevent H2O formation, in which the Cr2O3 surface provides alternative H2 evolution sites, whereas Rh plays a role in aiding the electron migration towards the Cr2O3 surface (Fig. 21c).110
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration for the selective coating of Pt and Cu2O co-catalysts to enhance photocatalytic CO2 reduction (adapted with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b, c) schematic illustrating the reaction mechanism of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) in photocatalytic water splitting with (b) bare Rh nanoparticle and (c) Rh–Cr2O3 core–shell as co-catalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 


3.3.4 Surface vacancies. 
Certainly, not all the surface atoms can efficiently participate in photocatalytic reactions. As a matter of fact, adsorption and activation often take place on the coordinately unsaturated sites that are thermodynamically unstable for the reason that the dangling bonds in the sites are prone to accept charge carriers and reactants. It has been found that the creation of oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ on TiO2 surfaces can promote CO2 activation, leading to enhanced photocatalytic production of CO and CH4 as compared with a defect-free surface.171 Thus, increasing the density of surface vacancies may enhance the molecular adsorption and activation processes. Many methods, such as high-temperature reduction, doping a foreign element with a lower valence state, and development of 2D nanosheets with few layers, have been applied to manipulate the surface vacancy density. However, as mentioned earlier, the side effects of surface vacancies on charge recombination should also be taken into account when we design photocatalysts. The complex working mechanisms of photocatalysis always make the design of materials more challenging than other catalytic systems.

4. Photocatalyst design and synthesis
In terms of building a photocatalytic system, the “principles, models and processes” in Section 2 depict the mechanisms for charge kinetics, whereas the “key parameters” in Section 3 specifically clarify how to choose building materials and tune their internal structures, exposed surface and interface with other components, with the aim of satisfying the demand for charge kinetics. Now we are in a position to outline the design rules and synthetic methods for an efficient photocatalytic system in this section. In spite of principles and building materials, there are many other detailed matters that need special attention in the design process. When two components are integrated into hybrid structures, they may form many different combinations of configurations, which would exhibit different performances in each step of the photocatalysis reaction. Thus, the key mission for materials design is to organize the building blocks into a working photocatalytic system. On one hand, the geometry architecture should facilitate various processes of charge kinetics. The criteria includes light absorption in the broad spectrum, smooth transfer of electrons and holes, and large surface area exposed to redox reactions. On the other hand, the configurations of hybrid structures should be achievable from the viewpoint of materials synthesis.
4.1 Photocatalyst designs (classic versus novel configurations)
In the photocatalyst designs, there are many classic configurations for hybrid structures such as decorated, heterojunction and encapsulated structures with direct contact between components, and connected and isolated structures without contact between components (Fig. 22). These configurations have their own advantages and disadvantages in each step of the charge kinetics process, and thus can be selected to compose the hybrid structures that work through specific charge kinetics models. Notably, charge kinetics should be correlated with the location of light excitation in a hybrid structure.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration for classic photocatalytic hybrid configurations. 
The decorated structure is formed by loading a certain amount of smaller-sized component I on a larger-sized component II. In the synthesis, it is often obtained through non-epitaxial growth or a self-assembly method. In this structure, both components are exposed to the surrounding medium, allowing the charges on both surfaces to interact with reactants. However, the two components may block the light absorption of each other due to shielding effects. Moreover, the interface formed in this structure is exposed to the surrounding medium, which does not favor charge transfer due to corrosion by the medium. The polycrystalline interface containing a large number of defects also potentially induces interfacial charge recombination.
The heterojunction structure resembles the decorated configuration, but only contains an interface in a single micro/nanostructure. The sizes of the two components are usually comparable. In comparison with the decorated structure, the heterojunction has a better light absorption and interfacial contact (particularly when both components are single crystals). Moreover, the asymmetric Janus structure favors electron–hole spatial separation. However, it remains a big challenge to synthesize this structure at a large scale and in high quality. The reported success is often based on epitaxial growth in which the same or similar anions or cations are used for both components.
The encapsulated structure is typically synthesized by coating a component I core with a component II shell. This structure offers interfacial contact over a large area. Moreover, the interface protected by the shell stays away from corrosion, which favors fast charge transfer. However, the component I core is not exposed to the surrounding environment and cannot directly participate in redox reactions. As a result, the charges on the core are not consumed, and their accumulation inhibits further charge transfer from the shell to the core. The core–shell structure only works for Type I semiconductor junctions in which both electrons and holes are required to transfer from the shell to the core.
The connected structure links two separated components with a conducting layer. The conducting layer acts as the path or bridge for the charge transfer between the two components. When the two components do not have good compatibility in terms of crystal structures or electronic structures, this structure can offer an ideal alternative model. In addition, this structure enables good light absorption and provides a sufficient surface for reactions, as the two components are interface-free. However, the probability of electron–hole recombination loss would be inevitably increased by this design, because it involves two types of interfaces as well as suffering from a longer charge-transfer distance between the components.
In the isolated structure, the two components are isolated by a thin non-conducting layer so as to prevent direct charge transfer. This structure is solely designed as an energy-transfer mechanism in a catalytic system such as electromagnetic field-mediated energy transfer and resonant photon-scattering energy transfer for plasmonic metal–semiconductor structures. Table 2 summarizes the characteristics, applications and implications of the five classic configurations. Certainly, their performance also relies on some other factors such as crystallinity and material type.
Table 2 The charge kinetics evaluation for the classic photocatalytic hybrid configurationsa




Hybrid configuration
Light-excited component
Light absorption
Charge transfer
Surface reaction
Controlled synthesis
Samples of charge kinetics models
Ref.





a “×” and “√” denote limited success and great progress, respectively.





Decorated structure
I
×
×
√
√
Light sensitizer-semiconductor

172



II
×
×
√
√
Semiconductor–co-catalyst

173



I and II
×
×
√
√
Phase junction

174







Heterojunction structure
I or II
√
√
√
×
Plasmonic metal–semiconductor

175



I and II
√
√
√
×
Type II junction

176







Encapsulated structure
I
×
×
√
×
Upconversion-semiconductor

177



II
√
×
×
×
Metal–semiconductor Schottky junction

178



I and II
×
×
×
×
Type I junction; phase junction

179







Connected structure
I or II
√
×
√
√
Semiconductor–co-catalyst

180



I and II
√
×
√
√
Z-scheme

181







Isolated structure
I
×
×
√
×
Plasmonic metal–semiconductor

182





Based on the performance of the classic configurations, some novel configurations have been developed to make up for their shortages (Fig. 23). For instance, a multi-segmented heterojunction structure has been developed to further strengthen the advantage of the heterojunction in charge transfer. In this structure, component I or component II forms two interfaces with the two neighboring heterogeneous components. The increased number of interfaces not only halves the average charge-transfer length, but also doubles the contact area between components. In the literature, both metal–semiconductor and semiconductor–semiconductor multi-segmented heterojunction structures have been reported.183,184 The only problem is that the interfaces between the components are still exposed to the surrounding medium. To solve this problem, a necklace-like heterostructure has been designed for both metal–semiconductor and semiconductor–semiconductor hybrid structures.185,186 In the design, component II is partially coated on component I (in the forms of nanowires or nanobelts) to form a necklace-like one-dimensional structure. Unlike the multi-segmented heterojunction, the interface between the two components is covered by component II, offering better interface contact. Moreover, the continuity of component I can sustain the charge transfer with high mobility. In addition to the two structures, the charge transfer can be further enhanced by aligning the building blocks into ordered mesocrystal superstructures, which possess the largest contact area between the two components.187
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration for the reported novel photocatalytic hybrid configurations for enhanced charge kinetics. 
To solve the shortage of core–shell structures, a porous core–shell structure and a half core–shell stack structure have been proposed. In the porous core–shell structure, a porous/mesoporous shell partially exposes the surface of component I core to the surrounding environment for redox reactions.188 In an alternative design, a half core–shell stack structure has component I core in contact with a conducting layer so that the charges accumulated in the core can flow out through the conducting layer for redox reactions.147 With the development of 2D nanomaterials, a 2D layered stack structure has been reported.189 In this structure, the large surface area and the low thickness of 2D structures maximize the interfacial contact area for charge transfer as well as shortening the charge diffusion distance from interface to surface for redox reactions.
4.2 Controlled synthesis and fabrication
With ideal designs in mind, one has to develop unique synthetic approaches to realize the designs. The rapid development of photocatalysis research, along with the corresponding deepened understanding, allows more complicated structures to be achieved as well as demands higher requirements for uniformity and controllability in terms of bulk, surface and interface. Precise control over the dimensions and structures of materials is always a big challenge to synthetic chemists. Nevertheless, significant progress on the controlled synthesis has been made to meet the strong demands for photocatalytic materials. Many impressive photocatalytic structures have been reported with their charge kinetics successfully steered. Due to the limited space, in this section we only name several examples reported recently to show how the researchers contribute to steering the charge kinetics from the angle of controlled synthesis.
The first example is the synthesis of mesoporous single-crystal semiconductors. As just discussed, mesoporosity provides a large surface area for activation reactions, whereas single-crystal structure can facilitate charge transfer owing to long-range electronic connectivity without a grain boundary. The mesoporous single-crystal semiconductor meeting both criteria can significantly improve the charge kinetics for photocatalysis. Recently, mesoporous TiO2 single crystals have been synthesized based on crystal seeding on a sacrificial guiding template.190 A quasi-close packed array of silica beads was employed as a template for the subsequent homogeneous nucleation and growth of single-crystal TiO2 (Fig. 24a). The silica template was selectively etched in a NaOH aqueous solution, leaving behind the mesoporous TiO2. The external dimensions of TiO2 are several orders of magnitude larger than their internal mesopores.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis (a1) as well as the SEM images (a2–a4) of mesoporous TiO2 single crystals (adapted with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group); (b) schematic illustration for the fabrication (b1) as well as the SEM images (b2–b4) of nanotree heterostructures (adapted with permission from ref. 191, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration for the synthesis (c1) as well as the TEM and HRTEM images (c2, c3) of Cu2O–Pd–graphene stack structure (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (d) schematic illustration for the synthesis (d1) as well as the SEM and TEM images (d2–d4) of (Ti0.91O2–graphene)5 hollow spheres (adapted with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 
The second example is the “Z-scheme” artificial forest for solar water splitting (Fig. 24b).191 As discussed in Section 2.3.4, all-solid-state Z-scheme structures are composed of two semiconductors with different light absorption through ohmic contact. A nanoscale tree-like light-harvesting architecture has been reported to maximize the performance. In this heterojunction, Si nanowire and TiO2 nanowire acted like the trunk and branch of a tree. Specifically, the branches were grown on the upper half of a Si nanowire so that the trunks and branches could be used to harvest visible and UV light, respectively, in different regions. It is known that the diffusion rate of electrons is significantly higher than that of holes. The TiO2 branches (i.e., the location for hole transfer) possessed a shorter carrier diffusion length and a higher surface area than the Si trunks, which could facilitate hole transport for the oxidation reaction and better balance with the faster electron transfer in the Si for the reduction reaction. This unique heterostructure was synthesized through micro- and nano-fabrication with several steps. First, p-type Si nanowire arrays with highly doped n+ shell layers were fabricated by reactive ion etching (RIE). Then the array was coated with a polymer and then treated with O2 plasma to expose the top half of the Si nanowires, and as such, the n+ layer on the exposed Si could be removed with KOH to form asymmetric nanowire structures with p-type tops and n+/p core–shell bottoms. Next, a polymer coating and O2 plasma treatment were used again to leave a gap between the first and second polymer etching. Subsequently, the seed layer for TiO2 nanowire growth was deposited on the exposed Si by atomic layer deposition or vacuum sputtering. After the removal of residual polymer, the Si nanowires substrate was finally used to produce the Si/TiO2 nano-tree heterostructures through hydrothermal TiO2 nanowire synthesis.
The third example is the semiconductor–metal–graphene stack structure (Fig. 24c).147 According to the half core–shell stack structure model discussed in Section 4.1, the charges can successively flow from semiconductor to metal and then to conductive graphene, which not only makes up the shortage of core–shell structure in charge accumulation, but also inherits its merit in interface protection. Most recently, a Cu2O–Pd–graphene stack structure has been reported by our research group. In the synthesis, the (100)-faceted Pd nanocubes were firstly grown in situ on rGO sheets by co-reducing K2PdCl4 and graphene oxide (GO) with ascorbic acid. In the next step, Cu2O single-crystal shells enclosed by (100) facets were selectively coated on the Pd nanocubes. In this structure, one face of the Pd nanocubes is in intimate contact with rGO nanosheets, whereas the other 5 faces form single-crystal face-to-face interfaces with Cu2O. The obtained Cu2O–Pd–graphene stack structure shows a significantly higher photocatalytic H2 production rate in comparison with the Pd–Cu2O core–shell structure discussed in Section 3.2.1.
The last case is the hollow spheres consisting of alternating nanosheets with face-to-face contact (Fig. 24d).192 As discussed in Section 4.1, the 2D contact of two components produces a large interfacial area for charge transfer as well as a short distance to the surface for redox reactions. Moreover, the hollow structure allows the multiscattering of incident light to enhance light absorption. The robust hollow spheres with molecular-scale alternating titania (Ti0.91O2) nanosheets and graphene nanosheets as building blocks were fabricated by a layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly technique with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) beads as sacrificial templates. In the synthetic procedures, PMMA spheres were modified with a protonic polyethylenimine (PEI) aqueous solution, a colloidal suspension of negatively charged Ti0.91O2 nanosheets, a PEI solution, and a negatively charged GO suspension through electrostatic attraction. After repeating dipping cycles several times, composites with five layers of (PEI/Ti0.91O2/PEI/GO)5 could be obtained and then be converted into (Ti0.91O2–graphene)5 hollow spheres by reducing GO and removing PMMA. The obtained Ti0.91O2–graphene hollow spheres exhibit a considerably higher conversion yield than bare Ti0.91O2 hollow spheres in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into fuel, which is attributed to the improved charge separation ability by graphene as discussed in Section 2.4.1. From the listed examples, one can see that the combination of wet-chemical synthesis with micro- and nanofabrication plays an important role in the future preparation of photocatalytic materials. The size, shape, structure and composition of nanoparticles can be well controlled by wet chemistry, whereas micro- and nano-fabrication can generate, replicate and even transfer highly ordered structures to different systems.
5. Characterization techniques
To depict the charge behaviors in a photocatalytic system, it is imperative to probe charge kinetics through characterization techniques with a focus on spectroscopic characterizations. To date, various characterization methods have been developed or can potentially be used to examine the charge kinetics behaviors at all the three stages. Specifically, the capabilities of charge photogeneration can be appreciated by characterizing the light absorption and band structure. In terms of charge separation and transfer, the characterizations are mainly focused on charge dynamics such as photoexcited carrier lifetime and charge separation efficiency. As for the surface reactions in charge consumption, various advanced techniques have been developed to monitor the surface reaction molecular dynamics, including molecular adsorption and desorption, reactant dissociation, reaction paths and intermediate products. The characterizations will prove whether a design and synthesis succeeds in steering the charge kinetics. On the other hand, the charge kinetics information provided by characterizations can guide us to further tune the parameters in new designs or synthetic processes. In this section, we will elucidate the basic principles of various characterization techniques, followed by specific examples. It should be noted that using only one characterization technique may not give the exact charge kinetics information. A comprehensive evaluation is often needed through the combination of several characterization techniques.
5.1 Light absorption and band structure characterizations
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) diffuse reflectance spectroscopy is the most widely employed method for measuring the light absorption of photocatalytic systems as well as the optical band gaps of semiconductors. However, due to the occurrence of multiple charge transitions from the occupied electronic states to the unoccupied electronic states under the same excitation energy, it is difficult for UV-vis spectroscopy to resolve the individual energy levels in the two states, particularly for complex systems. Unlike UV-vis spectroscopy, the synchrotron-based soft X-ray spectroscopy technique with element selectivity can depict the electronic structures of complex materials at high precision, in which the CBM and VBM are determined by X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES), respectively. Complementarily, photoelectron spectroscopy, including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), is able to detail the VB of semiconductors. It should be noted that the electronic structures obtained from these characterization techniques are mainly based on the information collected from the surface or a limited depth of the semiconductors, due to the relatively low penetration capability of UV-vis light or soft X-rays. To analyze the electronic structures deep inside the bulk semiconductor, a hard X-ray with high penetration ability should be used.193 Certainly, Mott–Schottky plots obtained by PEC measurements can determine the CB or VB edge positions of n-type or p-type semiconductors, respectively.

5.1.1 UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. 
In the characterization of a semiconductor-based photocatalytic system, UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy is the most available and commonly used technique. The overall light absorption regions of a light-harvesting semiconductor alone or together with doping,194 light sensitizer,195 and plasmonic metal196 can be reflected on the UV-vis spectroscopy. For instance, the UV-vis spectra of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (discussed in Section 3.1.1) are shown in Fig. 25a.127 The BiOCl nanoplates exhibit an absorption edge (i.e., the position at which reflectance starts to decrease) in the UV light region. For ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets, the absorption edge shows a red-shift toward visible light region, indicating the enhanced light absorption. Moreover, the different positions of the absorption edges indicate the variation in band gaps. The band gaps of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates can be determined from the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra by employing the following relational expression proposed by Tauc, Davis, and Mott:197 (αhν)1/n = A(hν − Eg)(3)where α is the absorption coefficient, A is the proportional constant, n is 1/2, 3/2, 2, and 3 for a direct allowed transition, direct forbidden transition, indirect allowed transition, and indirect forbidden transition, respectively, hν is the absorption energy (1240/λ), and Eg is the band gap energy. The curves plotted for (αhν)1/nvs. hν based on the UV-vis spectra are shown in Fig. 25b. The value corresponding to the intersection point of the line tangent to the inflection point of the plotted curve with the horizontal axis (i.e., hν axis) becomes the band gap Eg value. From this calculation, the indirect band gap of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets is ∼3.00 eV, slightly smaller than that of BiOCl nanoplates (3.25 eV) (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 25  (a, b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (a) of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates as well as the determination of indirect band gap (b) from the UV-vis spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (c, d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (c) of anatase TiO2 exposed with different facets as well as the determination of indirect band gap (d) from the UV-vis spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 198, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (e) oxygen X-ray absorption-emission spectra reflecting CB and VB near the Fermi level of ZnO nanoparticles in comparison with bulk ZnO (adapted with permission from ref. 201, Copyright 2004 American Physical Society); (f) band gaps of rutile and anatase TiO2 as revealed by XAS and XES spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 
Another method is to measure the band gaps of different facets for single-crystal anatase TiO2 with UV-vis spectroscopy.198 As shown in Fig. 25c, the absorption edges of TiO2 exposed with (111), (010), (101), and (001) facets are nearly 371, 385, 388, and 392 nm, respectively. As an indirect band gap semiconductor, the band gaps are calculated to be 3.17, 3.08, 3.04, and 3.01 eV for TiO2 dominated with (111), (010), (101), and (001) facets (Fig. 25d), respectively, demonstrating that various facets have different band structures, as we have discussed in Section 2.1.2. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy offers the most economical and convenient method to acquire the optical band gaps. However, it should be pointed out that the optical band gap is different from the electronic band gap as they represent two distinctive dynamics. The optical band gap probes the material within the energy range of its binding exciton and does not account for impurity energy states within the forbidden band, whereas the electronic band gap can probe the total or partial electron density in the CB and VB and furthermore the separation between the two states.199


5.1.2 Synchrotron-radiation-based soft X-ray spectroscopy. 
Synchrotron-radiation-based X-ray spectroscopy is an accurate tool that offers the ability to probe the electronic structure of a photocatalytic system, in which tuning the wavelength of incident light enables the element-selective study of materials as the energy separations at core levels differ from element to element.200 Two common spectroscopic techniques, XAS and XES, have been widely used. XAS probes the unoccupied electronic states (namely the CB) as a result of the excitation of core electrons into the CB, whereas XES depicts the occupied electronic states (namely the VB) by monitoring the emission as the core holes are populated by electrons from the valence orbital.199 Combining absorption with emission spectra is a direct method to extract the band gap information and to study band-to-band transitions between the occupied and unoccupied states. For instance, Fig. 25e displays the XES and XAS spectra of bulk and nanostructured ZnO,201 among which the O K-edge XES reflects the O 2p occupied states, whereas the O 1s XAS shows the O 2p unoccupied states. The band gap energy of 3.3 eV has been obtained from the absorption and emission spectra for both bulk and nanostructured ZnO. Another case is the absorption and emission spectra of rutile and anatase TiO2 (Fig. 25f).200 The band gaps of the anatase and rutile TiO2 estimated from the spectra are 2.1 and 1.6 eV, respectively. The band gap broadening in anatase has been observed as a result of both the lowered VBM and raised CBM.


5.1.3 Photoelectron spectroscopy. 
In addition to XAS and XES (photon-in and photon-out spectroscopy), photoelectron spectroscopy, including XPS and UPS, has also been utilized to investigate the electronic structure on or near semiconductor surfaces. As photoelectron spectroscopy is known as emission spectroscopy, only the VB of a semiconductor can be measured by this technique, similar to synchrotron-radiation-based XES. For instance, valence-band XPS spectroscopy has been used to measure the VB of both the ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (discussed in Section 3.1.1) (Fig. 26a).127 The BiOCl nanoplates display a VB with the edge of the maximum energy at about 2.22 eV. According to the optical band gap of 3.25 eV (discussed in Section 5.1.1), the CBM of BiOCl nanoplates should thus occur at about −1.03 eV. For the ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets, the VBM up-shifts by 1.05 to 1.17 eV in comparison with that of BiOCl nanoplates. Upon acquiring the band gap value of 3.00 eV, the CBM of nanosheets can be determined to occur at −1.83 eV, up-shifting by 0.8 eV compared with the nanoplates. By combining UV-vis spectroscopy with XPS, the band structures of the two BiOCl structures can be depicted as shown in Fig. 14c. The band structure of black TiO2 (Fig. 15d, discussed in Section 3.1.2) has also been determined through this approach.136 In the valence-band XPS spectra (Fig. 26b), the white TiO2 nanocrystals display a VB with the edge of the maximum energy at about 1.26 eV. Given the 3.30 eV band gap of white TiO2 obtained from UV-vis spectroscopy, the CBM would occur at about −2.04 eV. In comparison, the VBM energy of black TiO2 blue-shifts toward the vacuum level to approximately −0.92 eV, and its CBM is at −2.46 eV with a narrower band gap of 1.54 eV.
 Fig. 26  (a) Valence-band XPS spectra of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (b) valence-band XPS spectra of white and black TiO2 nanocrystals (adapted with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science); (c, d) Mott–Schottky plots (c) for CoO nanocrystals and micropowders as well as their band edge positions (d) according to the band gaps and the flat-band potentials obtained from (c) (adapted with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group). 


5.1.4 PEC measurements. 
The CB of an n-type semiconductor or the VB of a p-type semiconductor can also be measured by PEC. In the measurement, the semiconductor should be made into a photoelectrode and inserted into a PEC cell, following the collection of Mott–Schottky plots through an electrochemical workstation. A Mott–Schottky equation fit for the semiconductor, which is derived from modeling the depletion region capacitance as a parallel plate capacitor, is applicable to flat semiconductor–electrolyte interfaces.38 For an n-type semiconductor: (4)whereas for a p-type semiconductor:202 (5)where C and A are the interfacial capacitance and area, respectively. ε is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor and ε0 is the permittivity of free space. ND and NA are the number of donors and acceptors for n-type and p-type semiconductors, respectively, U is the applied voltage, Ufb is the flat-band potential, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the absolute temperature, and e is the electronic charge. Therefore, a plot of 1/C2 against U should yield a straight line from which the values of Ufb and ND (or NA) can be determined from the intercept on the U axis and the slope, respectively. For n-type and p-type semiconductors, the slopes of the straight line are positive and negative, respectively. As Ufb denotes the Ef position of the semiconductor with respect to the potential of the reference electrode, the CB edge of the n-type semiconductor can be calculated from the equation:38 (6)whereas the VB edge of the p-type semiconductor can be calculated from the equation:202 (7)in which NC and NV are the DOS in the CB and the VB of n-type and p-type semiconductors, respectively, and q is the unsigned charge of an electron. A typical example is the determination of band edge positions of the CoO photocatalyst for water splitting.203Fig. 26c shows the Mott–Schottky plots of both films of CoO micropowder and nanoparticles, in which 1/C2 as a function of electrochemical potentials has been obtained from impedance measurement. The negative slopes of Mott–Schottky plots indicate the p-type nature of CoO. A significant difference in the Ufb between nanocrystals and micropowders has been observed: the flat-band potential of CoO nanocrystals is less than that of powders by more than 1 V. Based on the Ufb (Fermi levels are about 0.3 eV above the VB for lightly doped p-type CoO), the approximate VB edge positions of the nanocrystals and micropowders can be obtained. As long as their band gaps are acquired by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, their CB edge positions can be further calculated to depict the band structures shown in Fig. 26d.

5.2 Charge transfer kinetics characterizations
In terms of charge transfer kinetics, the processes of charge separation, transfer and recombination often take place in an ultrasmall timescale from less than 100 fs to hundreds of ps. Basically, the information on such ultrafast carrier dynamics has to be examined by time-resolved spectroscopy, which after illumination can monitor the dynamic processes in materials that occur in time scales as short as 10−16 s with the help of pulsed lasers. Among the time-resolved spectroscopy techniques, transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) has been widely used in photocatalytic mechanism studies. TA spectroscopy offers the signals for ground and excited charges as well as the radiative recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes. However, due to the strong pulsed laser used as an excitation source in the time-resolved spectroscopy, it cannot completely reflect the photocatalytic processes under irradiation by normal solar light. As a complementary technique, PEC measurements have also been used to examine the charge-transfer behavior of a photocatalytic system and deduce average dynamic parameters. In addition, steady-state or time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy has been employed to examine the radiative recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes.

5.2.1 Transient absorption spectroscopy. 
In TA spectroscopy, a fraction of the molecules is elevated to an electronically excited state by means of an excitation (or pump) pulse.204 Then, a weak probe pulse is sent through the sample with a time delay τ with respect to the pump pulse. A differential absorption spectrum (ΔA) is then calculated through the subtraction of the absorption spectrum of the sample in the ground state from the absorption spectrum of the excited sample. The ΔA profile as a function of τ and wavelength λ can be obtained by changing the τ between the pump and the probe and recording a ΔA spectrum at each time delay. The obtained ΔA(λ,τ) is an overlapping spectrum of ground-state bleach (GSB), excited-state absorption (ESA) and stimulated emission (SE), which offers us important charge dynamics information for a photocatalytic system.
On the one hand, according to the Pauli exclusion principles, the filling of quantized electronic states will lead to the bleaching of the corresponding optical transitions from ground state to excited state. The so-called “GSB” signal reflects the population of holes in the ground state or electrons around the conduction band edge. On the other hand, the photoexcited electrons in the excited states can further absorb probe light and get excited to higher levels, generating the ESA signal. Alternatively, the photoexcited electrons may return to ground state through stimulated radiation induced by probe light, yielding the SE signal. Thus, the ESA tracks the evolution of energized electrons in their excited states, whereas the SE results from the radiative recombination of energized electrons with holes. In the ΔA spectrum, the ESA is positive in value, whereas the GSB and SE are negative. According to the working mechanisms, the GSB and SE can be distinguished by the wavelengths of probe light. Basically, the negatively valued transients probed at wavelengths shorter or longer than the one corresponding to the band gap of semiconductors can be assigned to the GSB or the SE, respectively. By analyzing the three types of signals, the charge dynamics of a photocatalytic system can be tracked in real time.
A typical case is to compare the charge behaviors of the classic geometry architectures of a decorated structure and an encapsulated structure with a novel half core–shell stack structure using Pd (component I) and Cu2O (component II) as a model system (see detailed designs in Sections 4.1 and 4.2).147 The TA spectra of three samples have been benchmarked against bare Cu2O to evaluate their performance for electron–hole separation (Fig. 27a). For the Pd-decorated Cu2O structure, the TA features with distinct SE and GSB signals (i.e., negative signals) are analogous to those for bare Cu2O, indicating a low efficiency of charge separation. In the case of the Pd–Cu2O core–shell structure, as there is no channel to deliver out the holes accumulated on the Pd core, predominant SE and GSB transients have also been observed. In stark contrast, the SE and GSB transients associated with charge recombination nearly vanish in the Cu2O–Pd–rGO half core–shell stack structure, clearly demonstrating the advantage of a half core–shell stack structure in suppressing the charge recombination. In this structure, the holes are extracted from Cu2O to Pd through Schottky junctions and then transported out through graphene, significantly reducing the charge recombination (Fig. 27b).
 Fig. 27  (a, b) TA analysis of the charge kinetics in different geometry architectures of metal–semiconductor junction: (a) TA signal (probed at 600 nm) as a function of probe delay for bare Cu2O, Pd-decorated Cu2O, Pd–Cu2O core–shell as well as Cu2O–Pd–rGO structures as well as (b) schematic illustration for the charge flow in a semiconductor–metal–graphene stack design (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (c–f) TA analysis of the charge transfer directions of Schottky junction and plasmonic hot electron injection: (c) TA signal (probed at 520 nm) as a function of probe delay for bare TiO2, bare Pd, and TiO2–Pd hybrid structures recorded with a 480 nm pump as well as (d) schematic illustration for the electron behavior under photoexcitation at 480 nm; (e) TA signals recorded with a 350 nm pump as well as (f) schematic illustration for the electron behavior under photoexcitation at 350 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 163, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 
Another case is to verify the opposite directions between charge transfer of Schottky junctions and hot electron injection from plasmonic metal in the case of direct contact between an n-type semiconductor and a metal, using the TiO2–Pd junction as an example (discussed in Section 3.2.3).163 Two pumping scenarios with different center wavelengths at 480 and 350 nm were used to excite the samples of bare TiO2, bare Pd and TiO2–Pd. Under photoexcitation at 480 nm with only Pd excited (Fig. 27c), bare TiO2 produced no TA signal due to its band gap being larger than 3 eV, whereas bare Pd displayed the well-known plasmon damping effect in its TA kinetic trace. However, TiO2–Pd exhibited a rather different dynamic behavior with recovery being considerably slower than the bare Pd sample. This behavior can be understood as a result of hot electron injection from Pd to TiO2, followed by electron relaxation within the CB to yield the SE signal (Fig. 27d). To further verify this effect, a 350 nm pump was then used to simultaneously excite Pd and TiO2 (Fig. 27e). For bare TiO2, there was an apparent competition between the SE and the ESA, with the initial buildup and the subsequent decay features of the ESA being superimposed on the predominant SE trace, showing the excitation of TiO2. A similar plasmon damping effect to the case pumped at 480 nm has been observed for bare Pd, indicating the activation of Pd at 350 nm. Then, for the hybrid TiO2–Pd system of interest, the SE process induced by the injection of hot electrons from Pd to TiO2 is so strong as to completely suppress the ESA processes on both the Pd and TiO2 (Fig. 27f). This study clearly proves that plasmonic hot electron injection indeed takes the opposite direction to the charge migration driven by the Schottky junction.


5.2.2 PEC measurements. 
In addition to TA spectroscopy, PEC photocurrent and photovoltage measurements also give charge kinetics information of a photocatalytic system.38,205 In the PEC cell, the photoexcited electrons and holes on the semiconductor electrode are separated in the space charge layer toward the electrode surface, where they participate in transfer reactions of cathodic electrons (band bending down) or anodic holes (band bending up) to provide a reaction current. Such a reaction current of photoexcited electrons or holes is called a photocurrent.
The photocurrent of electrons or holes is quite small when the reacting electrons or holes in the semiconductor electrode are the majority charge carriers whose concentration can hardly be increased after photoexcitation. However, the photocurrent becomes relatively large with the participation of minority charge carriers whose concentration is increased greatly by photoexcitation, compared with the charge carrier concentration in the dark. Thus, the photocurrent can be observed more clearly in the transfer reaction of anodic holes at n-type electrodes or the transfer reaction of cathodic electrons at p-type electrodes. For the same reason, for an n-type semiconductor in the system, the photocurrent appears clearly when an external positive bias is applied for obtaining upward band bending. Furthermore, the photocurrent becomes larger with increased positive bias, leading to more serious bending, so as to enhance the electron–hole separation ability. For a p-type semiconductor, increased negative bias also results in a larger photocurrent.
Only at the Ufb, no photocurrent occurs because no band bending happens to form an internal electric field for separating photoexcited electron–hole pairs. Thus, the Ufb can be regarded as the onset potential of the photocurrent (i.e., the potential where the photogenerated electrons and holes begin to separate and the photocurrent appears). However, in a practical PEC system, the onset potential is not equal to the Ufb. An additional potential should be applied before a photocurrent can be observed, due to the recombination in the space charge layer, the trapping of holes/electrons by surface defects, or the accumulation of holes/electrons at the surface caused by poor charge transfer kinetics (note: the affected carriers are holes for an n-type semiconductor, and electrons for a p-type semiconductor). As a result, the onset potential is more positive than the Ufb for an n-type semiconductor-based system and more negative for a p-type semiconductor. As co-catalysts can lower this additional potential, their presence will cause a negative shift of the onset potential for an n-type system as well as a positive shift for a p-type system without altering the Ufb. The photocurrent value can indirectly reflect the ability of photocatalysts to separate and transfer the photoexcited charge carriers under irradiation. In general, the anodic photocurrent of an n-type electrode reflects the behavior of holes, whereas the cathodic photocurrent of a p-type electrode resolves the activity of electrons. Photocurrent measurements with long-time steady illumination could reveal the stability of charge transfer kinetics in a photocatalyst.
A typical example for this application is to compare the photocurrents of bare ZnO with those of the ZnO loaded with CoPi oxidation co-catalyst (Fig. 28a).114 Due to the n-type nature of ZnO, both ZnO electrodes generate anodic photocurrents upon illumination, which can be enhanced with the increase of positive bias in the photocurrent vs. potential characterization. The CoPi co-catalyst helps the electron–hole separation and thus enhances the photocurrent of ZnO. Thus the photocurrents measured against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode show that the presence of the CoPi co-catalyst has enhanced the steady-state photocurrent by 2.6 and 1.5 times at a constant bias of 0.0 V and 0.2 V, respectively (Fig. 28b and c). The difference in photocurrent enhancement by the co-catalyst originates from the fact that the more pronounced band bending at 0.2 V still helps charge separation for photo-oxidation reactions in the absence of a co-catalyst. With comparable flat-band potentials, the 0.23 V negative shift of onset potential caused by the addition of the co-catalyst can be attributed to the reduced charge recombination near the flat-band potential (Fig. 28a).
 Fig. 28  (a–c) Photocurrent–potential characteristics (a) of ZnO (black) and ZnO/Co-based catalyst electrodes (gray) measured with chopped light (arrows indicate the onset potential of photocurrent) as well as photocurrent of ZnO (black) and ZnO/Co-based catalyst electrodes (gray) measured at (b) 0.0 V and (c) 0.2 V against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (adapted with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2009 National Academy of Sciences); (d) schematic band diagrams illustrating photovoltage characterizations; (e, f) transient open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) from TiO2 (gray) and Au–TiO2 (black) photoanodes following exposure to UV or visible-light excitation, respectively: (e) Voc transient rise/decay obtained during excitation/termination of irradiation, and (f) average electron lifetimes (τn) within the device (adapted with permission from ref. 206, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 
The PEC measurements can also provide a tool to evaluate the average lifetime of photogenerated carriers by collecting transient open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD). The occupancy of CB states within a semiconductor during light excitation is given by the quasi-fermi level (Ef*) of the device, which can be monitored externally via the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the PEC cell. Under the open-circuit conditions, the photovoltage (Vph) corresponds to the increase in Ef* with respect to the equilibrium state of Ef (also the Eredox) in the dark (Fig. 28d):206 (8)where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (in Kelvin), q is the unsigned charge of an electron, and N and N0 represent the free electron concentration under illumination and in the dark, respectively. By recording Voc decay in the dark after illumination, the lifetime of the photogenerated carriers can be estimated. The average lifetime (τn) is obtained from the OCVD according to eqn (9):206 (9)
In a typical case, the OCVD has been utilized to evaluate the plasmon-mediated electron transfer dynamics of Au–TiO2.206 The OCVD of TiO2 photoanodes following exposure to UV light was compared with that of Au–TiO2 hybrid structures under visible light excitation. As shown in Fig. 28e, under the UV excitation of TiO2, the electron–hole pairs were generated to promptly establish a significant Vph of 0.7 V. Upon the termination of UV irradiation, the Voc rapidly decreased back to the equilibrium state as electrons were consumed by the adsorbed species or recombined with holes, showing the short lifetime of charge carriers. For the Au–TiO2 under visible light irradiation, a prolonged Voc decay was observed over several minutes, demonstrating the long lifetime of charge carriers. This finding reflects that the Schottky barrier at the Au/TiO2 interface can impede the recombination of the electrons injected into the CB of TiO2 with the holes trapped on Au. As shown in Fig. 28f, the plasmonic hot electrons transferred to TiO2 exhibited lifetimes (τn ≈ 103 s) of 1–2 orders of magnitude longer than the electrons excited in bare TiO2 (τn ≈ 101 s).


5.2.3 Photoluminescence spectroscopy. 
While absorption spectroscopy measures the transitions from the ground state to the excited state, PL emission spectroscopy deals with the backward transitions accompanied by luminescence. PL spectroscopy, including steady-state and time-resolved PL, can give information about the separation and recombination of photoinduced charge carriers, as PL essentially originates from the electron–hole recombination in a system.207 In general, high intensity in steady-state PL spectroscopy indicates severe radiative recombination of electrons with holes. For time-resolved PL, a fast PL decay with a short lifetime reflects a low probability of electron–hole recombination.
In a typical example, PL spectroscopy has been employed to evaluate the charge transfer kinetics in the novel p–n junction mesocrystal structure with ZnO and CuO as components (discussed in Section 4.1).187 The steady PL emission spectra of the ZnO mesocrystal showed a broad emission band at around 450–800 nm, originating from defect-mediated charge recombination on the ZnO surface (Fig. 29a). In comparison, the PL intensity of ZnO–CuO nanocrystals decreased to a certain extent, whereas the ZnO–CuO mesocrystals exhibited completely quenched PL. This set of data demonstrates the niche of superstructure in suppressing charge recombination. To further understand the charge kinetics, the PL decay profiles of the three samples were measured at 365 nm (Fig. 29b). By fitting the profiles, the intensity-weighted average PL lifetime τPL of ZnO, ZnO–CuO nanocrystals and ZnO–CuO mesocrystals were determined to be 27, 16, and 2.7 ns, respectively, which are in agreement with the steady-state measurement findings.
 Fig. 29  (a, b) Steady-state PL spectra (a) and time-resolved PL spectra (b) of ZnO mesocrystals, ZnO–CuO mesocrystals and ZnO–CuO nanocrystals (red lines show fitting data) (adapted with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group); (c, d) steady-state PL spectra (c) and time-resolved PL spectra (d) for pure ZnO and Cu2+-doped ZnO nanocrystals at different Cu2+ concentrations, the inset in (c) shows the enlarged part of the spectra at 400–700 nm, and in (d), fitting results (solid curves) are also included for comparison (adapted with permission from ref. 208, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In another case, the modification of ZnO charge transfer kinetics by Cu2+ ion doping has been examined by PL spectroscopy.208Fig. 29c shows the steady-state PL spectra of Cu2+-doped ZnO nanocrystals in comparison with pure ZnO. Two emission bands were observed in the range of 350–700 nm: the predominant UV emission at 385 nm was attributed to excitonic band edge emission and the minor emission band at around 450–700 nm was ascribed to trap-state emission (originating from intrinsic defects). Upon Cu2+ doping, both emissions were greatly quenched. For the near band edge emission, the Cu2+ dopants may perform as electron acceptors for ZnO to prohibit charge recombination. On the other hand, the doped Cu2+ reduced the number of intrinsic defects in ZnO, leading to the decreased green emission. The effect of Cu2+ doping on charge carrier transfer can be better resolved by time-resolved PL measurements (Fig. 29d). The plots were further fitted with a biexponential function to generate a slow (τ1) and a fast (τ2) decay component, which could be assigned to radiative and nonradiative deactivation processes, respectively. Both decay components were shortened by the doping, suggesting that the Cu2+ dopants are in competition with the excited state deactivation in trapping the electrons from the CB. It clearly reveals that the Cu2+ dopant states provide extra nonradiative pathways for charge transfer. Moreover, the charge trapping ability can be promoted by increasing the Cu2+ concentration, as revealed by the enhanced quenching of steady-state PL as well as the shortened emission lifetime in time-resolved PL (Fig. 29c and d). As a result, the low concentration of the Cu2+ doping has enhanced the overall photoconversion efficiency as the introduction of interband transitions can improve the visible light harvesting as discussed in Section 3.1.2. In comparison, high concentration doping can lead to significant carrier trapping and decrease the photoconversion efficiency.

5.3 Surface reaction characterizations
Upon acquiring the band structures and charge transfer kinetics, better understanding of the charge dynamics in photocatalytic reactions on a catalyst surface at a molecular level is also critical for finalizing a photocatalyst design.209 The involvement of surface reactions in photocatalysis makes it well differentiated from other solar energy applications. To look into the surface reactions, various spectroscopic techniques have been developed as powerful tools to identify the element sources of products, the reaction paths and the intermediates as well as the adsorption and activation sites for half reactions. Infrared spectroscopy (IR) and thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) are two techniques that have been used to this end. However, the surface catalytic reactions are so complicated that IR and TDS are only capable of acquiring partial information from relatively simple reactions, and some other techniques are required to provide additional information. For instance, the defects or vacancies on the surface of a photocatalytic system can be examined by synchrotron-radiation-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), including X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS),210 positron annihilation spectroscopy (PAS),127 and electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy.211 Although the defects or vacancies have a huge impact on surface reactions, the related spectral data cannot resolve or deduce the charge kinetics involved in the reactions. For this reason, they are not discussed here in detail.

5.3.1 Infrared spectroscopy. 
IR spectroscopy has been widely used as a class of techniques to monitor surface reactions. Specifically, in situ Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool to investigate the surface properties of photocatalysts and the nature of adsorbed species. In parallel, time-resolved IR spectroscopy can accurately trace the charge kinetics in the surface reactions with adsorbed species because the free electrons and shallowly trapped electrons on surface absorb mid-IR light.120,212 As the mid-IR absorption spectra are not interfered by holes and are not sensitive to surrounding conditions, the dynamics of photoexcited electrons on the catalyst surface can be clearly reflected by the changes in mid-IR absorbance.
For instance, the mechanism of TiO2–Pt in photocatalytic hydrogen production from methanol was studied by in situ FTIR and time-resolved IR spectroscopy.212Fig. 30a shows the FTIR spectra taken after the adsorption of CH3OH onto TiO2–Pt. It was observed that the undissociated adsorbate CH3OH(a) (CH3 stretching at 2843 and 2944 cm−1) and the dissociated adsorbate CH3O(a) (CH3 stretching at 2818 and 2923 cm−1) were formed on the catalyst surface. Moreover, the IR absorbance of CH3OH(a) and CH3O(a) significantly decreases with the increase of Pt loading amounts as the Pt particles occupied some of the TiO2 surface active sites for methanol adsorption. As such, the FTIR spectra taken after different UV irradiation times could be used to examine the photocatalytic reactions of the methanol adsorbed on TiO2 and TiO2–Pt samples exposed to water, as shown in Fig. 30b and c, respectively. For bare TiO2, negative IR bands at 2800–2950 cm−1 appeared after the UV irradiation, which could be attributed to the desorption and reaction of CH3OH(a) and CH3O(a). The nearly unchanged intensity of the IR bands with prolonged irradiation time indicated that the photoreaction of adsorbed CH3OH on TiO2 was very slow. In the meantime, new bands at 1563, 1381 and 1360 cm−1 became stronger with time, showing the formation of formate. In comparison, the characteristic bands of CH3OH(a) and CH3O(a) greatly decreased in intensity and the new bands assigned to formate species grew remarkably with the UV irradiation in the case of TiO2–Pt, demonstrating that the Pt co-catalysts on TiO2 have strongly promoted the photoreaction.
 Fig. 30  (a) FTIR spectra of adsorbed CH3OH on TiO2–Pt samples at room temperature; (b, c) IR spectra taken after different UV irradiation times during the photocatalytic reaction of CH3OH on TiO2 (b) and TiO2–Pt (c); (d) transient profiles of average IR absorption of TiO2–Pt; (e, f) normalized transient profiles of an average IR absorption of TiO2 (e) and TiO2–Pt (0.2 wt%) (f) excited by 355 nm exposed to 20 Torr CH3OH and followed by evacuation at different time; (g) a possible reaction mechanism for the photocatalytic production of H2 from a methanol–water solution (adapted with permission from ref. 212, Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society). 
IR spectroscopy not only provides important information on surface species reactions, but may reflect charge kinetics. Time-resolved IR absorption spectroscopy has been used to examine the decay kinetics of photogenerated electrons on the surface of TiO2–Pt (Fig. 30d). The transient average IR absorbance changes were recorded on TiO2–Pt in vacuum in the presence of H2O and CH3OH. In both the vacuum and the H2O environment, the catalyst exhibited a fast electron decay within 10 μs due to charge recombination, followed by a subsequent slow decay corresponding to long-lived electrons. In the presence of CH3OH, however, the initial absorbance was enhanced about 17 times as compared with that observed in vacuum, and the absorbance stayed steady for a long time, showing the largely increased absorbance of long-lived electrons by CH3OH. In principle, when the hole was captured by CH3OH, the complementary electrons would have long lifetimes. The probability of electrons recombining with the holes captured by methoxy groups should be extremely low.
To further decode the charge kinetics, the normalized IR absorption decay curves of TiO2 and TiO2–Pt were measured under different methanol pressures (Fig. 30e and f). With methanol pressures increased, bare TiO2 exhibited nearly constant electron decay rates. With Pt loaded onto the TiO2, two distinct features were brought to the system: the electrons decayed considerably faster and the electron decays were significantly accelerated with the increase of methanol pressure. The fast decay of electrons could be mainly ascribed to the direct reaction of electrons with protons to produce H2 on Pt sites. This photoreaction could be accelerated effectively by increasing the pressures of CH3OH, because the molecularly adsorbed CH3OH and H2O equilibrated with CH3OH(g) and H2O(g) mediated the transfer of H+ to the Pt sites. By combining different IR spectroscopic techniques, sufficient information on surface species and charge kinetics has been gathered to propose the reaction mechanism illustrated in Fig. 30g. The H2 evolution reaction mainly takes place on Pt sites, and the hole-consuming reactions mainly take place on the TiO2 surface in reaction with methanol-derived adsorbates. The methanol-derived species are oxidized by holes directly into formate species, releasing H+ stepwise. The molecularly-adsorbed water and methanol mediate the transfer of H+ to Pt.


5.3.2 Thermal desorption spectroscopy and their coupling techniques. 
Thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS), also known as temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), is a method of observing molecular desorption from a catalyst surface when increasing surface temperature. This technique can be devoted for studying the kinetics and thermodynamic parameters of adsorption and desorption processes occurring on photocatalyst surfaces. The TPD can often be coupled with other techniques, such as mass spectroscopy (MS), isotope labeling, light illumination and XPS, to explore the photocatalytic reaction paths on catalyst surface.213,214
For instance, laser-induced photocatalysis combined with TPD coupled with MS (TPD-MS) spectroscopy has been used to probe nascent products from the photocatalytic dissociation of methanol on a TiO2(110) surface through isotope labeling.201 After the TiO2(110) surface was dosed with CD3OH and then irradiated by the 400 nm laser for various durations, the TPD spectra at a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 33 (CD2OH+) were collected. The signal intensity decreased monotonically with the increase of laser irradiation time, suggesting that the CD3OH molecules that were adsorbed on the Ti5c sites were photocatalytically dissociated (Fig. 31a). In the meantime, the TPD signal for m/z = 32 (CD2O+) showed promoted intensities by increasing laser irradiation time. The CD2O+ signal may originate from three sources: the parent ion signal of formaldehyde (CD2O), as well as the ion-fragment signals of the parent CD3OH molecule and the photocatalyzed CD3OD product. The strong TPD signal indicated that the formaldehyde could be an important photocatalytic product. As shown in Fig. 31b, the increase in the formaldehyde signal with laser irradiation time was almost perfectly anticorrelated with the decrease in the signal from the adsorbed parent CD3OH.
 Fig. 31  (a) Typical TPD spectra collected at m/z = 33 (CD2OH+) and 32 (CD2O+) following different laser irradiation times; (b) integrated TPD signals of the desorbed parent methanol (CD3OH) signal (from m/z = 33) and the formaldehyde (CD2O) product as a function of laser irradiation time; (c) TPD spectra collected at m/z = 18, 19, and 20 following different laser irradiation times; (d) integrated TPD signals for water isotopologues as a function of laser irradiation time; the inset of (d) shows the same data where the integrated TPD signals of HOD and D2O have been normalized to the TPD signal of H2O; (e) TPD spectra of H2O with laser surface irradiation for different times (adapted with permission from ref. 213, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
In the TPD measurements of the water product isotopologues, including H2O, HOD and D2O (Fig. 31c), the stepwise dissociation of CD3OH and the affinity of H and D for the bridge-bonded oxygen (BBO) vacancy sites can be confirmed. The observed TPD spectra for H2O, HOD and D2O suggested that the BBO sites with the adsorbed H and D atoms, which were produced by photocatalyzed dissociation of CD3OH on Ti5c sites, also contributed to the TPD signals. The relative TPD signals of H2O, HOD, and D2O as a function of laser irradiation showed that the TPD signals were raised monotonically as laser irradiation time increased (Fig. 31d). H2O formed at a higher rate than HOD and D2O, which indicated that photocatalyzed H-atom and D-atom dissociations from CD3OH were two steps in the formation of formaldehyde. Given that water was not photocatalytically active on the TiO2(110) surface (Fig. 31e), the photocatalyzed dissociation of methanol should take place in a stepwise manner: (10) (11)

6. Theoretical simulations
Complementarily to characterization techniques mentioned in Section 5, modern theoretical simulations and calculations are also indispensable in evaluating the charge kinetics in the designed or synthesized systems. On one hand, it is indeed a giant project to synthesize all possible photocatalysts and then formulate design rules for selecting proper parameters in steering charge kinetics based on their performance evaluation. This low-efficiency “try-error” methodology tremendously increases the work load of the research community. In most cases, theoretical simulations can provide a clear picture for the design of photocatalysts from the viewpoint of mechanisms and guide us to select the proper parameters. On the other hand, the limited instrumental characterizations cannot completely fulfill the requirements for complex charge kinetics, particularly at the atomic and electronic scale. Moreover, many charge kinetics factors interact with each other, and their interplay results in difficulty in assessing a single factor via experimental methods. The simulations on photocatalytic processes can provide us with charge kinetics information that we cannot or do not have to acquire from experimental syntheses and assessments through the “try-error” mode, thereby elevating the level of our understanding on charge kinetics. Indeed, the theoretical investigations of photocatalysis have progressed rapidly alongside experimental attempts and met with great success. To date, theoretical simulations have been developed to examine all the three key steps of charge kinetics.131,199 In analyzing the charge generating ability of a semiconductor, first-principles calculations based on quantum mechanics (mainly the ab initio simulation and density functional theory, DFT) can simulate the electronic structures and optical properties of a semiconductor without the need of any experimental parameters. The effects of doping or vacancies on these electronic and optical parameters can also be clarified by employing these calculations. In terms of charge transfer and separation, interfacial electronic coupling and the work function relationship between two components can be calculated by first-principles simulations. As for surface reactions, the adsorption and activation energies as well as the reaction pathways for a reactant on a catalyst surface can be revealed by quantum mechanics modeling as well as molecular dynamics simulation (MD) based on classical mechanics when the kinetic balance is considered.
6.1 Light absorption and band structure
The capabilities of a photocatalytic system in light absorption and charge generation highly depend on its electronic structures. Nowadays, first-principles simulations have been able to predict the electronic structures of semiconductors, including band structure, DOS, electron density distributions and charge population. For instance, as we have discussed above, the TiO2 materials with rutile, anatase and brookite phases have different electronic structures due to their unique unit cells (Fig. 32a). The space groups of anatase, rutile and rookite TiO2 are I41/amd, P42/mnm and Pbca, respectively. The DOSs of the anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2 were calculated by density functional theory (DFT) using generalized gradient approximation (GGA), as shown in Fig. 32b–d,215 showing that the three phases have similar constitutions of DOS. The VB of TiO2 consists of O 2p states and a few Ti 3d states, whereas the CB is mainly composed of Ti 3d states, mixed with a few O 2p and Ti 3p states. The energy band structures of anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2 along the high symmetry directions in the Brillouin zone were also calculated. In the anatase phase, an indirect band gap of 2.13 eV was observed between the CBM at the G point and the VBM at the B point along the ZM direction. In comparison, the rutile and brookite belong to the direct band gap semiconductor category and their corresponding band gaps are 1.86 and 2.38 eV at the G point, respectively. It should be noted that these values are considerably smaller than the experimental values mentioned in Section 3.1.1, resulting from the well-known shortcoming of the GGA function in DFT calculations. Moreover, the influence of foreign element doping on the electronic structure of a semiconductor can also be studied by theoretical calculations. For instance, the DOSs of the substitutional doping of C, N, F, P or S for O in the anatase TiO2 crystal were calculated by the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave (FLAPW) (Fig. 32e and f).216 The DOSs indicate that N is the most suitable doping element as its p orbitals contribute to the VB by mixing with O 2p orbitals, which can narrow the band gap of TiO2 by shifting the VB upward. Although doping with S shows a similar band-gap narrowing, it would be difficult to incorporate it into the TiO2 crystal because of its large ionic radius. In comparison, the states introduced by C and P are too deep in the gap to overlap sufficiently with the VB states of TiO2.
 Fig. 32  (a–d) Schematic conventional cells (a) for anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2 as well as band structures and DOS for anatase (b), rutile (c) and brookite (d) TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 215, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry); (e, f) total DOSs of doped TiO2 (e) and projected DOSs into the doped anion sites (f), calculated by FLAPW; the dopants F, N, C, S, and P are located at a substitutional site for an O atom in the anatase TiO2 crystal (the eight TiO2 units per cell). The results for N doping at an interstitial site (Ni-doped) and that at both substitutional and interstitial sites (Ni+s-doped) are also shown; the energy is measured from the top of the VBs of TiO2, and the DOSs for doped TiO2 are shifted so that the peaks of the O 2s states are aligned with each other (adapted with permission from ref. 216, Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
6.2 Charge separation and transfer
As discussed in the previous sections, charge separation in a semiconductor-based system can be predicted by evaluating the difference in work functions/Fermi levels between different regions, whereas charge transfer relies on the electronic coupling of two components in a hybrid structure. Thus, the information on work functions and electronic couplings, which can be referred to theoretical simulations, would help us evaluate the capabilities of a designed system in charge separation and transfer. For example, different facets of a semiconductor may have different electronic structures, resulting in spatial charge separation in a bare semiconductor. The directions of this charge separation are greatly determined by the work function difference between the two facets and the bulk. Thus acquiring the work functions of different facets by first-principles simulations is a highly efficient tool to identify reduction and oxidation facets.
In a typical example, our research group used Cu2O cuboctahedrons as a model system to demonstrate that Cu2O(100) and Cu2O(111) facets possessed different electronic structures due to varied atomic arrangements (Fig. 33a–c).34 In first-principles simulations, the work function of Cu2O(100) (ca. 7.2 eV) appears significantly higher than that of Cu2O(111) (ca. 4.8 eV) as well as bulk Cu2O, suggesting that photoexcited electrons prefer to transfer from the (111) to the (100) surface (Fig. 33d and e). Given the preference of electrons accumulated on Cu2O(100), it can be assumed that the photoexcited holes will most probably migrate to the Cu2O(111) surface, as illustrated in Fig. 33f.
 Fig. 33  (a) SEM images of Cu2O cuboctahedrons; (b, c) representations of the atomic arrangements for the (b) Cu2O(100) and (c) Cu2O(111) surfaces; (d, e) potential diagrams of (d) Cu2O(100) and (e) Cu2O(111) surfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (f) illustration for the charge spatial distribution between Cu2O(100) and Cu2O(111) surfaces; (g) SEM image of Cu2O cuboctahedrons whose (111) surface was selectively deposited with Pd; (h) potential lineup diagram of Cu2O(111)–Pd interfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (i) illustration for the charge transfer in the Cu2O cuboctahedrons with Pd deposited on (111) facets; (j) SEM image of Cu2O cuboctahedrons whose (100) surface was selectively deposited with Pd; (k) potential lineup diagram of Cu2O(100)–Pd interfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (l) illustration for the charge transfer in the Cu2O cuboctahedrons with Pd deposited on (100) facets (adapted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.). 
Based on this spatial charge separation of the semiconductor, Pd co-catalysts could be further integrated into the system and selectively deposited on the Cu2O(100) and Cu2O(111) facets (Fig. 33g and j). The motivation for using this co-catalyst is to extract holes from the p-type semiconductor Cu2O by a Schottky junction. However, from the simulated potential lineups of Pd interfacing with Cu2O(100) or Cu2O(111) facets, we found that Pd–Cu2O(100) and Pd–Cu2O(111) interfaces exhibited quite different charge transfer behaviors (Fig. 33h and k). According to the potential lineup of Pd–Cu2O(111), the Schottky barrier could not be formed at the Pd–Cu2O(111) interface due to the work function of Cu2O(111) being lower than Pd (Fig. 33i). For the Pd–Cu2O(100) interface, the potential lineups simulated in Fig. 33k showed that the work function of Pd was about 1.7 eV higher than that of the Cu2O(100) facet, which is in favor of forming a Schottky junction between Pd and Cu2O(100) (Fig. 33l). Despite the establishment of a Schottky junction at Pd–Cu2O(100), the Cu2O(100) is the location for accumulating electrons by spatial charge separation. Thus the Schottky junction cannot be synergized with spatial charge separation in this configuration. This case highlights that altering the facets for co-catalyst deposition may lead to different charge transfer behaviors.
6.3 Surface charge reactions
For the charge dynamics of photoreactions on a catalyst surface, it has been suggested that the adsorption and activation of species on the surface greatly determine catalytic activity and selectivity. Thus computing the adsorption and activation energies of a specific reactant (for molecular adsorption and activation) or a free radical (for dissociative adsorption and activation) to a reactive surface with theoretical simulations can help to understand the mechanisms responsible for reaction activity and selectivity. Moreover, reaction directions and paths can also be deduced by calculating the dissociation energies of different chemical bonds. Nowadays, theoretical simulations are mainly used to study the interactions of some small molecular compounds such as H2O and CO2 with specific surface facets of semiconductors or co-catalysts.
In a typical case, DFT calculations were performed to fundamentally understand the dissociation process of methanol on the TiO2(110) surface, which had been experimentally examined in Section 5.3.2.213 As shown in Fig. 34a, with the average adsorption energy of 0.75 eV for CH3OH, the first step of the O–H dissociation energy is slightly endoergic by 0.03 eV with a barrier of 0.25 eV, whereas the second dissociation step of the C–D bond is highly endoergic (1.03 eV) with a considerably higher barrier (1.57 eV). The barrier for the reverse reaction is therefore 0.54 eV. The high reverse barrier to C–D recombination and the weak adsorption of CD2O to the TiO2 surface make the photocatalytic methanol dissociation on TiO2(110) proceed efficiently. In the case of water (Fig. 34b), the significantly lower reverse barrier (0.1 eV) for the second O–H dissociation step, as compared to that of C–D in methanol, makes the recombination of O and H prone to happen, thus lowering the efficiency of water splitting.
 Fig. 34  (a, b) Calculated energetics of the two-step dissociation of (a) CD3OH and (b) H2O on a TiO2(110) surface (adapted with permission from ref. 213, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c–f) optimized configurations for CO2 adsorbed to (c) Pd(100) and (d) Pd(111) facets together with the adsorption energy Ea as well as the potential energy surface along the O–C bond length for the CO2 molecule adsorbed to (e) Pd(100) and (f) Pd(111) facets in the neutral state or charged with 2 electrons, from which the CO2 activation energy EB is deducted (adapted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Another case is to understand the facet-dependent reaction selectivity on Pd co-catalysts in photocatalytic CO2 reduction (i.e., the system discussed in Section 3.3.2), from the viewpoint of molecular adsorption and activation by first-principles theoretical investigations.109 As shown in Fig. 34c and d, the adsorption energy of CO2 in the case of Pd(111) (Ea = 0.230 eV) is considerably higher than that for Pd(100) (Ea = 0.064 eV), suggesting a better performance of Pd(111) in CO2 adsorption. Moreover, the activation energy barriers (EB) for CO2 reduction were also obtained before and after two electrons (which are known to facilitate CO2 activation) were brought to the Pd(100) and Pd(111) facets. The EB can be lowered from 6.79 to 4.15 eV for Pd(100) and from 7.15 to 3.98 eV for Pd(111) (Fig. 34e and f). These features explain the better performance of Pd(111) for CO2 reduction. These two cases thus demonstrate the prediction power of theoretical simulations in designing photocatalyst activation sites and thereby steering charge kinetics toward high quantum efficiency.
7. Conclusions and outlook
Photocatalysis has come into an age of fundamental understanding and rational design, and the development of photocatalysts is no longer a blind and occasional voyage of discovery. By steering charge kinetics, one can thus rationally design a photocatalytic system specifically according to various demands. In this review, we aim to outline how to understand and evaluate the charge kinetics in an existing photocatalytic system as well as how to design a new photocatalytic system in terms of harnessing charge kinetics. The charge kinetics contains three main steps during photocatalysis: charge generation, charge transfer, and charge consumption. In understanding the fundamentals of photocatalysis, the principles, models and processes of a photocatalytic system elucidate where charge carriers are produced and consumed as well as what directions the charges are transferred along, whereas the efficiencies of these charge kinetics processes are determined by some key parameters of the catalytic system that we have summarized in the review.
Three tools, including controlled syntheses, characterization techniques (with a focus on spectroscopic characterizations) and theoretical simulations, have been integrated and widely used in the evaluation and design of catalytic systems. The controlled syntheses produce the photocatalysts that people design and strive to achieve, whereas the characterization techniques help to acquire the charge kinetics information on the synthesized catalysts. The theoretical simulations are complementary to the syntheses and characterizations, which not only provide charge kinetics information for guiding the catalyst design and syntheses, but also make up the limitations of characterization techniques in certain charge kinetics analyses. We hope that readers can receive a big picture from this article regarding what techniques or methods should be chosen for specific purposes in charge-kinetics studies.
In recent years, great efforts and progress have been made on probing and steering the charge kinetics of photocatalytic systems. Due to space limitations, it is not very feasible to include all the reported cases in this review article. Nevertheless, we are conveying the important information that the performance of a catalytic system is ultimately determined by its intrinsic charge kinetics. If we regard the entire photocatalytic system as a car, charge kinetics would be the engine to drive the system. Thus it is believed that manipulation of the charge kinetics will be continuously employed by the research community to design optimal photocatalytic structures for significantly improved performance in the future. It is worth pointing out that the importance of charge kinetics to catalysis is not limited to photocatalytic systems. The understanding of the surface and interfacial charge kinetics has wide implications for other research fields such as surface polarization for electrocatalysis217 and catalytic gaseous reactions,218 both of which are essentially induced by the difference in work functions and electronic structures of components at the interface of hybrid structures.
Despite success in tuning the charge kinetics, there are still many challenges and opportunities for related research into photocatalyst development. The first challenge comes from the fact that the charge kinetics mechanisms involved in photocatalysis have not been completely understood and resolved. Despite the mechanisms and principles that we have discussed in Section 2, the interplay effects from multiple mechanisms and/or steps make the actual processes significantly more complicated. The existing mechanisms are proposed mainly based on the collected characterization data and the developed theories. With the development of catalytic theories and modeling methods on multiple scales, a deeper understanding of the fundamentals behind each catalytic system will be enabled.
Second, the development of charge kinetics models has lagged behind in the growing trend in research into photocatalysts. The existing models summarized in Section 2 are the platforms upon which researchers are designing new photocatalytic materials, most of which have been developed and used for a long time. It is anticipated that new models would be added to the existing family by borrowing findings from other research fields. For instance, artificial surface polarization has been developed to enhance performance in electrocatalytic H2 evolution as well as catalytic CO oxidation.217,218 The introduction of artificial surface polarization to a photocatalytic system may lead to new band bending and internal electric fields for charge separation and transfer, as well as altering activation reaction dynamics on the polarized surface.
Third, the limited controllability over catalyst synthesis forms an obstacle for researchers to design new photocatalytic systems and particularly the complicated synthetic protocols puzzle researchers without a materials chemistry background. Given the complexity of photocatalytic systems, it is necessary to optimize the three primary charge kinetics steps and to simultaneously control both the surfaces and the interfaces of hybrid structures, setting up higher criteria for materials synthesis. Thus far, this goal has not been achieved in the synthesis in most cases. This challenge also highlights the importance of collaborative research across the disciplines in the development of new photocatalytic systems.
The fourth challenge is caused by the lag in technology for charge kinetics characterizations. To acquire deeper understanding on charge kinetics as well as their relative parameters, in situ observations at high spatial, spectral and temporal resolutions are highly desirable for delineating a true, multi-dimensional picture of the processes in action.219,220 However, most existing characterization techniques can only provide indirect information at low resolutions. Thus, further development of photocatalysis inevitably relies on the invention or upgradation of characterization techniques in the future.
Certainly, these challenges indicate that lots ofopportunities are around the corner. Photocatalysis research will become a systematic project, in which design, syntheses and characterizations together with simulations would be conducted synergically in sustaining the rapid development of photocatalysis. The essential core of this project is the charge kinetics inside or between various materials and species. Energy band engineering, interface engineering and surface engineering all play important roles in materials design. The ultimate mission is to absorb more solar light to produce more charge carriers and to transfer the charges to reaction species and generate desired products more efficiently. As soon as this mission is completed, photocatalysis will be truly put into use in industry and in our lives.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by 973 Program (No. 2014CB848900, 2010CB923300), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 21471141, 21101145, 91123010, 21173205, 91127042, 21473166), Recruitment Program of Global Experts, CAS Hundred Talent Program, CAS Strategic Priority Research Program B (No. XDB01020000), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. WK2060190025, WK2310000035, WK2090050027, WK2340000063).
Notes and references
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mills and S. L. Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Chen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 6174 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765 RSC .
W. Tu, Y. Zou and Z. G. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemannt, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ding, K. Liu, S. He, C. Gao and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787 RSC .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782 RSC .
G. Xie, K. Zhang, B. Guo, Q. Liu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2253 RSC .

          S. M. Sze, Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Townsend, E. M. Sabio, N. D. Browning and F. E. Osterloh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4270 CAS .
M. A. Correa-Duarte, M. Giersig and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 286, 497 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kibria, S. Zhao, F. A. Chowdhury, Q. Wang, H. P. T. Nguyen, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3825 CAS .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Tan, S. C. Hsu, W. H. Ke, L. J. Chen and M. H. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Ge, A. Wang, M. Deng, X. Wang, S. Bai, R. Li, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5107 CAS .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Fan and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhen, J. C. Yu, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10416 RSC .
J. L. Giocondi and G. S. Rohrer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86, 1182 CrossRef CAS .

          R. V. D. Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Springer,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 8, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Langhammer, Z. Yuan, I. Zorić and B. Kasemo, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2009 RSC .
F. Yan, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Zheng and F. Huang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Odom and G. C. Schatz, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Lim, A. Barhoumi, R. G. Wylie, G. Reznor, R. S. Langer and D. S. Kohane, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Torimoto, H. Horibe, T. Kameyama, K. Okazaki, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura, A. Ishikawa and H. Ishihara, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2057 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9173 CAS .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang and Y. K. Guńko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16616 CAS .
M. Moskovits, Science, 2011, 332, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Baek, G. Park, J. Noh, C. Cho, C. H. Lee, M. K. Seo, H. Song and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, M. Ji, H. Qian, B. Dai, L. Weng, J. Gui, J. Zhang, M. Ouyang and H. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Calzolari, A. Ruini and A. Catellani, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 703 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fan, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2632 RSC .
S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, C. H. Chuang, C. Burda and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Lv, Q. Ling, D. Liu and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13041 CAS .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Zhang and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1611 RSC .
Z. Wang, A. Shakya, J. Gu, S. Lian and S. Maldondado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Teranishi and M. Sakamoto, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Park, T. Kim, E. Jang, S. Jun, H. Jang, B. Kim and S. W. Kim, Small, 2011, 7, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234 RSC .
Z. He, Y. Shi, C. Gao, L. Wen, J. Chen and S. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 389 CAS .
K. L. Schulte, P. A. DeSario and K. A. Gray, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 97, 354 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Xu, M. Li, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Shi, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 13089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Yuan, J. C. Zhao, E. R. Waclawik, X. Ke and H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, M. K. Seery, S. J. Hinder and S. C. Pillai, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 32 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Tao, W. F. Schneider and P. V. Kamat, Heterogeneous catalysis at nanoscale for energy applications, Wiley,  2014 Search PubMed .
H. J. Yun, H. Lee, N. D. Kim, D. M. Lee, S. Yu and J. Yi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 42 CrossRef .
L. Ye, J. Liu, C. Gong, L. Tian, T. Peng and L. Zan, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1677 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. G. Zhao and M. Miyauchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17132 CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Meng, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 800 RSC .
W. Wang, G. Liu, Z. G. Chen, F. Li, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3452 RSC .
J. G. Yu, S. H. Wang, J. X. Low and W. Xiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16883 RSC .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64 RSC .
D. Eder, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792 RSC .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568 RSC .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Shen, H. Lv, G. Zhu, C. Bao and Y. Shan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 405, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang and Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21724 CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504 CAS .
S. Karlsson, J. Boixel, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, H. C. Becker, F. Odobel and L. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen, X. Wang, L. Huang, G. Ma, J. Yang and C. Li, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Hu, M. Deng, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Hu, H. L. Jiang, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takeda, K. Koike, H. Inoue and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, L. Qi and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13118 CAS .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, A. Pierre, M. G. Kibria, K. Cui, X. Han, K. H. Bevan, H. Guo, S. Paradis, A. R. Hakima and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zong, H. J. Yan, G. P. Wu, G. J. Ma, F. Y. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, R. Li, J. Zhu, J. Shi, J. Han, X. Zong and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5082 CAS .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K. S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, A. K. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. L. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Cates, S. L. Chinnapongse, J. H. Kim and J. H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 12316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, P. Thiyagarajan, H. J. Ahn, S. I. Kim and J. H. Jang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6254 RSC .
W. Hu, L. Li, G. Li, C. Tang and L. Sun, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3676 CAS .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Chen, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11865 Search PubMed .
F. Zuo, K. Bozhilov, R. J. Dillon, L. Wang, P. Smith, X. Zhao, C. Bardeen and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Nakamura, N. Negishi, S. Kutsuna, T. Ihara, S. Sugihara and K. Takeuchi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 161, 205 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi, S. Ouyang, P. Li, J. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, Y. Cao, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9554 RSC .
M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bi, C. Ye, C. Xiao, W. Tong, X. Zhang, W. Shao and Y. Xie, Small, 2014, 10, 2820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Niu, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11013 CAS .
B. H. Kim, M. Park, M. Lee, S. J. Baek, H. Y. Jeong, M. Choi, S. J. Chang, W. G. Hong, T. K. Kim, H. R. Moon, Y. W. Park, N. Park and Y. Jun, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18424 RSC .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, Z. Lou, G. Wang, X. Zhang and X. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2758 RSC .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2002, 63, 1909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyauchi, A. Ikezawa, H. Tobimatsu, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 865 RSC .
Y. Cong, F. Chen, J. L. Zhang and M. Anpo, Chem. Lett., 2006, 800 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Irie, K. Kamiya, T. Shibanuma, S. Miura, D. A. Tryk, T. Yokoyama and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10761 CAS .
G. Chen, H. Qiu, P. N. Prasad and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Li, F. B. Shi, T. Zhang, H. S. Wu, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8109 RSC .
Z. Li, C. Li, Y. Mei, L. Wang, G. Du and Y. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3030 RSC .
K. Zhou, X. Li, S. Liu and J. H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 415401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y. L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toma, G. Loget and R. M. Corn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Ye, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, J. Ge, L. Wang, M. Gong, M. Deng, Q. Kong, L. Song, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, H. Cheng, S. Gao, Z. Sun, Q. Liu, Q. Liu, F. Lei, T. Yao, J. He, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai and Y. Xiong, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015 DOI:10.1166/sam.2015.2261 .
J. Jiang, K. Zhao, X. Xiao and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Wang, X. Chen, J. Du and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 175 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lordi, P. Erhart and D. Aberg, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 235204 CrossRef .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. Bright, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, P. Zheng, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 47 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9167 RSC .
J. Li, S. Lv, C. Chen, S. Huang and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51002 RSC .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, G. Wu, N. Guan, L. Li, Z. Li and X. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10978 RSC .
Y. Shimodaira, A. Kudo and H. Kobayashi, Chem. Lett., 2007, 170 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24 RSC .
A. F. Alkaim, T. A. Kandiel, F. H. Hussein, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahneman, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 3216 CAS .
R. Long, K. Mao, M. Gong, S. Zhou, J. Hu, M. Zhi, Y. You, S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, X. Wu and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, W. Li, J. Q. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, K. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Fu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo and B. Huang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bi, S. Ouyang, N. Umezawa, J. Cao and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kong, S. Min and G. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9281 RSC .
Q. Zhai, S. Xie, W. Fan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Zhao, J. M. Andino and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1817 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Zhao, N. Wu, M. A. E. Khakani and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2010, 24, 2310 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shim, H. McDaniel and N. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, W. Di, X. Zhai, R. Yang and W. Qin, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 405 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9136 CAS .
Y. C. Pu and Y. J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3881 RSC .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Torimoto, H. Horibe, T. Kameyama, K. Okazaki, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura, A. Ishikawa and H. Ishihara, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2057 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Liow, D. Qi, B. Zhu, W. R. Leow, H. Wang, C. Xue, X. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Robinson, B. Sadtler, D. O. Demchenko, C. K. Erdonmez, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2007, 317, 355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Yu, M. Chi and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bi, H. Hu, S. Ouyang, Z. Jiao, G. Lu and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14847 RSC .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3038 Search PubMed .
Y. P. Xie, Z. B. Yu, G. Liu, X. L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1895 CAS .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768 RSC .
E. J. W. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. Tian, J. Gao, X. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
A. X. Gray, C. Papp, S. Ueda, B. Balke, Y. Yamashita, L. Plucinski, J. Minár, J. Braun, E. R. Ylvisaker, C. M. Schneider, W. E. Pickett, H. Ebert, K. Kobayashi and C. S. Fadley, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. M. Chen, C. Liu, S. C. Andrews, C. Hahn and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 954 CAS .
P. A. DeSario, J. J. Pietron, D. E. DeVantier, T. H. Brintlinger, R. M. Stroud and D. R. Rolison, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8073 RSC .
Measurements of band gap in compound semiconductors: band gap determination from diffuse reflectance spectra, application new, No. A428, Shimadzu Corporation.
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kapilashrami, Y. Zhang, Y. S. Liu, A. Hagfeldt and J. Guo, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Vayssieres, On solar hydrogen & nanotechnology, Wiley,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. L. Dong, C. Persson, L. Vayssieres, A. Augustsson, T. Schmitt, M. Mattesini, R. Ahuja, C. L. Chang and J. H. Guo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 195325 CrossRef .
T. Cottineau, M. Morin and D. Belanger, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 23649 RSC .
L. Liao, Q. Zhang, Z. Su, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Lu, D. Wei, G. Feng, Q. Yu, X. Cai, J. Zhao, Z. Ren, H. Fang, F. Robles-Hernandez, S. Baldelli and J. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Berera, R. V. Grondelle and J. T. M. Kennis, Photosynth. Res., 2009, 101, 105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Sato, Electrochemistry at metal and semiconductor electrodes, Elsevier,  1998 Search PubMed .
J. S. DuChene, B. C. Sweeny, A. C. Johnston-Peck, D. Su, E. A. Stach and W. D. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Anpo and P. V. Kamat, Enviromental benign photocatalysts, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Lu, W. H. Lin, C. Y. Yang, Y. H. Chiu, Y. C. Pu, M. H. Lee, Y. C. Tseng and Y. J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8796 RSC .
R. Osgood, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Belver, R. Bellod, S. J. Stewart, F. G. Requejo and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 65, 309 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Lei, Y. F. Sun, K. T. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Z. Feng, G. Wu, J. Shi, G. Ma, P. Ying and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8005 CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Xu, Z. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, D. Dai, H. Fan, T. K. Minton and X. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, Z. Wu, Y. Jin, L. Xu, F. Xiong, Y. Ma and W. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, P. Zhou, J. Liu and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20382 RSC .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, C. Wang, M. Deng, M. Gong, Y. Bai, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Wang, W. Huang, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4557 RSC .
U. Bentrup, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4718 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Song Bai
	Song Bai received his BS and MS degrees from the Jiangsu University in 2009 and 2012, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate under the tutelage of Professor Yujie Xiong at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests focus on design and synthesis of novel hybrid nanomaterials for photocatalysis.

Jun Jiang
	Jun Jiang received his BS in physics in 2000 at Wuhan University, China, a PhD in theoretical chemistry in 2007 (with Professor Yi Luo) at the Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, and a PhD in solid state physics in 2008 (with Professor Wei Lu) at the Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After three-years of postdoctoral training with Professor Shaul Mukamel at University of California Irvine, he joined the University of Science and Technology of China in 2011 as a Professor in theoretical chemistry. His research interests focus on the development and employment of multi-scale modeling methods for electron kinetics in complex systems.

Qun Zhang
	Qun Zhang received his PhD in chemical physics from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1999. After seven-years of postdoctoral training with Professor Moshe Shapiro at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel (2000–2003), and Professors Moshe Shapiro and John W. Hepburn at the University of British Columbia, Canada (2003–2007), he joined the USTC as an Associate Professor of Chemical Physics. He has published more than 70 peer-reviewed papers in the fields of laser spectroscopy and molecular reaction dynamics. His current research interests focus on ultrafast spectroscopy and dynamics in nanomaterials and condensed-phase molecular systems.

Yujie Xiong
	Yujie Xiong received his BS in chemical physics in 2000 and PhD in inorganic chemistry in 2004 (with Professor Yi Xie), both from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). After four-years of training with Professors Younan Xia and John A. Rogers, he joined the NSF-NNIN at Washington University in St. Louis as the Principal Scientist and Lab Manager. Starting from 2011, he is a Professor of Chemistry at the USTC. He has published 101 papers with over 8000 citations (H-index 47). His research interests include synthesis, fabrication and assembly of inorganic materials for energy and environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for probing charge kinetics in existing photocatalytic systems as well as steering the kinetics via the design and fabrication of new photocatalytic systems at the intersection of materials syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration for the basic mechanism of a bare semiconductor photocatalytic process; (b, c) schematic illustrations for the band bending near the n-type semiconductor surface: (b) upward bending; (c) downward bending.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a, b) Schematic illustration for spatial charge separation in a bare n-type semiconductor between different facets: (a) driven by surface band bending and (b) driven by different band structures of facets. (c, d) Schematic illustration for spatial charge separation in a bare semiconductor between the two sides of the semiconductor (but with the same surface facet): (c) driven by a ferroelectric field and (d) driven by a dipole field.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic band diagrams illustrating PEC processes: (a) before contact for an n-type semiconductor; (b) after contact for an n-type semiconductor in the dark; (c) n-type semiconductor under light irradiation without external bias; (d) n-type semiconductor under light irradiation with external bias; (e) after contact for a p-type semiconductor in the dark; and (f) p-type semiconductor under light irradiation with external bias.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer driven by the Schottky junction between a metal and an n-type semiconductor; (b) schematic illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer driven by the Schottky junction between a metal and a p-type semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic band diagrams illustrating: (a) charge transfer driven by the Schottky junction and the plasmonic hot carrier effect in the hybrid structures between metal and n-type or p-type semiconductor; (b) charge transfer driven by the ohmic contact and the plasmonic hot carrier effect in the hybrid structures between metal and n-type or p-type semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic band diagrams illustrating two mechanisms of plasmonic effects for energy transfer between metal and semiconductor: (a) local electromagnetic field enhancement and (b) resonant photon scattering.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic band diagrams illustrating the formation of a semiconductor–semiconductor junction.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic band diagrams illustrating semiconductor sensitization: (a) injection of sensitized electrons and (b) injection of sensitized holes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic band diagrams illustrating semiconductor–semiconductor junctions: (a) Type II, (b) Type I, (c) Type III, and (d) p–n junction. Schematics illustrating the processes of charge separation and transfer in (e) n–n junction with consistent directions of charge separation and transfer, (f) p–n junction, and (g) n–n junction with opposite directions of charge separation and transfer.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic band diagrams illustrating the semiconductor with a phase junction: (a) Type II-like phase junction; (b) Type I-like phase junction; and (c) semiconductor sensitization-like phase junction.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic band diagrams illustrating a Z-scheme structure: (a) indirect Z-scheme structure mediated by redox pairs; (b) semiconductor–conductor–semiconductor all-solid-state Z-scheme structure; and (c) semiconductor–semiconductor all-solid-state Z-scheme structure.	 
A + e− → D (CB of semiconductor 1)	(1)
D + h+ → A (VB of semiconductor 2)	(2)

 	Fig. 13  Schematic band diagrams illustrating (a) semiconductor–carbon material hybrid structure; (b) dye-sensitized semiconductor structure; and (c) semiconductor-based co-catalyst structure. For illustration simplicity, band bending is not depicted here.	 


Bare semiconductor	Basic photocatalytic systems	No surface band bending	

	None	
Fig. 2a
	Fe2O3	
27


	
	Surface band bending up	

	Step II	
Fig. 2b
	n-type GaN	
30


	
	Surface band bending down	

	Step II	
Fig. 2c
	p-type GaN	
30


	Spatial charge separation	Driven by surface band bending	

	Step II	
Fig. 3a
	Cu2O	
33


	
	Driven by different band structures of facets	

	Step II	
Fig. 3b
	BiVO4	
35


	
	Driven by ferroelectric field	

	Step II	
Fig. 3c
	PbTiO3	
36


	
	Driven by dipole field	

	Step II	
Fig. 3d
	SrTiO3	
37


	PEC process	n-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 4c
	Ta3N5	
41


	
	p-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 4f
	Cu2O	
42



Metal–semiconductor junction	Schottky junction	n-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 6a
	TiO2–Au	
16


	
	p-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 6a
	Cu2O–Pd	
34


	Ohmic contact	n-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 6b
	ZnO–Ag	
47


	
	p-type semiconductor	

	Step II	
Fig. 6b
	—	—

	Plasmonic hot charge injection	n-type semiconductor	

	Step I	
Fig. 6a
	Au–TiO2	
56


	
	p-type semiconductor	

	Step I	
Fig. 6a
	Au–TiO2 (p-type)	
45


	Plasmonic energy transfer	Local electromagnetic field enhancement	

	Step I	
Fig. 7a
	Ag–TiO2	
61


	
	Resonant photon scattering	

	Step I	
Fig. 7b
	Au–CdS	
63



Semiconductor –semiconductor junction	Semiconductor sensitization	Electron sensitization	

	Step I	
Fig. 9a
	CdS–Zn1−xCdxS	
71


	
	Hole sensitization	

	Step I	
Fig. 9b
	CdSe–GaP	
72


	Semiconductor–semiconductor junction	Type II	

	Step II	
Fig. 10a
	ZnO–SnO2	
75


	
	Type I	

	None	
Fig. 10b
	ZnSe–InP–ZnS	
74


	
	p–n junction	

	Step II	
Fig. 10d
	BiOCl–BiVO4	
77


	Phase junction	Type II like	

	Step II	
Fig. 11a
	α-β Ga2O3	
79


	
	Type I like	

	Step II	
Fig. 11b
	Anatase–TiO2(B)	
80


	
	Semiconductor sensitization-like	

	Step II	
Fig. 11c
	Anatase–rutile TiO2	
81


	All-solid-state Z-scheme	Semiconductor–conductor–semiconductor	

	Step I	
Fig. 12b
	TiO2–Au–CdS	
70


	
	Semiconductor–semiconductor	

	Step I	
Fig. 12c
	ZnO–CdS	
89



Other semiconductor-based structure	Semiconductor–carbon material structure	

	Step II	
Fig. 13a
	Ag3PO4–rGO	
97


	Dye-sensitized semiconductor structure	

	Step I	
Fig. 13b
	OTARu–TiO2	
102


	Co-catalyst	Reduction co-catalyst	

	Step III	—	C3N4–Pd	
109


	
	Oxidation co-catalyst	

	Step III	—	ZnO–CoPi	
114


	
	Reduction/oxidation dual co-catalysts	

	Step III	
Fig. 13c
	Rh/Cr2O3–GaN:ZnO–Mn3O4	
115


 	Fig. 14  (a) A proposed band structure model for the anatase TiO2 with oxygen vacancies (adapted with permission from ref. 123, Copyright 2000 Elsevier); (b) image of a blue TiO2 dispersion (adapted with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration for the band structure of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram illustrating the band structures of doped TiO2: (a) metal-doped TiO2: (a1) V-doped TiO2; (a2) Fe-doped TiO2; (a3) Cr-doped TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 133, Copyright 2002 Elsevier); (b) N-doped TiO2 in comparison with pure TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 134, Copyright 2004 Royal Society of Chemistry); (c) C,N co-doped TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2006 The Chemical Society of Japan); (d) black TiO2 in comparison with white TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration for the upconversion mechanism of YF3:Yb,Tm@TiO2 photocatalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry); (b, c) SEM image (b) of InP nanopillar arrays (NPLs), as well as the specular reflectance (c) and the visual inspection (inset of c) of the NPLs (blue) compared with that of planer InP (red) (adapted with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (d, e) SEM image (d) of WO3 inverse opals, and the absorbance enhancement spectra (ratio to unpattern WO3) (e) of the WO3 inverse opals with different diameters and a disordered porous WO3 (adapted with permission from ref. 145, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustrating the limited charge diffusion path in metal–semiconductor core–shell structures (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b) schematic illustrating the enhanced charge diffusion rate of BiVO4 by rGO in PEC (adapted with permission from ref. 149, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration showing the different charge diffusion distance of BOC-001 and BOC-010 due to the direction of internal electric field (adapted with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (d) schematic illustrating the charge transfer behavior of TiO2 with metallic and semiconducting MoS2 nanosheets as co-catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2015 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustrating the recombination pathways of photogenerated electrons and holes on TiO2 with surface and bulk defects (adapted with permission from ref. 159, Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry); (b) electron density contour maps for the CBM of K2La2Ti3O10 in K2La2Ti3O10(101)–Ni(111) and K2La2Ti3O10(002)–Ni(111) interfaces (adapted with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2007 The Chemical Society of Japan); (c) schematic illustrating the band structure of an n-type semiconductor in solution with different particle sizes: (left) radius (R) is greater than the space charge width and (right) R is smaller than the space charge width (adapted with permission from ref. 161, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry); (d) schematic band diagrams illustrating that charge accumulation attenuates the driving force for charge separation and transfer; (e) schematic band diagram illustrating the coordination of driving force directions for charge separation and transfer.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of g-C3N4 nanosheets (adapted with permission from ref. 164, Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b, c) TEM images along (b) [100] and (c) [110] planes of ordered mesoporous black TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 165, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society); (d) TEM image of Cu3(BTC)2@TiO2 core–shell structures (adapted with permission from ref. 105, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 

 	Fig. 20  (a, b) SEM images of Ag3PO4 sub-microcrystals with the morphology of (a) rhombic dodecahedrons and (b) cubes (adapted with permission from ref. 167, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (c, d) TEM and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of TiO2 nanosheets (adapted with permission from ref. 168, Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (e, f) TEM images of (e) C3N4–Pd nanocubes with Pd(100) facets and (f) C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedrons with Pd(111) facets (adapted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration for the selective coating of Pt and Cu2O co-catalysts to enhance photocatalytic CO2 reduction (adapted with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (b, c) schematic illustrating the reaction mechanism of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) in photocatalytic water splitting with (b) bare Rh nanoparticle and (c) Rh–Cr2O3 core–shell as co-catalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration for classic photocatalytic hybrid configurations.	 


Decorated structure	I	×	×	√	√	Light sensitizer-semiconductor	
172

II	×	×	√	√	Semiconductor–co-catalyst	
173

I and II	×	×	√	√	Phase junction	
174



Heterojunction structure	I or II	√	√	√	×	Plasmonic metal–semiconductor	
175

I and II	√	√	√	×	Type II junction	
176



Encapsulated structure	I	×	×	√	×	Upconversion-semiconductor	
177

II	√	×	×	×	Metal–semiconductor Schottky junction	
178

I and II	×	×	×	×	Type I junction; phase junction	
179



Connected structure	I or II	√	×	√	√	Semiconductor–co-catalyst	
180

I and II	√	×	√	√	Z-scheme	
181



Isolated structure	I	×	×	√	×	Plasmonic metal–semiconductor	
182


 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration for the reported novel photocatalytic hybrid configurations for enhanced charge kinetics.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis (a1) as well as the SEM images (a2–a4) of mesoporous TiO2 single crystals (adapted with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group); (b) schematic illustration for the fabrication (b1) as well as the SEM images (b2–b4) of nanotree heterostructures (adapted with permission from ref. 191, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (c) schematic illustration for the synthesis (c1) as well as the TEM and HRTEM images (c2, c3) of Cu2O–Pd–graphene stack structure (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (d) schematic illustration for the synthesis (d1) as well as the SEM and TEM images (d2–d4) of (Ti0.91O2–graphene)5 hollow spheres (adapted with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 
(αhν)1/n = A(hν − Eg)	(3)

 	Fig. 25  (a, b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (a) of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates as well as the determination of indirect band gap (b) from the UV-vis spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (c, d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (c) of anatase TiO2 exposed with different facets as well as the determination of indirect band gap (d) from the UV-vis spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 198, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (e) oxygen X-ray absorption-emission spectra reflecting CB and VB near the Fermi level of ZnO nanoparticles in comparison with bulk ZnO (adapted with permission from ref. 201, Copyright 2004 American Physical Society); (f) band gaps of rutile and anatase TiO2 as revealed by XAS and XES spectra (adapted with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Valence-band XPS spectra of ultrathin BiOCl nanosheets and BiOCl nanoplates (adapted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society); (b) valence-band XPS spectra of white and black TiO2 nanocrystals (adapted with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2011 American Association for the Advancement of Science); (c, d) Mott–Schottky plots (c) for CoO nanocrystals and micropowders as well as their band edge positions (d) according to the band gaps and the flat-band potentials obtained from (c) (adapted with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group).	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 27  (a, b) TA analysis of the charge kinetics in different geometry architectures of metal–semiconductor junction: (a) TA signal (probed at 600 nm) as a function of probe delay for bare Cu2O, Pd-decorated Cu2O, Pd–Cu2O core–shell as well as Cu2O–Pd–rGO structures as well as (b) schematic illustration for the charge flow in a semiconductor–metal–graphene stack design (adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.); (c–f) TA analysis of the charge transfer directions of Schottky junction and plasmonic hot electron injection: (c) TA signal (probed at 520 nm) as a function of probe delay for bare TiO2, bare Pd, and TiO2–Pd hybrid structures recorded with a 480 nm pump as well as (d) schematic illustration for the electron behavior under photoexcitation at 480 nm; (e) TA signals recorded with a 350 nm pump as well as (f) schematic illustration for the electron behavior under photoexcitation at 350 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 163, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 

 	Fig. 28  (a–c) Photocurrent–potential characteristics (a) of ZnO (black) and ZnO/Co-based catalyst electrodes (gray) measured with chopped light (arrows indicate the onset potential of photocurrent) as well as photocurrent of ZnO (black) and ZnO/Co-based catalyst electrodes (gray) measured at (b) 0.0 V and (c) 0.2 V against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode (adapted with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2009 National Academy of Sciences); (d) schematic band diagrams illustrating photovoltage characterizations; (e, f) transient open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD) from TiO2 (gray) and Au–TiO2 (black) photoanodes following exposure to UV or visible-light excitation, respectively: (e) Voc transient rise/decay obtained during excitation/termination of irradiation, and (f) average electron lifetimes (τn) within the device (adapted with permission from ref. 206, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 29  (a, b) Steady-state PL spectra (a) and time-resolved PL spectra (b) of ZnO mesocrystals, ZnO–CuO mesocrystals and ZnO–CuO nanocrystals (red lines show fitting data) (adapted with permission from ref. 187, Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group); (c, d) steady-state PL spectra (c) and time-resolved PL spectra (d) for pure ZnO and Cu2+-doped ZnO nanocrystals at different Cu2+ concentrations, the inset in (c) shows the enlarged part of the spectra at 400–700 nm, and in (d), fitting results (solid curves) are also included for comparison (adapted with permission from ref. 208, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) FTIR spectra of adsorbed CH3OH on TiO2–Pt samples at room temperature; (b, c) IR spectra taken after different UV irradiation times during the photocatalytic reaction of CH3OH on TiO2 (b) and TiO2–Pt (c); (d) transient profiles of average IR absorption of TiO2–Pt; (e, f) normalized transient profiles of an average IR absorption of TiO2 (e) and TiO2–Pt (0.2 wt%) (f) excited by 355 nm exposed to 20 Torr CH3OH and followed by evacuation at different time; (g) a possible reaction mechanism for the photocatalytic production of H2 from a methanol–water solution (adapted with permission from ref. 212, Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Typical TPD spectra collected at m/z = 33 (CD2OH+) and 32 (CD2O+) following different laser irradiation times; (b) integrated TPD signals of the desorbed parent methanol (CD3OH) signal (from m/z = 33) and the formaldehyde (CD2O) product as a function of laser irradiation time; (c) TPD spectra collected at m/z = 18, 19, and 20 following different laser irradiation times; (d) integrated TPD signals for water isotopologues as a function of laser irradiation time; the inset of (d) shows the same data where the integrated TPD signals of HOD and D2O have been normalized to the TPD signal of H2O; (e) TPD spectra of H2O with laser surface irradiation for different times (adapted with permission from ref. 213, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 32  (a–d) Schematic conventional cells (a) for anatase, rutile and brookite TiO2 as well as band structures and DOS for anatase (b), rutile (c) and brookite (d) TiO2 (adapted with permission from ref. 215, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry); (e, f) total DOSs of doped TiO2 (e) and projected DOSs into the doped anion sites (f), calculated by FLAPW; the dopants F, N, C, S, and P are located at a substitutional site for an O atom in the anatase TiO2 crystal (the eight TiO2 units per cell). The results for N doping at an interstitial site (Ni-doped) and that at both substitutional and interstitial sites (Ni+s-doped) are also shown; the energy is measured from the top of the VBs of TiO2, and the DOSs for doped TiO2 are shifted so that the peaks of the O 2s states are aligned with each other (adapted with permission from ref. 216, Copyright 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) SEM images of Cu2O cuboctahedrons; (b, c) representations of the atomic arrangements for the (b) Cu2O(100) and (c) Cu2O(111) surfaces; (d, e) potential diagrams of (d) Cu2O(100) and (e) Cu2O(111) surfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (f) illustration for the charge spatial distribution between Cu2O(100) and Cu2O(111) surfaces; (g) SEM image of Cu2O cuboctahedrons whose (111) surface was selectively deposited with Pd; (h) potential lineup diagram of Cu2O(111)–Pd interfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (i) illustration for the charge transfer in the Cu2O cuboctahedrons with Pd deposited on (111) facets; (j) SEM image of Cu2O cuboctahedrons whose (100) surface was selectively deposited with Pd; (k) potential lineup diagram of Cu2O(100)–Pd interfaces obtained from first-principles simulations; (l) illustration for the charge transfer in the Cu2O cuboctahedrons with Pd deposited on (100) facets (adapted with permission from ref. 34, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.).	 

 	Fig. 34  (a, b) Calculated energetics of the two-step dissociation of (a) CD3OH and (b) H2O on a TiO2(110) surface (adapted with permission from ref. 213, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society); (c–f) optimized configurations for CO2 adsorbed to (c) Pd(100) and (d) Pd(111) facets together with the adsorption energy Ea as well as the potential energy surface along the O–C bond length for the CO2 molecule adsorbed to (e) Pd(100) and (f) Pd(111) facets in the neutral state or charged with 2 electrons, from which the CO2 activation energy EB is deducted (adapted with permission from ref. 109, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
