Atomically precise thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters: current advances in solar-powered photoredox catalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TA01154B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3TA01154B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 9401-9426Atomically precise thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters: current advances in solar-powered photoredox catalysis

        
          
            Hao 
            Liang†
, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Chen†
, 
      
        
          
            Qiao-Ling 
            Mo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Wu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Fang-Xing 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      *
      College of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, New Campus, Minhou, Fujian Province 350108, China. E-mail: yue_wu@fzu.edu.cn; fxxiao@fzu.edu.cn
Received 
      24th February 2023
    , Accepted 29th March 2023First published on 3rd April 2023AbstractPhotocatalysis has been regarded as an emerging technology to convert renewable solar energy to chemical fuels, providing unprecedented opportunities for solving the deteriorating energy crisis and environmental issues in the future. In recent years, atomically precise gold nanoclusters, which have emerged as novel light-harvesting antennas possessing the merits of unique atomic stacking fashion, the quantum confinement effect, enriched catalytically active sites and a discrete energy band structure, have been drawing enormous attention in diverse fields. Despite the advancement, there is deficiency of a systematic, comprehensive, and insightful summary on the gold nanocluster-based photosystems to reinforce our fundamental understanding of the charge transport characteristics of metal nanoclusters in photocatalysis. Herein, our review summarizes the latest progress in gold nanocluster mediated photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis for diverse applications including non-selective photocatalytic organic pollutant mineralization, photocatalytic selective organic transformation, photocatalytic hydrogen generation, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, and photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. Moreover, we discuss the underlying photocatalytic and PEC mechanisms associated with the energy band and electronic structure of gold nanoclusters. Finally, perspectives and challenges of gold nanocluster-based photosystems are outlined. It is anticipated that our review could inspire ideas on how to smartly utilize atomically precise metal nanoclusters for crafting high-efficiency photosystems towards solar energy conversion.Hao LiangHao Liang received a Bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering (2019) from Nanjing Institute of Technology, and an MS degree (2022) in Materials Engineering from Fuzhou University. His research interest is centered on developing metal nanocluster-based materials for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and selective organic conversion.Qing ChenChen Qing is currently a second-year master student at Fuzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Fang-Xing Xiao. She holds a Bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Anhui University of Science and Technology (2020). Her research interest is centered on developing transition metal sulfide-based materials for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.Qiao-Ling MoQiao-Ling Mo is a third-year PhD student at Fuzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Xiao. She holds a Bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry (2015) from Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, and an MS degree (2018) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Fuzhou University. Her PhD research interest is centered on developing layered transition metal chalcogenide materials for photocatalytic selective organic conversion and photoelectrochemical water splitting.Yue WuYue Wu is currently an associate Professor at Fuzhou University, China. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, in 2016, and her PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2022. Her research interest focuses on rational design and controlled synthesis of nanomaterials, and their surface/interface structure modulation for catalysis.Fang-Xing XiaoFang-Xing Xiao is currently a full professor at Fuzhou University, China. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from National Huaqiao University in 2006 and 2009, and his PhD degree from Fuzhou University in 2013. From 2013 to 2017, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the Nanyang Technological University. His research group works on heterogeneous photoredox catalysis, predominantly centered on designing composite catalysts, fundamental investigation on catalyst structures and catalytic mechanisms, and probing their multifarious redox applications in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis. More detailed information can be found at his research group website: https://fxxiao.fzu.edu.cn.
1. Introduction
Catalysis continues to plays a key role in addressing global challenges such as energy shortage and environmental pollution. Among the diverse catalysis methods, photocatalysis has emerged as a frontier in renewable energy conversion and catalysis science. However, so far, photocatalytic conversion of solar energy into chemical energy has still been far from satisfactory, predominantly due to the fast charge recombination rate. In order to develop high-efficiency photocatalysts, many strategies have thus been developed such as enhancing and extending light absorption, reinforcing photogenerated charge separation, and charge transfer kinetics modulation. Despite these endeavors, development of robust heterogeneous photocatalysis remains a grand challenge.
In recent years, atomically precise gold nanoclusters (NCs) have emerged as a novel sector of metal nanomaterials, owing to their unique atomic stacking fashion and electronic structure.1 It is generally believed that the size of gold NCs is generally less than 2 nm (excluding the protective layer of the shell), and the number of gold atoms is less than 150.2,3 Due to the nano-size effect, gold NCs usually exhibit non-metallic behaviors with energy quantization afforded by their highest occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (HOMO–LUMO) gap rather than localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of conventional plasmonic metal nanocrystals.4 Thus, electrons can be photoexcited from the HOMO to the LOMO level of gold NCs upon light irradiation,5 thus generating the electron–hole pairs. Noteworthily, the HOMO is featured by a hybrid orbital consisting of atomic orbitals of Au, causing elegant optical absorption.1 The generation of electron–hole pairs over gold NCs using solar energy exert substantial influence on the photocatalytic applications of gold NCs\-based photosystems.
Despite these merits, high surface energy inevitably leads to the spontaneous aggregation of gold NCs, which results in the destruction of the original structure, and a remarkably reduced active site number.6 Besides, owing to the quantum confinement effect, increase and decrease of the gold atom number significantly change the electronic structure of gold NCs, affecting their photocatalytic performances.7 Integrating gold NCs with semiconductors provides an efficacious approach to harness the charge carriers of gold NCs in photoredox catalysis, by which the generic photosensitization effect of gold NCs can be optimized with the charge transport pathway finely modulated.8–10 Although recent years have witnessed a sporadic investigation on gold NC-based photocatalysis, a comprehensive summary of gold NC-mediated photosystems for heterogeneous photocatalysis has been seldom reported, and moreover, charge transport characteristics of gold NCs in photoredox catalysis has still remained elusive and needs to be well elucidated. The information on these aspects is of paramount importance to reinforce our fundamental understanding of the charge transfer mechanism of atomically precise metal NCs.
Motivated by these considerations, our review primarily focuses on summarizing the latest developments in preparation, modification strategies, and photocatalytic mechanisms of atomically precise gold NCs, and furthermore, gold NC based photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems for diverse applications including photocatalytic hydrogen generation, photocatalytic selective organic transformation, photocatalytic organic pollution mineralization, photocatalytic CO2 reduction and PEC water splitting are specifically discussed. Besides, future perspectives and challenges in this booming research field are elucidated. It is anticipated that our work could provide enriched information on the emerging potential of atomically precise metal NCs for solar energy conversion.
2. Preparation of gold NCs
With the aid of suitable ligands, gold NCs with an accurate atomic number can be synthesized.11 According to the ligand type, there are monolayer protected nanoclusters such as thiol, phosphine, alkyne, selenium, and multiple layer protected (e.g., thiol/phosphine) NCs. Among these ligands, thiol has drawn widespread attention owing to high chemical energy between thiol and gold atoms. In the past few decades, various synthesis techniques have been developed to prepare gold-thiol NCs, including chemical reduction, template synthesis, ligand etching and so on. Aside from the synthetic methodology, revealing the formation mechanism of metal NCs at the molecular level remains challenging. Determining the decisive intermediate species and tracing the evolution routes in the formation process can advance the precise regulation and control of the size and composition of gold NCs. Taking the gold-thiol NCs, for example, the review focuses on four synthesis strategies and reciprocal growth mechanisms of gold NCs.
2.1 Reduction growth
The reduction growth method is the process of reducing a Au(I) or Au(III) precursor to Au by using a reducing agent. The speed of the reduction process and the strength of the reducing agent are of great importance for the successful preparation of gold NCs. For instance, Chen et al. prepared Au25(PPh3)10[SC3H6Si(OC2H5)3]5Cl2 nanoclusters with a high turnover frequency and various active sites by dropwise addition of NaBH4, dispersed in ethanol, to a mixed solution containing Au(PPh3)Cl, MPTES, CH2Cl2 and ethanol.9 Schaaff et al. prepared Aux NCs by mixing thiols (H-SR) with Au(III) salt (e.g., [AuX4]− where X = halogen ligand) or phase-transferred Au(III) salt (e.g., [TOA][AuX4], TOA represents a tetraoctylammonium cation), and this leads to extensive formation of oligomeric SR[Au(I)–SR]x complexes via eqn (1) and (2).12 To gain a further insight into the growth mechanism of Aux NCs, Luo et al. revealed the detailed synthetic process for reducing Au(I) complex precursors to [Au25(SR)18]− for the first time by exploring the time evolution of the Au(I) precursor and Aux NC intermediate species with electro spray ionization-mass spectroscopy (ESI-MS). They found that the growth of Aux NCs is correlated with the formation of multiple 2e− intermediate NC species from 2e− to 8e−.13
Aqueous phase: x[AuX4]− + 3xH–SR → SR–[Au(I)–SR]x + xSR–SR + 3xH+ + 4xX−(1)
Organic phase: x[TOA][AuX4] + 3xH–SR → SR–[Au(I)–SR]x + xSR–SR + 3xHX + x[TOA][X](2)
2.2 Seed growth
The seed growth method refers to choosing small-size metal NCs as the seeds and making them gradually grow into a larger size. Similar to the reduction growth method, it can be realized by the two-electron transfer-reduction process. For example, Luo et al. reduced Au(I)–SR complexes by using CO in the presence of a preformed 8e− [Au25(SR)18]− seed, generating monodisperse 20e− [Au44(SR)26]2−, and thus the authors proposed a three-stage growth mechanism.11,14 The growth mechanism includes: (1) a pre-growth stage: Au(I)–SR complexes to [Au25(SR)18]−; (2) a Au25-assisted growth stage: [Au25(SR)18]− to [Au44(SR)26]2−; (3) a thermodynamically controlled size-focusing stage; (4) refining the purity of [Au44(SR)26]2−.13
2.3 Alloying reaction
The alloying method is to use a certain amount of external molds to gradually exchange the original surface mold of the NCs to achieve metal exchange, so as to obtain alloy nanoclusters doped with different metals. For instance, Yao et al. found that thermodynamically less favorable [Ag32@Au12(SR)30]4− NCs can be synthesized by reacting [Ag44(SR)30]4− with [Au2(SR′)2Cl]−via a definitive reaction as formulated by using eqn (3), and then proposed an association–dissociation assisted surface motif exchange (SME) mechanism.15 In addition, alloy NCs can also be produced by other methods, such as coreduction,16 metal exchange, and inter cluster reactions. [Ag44−x@Aux(SR)30−2x(SR′)2x]4− + [Au2(SR′)2Cl]− → [Ag44−(x+1)@Aux+1(SR)30−2(x+1)(SR′)2(x+1)]4− + [Au(SR)2]− + AgCl (x ≤ 11)(3)
2.4 Ligand exchange
The ligand exchange method, similar to the alloying method, belongs to the exchange process, and the SME mechanism can be applied in the ligand–exchange reaction as well. Apart from preparing alloy NCs by exchanging motifs, it can also exchange peripheral protective ligands to form other ligand-protected gold NCs or multi-ligand protected NCs. The ligand exchange mechanism of NCs also follows the SME mechanism. In addition to the size and composition, recent advances in X-ray crystallography analysis indicate that the stacking symmetry of the core of metal NCs could be adjusted among icosahedron-based, face-centered-cubic (FCC), hexagonal-close-packing (HCP), and body-centered-cubic (BCC) arrangements, by simply tuning the volume of thiolate ligands.
3. Category of gold NCs
Thiol-based NCs can be expressed by using the explicit formula Aun(SR)m (where SR is the thiol ligand, n is the number of gold atoms, and m is the number of ligands), which is similar to organic gold compounds with a clear structure. In the mid-1890s, researchers determined a series of thiol-based NCs from mixed species, including Au5(SR)13, Au18(SR)14, Au22(SR)16, Au22(SR)17, Au25(SR)18, and Au29(SR)20. These different gold NCs are composed of kernel and surface structures. The known basic polyhedron-based kernel units (except the bc type) are summarized n Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Compilation of the basic kernel structure (magenta Au). Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
However, a complicated separation process and low separation yield seriously hinder the use of gold NCs in photocatalysis. Nowadays, gold NCs such as Au25(SR)18, Au38(SR)24, Au144(SR)60, and Au28(SR)20 have been successfully synthesized (Fig. 2), making them potential light harvesting antennas for solar energy conversion.
 Fig. 2  Structure of Au25(SR)18 NCs [magenta, gold atoms of the core; cyan, gold atoms of the shell (or surface)]. (a) Ball-stick model; (b) space-filling model; structure of (c) Au38(SR)18 and (d) Au23 core (L-isomer, color labels: magenta, Au; yellow, S; gray: C, H atoms are omitted). Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 18, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
3.1 Au25(SR)18
Among the various gold NCs, Au25(SR)18 was the first one that has been attracting enormous attention owing to its ease of preparation, unique structure, high stability and wide-spread application prospect. Through X-ray crystallography analysis and theoretical simulation, it has been well established that Au25(SR)18 NCs consist of a centered icosahedral Au13 core (Fig. 2a, magenta portion) surrounded by six Au2(SR)3 semi-rings (Fig. 2, cyan and yellow). The cluster core provides three kinds of Au sites (center, icosahedral surface, and semi-ring) and two thiolate environments.19 Additionally, the semi-ring (or surface) Au atoms are also accessible to reactant molecules in photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 2b).17 Generally, many catalytic properties of Au25(SR)18 result from these semi-ring structures. It should be noted that Zhu et al. revealed the difference in structure of the protected semi-rings between oxidized neutral and native anionic forms by monitoring its crystal structure.20 In another case, Chen et al. synthesized atomically precise Au25 NCs, and then they were deposited on the TiO2 substrate. The result suggests that Au25 NCs/TiO2 nanocomposites exhibit excellent selectivity and high activity in visible-light-driven photocatalytic oxidation of amines to imines.9 The turnover frequency (TOF) of oxidation is found to be 1522 h−1 which is considerably higher than that obtained utilizing conventional gold catalysts. Furthermore, Au25 NCs demonstrate good recyclability and stability in photocatalytic selective oxidation of a wide range of amines.
3.2 Au38(SR)24
In addition to Au25(SR)18, Au38(SR)24 has also received enormous interest in academic research on gold NCs. As shown in Fig. 2c, Au38(SR)24 NCs are based on a face-fused bi-icosahedral Au23 core which is covered by a second shell composed of the remaining 15 gold atoms, thus forming a core–shell structure. Taking thiolate ligands into account, the NCs may also be considered as a Au23 core with three monomeric staples (RS–Au–SR, abbreviated as Au(SR)2 below) and six dimeric staples (RS–AuS(R)–Au–SR, abbreviated as Au2(SR)3 below).18 It is worth mentioning that the Au23 core can be regarded as two Au13 icosahedra fused together by sharing a common Au3 face (Fig. 2d).
3.3 Au144(SR)60
Au144(SR)60 has the biggest size of gold NCs ever obtained, which can be seen as 144 gold atoms acting as the core and 60 thiol ligands protecting the periphery (Fig. 3G). As shown in Fig. 3, the cluster is composed of 30 (RS–Au–SR) staples on the surface (Fig. 3D and F) and a metal core with three shells (Au12–Au42–Au60). The internal shell is a hollow 12-atom icosahedron (Fig. 3A), and the second layer is composed of 42 gold atoms, forming a 54-atom Mackay icosahedral structure with a hollow Au12 core and exhibiting 20 triangular (111) faces (Fig. 3B).21 Then, 60 gold atoms besiege the second layer and assemble into a rhombicosidodecahedron (Fig. 3C).21
 Fig. 3  Atomic structure of Au144(SR)60. (A) Inner icosahedral shell of 12 Au atoms (light blue). (B) Middle icosahedral shell of 42 Au atoms (pink). (C) Outer rhombicosidodecahedron shell of 60 Au atoms (orange). (D) Thirty (SR–Au–SR) staples containing 30 Au atoms (yellow) and 60 sulfur atoms (green). (E) Three-layered Au114 core with an a–b–c structure. (F) Isolated (SR–Au–SR) staple astride the parallelogram on the Au60 shell. Alkyl groups are omitted for clarity. (G) Total structure of Au144(SCH2Ph)60 (yellow, gold; green, sulfur; gray, carbon; white, hydrogen). Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, copyright 2018 the Authors. 
Rosina et al. successfully prepared Au144 NCs which were utilized as photosensitizers for generating singlet oxygen under laser (λ = 532 nm) irradiation, and compared the results with that obtained utilizing Au25 and Au32.22 It was found that Au144 NCs show a 1O2 generation rate twice that of Au25 and Ag32, and tthe high absorption cross section-to-volume ratio of Au144 is remarkably higher than that of nanoparticles (>5 nm). For example, Han et al. reported the photocatalytic performance of ZnO–Au144 nanocomposites for the photoreduction of azobenzene under visible light irradiation.23 The rate constants of electron transfer from ZnO to Au144 NCs are estimated to be 1.0 × 109 s−1. Compared with the ZnO–Au25 counterpart, electron transfer efficiency of ZnO–Au144 nanocomposites is increased by 160%. Besides, gold NCs with multiple atom numbers have also been successfully synthesized, but they are rarely used in photocatalysis, which will not be discussed here one by one.
4. Modification strategies of photoactive gold NCs
In addition to the Au atom number of gold NCs, the surface composition and structure of Au NCs are also responsible for the photocatalytic performance of gold NC-based photosystems, which are specified in the following section from the perspectives of ligand type, gold atom and ligand number, and metal–thiolate motifs. In other words, catalytic properties of gold NCs can be modified by regulating several important factors, such as the species of surface ligands (capping agents), molar ratio of ligand/metal ions, or composition.
4.1 Surface ligand modulation
In the synthesis of gold NCs, high surface energy of gold NCs resulting from the ultra-small size makes gold ions prone to aggregation, which requires an effective stabilization approach with the aid of surface ligands. A surface ligand, especially its structure, plays an important role in maintaining the stability of gold NCs, preventing aggregation and modifying its surface activation. The observed basic surface motifs are summarized in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Protected motifs discovered so far in Aun(SR)m. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 

4.1.1 Thiolate. 
The studies on self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) led to the vigorous development of gold-thiol chemistry in the 1980s because of their extraordinary stability.24,25 Recently, it was reported that glutathione (GSH) protected gold NCs (Aux@GSH) can inject photo-excited electrons into TiO2 under visible light irradiation, producing photocurrent in a Aux NC-based solar cell with analogous efficiency to that of CdS (2% power conversion efficiency). In another case, Xu et al. reported the photocatalytic mechanism of a GSH-protected Aux NC decorated TiO2 nanocomposite in photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.26 It was unveiled that the GSH ligand not only protects Aux NCs but also plays a crucial role in boosting photocatalytic degradation.


4.1.2 Phosphine. 
The attempt of using phosphine ligands to decorate gold NCs can be traced back to the 1970s.27 Since then, enormous efforts have been made to synthesize gold NCs capped by thiolate and phosphine ligands from Au4 to Au24.1,28 For example, Zhao et al. have successfully synthesized phosphine-capped gold NCs that are deposited on the TiO2 support. In the preparation, a phosphine compound was used for tuning the cluster size.29 It was unveiled that the photocatalyst exhibits significant activity for liquid and gas-phase oxidation reactions. Fig. 5 shows the molecular structures of some relatively small size (n ≤ 13) NCs with gold–phosphine ligands.30 Among the basic motifs of gold NCs, icosahedral Au13 drew great attention. For instance, Zhang et al. successfully synthesized Au13 NCs using the di-phosphine-protected Au12(dppe)Cl2 motif as a precursor, that is, employing di-phosphine as the protecting ligand.28 The structure of the gold NCs is composed of a Au13 core capped with two axial Cl atoms and five equatorial dppe ligands. It should be noted that Au13 as photosensitizers for photo-induced generation of singlet oxygen exhibited a high quantum yield of ΦAu13 = 0.71.
 Fig. 5  X-ray structures of Aux NCs with gold–phosphine ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Springer. 

4.2 Gold-based bimetal NCs
Electronic configuration, optical performance, and photocatalytic performances including catalytic activity and stability of metal dppe, can be tailored by substituting one or several gold atoms with heteroatom(s) of other metal elements (e.g., Ag, Cu, Pd, and Pt).31–37 Compared with conventional nanoparticles whose structure is unclear enough, atomically precise gold NCs with a well-defined structure, characterized by single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD), provide an ideal model for mapping out the structure of the bimetal NCs.38 According to the type of heteroatom, atomically precise alloy gold NCs can be classified into bimetallic, tri-metallic and multi-metallic alloys. Among them, bimetallic alloys are the most commonly used alloy NCs in gold NC-based photocatalysis, which will be briefly discussed below. Usually, strategies of synthesizing bimetal NCs are mainly classified into two categories: (i) co-reduction in situ synthesis of gold NCs and other metal NCs; (ii) doping gold NCs with other metal salts.38 Varying the metal composite ratio can control the number of heteroatoms in the final alloy NCs. Generally, two types of heteroatom substitution behaviors have been elucidated:1 (i) the precise number of heteroatoms after modification; (ii) distribution of heteroatoms, but the total number of metal atoms is still maintained.

4.2.1 Au–Ag/Cu. 
For Ag or Cu substitution, here we illustrate the case of heteroatom substitution in Au25(SR)18 since such bimetallic NCs have been investigated for catalysis recently. It is noted that Ag or Cu substitution in Au25(SR)18 NCs with a specific number has not been obtained yet.39 The similarity between Ag and Au readily leads to alloy NCs with a wide distribution of Ag atoms rather than trace doping. As an example, the total structure of AgxAu25−x(SR)18 is shown in Fig. 6c,40 in which the central atom remains gold, whereas the icosahedral shell is composed of Au and Ag (Fig. 6a), and heavy doping can also lead to Ag distribution into the external staple motifs (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  X-ray crystal structure of Au25−xAgx(SR)18. The X-ray crystallography averaged composition is Au5.6Ag19.4(SC6H11)18. (a) The 13-atom icosahedral alloy core. (b) Six [–SR–Au(Ag)–SR–Ag–SR–] dimeric staples with different occupancies of Au/Ag atoms. (c) Total structure of Au25−xAgx(SR)18 (Magenta: Au, gray: Ag/Au, yellow: S, grey: C). (d) Alloy structure of Au55Ag92 showing charge accumulation and depletion. As one moves from the left to the right: 147 atoms; 55 atoms; 13 atoms and 1 atom for the Ag@Au@Ag system, Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 41, copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 and copyright the Owner Societies 2014. 
In a typical example, Anna et al. reported the effect of segregation on the properties of (AuAg)(147).41 This type of bimetal NC can be considered as gold NCs templates, and Ag atoms are placed on an aimed location, forming a Ag@Au@Ag configuration (Fig. 6d). Usually, Ag147 is appropriate for photocatalytic reactions resulting from the less unoccupied d-orbitals on the surface atoms compared to Au, whereas Au147 demonstrates more unoccupied d-states than Ag147 at EF. However, alloy structures are more thermodynamically stable at the Gupta level, as these constructions can maximize the interaction between Au and Ag. For instance, Soumyadip Bhunia et al. prepared bimetallic alloy gold–silver NCs (Au–Ag NCs) by combining Au3+ and Ag+.42 The thus-obtained alloy NCs can emit variably, and the quantum yield varies optimally considering the ratio of Ag in the Au NCs. When the ratio of Ag to Au is tuned to be 1:4, fluorescence emission is the maximum owing to the highest electronic transition. Chong et al. compared the photocatalytic performances of Au25, Ag25, and Au25−xAgx NCs toward oxidation of benzylamine.43 The results indicate that Ag25 NCs demonstrate 100% conversion, but with a relatively low selectivity for producing N-benzylidenebenzylamine (29.1%). However, Au25 NCs showed higher selectivity (ca. 70%) and conversion (ca. 80%). Significantly, bimetallic Au25−xAgx NCs exhibit a >99% conversion and an almost complete 100% selectivity, which can be ascribed to the synergistic effect between Au and Ag.43,44


4.2.2 Au–Pt/Pd. 
Concerning Pd or Pt doping, it has been confirmed that Pd or Pt is located in the center of Au25(SR)18 by experimental and theoretical studies, wherein the centrally doped bimetal NCs are the most stable, otherwise they would break the high symmetry of the ligand environment.45–49 The doped statements are different in Au NCs with different atomic numbers. At present, this structure has not been widely used in photocatalysis. In a typical example, TiO2 modified with a Au-core/Pt-shell bimetallic nanocluster (Auc–Pts/TiO2) was prepared by Tada et al., via a two-step method composed of depositing Aux NCs first and then depositing Pt (Fig. 7b).50 As shown in Fig. 7c, the binding energy of Pt4f7/2 for Au–Pt/TiO2 is very low, and the red shift of λmax caused by Pt photo-deposition is observed, which indicates partial electron transport from gold to platinum. The electronic polarization (Auδ+–Ptδ−), whose direction is opposite to that expected from the usual electronegativity scale, is supported by the DFT calculation for a model cluster of Au2–Pt2/TiO2. As shown in Fig. 7a, photo-generated charge carriers over TiO2 can be directionally transferred via the route of TiO2 → Au → Pt, which further increases the separation efficiency and lifespan of charge carriers. TiO2 loaded with bimetallic alloy Au–Pt nanoclusters exhibit a unique photocatalytic property, which is ascribed to the electronic modification of the shell metal through interaction with the core metal and support. Noteworthily, it is inadequate to simply explore the influence of composition on the physicochemical properties out of the position of heteroatoms since surface activity might also be responsible for the photocatalytic performances of gold NCs. However, research work in this area on gold NC-based photocatalysis is still in the infant stage.
 Fig. 7  (a) The photocatalytic mechanism of the Au–Pt/TiO2 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. (b) HRTEM image of the Au–Pt/TiO2 nanocomposite. (c) EDS of the labelled single metal particle in (b). (d) The photocatalytic mechanism of the CdS–Pt–Auc photosystem under visible light irradiation. (e) HRTEM image of the CdS–Pt–Auc nanocomposite. (f) The luminescent photoemission (λex = 358 nm) spectra of CdS, CdS–Pt, CdS–Auc and CdS–Pt–Auc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and 51, copyright 2002 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. 
As displayed in Fig. 7d, Ling et al. reported the photocatalytic activity and photostability of CdS decorated with Aux@GSH and Pt nanoparticles (CdS–Pt–Auc),51 and the photocatalysts were prepared by a self-assembly method.52 It was ascertained that Aux@GSH can be photoexcited to produce electron and hole pairs under visible light irradiation.53 Subsequently, the photoexcited electrons of Aux@GSH are injected into the conduction band of CdS, which is responsible for the efficient charge separation and prolonged charge lifetime. After modifying CdS–Auc by loading Pt nanoparticles, photoelectrons can be further transferred to the Pt NPs, leading to a vectorial electron transfer pathway (Aux@GSH → CdS → Pt) and additionally increasing the charge separation efficiency. Refer to Section 6.3 for more photocatalytic applications of gold-based bimetal NCs.

5. Photocatalytic mechanism of gold NCs
Although new developments in exploring suitable gold NC-based photocatalysis for solar energy conversion have been witnessed in the past few years, the underlying reaction mechanism is still elusive. To make a breakthrough in gold NC-based photocatalysis, it is heavily dependent on an in-depth understanding of the intrinsic mechanism. Recently, substantial studies have been dedicated to the exploration of the principle of gold NC-based photocatalysis, including interaction between gold NCs and semiconductors, influence of reaction conditions, and supply of active sites. The reaction mechanism of gold NC-based photocatalysis can be classified into the following parts including (i) excitation and flow of photoinduced charge carriers, (ii) activity improvement and (iii) instability of the gold NC induced mechanism. The studies on the underlying photocatalytic mechanism would advance construction of more efficient and stable gold NC-based photocatalysts in the near future.
5.1 Photoexcitation of charge carriers over gold NCs
As mentioned above, due to their ultra-small size (<2 nm) effect, instead of the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of conventional plasmonic metal NPs, atomically precise gold NCs usually exhibit a molecule-like electronic transition with a discrete energy level as demonstrated in their HOMO and LUMO bands. The HOMO–LUMO gap of gold NCs is closely related to their photocatalytic properties such as multiple absorption bands and phoredox potential. Initially, gold NCs are placed in an excited state by absorbing photons of energy under light irradiation. In the simplest case, electrons produced over excited-state gold NCs with adequately high energy will be photoexcited from the HOMO to the LUMO level of gold NCs, leading to the emergence of electron–hole pairs like for semiconductors.5
In addition, it has been well established that the band gap of gold NCs can be modulated for obtaining excellent photocatalytic performances, which is correlated to the modification strategies, as elucidated in Section 4. For example, Muhammad reported the variation of HOMO–LUMO levels of gold NCs with different sizes by precisely regulating the growth kinetics in the reducing precursor.54 In this work, the HOMO–LUMO gap of various gold NCs was determined by TD-DFT calculations. The energy diagram of the gold NCs is displayed in Fig. 8a, and the corresponding simulated UV-vis absorption spectra are shown in Fig. 8b and Table 1. The result indicates that the absorption onset of gold NCs becomes redshifted on increasing the size, which coincides with the variation of the band gap due to the quantum confinement effect.
 Fig. 8  (a) Simulated UV-vis spectra of Au NCs (b) energy diagrams of different Au NCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Computed total energy of gold NCs at neutral and cationic states, along with HOMO and LUMO levels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society






Total energy (Hartree)
HOMOa (eV)
LOMOb (eV)
Optical gap (eV)


Neutral
Cation





a HOMO = ionization potential (IP) and IP = Ecation − Eneutral.
b LUMO = IP − optical_gap.





Au10(SR)10
−5736.3837
−5736.1416
6.59
3.18
3.41


Au15(SR)13
−7728.3229
−7728.0855
6.46
3.70
2.76


Au18(SR)14
−8572.9767
−8572.7475
6.24
3.75
2.49


Au25(SR)18
−11274.0496
−11273.8493
5.45
4.14
1.31




5.2 Flow of charge carriers over gold NCs
Generally, the band gap width of gold NCs is relatively narrow compared with that of the conventional semiconductor-based photocatalysts. Normally, photogenerated electron–hole pairs demonstrate a tendency for recombination, which significantly decreases the intensity of charge carries in photocatalysis. Therefore, once the charge lifetime is shorter than that of subsequent chemical interaction, there is no considerable photocatalytic activity. Thus, in order to fully utilize the charge carriers generated from gold NCs, it is necessary to couple with semiconductors to achieve efficient interfacial charge migration and separation. From another point of view, being able to generate photo-excited electron–hole pairs, gold NCs are able to serve as a visible light photosensitizer owing to a favorable band-gap. The delivery pathway of charge carriers is similar to that of dye or quantum dot-based photocatalysts.
Using PEC measurements and emission spectra, Chen et al. revealed the photoexcited state interaction between the semiconductor and gold NCs that acted as a photosensitizer.55 As shown in Fig. 9c, photoluminescence emission intensity decreases on increasing the TiO2 concentration, which suggests that electrons photoexcited over gold NCs gradually migrate from the LUMO level to the conduction band (CB) of TiO2. Note that the IPCE result is consistent with the light absorption of Aux NCs, which confirms that photocurrent generation is ascribed to the photo-excitation of Aux NCs (Fig. 9d). In addition, the maximum IPCE and short-circuit current of 3.96 mA cm−2 imply the outstanding photosensitization ability of the Aux NCs in capturing incident photons and converting solar energy into electrical energy (Fig. 9d and e). A schematic illustration of the photo-induced excitation and charge transport process of the Aux NCs–TiO2 nanocomposite is shown in Fig. 9a. Given that the LUMO potential of Aux NCs is more negative than the CB edge of TiO2 in conjunction with the intimate interfacial contact between them, photo electrons from Aux NCs can be easily injected into the CB of TiO2. Thus, photo-generated electrons and holes produced over Aux NCs are efficaciously separated, and consequently drive the photoredox reactions. In general, acting as a narrow bandgap semiconductor, Aux NCs supported on TiO2 can not only generate considerable charge carriers under visible light, but can also extend the light absorption range of wide bandgap semiconductors (e.g., TiO2).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the working principle of metal nanocluster-sensitized TiO2, (b) schematic illustration of the photocatalytic water splitting mechanism using a one-step photoexcitation system, (c) emission spectra of Aux NC aqueous solution with different concentrations of TiO2: a-0, b-25, c-50, d-75, e-100, f-125, and g-150 μM. (d) IPCE spectra (external quantum efficiency) and (e) J–V curves of electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 and 56, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Aside from generating electron–hole pairs under visible light, Aux NCs can also be deposited onto a semiconductor as metal type co-catalysts under UV light. For instance, in most water-splitting semiconductor photocatalysts, loading metal NCs are demonstrated to contribute to effective separation of charge carriers for extending the electron lifetime and enriching active sites.56 As shown in Fig. 9b, photo-generated electrons over a semiconductor photocatalyst are able to move to Aux NCs acting as co-catalysts, and the transferred electrons then reduce protons for H2 evolution.
5.3 Role of catalytically active sites
It is generally accepted that catalytic activities of semiconductors can be improved after loading metal NCs. However, it was proven that surface ligands do not directly influence the catalytic activity by comparing the catalysts modified with different ligands.9 Therefore, as for gold atoms themselves, distinct electronic properties and framework of gold NCs should be responsible for the high catalytic activity. Thus, due to the small bandgap, apart from the absorption of visible and near infrared (NIR) light, gold NCs can improve the photocatalytic activity by providing enriched catalytic active sites as well.
As mentioned above, there is partial ligand removal under the reaction conditions, and thus, gold atoms are accessible to reactants in the core and on the shell. On the one hand, ligand removal leads to the aggregation of gold NCs and formation of Au nanoparticles, resulting in the variation of the photocatalytic mechanism. It should be emphasized that plenty of gold atoms are actually exposed without protection, providing a multitude of catalytically active sites for chemical reactions. In other words, active sites can be deemed as the unprotected gold atoms. Hence, such exposed gold atoms are able to capture reactants, forming the intermediates. Furthermore, forming the intermediates between gold atoms and reactants can properly retard the aggregation of gold NCs. Using the role of TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy), which can selectively abstract hydrogen from the metal surface instead of from the substrate,57 Chen et al. reported the emergence of Au–H species during the photocatalytic process for selective oxidation of amines to imines.9 It is worth mentioning that Cl− and phosphine ligands can be more easily separated from the NC surface owing to the lower detachment energy of a Cl− (0.9 eV mol−1) or PH3 ligand (1.3 eV mol−1) than that of the detachment of a thiolate ligand (2.7 eV mol−1), thereby providing Au active sites. In fact, possible catalytic sites are not limited in the above conventional accessible area. For instance, Chen et al. synthesized the Au22 NCs protected by six bidentate di-phosphine ligands.58 The Au22 NCs are composed of two Au11 units clipped together by four ligands, while the two additional ligands coordinate to each Au11 unit in a bidentate fashion. Intriguingly, eight gold atoms at the interface of the two Au11 units are not coordinated by any ligands and thus render uncoordinated gold sites, which can be used as in situ catalytic active sites.
In addition to the formation of intermediates, the holes generated from the photoexcitation of Aux NCs are capable of inducing the highly active oxygen species, which can accelerate the photocatalytic reaction. For instance, the generated holes can also be utilized to produce hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) that are usually the cardinal active species in photocatalytic reactions.59
5.4 Instability of gold NCs
Many modification methods, including electronic structure modulation and amelioration of the reaction environment, have been devoted to retarding the aggregation of gold NCs stemming from generic instability. However, this aggregation cannot be completely eradicated with continuous illumination. Thus, photocatalytic mechanisms of gold NC based photosystems are complicated considering the instability of gold NCs.
It was reported that light yellow Aux NCs–TiO2 composites gradually turn purple during the photocatalytic reaction,60 which indicates the aggregated transformation of Aux NCs into Au NPs. As shown in Fig. 10, when Aux NCs are dispersed on the TiO2 surface (Fig. 10e), photo-induced charge carriers over Aux NCs participate in the photoredox catalysis. However, under visible or simulated solar light irradiation, Aux NCs tend to aggregate because of high surface energy (Fig. 10f), implying the generation of Au nanoparticles. This transformation makes the photocatalytic mechanism of Aux NCs–TiO2 composites complex. Specifically, photo-induced aggregated Au NPs with an intrinsic surface plasmon resonance (SPR) feature are capable of generating hot electrons that can be injected into the CB of TiO2, and then increase the density of photoelectrons in the whole reaction system.61–63 Thus, the co-existence of Aux NCs and plasmonic Au NPs endows the Aux–TiO2 composites with a synergistic effect, as displayed in Fig. 10c. In particular, instead of direct electron transfer from Aux NCs to the CB of TiO2, photoelectrons can also be transferred from the HOMO level of Aux NCs to Au NPs, and then to the CB of TiO2 (Fig. 10a), in which Au NPs act as a bridging medium to reinforce the electron flow.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic mechanisms of ideal Aux NCs–TiO2 nanocomposites, (b) Au NPs–TiO2 composites and (c) practical Aux NCs–TiO2 nanocomposites under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). SEM images of (d) NP-TNTAs, (e) pristine Aux/NP-TNTAs, and (f) Aux NCs/Au NPs/NP-TNTAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 and 64, copyright scientific reports and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Photo-induced aggregated transformation of ultra-small Aux NCs from a molecular-like photosensitizer with a small band-gap into metallic plasmonic Au NPs causes altered optical and photoelectrochemical properties and distinct photocatalytic performances. For example, Chen et al. utilized GSH-capped gold NCs as a photosensitizer for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical hydrogen evolution,8 and proposed that oxidation of water by Au–GSH+ (eqn (5)) should be possible because of the relatively high oxidation potential of Aux NCs. In this case, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as an electron donor is introduced into the hydrogen evolution system for the regeneration of the sensitizer, reducing the oxidized sensitizer quite effectively (eqn (6)). (4) Aux–GSH+ + 1/2H2O → Aux–GSH + 1/4O2 + H+(5) Aux–GSH+ + EDTA → Aux–GSH + oxidized EDTA(6)
6. Photocatalytic applications
Thus far, gold NC-based photocatalysts have been explored for catalyzing various chemical reactions under UV and visible light irradiation such as photocatalytic dye degradation, photocatalytic selective organic oxidation and reduction, photocatalytic water splitting, PEC water splitting and photocatalytic CO2 reduction, which will be elucidated in the following section.
6.1 Dye degradation
Based on the photosensitization effect of gold NCs, photocatalytic decomposition of organic dye pollutants utilizing gold NC-based photosystems has attracted enormous attention. For example, Golovko et al. prepared atomically precise Ru3Au NCs and then deposited them on the anatase TiO2 substrate.65 The as-prepared composite catalysts exhibited considerably improved photocatalytic performances toward methylene blue degradation under visible light irradiation. With regard to the photocatalytic materials, TiO2 is the most widely used photocatalyst in photocatalytic degradation under UV light.66–70 As shown in Fig. 11a, under UV light irradiation, TiO2 shows an efficient degradation rate of methyl orange, and TiO2 loaded with Au25(SR)18 shows no distinctive difference.59 However, under visible light irradiation, Au25(SR)18 loaded TiO2 shows a 1.6 times activity enhancement in photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange compared to that with blank TiO2 (Fig. 11b). This was mainly induced by the photosensitization effect of gold NCs for producing electron–hole charge carriers which participate in the photoredox catalysis.
 Fig. 11  The influence of Au25(SR)18 NC deposition on the photoactivity of the Au25/TiO2 nanocomposite toward degradation of methyl orange under (a) UV and (b) visible light irradiation, respectively. (c) Photocatalytic performances of NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, and the Aux/flat TiO2 film towards photodegradation of organic dye pollutants under simulated solar light irradiation and ambient conditions. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure. (e) Control experiments using different radical scavengers for photocatalytic mineralization of organic dye pollutants over a Aux NCs/NP-TNTA heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 71, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Generally, there are three proposed reaction mechanisms in terms of photocatalytic dye degradation:59 the photolysis process, dye photosensitization process,72,73 and photocatalytic process. As discussed above, Aux NCs are capable of serving as a photosensitizer because of a distinctive HOMO–LUMO gap. In addition to injecting a flow of electrons, photosensitization of Aux NCs can retard the recombination of charge carries, thus retaining more holes. The holes can subsequently transform into hydroxyl radicals, which are beneficial for dye degradation.74 For example, our group fabricated the highly ordered nanoporous layer-covered TiO2 nanotube arrays (NP-TNTAs) modified with Aux NCs (Fig. 11d) by a facile self-assembly strategy and disclosed the crucial roles of active species in situ produced during the photo-degradation of methyl orange under simulated solar light irradiation.71 As shown in Fig. 11c and e, Aux NCs/NP-TNTA shows a superior photocatalytic performance to that of blank NP-TNTA, and the electrons, holes, and hydroxyl radicals in situ produced during the photocatalytic reaction play pivotal roles in enhancing the degradation of organic dye pollutants. In another case, Venkata Krishnan et al. reported the reaction mechanism of electrons, holes, and hydroxyl radicals in promoting photocatalytic dye degradation.75 The holes and electrons photogenerated from Aux NCs can react with H2O to form the intermediate oxidative species (eqn (7)–(12)). These intermediate oxidative species and holes with oxidation capacity further react with dye molecules to fulfil the photodegradation process. e− + O2 → ˙O2−(7) ˙O2− + H2O → ˙OH + HO2˙ + H2O2(8) H2O2 + e− + hv → ˙OH + OH−(9) h+ + H2O → h+ + ˙OH(10) h+ + OH− → ˙OH(11) Organic pollutants + ˙O2− or ˙OH or OH− → degradation products(12)
In recent years, gold NCs have also been explored as a photosensitizer for 1O2 generation.76 As a chemically reactive molecule, singlet oxygen is crucial in photocatalytic dye degradation. For example, Yu et al. fabricated the Au25/TiO2 heterostructure by loading Au25 NCs (1.3 nm) onto TiO2 and then studied the effect of Aux NCs on the photocatalytic activity toward dye degradation under visible light irradiation.59 Owing to the small band gap of Aux NCs, electrons photo-generated over Au25 serving as a photosensitizer can flow to the CB of TiO2, and the recombination of electron–hole pairs is effectively inhibited.74 Thus, compared with pristine substrates, photocatalytic activity of Au25/TiO2 was remarkably enhanced. Besides, what is more interesting is the detection of singlet oxygen (1O2) from Au25 NCs in the photocatalytic dye degradation process (Fig. 12B and C). Not only are the hydroxyl radicals produced from holes responsible for photocatalytic dye degradation (Fig. 12A), but singlet oxygen was also verified to participate in the dye degradation process as well. The significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity of the Au25/TiO2 heterostructure was attributed to the synergy of the hydroxyl radicals and singlet oxygen generated from Aux NCs under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 12  (A) Photocatalytic mechanisms of Au25(SR)18/TiO2 under visible light irradiation. (B) Singlet oxygen production over TiO2 under 532 nm green light irradiation. (C) Singlet oxygen production over Au25(SR)18/TiO2 under 532 nm green light irradiation. (D) Schematic illustration of photoexcitation, photoelectron transfer, and photocatalytic reduction of UBA over the MPC–TiO2 nanocomposite. (E) Change in the UBA concentration (C) relative to the initial concentration (C0) during photocatalytic reaction: with (a) TiO2, (b) 1 wt% MPC–TiO2, (c) 3 wt% MPC–TiO2, (d) 4 wt% MPC–TiO2, and (e) MPC; (F) with (a) TiO2, (b) 1 wt% MPC–TiO2, (c) 3 wt% MPC–TiO2, and (d) 4 wt% MPC–TiO2. (G) Thermo-gravimetric analysis of GSH-coated MPC. TEM images of 4 wt% MPC–TiO2 composites (H) before and (I) after repeated photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 77, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In another study, by loading Aux@GSH NCs onto TiO2, Lee et al. probed the effect of Aux NCs serving as a co-catalyst on the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 in the photocatalytic degradation of Uniblue A (UBA) (Fig. 12D).77 Intriguingly, the as-fabricated Aux@GSH/TiO2 composites without any after-treatment exhibited no enhancement in photocatalytic dye degradation (Fig. 12E). Considering removal of the protected ligands to activate catalytic activity by thermal treatment,78–83 influence of GSH ligand removal on the Aux NCs surface was unveiled by thermogravimetric analysis. As shown in Fig. 12F–I, when thermal treatment is at 250 °C (note: complete detachment at 400 °C), GSH ligands capped on the Aux NCs were detached partially without a change in size; however, photocatalytic activity of the composites was enhanced significantly. To what extent the ligand removal benefits the catalytic activity, and where the exact catalytic active sites are in photocatalytic dye degradation remain elusive.
6.2 Photocatalytic selective organic transformation
As an important organic transformation method in both industry and laboratories, photocatalytic selective oxidation and reduction have been widely studied, due to their enormous potential and important roles of versatile intermediates generated from selective oxidation and reduction.

6.2.1 Selective photocatalytic oxidation. 
Developing a Au25/TiO2 nanocomposite as a photocatalyst for oxidation of amines to imines (eqn (13)) in the presence of O2 under visible light irradiation has been reported by Chen et al.9 The high photocatalytic activity stems from the photosensitization effect of Au25 NCs. As shown in Fig. 13a(I) and (II), an electron from benzylamine is seized by holes from Au25 NCs, which caused the transformation from benzylamine into the benzylamine radical cation. Subsequently, α-H of the benzylamine radical cation would be derived by the exposed Au atoms, which leads to the formation of a Au–H intermediate. Afterwards, H from the Au–H and the amine would be transformed by O2˙− species into Ph–CHNH and H2O2 (Fig. 13a(III)), which are extraordinarily active in the photocatalytic oxidation of amine. Fig. 13b shows the effect of the radical scavenger type on the photocatalytic oxidation of amine, implying that photo-generated holes and electrons drive the photocatalytic reactions jointly. As shown in Fig. 13c, conversion of amine to imine increases to 82% for Au25/TiO2, which is roughly 5.86 times higher than that of TiO2 (14%). The turnover frequency of amine oxidation was calculated to be 1522 h−1, which is remarkably higher than that of conventional Au-based catalysts.84 The result indicates that photocatalytic selective organic oxidation using a Aux NC-based photocatalyst under visible light irradiation is boosted efficiently, whicTh has also been confirmed by a recent work.85 Alternatively, it has been ascertained that Au38 NCs can act as a photocatalyst for conversion of amines to imines under visible light irradiation (λ = 455 nm) in the presence of oxygen with an efficiency of 99% along with 99% selectivity as well as good thermal stability. In addition, these authors also explored the photocatalytic activity of Au38 NCs for selective aerobic oxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides.85 After irradiation with λ = 532 nm for 12 h, sulfoxides were formed with 100% selectivity at 57% conversion of sulfides. The photocatalytic activity of Au38 NCs for the sulfide-oxidation reaction is attributed to the generation of singlet oxygen. (13)
 Fig. 13  (a) Mechanism for photo-oxidation of benzylamine catalyzed by TiO2-supported Au25 NCs and (b) controlled experiments using different radical scavengers for the photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzylamine over the Au25/TiO2 nanocomposite (AO: ammonium oxalate). (c) Time-dependent catalytic performances of Au25/TiO2 and TiO2 in photocatalytic oxidation of benzylamine. (d) Mechanism of the dexter-type electron exchange coupling between a gold cluster and an oxygen molecule for generation of singlet oxygen, and (e) schematic illustration of the generation process on the Au38(SAdm)20 structure, shown in space-filling mode. Color code: Au, orange; S, green; C, grey; H, white.85 (f) Sulfoxidation reaction catalyzed by a gold nanocluster catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, 86 and 87, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society, copyright 2018 Chinese Chemical Society and Institute of Material Medical, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
Recently, photogeneration of singlet oxygen and sulfoxidation over Aux NC-based photosystems was reported.76,86 Note that Aux NCs show no activity in the photocatalytic sulfide-oxidation reaction without oxygen.85 Utilizing 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran as the chemical trapping probe to detect 1O2 formation in a photocatalytic system, an oxygen molecule is readily activated to form singlet oxygen by photoelectrons with large reduction potentials in photocatalysis.88–90 As shown in Fig. 13d, photoexcited Au38 NCs, with a higher energy content (S1) than the clusters at the S0 singlet state via absorbing laser light, may undergo an intersystem crossing process to form a slightly lower energy level (T1) by spin flipping of the excited electrons. The gold NCs at the T1 state would exchange electrons with 3O2 back to the unexcited state and form singlet oxygen. On the other hand, gold NCs with a pocket-like surface structure (Fig. 13e), may act as active sites in activating oxygen. Beside activation to form 1O2 under visible/near-IR irradiation, gold NCs enable the photocatalytic oxidation conversion from sulfides to sulfoxides, due to the interaction between the surface gold atoms and the sulfur atom. In other words, sulfide is readily attached onto the surface of gold NCs,87 giving rise to the interaction between sulfide and singlet oxygen (Fig. 13f). It should be noted that the weak combination of produced sulfoxides and the Au surface can effectively avoid the excessive oxidation of sulfoxide products. Compared with conventional organic oxidants, gold NCs are both valuable and worthwhile to operate a selective oxidation process of sulfide in the presence of molecular oxygen, which is nontoxic and environmentally friendly. Consequently, it is anticipated that photocatalytic selective oxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides would be attained over gold NC-based photocatalysts.


6.2.2 Selective photocatalytic reduction. 
Aside from the selective photocatalytic oxidation reaction, gold NC-based photocatalysts have recently been fabricated to probe the conversion and selectivity of photocatalytic reduction of organic compounds under visible light. For example, as reported by our group,71 Aux/NP-TNTAs can act as a photocatalyst for selective reduction of substituted aromatic nitro compounds to amino derivatives under visible light irradiation. As shown in Fig. 14a, the Aux/NP-TNTA heterostructure exhibits enhanced visible light absorption, which is ascribed to the photosensitization effect of Aux NCs that endows the Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure with remarkably enhanced light absorption in the visible region. It can be seen from Fig. 14b that the Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure shows more efficient photocatalytic activity for reducing 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) to p-phenylenediamine (4-PDA) compared to NP-TNTAs. Notably, after adding K2S2O8 as an electron scavenger, photocatalytic activity of the Aux/NP-TNTA heterostructure was considerably reduced (Fig. 14c), which suggests that photo-generated electrons play a crucial role in photoreduction of aromatic nitro compounds. Consequently, the crucial influence of Aux NCs for causing the photocatalytic selective reduction of substituted aromatic nitro compounds was unequivocally determined.
 Fig. 14  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of NP-TNTAs and Aux/NP-TNTA. (b) Photocatalytic reduction of 4-NA to 4-PDA over blank NP-TNTAs and the Aux/NP-TNTA heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation, with the addition of ammonium formate as a quencher for photogenerated holes and N2 purging. (c) A control experiment using K2S2O8 as an electron scavenger for photocatalytic reduction of 4-NA over the Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. (d) A flowchart for in situ transformation of Aux NCs into Au NPs for the fabrication of Aux/Au/NPTNTAs ternary and Au/NP-TNTAs binary heterostructures. (e) Photocatalytic performances of NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs ternary, and Au/NP-TNTAs binary nanostructures toward reduction of 4-NA under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71 and 91, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Afterwards, we further successfully fabricated a Aux/Au/TiO2 ternary heterostructure by light-induced in situ transformation of Aux NCs into Au nanocrystals (Fig. 14d) and explored the reaction activity of different photocatalysts (e.g., NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, Au/NP-TNTAs, and Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs) toward photocatalytic reduction of aromatic nitro compounds to amino organics.91 As shown in Fig. 14e, compared with NP-TNTAs, composite photocatalysts (Au/NP-TNTAs < Aux/NP-TNTAs < Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs) show increased photocatalytic performances. Among these photocatalysts, Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs demonstrates the optimal conversion, which can be ascribed to the synergistic interaction between the photosensitization effect of Aux NCs and the SPR effect of plasmonic Au nanocrystals. More recently, self-transformation of Aux NCs into Au NPs toward photoreduction of 4-NA was investigated, which provides new insights into the photocatalytic mechanism of Aux NC-based photocatalysts.64,92
In addition to organic compounds, photocatalytic reduction of heavy metal ions over Aux NC-based photocatalysts has also been reported.93,94 For example, Xu et al. successfully prepared Ag-tipped ZnO nanorods modified with GSH-protected Aux NCs (ZnO–Ag–Aux) via an electrostatic self-assembly (Fig. 15a) combined with the photo-deposition method.93 Because of introducing Aux NCs into a ZnO–Ag photosystem, its photoactivity was remarkably enhanced, as compared with the ZnO, ZnO–Ag and ZnO–Aux counterparts (Fig. 15e). As shown in Fig. 15b–d, ZnO–Ag–Aux shows more enhanced photocatalytic performances than ZnO–Ag mainly owning to the interaction between Aux and Ag, in which the Aux NC ingredient serves as a photosensitizer to produce substantial charge carriers, and Ag nanoparticles are proposed to work as an electron bridge medium to promote the charge transport.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) in aqueous solution over ZnO–Ag–Aux NRAs under UV–vis light irradiation (300 nm < λ < 800 nm), (b) photoluminescence spectra with an excitation wavelength of 320 nm, (c) transient photocurrent responses, (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots, and (e) photoactivities of ZnO NRAs, ZnO–Ag NRAs, ZnO–Au NRAs and ZnO–Ag–Aux NRAs in the reduction of Cr(VI) aqueous solution under UV-vis light (300 nm < λ < 800 nm) irradiation for 2 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

6.3 Photocatalytic water splitting
Utilizing solar energy to trigger photocatalytic water splitting for obtaining hydrogen and oxygen has been considered as a sustainable, green and environmentally friendly technique to realize solar energy conversion. The first demonstration of the remarkable potential of Aux NCs for photocatalytic water splitting was reported by Shen et al.95 This work highlighted an enormous enhancement in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution by Aux NCs under visible light irradiation. A 35-times enhancement in photoactivity was obtained over Aux NC modified CdS as compared with pure CdS (Fig. 16b), and this is much higher than that of the conventional co-catalyst decorated counterparts, including 2–4 nm Ru, Pd, Pt and Rh/CdS. Similarly, Negishi et al. loaded monodisperse Aux NCs as co-catalysts on BaLa4Ti4O15 for photocatalytic water splitting, whose photoactivity is 2.6 times larger than that of BaLa4Ti4O15 modified with larger sized Au NPs (Fig. 16c).96,97
 Fig. 16  (a) DRS results of the different Aun–BaLa4Ti4O15 samples. The red line indicates the location of the peak corresponding to the plasmonic absorption effect of Au NPs. (b) Hydrogen evolution rates of Au/CdS with different sizes of Au NPs. (c) Time course of photocatalytic water splitting over (red) Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 prepared by the present method and (black) Au NP–BaLa4Ti4O15 prepared by the conventional photo-deposition method. (d) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic water splitting mechanism. (e) Effect of cluster size on the photoactivity for water splitting over Aux–BaLa4Ti4O15 and Au NP-BaLa4Ti4O15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, 96 and 97. copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V., copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013 and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Generally, loading metal nanoparticles on a photocatalyst as active sites can effectively increase the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 16d). Later, these authors explored the size effect of Aux NCs on the photocatalytic water splitting performances by loading Aux NCs (x = 10–39) with different sizes onto BaLa4Ti4O15. As shown in Fig. 16a, absorption intensity of Aun (n = 10, 15, 18, 25, 39) gradually increases as the wavelength decreases, and Aum (m = 22, 29, 33) NCs show a distinct peak at ca. 520 nm that is observed in Au NPs > 2 nm. As shown in Fig. 16e, photocatalytic activity of the composite increases on decreasing the Aux NC size, suggesting that the number of active sites (e.g. Aux NCs) on the surface of the photocatalyst decreases significantly.
In another case, Chen et al. successfully prepared a Aux/Pt/TiO2 heterostructure via a photo-deposition method, and then its photocatalytic water splitting performances were probed.8 The amount of hydrogen evolution increases on prolonging the irradiation time, which is consistent with the linear relationship during the first 90 min. In contrast, the Pt/TiO2 nanocomposite shows no hydrogen evolution under similar experimental conditions (Fig. 17b), suggesting that hydrogen evolution stems from the photosensitization effect of Aux NCs. As shown in Fig. 17a, electrons photo-generated over Aux NCs can flow to the CB of TiO2 and further to Pt for increasing the electron intensity. In addition, the reaction mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting in supported metal NCs was investigated via tuning of quantum well states (QWSs).93,98 The result indicates that the water splitting energy barrier of the ground state can be significantly lowered via combination between water molecules and certain QWSs.
 Fig. 17  (a) The working principle of a Aux NC-sensitized Pt/TiO2 NPs photocatalytic system for the water splitting reaction under visible light irradiation. (b) Time course of hydrogen evolution of different catalysts under visible light irradiation. (c) The procedures of Cr2O3 shell formation. (d) Comparison of H2 and O2 evolution rates by photocatalytic water splitting over Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 and Au25–Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15 (0.5 wt% Cr). Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 99, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In a study performed by Negishi,99 the structure of Aux-based photocatalysts was modulated to promote H2 generation. Utilizing Aux NCs as the co-catalyst contributes to photocatalytic water splitting, including hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution.100,101 Based on the permeability to hydrogen protons and impermeability to oxygen of Cr2O3, Au25–Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15 was fabricated by covering Au25 NCs with a Cr2O3 shell via a strong metal–support interaction (Fig. 17c), instead of a photo-deposition approach. Photocatalytic water splitting activity of Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 with an optimized Cr2O3 shell coverage was increased by 19 times (Fig. 17d). Furthermore, covering Aux NCs with a Cr2O3 shell can prevent the agglomeration of Au25 NCs, improving the stability of Au25 NC based photocatalysts.
Apart from tuning the size and structure of Aux NCs or Aux NC-based photocatalysts, heteroatom doping or bi/tri/multi-metallic alloying over Aux NCs aiming to gain higher activity in photocatalytic water splitting has been explored. For example, Negishi et al. synthesized atomically precise Au24Pd and Au24Pt NCs that acted as co-catalysts by substituting one Au atom of thiolate-protected Au25 NCs, and loaded them onto BaLa4Ti4O15 (Fig. 18a).56 Pd substitution on the surface of Aux NCs occurs at the interface between the substrate and metal NCs (Fig. 18c). The hydrogen evolution rate of different metal NC-based photocatalysts follows the order of Au24Pd–BaLa4Ti4O15 < Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 < Au24Pt–BaLa4Ti4O15 (Fig. 18b), which indicates that the heteroatom doping type contributes to the photocatalytic water splitting activity. Furthermore, Pt-doped Aux NCs coated with a protected Cr2O3 shell exhibit higher activity and stability (Fig. 18d), similar to the aforementioned HOMO-gold NCs.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental procedures for fabricating Au24M–BaLa4Ti4O15. (b) Time course of hydrogen evolution following visible light illumination. (c) Photocatalytic H2 and O2 generation rates by water splitting with Au24M–BaLa4Ti4O15. (d) Time course of water splitting over (Au24Pt)1–3–Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
6.4 PEC water splitting
Semiconductor-based PEC water splitting, which was launched by Honda and Fujishima in 1972,102,103 provides significant new insights into solar energy conversion. Contrary to heterogeneous photocatalysis, photoelectrocatalysis could effectively restrain the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole and remarkably enhance water splitting efficiency by harnessing the synergy of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.104–111 In this regard, due to the distinct energy level configuration and quantum confinement effect, gold NCs exhibit promising potential in photoelectrocatalysis. For example, Tatsuma and co-workers ascertained that all the GSH-protected Aux (x = 15, 18, 22, 25, 29, 33, 39) NCs adsorbed on the TiO2 electrodes can promote the solar-to-electric energy conversion regardless of different electronic structures.112 Among them, Au25 NCs with the HOMO level located between +1.79 V and +1.56 V vs. SHE exhibit the highest incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) (Fig. 19a and b), and internal quantum yield of Au25-modified TiO2 with electron donors is more than 60% at 400–900 nm. The photocurrent action spectra are highly consistent with the optical absorption spectra of the corresponding gold NCs,55,112 which indicated that gold NCs play a decisive role in the PEC responses. Later, these authors analyzed the photocurrents in terms of charge separation at the interface between gold NCs and TiO2.113 As shown in Fig. 19c, electrons in an occupied level (i.e., HOMO level) are photo-excited to the unoccupied level (i.e., LUMO level) under visible light irradiation, similar to the photoexcitation of a semiconductor for charge carrier generation in semiconductor-based photocatalysis. Subsequently, such photo-excited electrons are injected into the CB of TiO2, and the holes produced in the occupied level would be reduced by electron donors. The photocurrent action spectra of all the gold NCs–TiO2 electrodes (Fig. 19d) are highly consistent with the corresponding optical absorption spectra (Fig. 19e). In addition, it was evidenced that the band bending edge evolving from the semiconductor heterostructure also facilitates the oriented electron transfer at the interfere between gold NCs and TiO2,71 leading to the enhanced PEC performances (Fig. 19f).
 Fig. 19  (a) Photocurrent action spectra for TiO2 electrodes modified with Aux NCs in N2-saturated acetonitrile. (b) IPCE results corrected by taking the re-incident photons from the counter electrode into account (normalized at 400 nm) (dots) and UV-vis absorption spectra (solid lines). (c) Schematic illustration of the charge separation at the Au CL/TiO2 interface. (d) Anodic photocurrent action spectra of the Au CL-modified TiO2 electrodes under monochromatic light irradiation. (f) Normalized absorption spectra of Au CL–M, Au CL–L and Au25(SG)18 dissolved in water. (e) Changes in short-circuit anodic photocurrents of the TiO2 electrodes with (coloured solid lines) and without (black broken line) Au CLs in the presence of iodide ions under 460–800 nm light (75 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 and 113, copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
Recently, Chen et al. verified that Aux@GSH NCs can act as photosensitizers for PEC water splitting (Fig. 20b).8 After being photosensitized by Aux@GSH NCs, a mesoscopic TiO2 film as the photoanode demonstrates significantly enhanced photocurrent, which is ascribed to the visible-light response of Aux NCs (Fig. 20b). The reversible reduction (−0.63 V vs. RHE) and oxidation (0.97 and 1.51 V vs. RHE) potentials of the GSH-protected Aux NCs make it applicable to drive the PEC water splitting reaction. When the electrolyte contains the sacrificial reagent (e.g., EDTA), a nearly 3 times larger hydrogen evolution rate was observed. The mechanism of a Aux@GSH NC-sensitized PEC water splitting system is shown in Fig. 20a. In another case, our group prepared nanoporous TiO2 nanotube arrays (NP-TNTAs) integrated with Aux@GSH NCs and graphene quantum dots (GQDs) via an electrostatic self-assembly strategy.114 The cooperative synergy between GQDs and Aux NCs (Fig. 20d) contributes to the cascade electron transport pathways, leading to considerably enhanced PEC water splitting performances (Fig. 20c). The faradaic efficiency of oxygen production over Aux/GQDs/NP-TNTAs was detected to be the same as the theoretical values (Fig. 20e).
 Fig. 20  (a) The working principle of the Aux NC sensitized TiO2 film as a photoanode for PEC water splitting. (b) Photocurrent responses of the TiO2 film and Aux/TiO2 to on–off cycle of irradiation of photoanodes. (c) On–off transient photocurrent responses (bias: 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) of blank NP-TNTAs, GQDs/NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs and Aux/GQDs/NP-TNTAs. (d) Schematic illustration of the PEC water splitting mechanism of the Aux/GQDs/NP-TNTAs ternary heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. (e) Comparison of the oxygen evolution amount with the theoretical result calculated based on the amount of consumed charges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 114, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018. 
Apart from PEC water splitting, Aux NCs can also serve as a photosensitizer for PEC removal of antibiotics. For example, Xie et al. designed an efficient photoelectrode by depositing Au25 NCs onto two types of TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNAs) with different lengths,104 including the short one, in which the TNA electrodes are a short TNA (ca. 0.5 μm in length), and a long one (ca. 4.5 μm in length) (Fig. 21a). Compared with pristine TNAs, Au25-coated TNA exhibited enhanced light absorption in the visible region and PEC performance towards tetracycline decomposition, where the degradation efficiency increases from 65% to 81% for Au25/long-TNA heterostructures, and from 46% to 73% for Au25/short-TNA electrodes (Fig. 21b). The enhanced PEC performance towards tetracycline degradation was considered to result from the generation of photo-generated electrons and holes over Au25 NCs. The thus-produced photoelectrons can either reduce the adsorbed organic molecules (e.g., tetracycline or byproducts) or be energetic enough to generate hydrogen, or react with dissolved O2 to produce active oxygen species (e.g., superoxide radical anion, O2˙− and hydroxyl radical, OH˙), and the holes with oxidation potential react with the adsorbed tetracycline molecules or directly recombine with electrons, or indirectly react with H2O or OH− to produce OH˙ (Fig. 21a). The holes and OH˙ allow blank TiO2 or Aux NC-modified TiO2 to completely degrade most organic pollutant molecules to non-toxic and environment-friendly substances (e.g., CO2).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for visible light-driven PEC oxidation of organic compounds. (b) PEC tetracycline removal efficiency by short-TNA, Au NC/short-TNA, long-TNA, and Au NC/long-TNA photoanodes. Experimental conditions: applied potential of +0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration showing the PEC mechanism of the Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs ternary heterostructure (red electrons: electrons photoexcited from Aux NCs; orange electrons: hot electrons produced from plasmonic excitation of Au NPs) (d) photoluminescence (PL) results of NP-TNTAs, Au/NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, and Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs with the excitation wavelength set at 500 nm. (e) Transient photocurrent responses, (f) electron impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results and (g) photocurrents (0.61 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) of blank NP-TNTAs, TNTAs-Aux, and TNTAs-Au. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104, 64 and 115, copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Generally, light absorption of Aux NCs in the visible domain is far from satisfactory for PEC water splitting. Thus, combination of Aux NCs and plasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs) is beneficial for further extending the light absorption range of Aux NC-based photocatalysts.64 As shown in Fig. 21c, electrons photoexcited from Aux NCs are directly transferred to the CB of TiO2 or transferred to the Fermi level of Au NPs, and then to the CB of TiO2, in which the Au NP ingredient works as an efficient electron bridging medium to promote the charge transport. Simultaneously, hot electrons generated from the plasmonic effect of Au NPs can also be injected into the CB of TiO2, therefore increasing the electron density of the whole reaction system. Additionally, localized oscillation of the electric field afforded by the plasmonic absorption of Au NPs simultaneously facilitates the transport of electrons photogenerated over Aux NCs.116–118 Hence, photo-generated electrons from Aux NCs and hot electrons from plasmonic Au NPs jointly resulted in the significantly prolonged lifetime of electron–hole pairs (Fig. 21d) and thus, substantially enhanced PEC performances of the Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs heterostructure (Fig. 21e). Besides, Aux-core/Pt-shell bimetallic NCs integrated on the TiO2 surface were investigated by Tada.50 The result indicated that the deposited Pt leads to a red shift in the light absorption maximum of Aux NCs.
As illustrated in 5.4, small-sized Aux NCs tend to aggregate under light irradiation and thus lose their original advantageous photosensitization effect. Therefore, photoinduced instability of Aux NCs in the PEC water splitting reaction cannot be neglected. For example, our group systematically reported a comparison of the electrons photogenerated from Aux@GSH and hot electrons from plasmonic gold nanocrystals (Au NYs) in situ transformed from Aux NCs influencing the PEC water splitting performances.115 The authors ascertained that interfacial charge separation (Fig. 21f) and transfer (Fig. 21g) of photoelectrons from Aux NCs are superior to that of hot electrons from plasmonic Au NYs under the same conditions.60,64,115 In other words, self-transformation of Aux NCs into Au NYs is detrimental to PEC water splitting in a Aux NC-based photocatalytic system.60,64,119
6.5 Photocatalytic CO2 conversion
Apart from the photocatalytic and PEC water splitting reaction, solar-driven CO2 conversion to high value-added fuels (e.g., methane, methanol, etc.) represents a rather promising way to tackle the increasing energy crisis and deteriorating greenhouse effect. Nevertheless, the lack of active sites caused by tight ligand protection on Aux NCs increases the difficulty of CO2 conversion in a Aux NC-based photocatalytic system, although Aux NCs can potentially extend the light absorption to the visible range. Specifically, tight combination of the ligand and Aux NCs restrains the photoelectron transfer from the internal sector of Aux NCs to the external region, cutting off the contact between the electrons with reducibility and CO2 molecules.
To overcome this problem, Xiong et al. developed an effective strategy to graft diverse metal cations on Aux NCs via bridging ligands for creating active sites (Fig. 22a).120 As shown in Fig. 22b, grafted isolated metal cations (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+) enable the electron transport from the internal surface of Aux NCs to the external surface, and then act as catalytic active sites for reducing CO2 molecules. By DFT calculations (Fig. 22c and d), it was ascertained that different single metal sites possess varied d-band centers and binding energy with CO2 molecules, which allows controlling the electron transfer efficiency and CO2 activation energy for tuning the activity and selectivity.120,121 Unfortunately, Aux NC-based photocatalysts exhibit discouraging stability, for example, Aux NCs inevitably agglomerate and thus lose activities under light irradiation. To enhance the photostability, as demonstrated by the authors, metal–organic frameworks were employed as the encapsulation shell to protect the Aux NC-based catalyst inside. This work endows Aux NCs with new opportunities for photocatalytic CO2 conversion and provides an effective strategy for modifying the surface active sites of metal NCs toward solar-to-fuel conversion.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration for the process of modifying Au clusters with L-cys ligands (Auc-C) and further grafting them with metal cations (Auc-C-M). (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 over metal cations. (c) Projected density of states (PDOS) of the d-orbitals of surface atoms for Auc-C-Fe, Auc-C-Co, Auc-C-Ni, and Auc-CCu. (d) Models for CO2 adsorption on the Auc-C-Co surface (left) and Auc-C-Ni surface (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
7. Conclusions and perspectives
Overall, we have summarized the latest developments in the growth mechanism and classification of gold NCs, and the photocatalytic mechanism of gold NC-based photosystems along with multiple photocatalytic applications including non-selective dye degradation, selective organic transformation, photocatalytic water splitting, photocatalytic CO2 reduction and PEC water splitting. Although the progress on metal NCs and photocatalysis as well as photoelectrocatalysis is encouraging,122–139 solar-driven gold NC-based photocatalysts are still a new research field lacking in-depth study, and moreover, its photocatalytic applications are limited with solar energy conversion efficiency being far from satisfactory. From our perspective, the following several challenges should be highlighted in future research work.
Firstly, size-dependent photocatalytic rules require more in-depth investigation. Basically, gold NCs used in photocatalysis are composed of an accurate number of atoms and ligands. However, there is deficiency of systematic study on the influence of the size structure of metal NCs on the photocatalytic performance such as photoactivity and product selectivity, although nano-chemistry and optical properties of metal NCs with atomic precision have been summed up in great detail in the past few years.
Secondly, although the reaction mechanism of gold NC-based photosystems has been explored, the surface atomic state is not fully understood. For example, whether there is separation between a gold atom and ligand in the photocatalytic process is crucial to determine the active sites. In addition, it is important to determine the binding state of gold NCs with reactants and intermediates for finely tuning the catalytic reaction. Therefore, in-depth mechanism study on gold NC-based photocatalysis should be highlighted by a coupling experiment with theoretical calculations.
Thirdly, up to now, sporadic efforts have been devoted to preventing the agglomeration of metal NCs for enhancing the photostability, such as controlling the reaction conditions and capping robust ligands. Nevertheless, exploring metal NC-based photosystems with long-term photostability remains a challenging task. Thus, how to effectively improve the photostability of metal NCs in diverse photocatalytic systems while maintaining the activity needs more comprehensive investigation. We believe that coupling structure design and rational reaction condition modulation would synergistically achieve excellent long-term photo-stability of metal NCs without losing activity seriously.
Fourthly, the current photo-conversion efficiency of metal NC-based photosystems is not high enough. More modification strategies need to be explored to remarkably enhance the photocatalytic performances of metal NC-based photosystems. For example, substituting one or more gold atoms with heteroatom(s) of other metal elements for fabricating bimetallic NCs provides an exciting approach to tune the electronic structure of metal NCs, which plays an important role in dictating the photocatalytic performances.
Finally, developing Aux nanocluster based photocatalytic or PEC systems is seriously retarded by the preparation of Aux nanoclusters. Thus far, there has still been deficiency of a facile, green, easily accessible, and efficacious synthetic approach to readily prepare Aux nanoclusters under mild and convenient experimental conditions (e.g., ambient temperature, etc.). Notably, predominant synthesis methods developed in the past few years inevitably involve complicated procedures and a tedious purification process along with low separation yield, which are difficult to repeat and access by those who are engaged in Aux nanocluster-based photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis. Besides, fine tuning of the electronic structure of Aux nanoclusters in the preparation process to surmount the generically poor photostability of metal nanoclusters represents an emerging and effective strategy to, in essence, tackle this long-term challenging issue. In this regard, we believe that it is highly desirable to develop a truly efficient and convenient method to prepare atomically precise metal nanoclusters in an easy and controllable fashion, which would lay a solid and significant foundation for exploring a large variety of novel metal nanocluster-based photosystems in the field of photocatalysis toward solar energy conversion.
To our great delight, on-going research studies are being performed to conquer these challenges. It is expected that great progress and exciting breakthroughs would be made, and these challenges and difficulties would be perfectly overcome in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The support by the award Program for a Minjiang scholar professorship is greatly acknowledged. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21703038 and 22072025).
References
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Qian, M. Zhu and R. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1915–1920 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , 1893..
Y. Lu and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3594–3623 RSC .
S. Yamazoe, K. Koyasu and T. Tsukuda, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 816–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Akimov, A. J. Neukirch and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4496–4565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, Z.-Q. Wei, T. Li, M.-H. Huang, S. Xu, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1364–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, J. Chen, F. Gao, R. Brydson and D. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1009–1017 RSC .
Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, C. Liu, M. Wang, C. Zhang, N. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Abroshan, G. Li and F. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kogo, N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 996–999 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, T. Chen, X. Yuan and J. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1338–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Schaaff, M. N. Shafigullin, J. T. Khoury, I. Vezmar, R. L. Whetten, W. G. Cullen, P. N. First, C. Gutiérrez-Wing, J. Ascensio and M. J. Jose-Yacamán, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7885–7891 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, V. Nachammai, B. Zhang, N. Yan, D. T. Leong, D. E. Jiang and J. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10577–10580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yao, X. Yuan, V. Fung, Y. Yu, D. T. Leong, D. E. Jiang and J. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 927 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yao, Y. Feng, V. Fung, Y. Yu, D.-E. Jiang, J. Yang and J. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1555 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, S. Jin, S. Yang, S. Chen and M. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500441 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li and R. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qian, W. T. Eckenhoff, Y. Zhu, T. Pintauer and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8280–8281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Parker, C. A. Fields-Zinna and R. W. Murray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1289–1296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, W. T. Eckenhoff, T. Pintauer and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2008, 112, 14221–14224 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yan, N. Xia, L. Liao, M. Zhu, F. Jin, R. Jin and Z. Wu, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat7259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ho-Wu, S. H. Yau and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2017, 121, 10073–10080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Han, D. Kim, J. W. Lee, J. Kim, H. S. Shim, Y. Lee, D. Lee and J. K. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1067–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bain, E. B. Troughton, Y. T. Tao, J. Evall, G. M. Whitesides and R. G. Nuzzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 321–335 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, J. F. Chen, S. Kalytchuk, L. Chu, Y. R. Shao, D. X. Kong, K. H. Chu, P. H. L. Sit and W. Y. Teoh, J. Catal., 2017, 354, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. P. Mingos, Struct. Bonding, 2014, 161, 1–47 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, K. Zheng, H. Abroshan, D. R. Kauffman, J. Sun and G. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 5787–5798 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, G. Ramakrishnan, D. Su, R. Rieger, A. Koller and A. Orlova, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
K. Konishi, Struct. Bonding, 2014, 161, 49–86 CrossRef .
Y. Negishi, T. Iwai and M. Ide, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4713–4715 RSC .
C. Kumara, C. M. Aikens and A. Dass, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 461–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gottlieb, H. Qian and R. Jin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4238–4243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kurashige, K. Munakata, K. Nobusada and Y. Negishi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5447–5449 RSC .
M. S. Bootharaju, C. P. Joshi, M. R. Parida, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 922–926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Soldan, M. A. Aljuhani, M. S. Bootharaju, L. G. AbdulHalim, M. R. Parida, A.-H. Emwas, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5749–5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, S. Zhou, Y. Dai, L. Liu, C. Yao, C. Fu, J. Yang and Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9511–9514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kang, Y. Li, M. Zhu and R. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6443–6514 RSC .
J. Zhao and R. Jin, Nano Today, 2018, 18, 86–102 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Wang, K. Kirschbaum, K. J. Lambright and R. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5194–5197 RSC .
A. L. Gould, C. J. Heard, A. J. Logsdail and C. R. A. Catlow, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21049–21061 RSC .
S. Bhunia, S. Kumar and P. Purkayastha, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 449 CrossRef .
H. Chong, G. Gao, J. Chai, J. Chai, B. Rao, G. Li and M. Zhu, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 482–486 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chai, H. Chong, S. Wang, S. Yang, M. Wu and M. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 111399–111405 RSC .
R. C. Jin and K. Nobusada, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 285–300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Walter and M. Moseler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15834–15837 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yuichi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 23, 6219–6225 Search PubMed .
K. A. Kacprzak, L. Lehtovaara, J. Akola, O. Lopez-Acevedo and H. HKkinen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 7123–7129 RSC .
D.-E. Jiang and S. Dai, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2720–2722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, F. Suzuki, S. Ito, T. Akita, K. Tanaka, T. Kawahara and H. Kobayashi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8714–8720 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ling, X. Cui, X. Zhang, B. Liu, C. He, J. Wang, W. Qin, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao and G. Bai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 120–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Tang, L. Lu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9401–9409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Li, T. Li, X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8938–8951 RSC .
M. A. Abbas, T.-Y. Kim, U. L. Sang, S. K. Yong and H. B. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 390–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chen, H. Choi and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8822–8825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kurashige, R. Hayashi, K. Wakamatsu, Y. Kataoka, S. Hossain, A. Iwase, A. Kudo, S. Yamazoe and Y. Negishi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4175–4187 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Roth, J. C. Yoder, T.-J. Won and J. M. Mayer, Science, 2001, 294, 2524–2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Q.-F. Zhang, T. A. Bonaccorso, P. G. Williard and L.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Yu, G. Li, S. Kumar, H. Kawasaki and R. C. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2847–2852 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Liu and Y. J. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tesana, G. F. Metha, G. G. Andersson, C. Ridings and V. Golovko, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 15, 669–675 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, M. A. Carvalho and O. K. Varghese, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 628–634 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xi, L. K. Verma, J. Li, C. S. Bhatia, A. J. Danner, H. Yang and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1093–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, Y. Tang, J. Gong, D. Gong, L. Chi, C. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420–7426 RSC .
A. Haarstrick, O. M. Kut and E. Heinzle, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamashita, M. Harada, J. Misaka, M. Takeuchi, B. Neppolian and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2003, 84, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nasr, K. Vinodgopal, L. Fisher, S. Hotchandani, A. K. Chattopadhyay and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, T. Ohno, K. Nishijima, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 429, 606–610 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, Y. Y. Chen, J. G. Zheng and Y. J. Cui, J. Environ. Sci., 2007, 19, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sharma, S. Kumar and V. Krishnan, Chemistryselect, 2016, 1, 2963–2970 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kawasaki, S. Kumar, G. Li, C. Zeng, D. R. Kauffman, J. Yoshimoto, Y. Iwasaki and R. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2777–2788 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, P. Amaratunga, J. Kim and D. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18366–18371 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zheng and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14278–14280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Long, J. D. Gilbertson, G. Vijayaraghavan, K. J. Stevenson, C. J. Pursell and B. D. Chandler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10103–10115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4270–4277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mrowetz, A. Villa, L. Prati and E. Selli, Gold Bull., 2007, 40, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Comotti, W.-C. Li, B. Spliethoff and F. Schüth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 917–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, V. W. Jones, M. M. Maye, L. Han, N. N. Kariuki and C.-J. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13988–13989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-i. Naya, K. Kimura and H. Tada, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Liu, H. Abroshan, D. R. Kauffman and G. Li, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3368–3374 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, R. Wang and G. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 687–693 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Qian and R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6714–6717 RSC .
P. Ogilby, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3181–3209 RSC .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hayyan, M. A. Hashim and I. M. Alnashef, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3029–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng, S.-H. Hsu, S.-F. Hung, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28105–28109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Huang, Y.-B. Li, T. Li, X.-C. Dai, S. Hou, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10591–10594 RSC .
Y.-S. Xie, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, M. Anpo and Y.-J. Xu, Catal. Today, 2020, 340, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kogo, N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 996–999 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shen, S. Zhao, D. Su, Y. Li and A. Orlov, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Negishi, M. Mizuno, M. Hirayama, M. Omatoi and A. Kudo, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7188–7192 RSC .
Y. Negishi, Y. Matsuura, R. Tomizawa, W. Kurashige, Y. Niihori, T. Takayama, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11224–11232 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ding, L. Yan, Z. Li, W. Ma, G. Lu and S. Meng, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 045404 CrossRef .
W. Kurashige, R. Kumazawa, D. Ishii, R. Hayashi, Y. Niihori, S. Hossain, L. V. Nair, T. Takayama, A. Iwase, S. Yamazoe, T. Tsukuda, A. Kudo and Y. Negishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13669–13681 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136–137, 89–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Catal. Lett., 2006, 108, 7–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Michael G, Chem. Rev., 2010, 11, 6446–6473 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Yao, X. Wu, T. Chen, Y. Ma, C. N. Ong and J. Xie, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10145–10151 RSC .
Z.-Q. Wei, X.-C. Dai, S. Hou, Y.-B. Li, M.-H. Huang, T. Li, S. Xu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 177–189 RSC .
L. Shi, W. Zhou, Z. Li, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6335–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hou, X.-C. Dai, Y.-B. Li, M.-H. Huang, T. Li, Z.-Q. Wei, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22487–22499 RSC .
M. Ye, J. Gong, Y. Lai, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15720–15723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang, Y.-B. Li, T. Li, B.-B. Zhang, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2741–2753 RSC .
S. Hou, Z.-Q. Wei, X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang and F.-X. Xiao, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 7325–7334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang and F.-X. Xiao, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 9023–9027 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3185–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kogo, N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4217–4221 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y.-B. Li, S. Chen, P. Chen and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11154–11162 RSC .
X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang, Y.-B. Li, T. Li, S. Hou, Z.-Q. Wei and F.-X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 4989–4998 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ruibin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 31, 5274–5309 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, R. Jiang, F. Wang, C. Fang, J. Wang and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5790–5805 RSC .
A. Sreedhar, I. N. Reddy, J. H. Kwon, J. Yi, Y. Sohn, J. S. Gwag and J.-S. Noh, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 18978–18986 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17118–17132 RSC .
X. Cui, J. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ling, R. Long and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16514–16520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bo, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12196–12209 RSC .
Y. Xiao, Q.-L. Mo, G. Wu, K. Wang, X.-Z. Ge, S.-R. Xu, J.-L. Li, Y. Wu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 2402–2411 RSC .
Q.-L. Mo, J.-L. Li, S.-R. Xu, K. Wang, X.-Z. Ge, Y. Xiao, G. Wu and F.-X. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 33, 2210332 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Li and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 589–599 RSC .
S.-C. Zhu, Z. Wang, B. Tang, H. Liang, B.-J. Liu, S. Li, Z. Chen, N. Cheng and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 11926–11937 RSC .
S. Li, S.-C. Zhu, Z.-Q. Wei, B. Tang, B.-J. Liu, H. Liang and F.-X. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110848 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hou, M.-H. Huang and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7006–7012 RSC .
B. Tang, S.-C. Zhu, H. Liang, S. Li, B.-J. Liu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4032–4042 RSC .
Z.-Q. Wei, S. Hou, S.-C. Zhu, Y. Xiao, G. Wu and F.-X. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2106338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, S. Xu, Z.-Q. Wei, S. Hou, Q.-L. Mo, X.-Y. Fu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20151–20161 RSC .
Q.-L. Mo, X. Lin, Z.-Q. Wei, X.-C. Dai, S. Hou, T. Li and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16392–16404 RSC .
S. Xu, M.-H. Huang, T. Li, Z.-Q. Wei, X. Lin, X.-C. Dai, S. Hou, X.-Y. Fu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8360–8375 RSC .
Y.-B. Li, T. Li, X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang, S. Hou, X.-Y. Fu, Z.-Q. Wei, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4373–4384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, M.-H. Huang, Y.-B. Li, X.-C. Dai, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21182–21194 RSC .
Z. Zeng, T. Li, Y.-B. Li, X.-C. Dai, M.-H. Huang, Y. He, G. Xiao and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24686–24692 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701098 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. Chen, Z. Yu, R. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1700–1713 RSC .
K.-Y. Jiang, Y.-L. Weng, S.-Y. Guo, Y. Yu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 9, 16922–16936 CAS .
Z.-Y. Liang, J.-X. Wei, X. Wang, Y. Yu and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15601–15612 RSC .

Footnote† Hao Liang & Qing Chen contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Hao Liang	Hao Liang received a Bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering (2019) from Nanjing Institute of Technology, and an MS degree (2022) in Materials Engineering from Fuzhou University. His research interest is centered on developing metal nanocluster-based materials for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and selective organic conversion.
Qing Chen	Chen Qing is currently a second-year master student at Fuzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Fang-Xing Xiao. She holds a Bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Anhui University of Science and Technology (2020). Her research interest is centered on developing transition metal sulfide-based materials for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.
Qiao-Ling Mo	Qiao-Ling Mo is a third-year PhD student at Fuzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Xiao. She holds a Bachelor's degree in Materials Chemistry (2015) from Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, and an MS degree (2018) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Fuzhou University. Her PhD research interest is centered on developing layered transition metal chalcogenide materials for photocatalytic selective organic conversion and photoelectrochemical water splitting.
Yue Wu	Yue Wu is currently an associate Professor at Fuzhou University, China. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, in 2016, and her PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, in 2022. Her research interest focuses on rational design and controlled synthesis of nanomaterials, and their surface/interface structure modulation for catalysis.
Fang-Xing Xiao	Fang-Xing Xiao is currently a full professor at Fuzhou University, China. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from National Huaqiao University in 2006 and 2009, and his PhD degree from Fuzhou University in 2013. From 2013 to 2017, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at the Nanyang Technological University. His research group works on heterogeneous photoredox catalysis, predominantly centered on designing composite catalysts, fundamental investigation on catalyst structures and catalytic mechanisms, and probing their multifarious redox applications in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis. More detailed information can be found at his research group website: https://fxxiao.fzu.edu.cn.
x[AuX4]− + 3xH–SR → SR–[Au(I)–SR]x + xSR–SR + 3xH+ + 4xX−	(1)
x[TOA][AuX4] + 3xH–SR → SR–[Au(I)–SR]x + xSR–SR + 3xHX + x[TOA][X]	(2)
[Ag44−x@Aux(SR)30−2x(SR′)2x]4− + [Au2(SR′)2Cl]− → [Ag44−(x+1)@Aux+1(SR)30−2(x+1)(SR′)2(x+1)]4− + [Au(SR)2]− + AgCl (x ≤ 11)	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Compilation of the basic kernel structure (magenta Au). Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure of Au25(SR)18 NCs [magenta, gold atoms of the core; cyan, gold atoms of the shell (or surface)]. (a) Ball-stick model; (b) space-filling model; structure of (c) Au38(SR)18 and (d) Au23 core (L-isomer, color labels: magenta, Au; yellow, S; gray: C, H atoms are omitted). Reproduced with permission from ref. 17 and 18, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Atomic structure of Au144(SR)60. (A) Inner icosahedral shell of 12 Au atoms (light blue). (B) Middle icosahedral shell of 42 Au atoms (pink). (C) Outer rhombicosidodecahedron shell of 60 Au atoms (orange). (D) Thirty (SR–Au–SR) staples containing 30 Au atoms (yellow) and 60 sulfur atoms (green). (E) Three-layered Au114 core with an a–b–c structure. (F) Isolated (SR–Au–SR) staple astride the parallelogram on the Au60 shell. Alkyl groups are omitted for clarity. (G) Total structure of Au144(SCH2Ph)60 (yellow, gold; green, sulfur; gray, carbon; white, hydrogen). Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, copyright 2018 the Authors.	 

 	Fig. 4  Protected motifs discovered so far in Aun(SR)m. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  X-ray structures of Aux NCs with gold–phosphine ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2014 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 6  X-ray crystal structure of Au25−xAgx(SR)18. The X-ray crystallography averaged composition is Au5.6Ag19.4(SC6H11)18. (a) The 13-atom icosahedral alloy core. (b) Six [–SR–Au(Ag)–SR–Ag–SR–] dimeric staples with different occupancies of Au/Ag atoms. (c) Total structure of Au25−xAgx(SR)18 (Magenta: Au, gray: Ag/Au, yellow: S, grey: C). (d) Alloy structure of Au55Ag92 showing charge accumulation and depletion. As one moves from the left to the right: 147 atoms; 55 atoms; 13 atoms and 1 atom for the Ag@Au@Ag system, Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 41, copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 and copyright the Owner Societies 2014.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The photocatalytic mechanism of the Au–Pt/TiO2 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation. (b) HRTEM image of the Au–Pt/TiO2 nanocomposite. (c) EDS of the labelled single metal particle in (b). (d) The photocatalytic mechanism of the CdS–Pt–Auc photosystem under visible light irradiation. (e) HRTEM image of the CdS–Pt–Auc nanocomposite. (f) The luminescent photoemission (λex = 358 nm) spectra of CdS, CdS–Pt, CdS–Auc and CdS–Pt–Auc. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50 and 51, copyright 2002 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Simulated UV-vis spectra of Au NCs (b) energy diagrams of different Au NCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 



Au10(SR)10	−5736.3837	−5736.1416	6.59	3.18	3.41
Au15(SR)13	−7728.3229	−7728.0855	6.46	3.70	2.76
Au18(SR)14	−8572.9767	−8572.7475	6.24	3.75	2.49
Au25(SR)18	−11274.0496	−11273.8493	5.45	4.14	1.31

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the working principle of metal nanocluster-sensitized TiO2, (b) schematic illustration of the photocatalytic water splitting mechanism using a one-step photoexcitation system, (c) emission spectra of Aux NC aqueous solution with different concentrations of TiO2: a-0, b-25, c-50, d-75, e-100, f-125, and g-150 μM. (d) IPCE spectra (external quantum efficiency) and (e) J–V curves of electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 and 56, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic mechanisms of ideal Aux NCs–TiO2 nanocomposites, (b) Au NPs–TiO2 composites and (c) practical Aux NCs–TiO2 nanocomposites under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). SEM images of (d) NP-TNTAs, (e) pristine Aux/NP-TNTAs, and (f) Aux NCs/Au NPs/NP-TNTAs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 and 64, copyright scientific reports and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 
	(4)
Aux–GSH+ + 1/2H2O → Aux–GSH + 1/4O2 + H+	(5)
Aux–GSH+ + EDTA → Aux–GSH + oxidized EDTA	(6)

 	Fig. 11  The influence of Au25(SR)18 NC deposition on the photoactivity of the Au25/TiO2 nanocomposite toward degradation of methyl orange under (a) UV and (b) visible light irradiation, respectively. (c) Photocatalytic performances of NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, and the Aux/flat TiO2 film towards photodegradation of organic dye pollutants under simulated solar light irradiation and ambient conditions. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure. (e) Control experiments using different radical scavengers for photocatalytic mineralization of organic dye pollutants over a Aux NCs/NP-TNTA heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 71, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
e− + O2 → ˙O2−	(7)
˙O2− + H2O → ˙OH + HO2˙ + H2O2	(8)
H2O2 + e− + hv → ˙OH + OH−	(9)
h+ + H2O → h+ + ˙OH	(10)
h+ + OH− → ˙OH	(11)
Organic pollutants + ˙O2− or ˙OH or OH− → degradation products	(12)

 	Fig. 12  (A) Photocatalytic mechanisms of Au25(SR)18/TiO2 under visible light irradiation. (B) Singlet oxygen production over TiO2 under 532 nm green light irradiation. (C) Singlet oxygen production over Au25(SR)18/TiO2 under 532 nm green light irradiation. (D) Schematic illustration of photoexcitation, photoelectron transfer, and photocatalytic reduction of UBA over the MPC–TiO2 nanocomposite. (E) Change in the UBA concentration (C) relative to the initial concentration (C0) during photocatalytic reaction: with (a) TiO2, (b) 1 wt% MPC–TiO2, (c) 3 wt% MPC–TiO2, (d) 4 wt% MPC–TiO2, and (e) MPC; (F) with (a) TiO2, (b) 1 wt% MPC–TiO2, (c) 3 wt% MPC–TiO2, and (d) 4 wt% MPC–TiO2. (G) Thermo-gravimetric analysis of GSH-coated MPC. TEM images of 4 wt% MPC–TiO2 composites (H) before and (I) after repeated photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 and 77, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society and copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Mechanism for photo-oxidation of benzylamine catalyzed by TiO2-supported Au25 NCs and (b) controlled experiments using different radical scavengers for the photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzylamine over the Au25/TiO2 nanocomposite (AO: ammonium oxalate). (c) Time-dependent catalytic performances of Au25/TiO2 and TiO2 in photocatalytic oxidation of benzylamine. (d) Mechanism of the dexter-type electron exchange coupling between a gold cluster and an oxygen molecule for generation of singlet oxygen, and (e) schematic illustration of the generation process on the Au38(SAdm)20 structure, shown in space-filling mode. Color code: Au, orange; S, green; C, grey; H, white.85 (f) Sulfoxidation reaction catalyzed by a gold nanocluster catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, 86 and 87, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society, copyright 2018 Chinese Chemical Society and Institute of Material Medical, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of NP-TNTAs and Aux/NP-TNTA. (b) Photocatalytic reduction of 4-NA to 4-PDA over blank NP-TNTAs and the Aux/NP-TNTA heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation, with the addition of ammonium formate as a quencher for photogenerated holes and N2 purging. (c) A control experiment using K2S2O8 as an electron scavenger for photocatalytic reduction of 4-NA over the Aux/NP-TNTAs heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. (d) A flowchart for in situ transformation of Aux NCs into Au NPs for the fabrication of Aux/Au/NPTNTAs ternary and Au/NP-TNTAs binary heterostructures. (e) Photocatalytic performances of NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs ternary, and Au/NP-TNTAs binary nanostructures toward reduction of 4-NA under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71 and 91, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed reaction mechanism for photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) in aqueous solution over ZnO–Ag–Aux NRAs under UV–vis light irradiation (300 nm < λ < 800 nm), (b) photoluminescence spectra with an excitation wavelength of 320 nm, (c) transient photocurrent responses, (d) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist plots, and (e) photoactivities of ZnO NRAs, ZnO–Ag NRAs, ZnO–Au NRAs and ZnO–Ag–Aux NRAs in the reduction of Cr(VI) aqueous solution under UV-vis light (300 nm < λ < 800 nm) irradiation for 2 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) DRS results of the different Aun–BaLa4Ti4O15 samples. The red line indicates the location of the peak corresponding to the plasmonic absorption effect of Au NPs. (b) Hydrogen evolution rates of Au/CdS with different sizes of Au NPs. (c) Time course of photocatalytic water splitting over (red) Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 prepared by the present method and (black) Au NP–BaLa4Ti4O15 prepared by the conventional photo-deposition method. (d) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic water splitting mechanism. (e) Effect of cluster size on the photoactivity for water splitting over Aux–BaLa4Ti4O15 and Au NP-BaLa4Ti4O15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, 96 and 97. copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V., copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013 and copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The working principle of a Aux NC-sensitized Pt/TiO2 NPs photocatalytic system for the water splitting reaction under visible light irradiation. (b) Time course of hydrogen evolution of different catalysts under visible light irradiation. (c) The procedures of Cr2O3 shell formation. (d) Comparison of H2 and O2 evolution rates by photocatalytic water splitting over Au25–BaLa4Ti4O15 and Au25–Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15 (0.5 wt% Cr). Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 99, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental procedures for fabricating Au24M–BaLa4Ti4O15. (b) Time course of hydrogen evolution following visible light illumination. (c) Photocatalytic H2 and O2 generation rates by water splitting with Au24M–BaLa4Ti4O15. (d) Time course of water splitting over (Au24Pt)1–3–Cr2O3–BaLa4Ti4O15. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photocurrent action spectra for TiO2 electrodes modified with Aux NCs in N2-saturated acetonitrile. (b) IPCE results corrected by taking the re-incident photons from the counter electrode into account (normalized at 400 nm) (dots) and UV-vis absorption spectra (solid lines). (c) Schematic illustration of the charge separation at the Au CL/TiO2 interface. (d) Anodic photocurrent action spectra of the Au CL-modified TiO2 electrodes under monochromatic light irradiation. (f) Normalized absorption spectra of Au CL–M, Au CL–L and Au25(SG)18 dissolved in water. (e) Changes in short-circuit anodic photocurrents of the TiO2 electrodes with (coloured solid lines) and without (black broken line) Au CLs in the presence of iodide ions under 460–800 nm light (75 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 and 113, copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The working principle of the Aux NC sensitized TiO2 film as a photoanode for PEC water splitting. (b) Photocurrent responses of the TiO2 film and Aux/TiO2 to on–off cycle of irradiation of photoanodes. (c) On–off transient photocurrent responses (bias: 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl) of blank NP-TNTAs, GQDs/NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs and Aux/GQDs/NP-TNTAs. (d) Schematic illustration of the PEC water splitting mechanism of the Aux/GQDs/NP-TNTAs ternary heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation. (e) Comparison of the oxygen evolution amount with the theoretical result calculated based on the amount of consumed charges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 and 114, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for visible light-driven PEC oxidation of organic compounds. (b) PEC tetracycline removal efficiency by short-TNA, Au NC/short-TNA, long-TNA, and Au NC/long-TNA photoanodes. Experimental conditions: applied potential of +0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration showing the PEC mechanism of the Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs ternary heterostructure (red electrons: electrons photoexcited from Aux NCs; orange electrons: hot electrons produced from plasmonic excitation of Au NPs) (d) photoluminescence (PL) results of NP-TNTAs, Au/NP-TNTAs, Aux/NP-TNTAs, and Aux/Au/NP-TNTAs with the excitation wavelength set at 500 nm. (e) Transient photocurrent responses, (f) electron impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results and (g) photocurrents (0.61 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) of blank NP-TNTAs, TNTAs-Aux, and TNTAs-Au. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104, 64 and 115, copyright The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society and copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration for the process of modifying Au clusters with L-cys ligands (Auc-C) and further grafting them with metal cations (Auc-C-M). (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 over metal cations. (c) Projected density of states (PDOS) of the d-orbitals of surface atoms for Auc-C-Fe, Auc-C-Co, Auc-C-Ni, and Auc-CCu. (d) Models for CO2 adsorption on the Auc-C-Co surface (left) and Auc-C-Ni surface (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Hao Liang & Qing Chen contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
