A study of the impact of co-adsorbents on DSSC electron transfer processes: anti-π-stacking vs. shield effect   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP00077K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP00077K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9645-9651A study of the impact of co-adsorbents on DSSC electron transfer processes: anti-π-stacking vs. shield effect†

        
          
            R. 
            Cisneros
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Beley
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            F. 
            Lapicque
          
        
      *c
aiS2-SAS, 10, Place de l'Hôtel de Ville, 57260, Dieuze, France
bLaboratoire de Synthèse et Réactivité des Systèmes Moléculaires Complexes, Faculté des Sciences et Techniques de Nancy, Université de Lorraine, 1, boulevard des Aiguillettes, 54500 Vandoeuvre, France
cLaboratoire Réaction et Génie des Procédés, Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Industries Chimiques, Université de Lorraine, 1, Rue Grandville, 54000 Nancy, France. E-mail: francois.lapicque@univ-loraine.fr
Received 
      5th January 2016
    , Accepted 13th March 2016First published on 15th March 2016AbstractIn this study we report a detailed exploration of the use of two different co-adsorbents – namely bis-methoxyphenylphosphinic acid (BMPP) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) – known to increase photoconversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs sensitized with N719. We have explored the variation of their abilities with the [co-ads]/[D] ratio of the sensitization bath in order to lower the intermolecular deactivations (anti-π-stacking effect) and recombinations between photo-injected electrons and the oxidized mediator (shield effect). EIS-λ technique has been used for this purpose, allowing the two effects considered here to be accurately quantified. DSSC containing BMPP allowed to improve the cell PCE by 60% with a ratio [co-ads]/[D] = 1, exhibiting a strong shield effect, while the maximum PCE obtained with CDCA was slightly over 7% (corresponding to 30% improvement) with a ratio [co-ads]/[D] = 10 and exhibiting a strong anti-π-stacking effect.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have emerged as an important class of photovoltaic device since the first works by O'Regan and Grätzel.1
The operating principle is depicted in Fig. 1. Photosensitivity of the DSSC is ensured by a transparent photoanode made of a large band gap semiconductor – currently a TiO2 nanocrystalline n-type semiconductor (gap: 3.2 eV) – which is sensitized by a dye D grafted on its surface. The photosensitizer harvests the sunlight to produce excited state D* (route 0). The larger the domain of absorption (350–800 nm), the higher the sensitivity is. D* injects an electron into the conduction band (route 2). The electron diffuses through the semiconductor and reaches the external circuit (route 6). Then, still on the surface of the photoanode, oxidized form D+ is reduced by electron donor M of the redox mediator couple M/M+ (route 7): it thus regenerates ground state D while oxidizing M into M+, which diffuses to the cathode (Pt) and is in turn reduced (route 4). According to this simplified mechanism, electric power can be generated without irreversible chemical modification. However, the excited state D* can decay following intra or intermolecular deactivation (route 1). A back transfer from TiO2 photo-injected electrons to D+ can occur (route 3), called electron back transfer. Another drawback process is the recombination between the injected electron and the oxidized redox species M+ (route 5). The impact of some of these phenomena can be reduced by addition of co-adsorbents, which could have various effects: (i) physical hindrance of interactions between neighbouring sensitizer molecules, i.e. for less significant π-stacking and therefore inter-molecular deactivation – this is often called anti-π-stacking effect, (ii) passivation of the semiconducting material, avoiding diffusion of the electrolyte to its surface, and preventing from recombination between electrons of the semiconductor and the oxidized form of the mediator. This latter phenomenon is referred as shield effect. Besides, addition of co-adsorbent cannot easily hinder intra-molecular deactivation, or electron recombination between oxidized form of the sensitizer D+ and the electrons contained in the TiO2. The effects of co-adsorbents depend on their chemical structure and their physicochemical properties, but also on the sensitizer used in the cell, and the significance of co-adsorbent grafting on the semiconductor surface. In addition the use of co-adsorbents appears often empirical in published works and, even though their efficiency has been demonstrated, their optimal concentration of use and their real effect on electron transfer processes in DSSCs have not yet been fully highlighted. For the present study, two co-adsorbent molecules have been considered:
 Fig. 1  Energy and electron transfers occurring in a DSSC. Black arrows represent operating processes and red arrows represent drawback processes. 
• Chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) is a natural saturated polycyclic molecule presenting a sterol nucleus separated from the carboxylic acid anchoring group by a 4-carbon chain (Fig. 2). CDCA has been widely used and described as co-adsorbent since Grätzel et al. showed its ability to increase both VOC and JSC in DSSCs.2 Since then, an increasing number of works have shown its efficiency with various types of sensitizer – organic sensitizers,3,4 Ru(II) complexes,5,6 or transition metal porphyrin complexes7,8 – and its aggregative behaviour in solution or at the surface of TiO2.9
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of co-adsorbents: chenodeoxycholic acid CDCA (a) and bis-methoxyphenylphosphinic acid BMPP (b). 
• Bis-methoxyphenylphosphinic acid (BMPP) is a much smaller molecule with an anchoring group directly attached to two methoxyphenyl groups responsible of its activity. Only few studies deal with its use as co-adsorbent. An interesting study published by Allegrucci et al. in 2009 showed the relevance of its use with zinc porphyrin sensitized cells.10
In this study, N719 dye, which can be considered as a reference sensitizer, has been used.11,12 Various amounts of co-adsorbent have been added in the sensitization bath, with [co-ads]/[N719] molar ratios ranging from 0.01 to 100, in order to investigate the effect of this ratio on the electrochemical behaviour of DSSC. N719 concentration was fixed at 0.5 mM in methanol. For this purpose, conventional J/V and IPCE measurements have been carried out and interpreted here, along with EIS and EIS-λ – i.e. depending on the light wavelength which has recently demonstrated its interest in the quantification of deactivation and recombination processes.13
Results and discussion
Optical characterization of photosensitive electrodes
Addition of co-adsorbent in DSSC can affect the adsorption of the dye onto the semiconducting material surface. Therefore we studied first the impact of adding co-adsorbent on the global absorbance of the photosensitized electrode. More precise information of the absorbance of the dye and estimated surface concentrations of the dye together with its coverage fraction on the TiO2 substrate are reported in the ESI.† Regarding CDCA, it appears that its addition even in small proportions in the staining solution – [co-ads]/[D] = 0.01 – decreases the global absorption of the photosensitized electrode (Fig. 3a). This expresses the competition between CDCA and dye adsorption on the substrate surface. However, the reduced absorbance of the photosensitive electrode is not necessarily accompanied by a lower photovoltaic performance of the cell. In contrast, slight addition of BMPP was shown to enhance the electrode absorbance between 400 and 800 nm (Fig. 3b), but greatly reduces its absorbance in the near UV domain. The absorbance enhancement is no more visible with higher co-adsorbent concentrations, and for ratios [co-ads]/[D] > 1, the electrode absorption is actually lower than that of the reference electrode i.e. without co-adsorbent (Fig. 3b). The evidenced synergetic effect between BMPP and the dye might be explained by favorable interaction between the bi-pyridine groups of the dye and the two aryl cycles of the co-adsorbent, by sort of π-stacking effect: according to this hypothesis, the presence of BMPP at moderate coverage fractions on the SC surface would favor adsorption of the dye. For higher BMPP concentration (ratio equal to 1 or higher), competition between the two molecules is to occur, which results in reduced coverage fractions of the dye for ratio [co-ads]/dye over unity.
 Fig. 3  Evolution of the absorbance of photosensitized electrodes with the amount and nature of co-adsorbent: (a) with CDCA and (b) with BMPP. 
Photoelectrical characterization of DSSCs
IPCE and J/V study of DSSCs assembled with the photo-electrodes depicted above have been performed. DSSCs with platinum counter electrodes have been filled with AN50 electrolyte from Solaronix (Aubonne, CH) consisting of 0.05 M of triiodide, 0.1 M LiI, 0.5 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide and 0.5 M of 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile. IPCE measurements reveal that whatever the co-adsorbent nature and its concentration, a significant improvement of photon-to-electron conversion efficiency was observed within the range of [co-ads]/[D] ratios studied. For CDCA best IPCE performance is obtained for 0.1 < [co-ads]/[D] < 1, in spite of the lower absorption mentioned above. For BMPP, IPCE is at its best for low value for low [co-ads]/[D] ratios (Fig. 4b) in consistence with the absorption data (Fig. 3b); for higher amounts of co-adsorbent, IPCE performance although lower, is nevertheless higher or comparable with that of the reference cell. Besides, examination of IPCE shows that addition of BMPP causes a broadening of activity peak in the IPCE curve beyond 540 nm (Fig. 4b). This effect was not observed on absorption spectra of the photosensitive electrodes, which only present a slight bathochromic shift.
 Fig. 4  Variations of IPCE with the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent: (a) with CDCA and (b) with BMPP. 
Four figures of merit have been determined from the J/V curves (which are fully shown in the ESI†): the open circuit potential VOC, the short-circuit photocurrent JSC, the fill factor ff, and the global yield. Their evolutions with ratio [co-ads]/[D] are reported in Fig. 5. The error bars given in the plots indicate on the repeatability in the cell preparation and the measurements. First, investigation of the short circuit current shows that the presence of the co-adsorbents enhances significantly JSC (Fig. 5a), as observed for the IPCE performance. Likewise a well-defined maximum is obtained at 18 mA cm−2 with BMPP for [co-ads]/[D] = 0.01, before it slightly decreases for higher ratios. With CDCA, a flat maximum at 15 mA cm−2 is reached with [co-ads]/[D] ranging from 0.1 to 10, followed by decreased JSC values at the highest ratio. For CDCA, optimal values for [co-ads]/[D] ratio is consistent with formerly published data,2,5 with concentration ratios CDCA/dye in the order of 10. Although not being identical, the data obtained for IPCE and short circuit current are in good consistence.
 Fig. 5  Variations of J/V measurement features with [co-ads]/[D] ratio: (a) short-circuit photo-current (Jsc), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) fill factor and (d). photo-conversion efficiency. Maximal, minimal and medium values are represented. 
BMPP allows a raise of open circuit voltage from 700 to 760 mV with a [co-ads]/[D] ratio at 1, followed by a pronounced decrease over this ratio value (Fig. 5b). The evolution of the open circuit potential with CDCA is not as sharp: a relative maximum of 740 mV is reached with ratios [co-ads]/[D] lying in the range 0.1–10. The increase in VOC with CDCA has been evidenced and interpreted as being due to its ability to move the band potential of TiO25 to lower potential.
A global reduction in the fill factor is observed in all cases studied here, except for the use of BMPP at [co-ads]/[D] = 1 (Fig. 5c). However, for this co-adsorbent, very high concentration ratios result in significant reduction in this factor. This observation cannot be the fact of insufficient repeatability as shown by the error bars. However, by plotting the reduced curve J/JSCversus V/VOC, the phenomenon might be partly explained as follows: (i) for voltage V near the open-circuit voltage, regeneration of the dye is more difficult because of the low driving force. In the presence of large coverage fractions of the dye, this phenomenon is of a moderate significance, but it becomes more severe in cases that the coverage fraction becomes lower, as with high [BMPP]/[D] ratios: (ii) for low voltage values, the driving force is large enough to compensate lower coverage fractions of N719. The above graphical construction not given in the manuscript, may explain the sharply decrease in the fill factor for high [BMPP]/[D] ratios in the sensitizing bath. However, the above reasoning is also to hold for CDCA, for which the fill factor is only weakly affected, and the above explanation probably does not suffice for interpretation of this seldom-discussed phenomenon.
Global yield study fosters the understanding of the photo-conversion ability of DSSCs, combining the three above figures of merit. Upon addition of co-adsorbents best results – over 8%, to be compared with 4.6% with the reference cell – can be obtained with the use of BMPP, for [co-ads]/[D] ratios lying between 0.1 and 1. Over this range, reduction in the short-circuit current causes inevitably lower global yields. Use of CDCA gives a flat maximum yield around 7%, attained for [co-ads]/[D] ratios between 0.1 and 10.
EIS and EIS-λ study should provide more accurate information about mechanistic aspects than determination of these figures of merit, as presented in the following section.
EIS characterisation
EIS measurements have been performed at zero current (U = VOC ± 10 mV) under 1 sun, AM1.5. Once treated, EIS measurements give access to a set of parameters describing electron transfer processes in DSSC (the model used is briefly presented in the experimental section). Three of them have been retained for this study: i0PA, i0k and ωk, the first one describing indirectly the amount of injected electrons,13i0k and ωk describing the exchange current density and the rate of recombination between electrons of TiO2 and M+ respectively. Parameters i0k and ωk, correspond to the maximal theoretical recombination rate: as a matter of fact diffusion processes are dramatically decreased with a nil electrical driving force since EIS investigation was carried out at VOC ± 10 mV. Ratio JSC/i0PA is also considered in the analysis since it indicates the collection yield of photo-injected electrons (Fig. 6). All other factors e.g. diffusion coefficient of the electrons through the semiconductor, density of charge carriers, rate constant at the cathode etc. estimated from EIS measurements, appeared to be very little affected by addition of the co-adsorbents.
 Fig. 6  Variations of EIS measurement features with [co-ads]/[D] ratio: (a) exchange current density at the photo-anode, (b) recombination exchange current density, (c) recombination rate, and (d) collection yield. 
Addition of the co-adsorbents at moderate amounts results in increased values of i0PA (Fig. 6a): in accordance with what was observed with IPCE the rate of photo-injected electrons is facilitated with [co-ads]/[D] < 1. Furthermore, the global variation of i0PA value is comparable to that observed for JSC with [co-ads]/[D] ratio, although less pronounced: with BMPP the ratio between the maximal JSC value and the reference one with pure N719 is near 1.9, whereas the maximum ratio obtained for i0PA does not exceed 1.4. Similar comment holds for CDCA: current density JSC can be enhanced by 60%, whereas the enhancement for i0PA attains only 30%. Thus, the photo-sensitizer ability to photo-inject electrons appears to be not the only property to be considered to correlate the short circuit current to the dye activity.
The assessment of data related to recombination between the oxidized mediator form and electrons injected into the semiconductor – i0k and ωk – shows that CDCA tends to increase the exchange current density between electrons of TiO2 and M+ (Fig. 6b) in agreement with what is described in the literature.5 However the rate of this electron transfer, indirectly observed through ωk, is decreased by a factor of 1.7 by the presence of CDCA. Considering the values obtained with BMPP, both i0k and ωk have been decreased in larger proportions: ωk has been decreased by a factor 3.3 with ratio [co-ads]/[D] over 0.1 whereas i0k has been decreased by a factor 3 with ratio [co-ads]/[D] over 10. Shield effect allowed by BMPP is visibly more significant than the one exhibited by CDCA.
The collection yield of photo-injected electrons expressed by the ratio JSC/i0PA (Fig. 6d), is also increased significantly by addition of both CDCA and BMPP. Nevertheless, BMPP has a stronger impact at lower concentrations than CDCA.
Finally, the rate of photo-injected electrons in DSSCs with CDCA is unexpectedly equal or higher than that observed upon use of BMPP, whereas the absorbance of photo-electrodes prepared with BMPP is higher than that of CDCA-containing photo-electrodes. This difference can be explained by the anti-π-staking effect of the co-adsorbent, which can be quantified by means of EIS-λ spectroscopy, as described below.
EIS-λ characterisation
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy coupled to wavelength sweep gives access to some of the constants characterising the elementary mechanisms governing DSSCs operation, and their dependence on wavelength and power of the incident light beam. In the present investigation, the discussion has been conducted with the results obtained in a co-adsorbent-free cell, and in the most promising cells prepared with CDCA and BMPP, namely with [co-ads]/[D] ratios = 10 and 1 respectively. Examining the impact of the incident wavelength on parameters related to recombination between electrons of the semiconductor and the oxidized form of the mediator – i0k and ωk – provides further information on the ability of co-adsorbents to shield the TiO2 surface (Fig. 7). Generally speaking, and in agreement with what was observed with EIS, use of BMPP was found to allow appreciable decrease in both i0k and ωk while the use of CDCA causes a lower reduction in ωk but is the source of increased i0k values for deeper examination of the variation of these parameters with wavelength, it can be first considered that wavelength ranges below 350 nm and over 650 nm correspond to very low generation of photo-excited states D* and thus to low density of photo-injected electrons. These ranges can be assimilated to quasi-dark conditions of observation – the EIS measurements carried out in complete darkness are not exploitable because of the very high impedance obtained. Owing to this approximation, it is observed that in quasi-dark conditions recombination's parameters are quite the same for each conditions exposed here: i0k is found to be around 4 mA cm−2 and ωk is found to be between 5 and 10 s−1. Those values were considered hereafter as close to those depending only on the properties of photoelectrode–electrolyte interface in dark conditions, without any photo-generation of charges. The question is to know how co-adsorbents modify the dependence of electron transfer parameters on the amount of photo-injected electrons in the semiconducting material. It is then observed that BMPP allows lower dependence of recombination phenomena on electron photo-injection rates. The gap observed between minimal and maximal i0k values – at 550 and 700 nm respectively – is close to 5 mA cm−2 with BMPP, but attains 10 mA cm−2 with N719 alone. On the contrary, the use of CDCA causes a raise of i0k even in dark conditions. Moreover the gap between minimal and maximal values is around 20 mA cm−2 showing a stronger dependence of recombination rate on electron photo-injection rate. The same conclusions as those expressed in the previous section, can be drawn: use of BMPP drastically reduces the rate of electron transfer: ωk ranges from 5 to 12 s−1 whereas it lies between 10 and 35 s−1 without co-adsorbent (Fig. 7b). Use of CDCA also reduces this rate but to a lower extent: 5 s−1 < ωk < 25 s−1. EIS-λ investigation for estimation of parameters characterising charge recombination phenomena between semiconductor electrons and the oxidized form of mediator, has confirmed and completed the results obtained with overall EIS measurement under 1 sun, AM1.5 light source. Use of BMPP as co-adsorbent reduces the global value of exchange current density i0k and its dependence on photo-injected electron amount, while CDCA exhibits the opposite effect. Furthermore, presence of BMPP and of CDCA – to a lower extent – causes lower rates of electron transfer involved in the recombination process considered.
 Fig. 7  Influence of the wavelength and the nature of the co-adsorbent on the recombination exchange current density i0k (a) and rate ωk (b). 
The study of the variation of exchange current density i0PA – homogeneous to the current density for electron injection from excited state of the sensitizer – with wavelength brings information about the intrinsic photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the sensitizer. Beforehand, comparison of the absorption spectra of the photo-electrodes considered here shows that reference photo-electrode (N719 only) and BMPP-containing electrodes have the same absorption profile between 380 and 700 nm, whereas the absorbance of electrode with CDCA is much lower. If we now compare the variation of i0PA exchange current density with wavelength, higher values are obtained with both CDCA and BMPP (Fig. 8). It is nonetheless surprising to observe how the presence of CDCA causes an increase in the electronic injection rate, while the absorbance of the photosensitive electrode is at its lowest of the three electrodes considered here (Fig. 3). This increase can be explained by the important reduction of intermolecular deactivation rate by a strong anti-π-stacking effect exerted by CDCA. It has been demonstrated elsewhere13 that from the variation of i0PA with the wavelength: the spectra of electrode absorbance and emission of the lamp, intra- and intermolecular deactivation phenomena could therefore be correlated. Deactivation processes follow a sigmoid law of the generation of excited states on the surface of semiconducting material:  where xdeact.total is the total percentage of deactivations, xdeact.inter is the maximal percentage of intermolecular deactivation, xdeact.intra is the percentage of intramolecular deactivation, θ is the knee point of the sigmoid and n is a dimensionless parameter, reflecting the slope of the linear part of the sigmoid. The variation of parameters n and xdeact.inter. with [co-ads]/[D] ratio has been plotted (Fig. 8). It is observed that both parameters are reduced by increased [co-ads]/[D] ratio for both CDCA and BMPP. Nevertheless, CDCA allows more efficient reduction in the intramolecular deactivation intensity and its emerging rate. Without co-adsorbent, more than 30% of excited states are deactivated without electron injection. With BMPP, the deactivation degree is reduced to 27% over a ratio of [co-ads]/[D] = 10. And with CDCA, it falls below 20% in the same conditions.
 Fig. 8  Influence of the nature and the amount of the co-adsorbent on intermolecular deactivations. (a) Influence of the wavelength on exchange current density at the photo-anode with three different systems, (b) influence of the generation of excited state on global deactivation with three different systems, (c) influence of the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent on n parameter and (d) influence of the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent on intermolecular deactivation ratio. 
A deeper study of the n factor shows that inflexion of the linear part linking the two plateaus of the sigmoid curve – at respectively xdeact.intra. and xdeact.inter. – is substantially modified by the addition of co-adsorbents, and this to a larger extent with CDCA than with BMPP. The increasing significance of intermolecular deactivations due to the raise of excited state density at the surface of TiO2 is more significantly hindered down with CDCA than with BMPP. In other words the ability of CDCA to avoid interactions between two neighbouring sensitizer molecules over the surface of semiconductor – i.e. the anti-π-stacking effect – is more pronounced than that of BMPP, for all [co-ads]/[D] ratios considered.
Conclusions
This study underscored more deeply the different effects of CDCA and BMPP on yields and electronic transfer processes in DSSC. We have demonstrated that these co-adsorbents have very different effects. On the one hand, CDCA exhibits a stronger anti-π-stacking effect than BMPP. Greatest effect is obtained for [CDCA]/[D] larger than 10 for which intermolecular deactivation rate is reduced by approx. 12%, whereas the reduction is only near 5% by using BMPP in the same conditions. On the other hand, BMPP exhibits a shield activity much more pronounced than CDCA. Even in low concentrations – for [co-ads]/[D] = 0.1 – a sharp slowdown of electron transfer rate between TiO2 and the oxidised mediator is observed: the rate is reduced by nearly 70% whereas, in the same conditions with CDCA, the reduction extent is only near 40%.
Considering the collection yield of photo-injected electrons (Fig. 6d) expressed through to the ratio of JSC – the short-circuit photo-current – and i0PA – directly linked to the amount of electrons photo-injected – we observed that both CDCA and BMPP allow improvement of performance features of the cell. Nevertheless, once again, BMPP exhibits the better effect, with a high global collection yield obtained with a ratio [co-ads]/[D] set in the range of 0.1 to 1. The maximum observed with CDCA is about 87%, obtained with a ratio [co-ads]/[D] = 10.
From this study, and regarding the increase in global efficiency of the cells, it appears that BMPP is a more efficient co-adsorbent than CDCA, thanks to its great ability to shield the semiconductor surface and to broaden the activity peak of the sensitizer. Nevertheless, the anti-π-stacking activity of CDCA is of a great interest: this could lead to design a new co-adsorbent combining BMPP and CDCA properties to enhance both collection of photo-injected electrons and intermolecular deactivation prevention.
Experimental section
Dye sensitized solar cell assembly
A sandwich-type cell was assembled from a transparent photosensitive electrode, a platinum electrode and I−/I3− electrolyte. Titania films (0.6 × 0.6 cm) were obtained by screen-printing technique using the Ti-nanoxide T/SP (Solaronix) ink on a fluorine-doped tin oxide, FTO, conductive glass plates (TEC Glass-TEC 8, solar 2.3 mm thickness 2 × 2 cm) pretreated by an aqueous solution of TiCl4 5 mM during 30 min at 70 °C. First, the TiO2 film was dried at 150 °C for 10 min and then heated under an air atmosphere at 450 °C for 30 min. Electrodes have been post-treated by TiCl4 30 min at 70 °C and heated one more time at 450 °C for 30 min.14,15 The thickness of transparent TiO2 layer was measured at 5 μm. The film was then immersed in a 0.5 mM methanol solution of di-tetrabutylammonium-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) (N719) with various amounts of co-adsorbent BMPP or CDCA (0.01 < [co-ads]/[D] < 100) overnight. Finally, the electrode was rinsed with the solvent before assembly with the counter electrode. A thin Pt layer was used as counter electrode which was also prepared by screen-printing of Pt ink (Platisol, Solaronix) onto the FTO coated glass substrate and then heated at 450 °C for 30 min under air atmosphere. The platinum counter electrode and the dye-adsorbed TiO2 electrode were assembled together by heating at 110 °C a hot-melt film (30 μm spacer Surlyn, Solaronix) sandwiched between the two electrodes. Then the Iodolyte AN50-electrolyte (Solaronix) consisting of 0.05 M of triiodide, 0.1 M LiI, 0.5 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide and 0.5 M of 4-tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile was filled between the two electrodes by a syringe. Three replicates of each experimented conditions were realised.
Optical and electrochemical characterisation
The photovoltaic characterization of the cells was obtained at room temperature using three complementary techniques. The spectral response was determined by measuring the wavelength dependence of the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) using light from an ORIEL 300 W xenon lamp coupled to a Newport monochromator (Oriel Cornerstone 260). Photocurrents were measured under short circuit conditions (DC mode) using a Newport 1936R optical power meter. Incident irradiance was measured with a 1 cm2 calibrated silicon photodiode.
The current–voltage characteristics were determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using a Keithley 2401 digital source meter. The irradiation source was a Solaronix Lumixo A lamp which matches the AM 1.5 solar spectrum, the irradiance, measured with a Thorlabs light power meter, was fixed at 100 mW cm−2. Warm air was continuously extracted from the cage to avoid too significant temperature increase in the irradiated area.
Electrochemical impedance (EI) measurements have been carried out with a PGSTAT 30 Autolab potentiostat without bias (U = VOC), under illumination at AM1.5 with Lumixo engine, and at different wavelengths in the domain 300–800 nm using the lamp and the monochromator previously described for IPCE measurements. Scanning around the steady state of the DSSC, with i = 0, avoided progressive change in the excitation state of the dye and its regeneration by the mediator. The voltage amplitude was 5 mV and the frequency range was 10 kHz to 0.1 Hz with ten points per decade.
EIS model of the DSSC
The model used for interpretation of EIS is widely inspired from the literature.16–19 It consists of various elements in series: two circuits in series for the cathode and the photo-anode (electrolyte–TiO2 particles interface) – each of them consisting of a charge transfer resistance and a constant phase element – the overall ohmic resistance, and a complex impedance for electron diffusion through the TiO2 layer and recombination processes.13 The values of the electrical features led to the various exchange current densities and rates.13
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–739 CrossRef .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6272–6277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Wu, J. Yang, J. Tang, Y. Long and J. Hua, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54(4), 699–706 CAS .
T. Marinado, M. Hahlin, X. Jiang, M. Quintana, E. M. J. Johansson, E. Gabrielsson, S. Plogmaker, D. P. Hagberg, G. Boschloo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11903–11910 CAS .
N. R. Neale, N. Kopidakis, J. van de Lagemaat, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 23183–23189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Péchy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. L. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397–15409 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Barea, V. Gonzales-Pedro, T. Ripollés-Sanchis, H. P. Wu, L. L. Li, C. Y. Yeh, E. Wei-Guang Diau and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10898–10902 CAS .
P. Salvatori, G. Marotta, A. Cinti, C. Anselmi, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3874–3887 CAS .
A. Allegrucci, N. A. Lewcenko, A. J. Mozer, L. Dennany, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer, K. Sunahara, S. Mori and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1069–1073 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Jirousek, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos, V. Shklover, C. H. Fischer and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 629 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Splivallo, P. Pliska, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1456–1457 RSC .
R. Cisneros, M. Beley, J.-F. Fauvarque and F. Lapicque, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 171, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, B. O'Regan, R. Haswell, H. Smit, N. Baker, J. Smits, J. Kroon and J. Roosmalen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19191–19197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, C. Nahm, J. Kim, J. Moon, S. Nam, D.-R. Jung and B. Park, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 737–741 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945–14953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adachi, M. Sakamoto, J. Jiu, Y. Ogata and S. Isoda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13872–13880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, P. P. Boix, I. Maro-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp00077kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy and electron transfers occurring in a DSSC. Black arrows represent operating processes and red arrows represent drawback processes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of co-adsorbents: chenodeoxycholic acid CDCA (a) and bis-methoxyphenylphosphinic acid BMPP (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  Evolution of the absorbance of photosensitized electrodes with the amount and nature of co-adsorbent: (a) with CDCA and (b) with BMPP.	 

 	Fig. 4  Variations of IPCE with the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent: (a) with CDCA and (b) with BMPP.	 

 	Fig. 5  Variations of J/V measurement features with [co-ads]/[D] ratio: (a) short-circuit photo-current (Jsc), (b) open circuit voltage (Voc), (c) fill factor and (d). photo-conversion efficiency. Maximal, minimal and medium values are represented.	 

 	Fig. 6  Variations of EIS measurement features with [co-ads]/[D] ratio: (a) exchange current density at the photo-anode, (b) recombination exchange current density, (c) recombination rate, and (d) collection yield.	 

 	Fig. 7  Influence of the wavelength and the nature of the co-adsorbent on the recombination exchange current density i0k (a) and rate ωk (b).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Influence of the nature and the amount of the co-adsorbent on intermolecular deactivations. (a) Influence of the wavelength on exchange current density at the photo-anode with three different systems, (b) influence of the generation of excited state on global deactivation with three different systems, (c) influence of the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent on n parameter and (d) influence of the amount and the nature of co-adsorbent on intermolecular deactivation ratio.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp00077k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
