Layer-by-layer self-assembly in the development of electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices from fuel cells to supercapacitors  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35048C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35048C
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7291-7321Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLayer-by-layer self-assembly in the development of electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices from fuel cells to supercapacitors

        
          
            Yan 
            Xiang
          
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Shanfu 
            Lu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            San Ping 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory of Bio-Inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: xiangy@buaa.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 8233 9539;   Tel: +86 10 8233 9539
bFuels and Energy Technology Institute & Department of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia. E-mail: S.Jiang@curtin.edu.au;  Fax: +61 8 9266 1138;   Tel: +61 8 9266 9804
cBeijing Key Laboratory for Advanced Functional Materials and Thin Film Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, P. R. China
Received 
      20th February 2012
    First published on 4th September 2012AbstractAs one of the most effective synthesis tools, layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly technology can provide a strong non-covalent integration and accurate assembly between homo- or hetero-phase compounds or oppositely charged polyelectrolytes, resulting in highly-ordered nanoscale structures or patterns with excellent functionalities and activities. It has been widely used in the developments of novel materials and nanostructures or patterns from nanotechnologies to medical fields. However, the application of LbL self-assembly in the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts, specific functionalized membranes for proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and electrode materials for supercapacitors is a relatively new phenomenon. In this review, the application of LbL self-assembly in the development and synthesis of key materials of PEMFCs including polyelectrolyte multilayered proton-exchange membranes, methanol-blocking Nafion membranes, highly uniform and efficient Pt-based electrocatalysts, self-assembled polyelectrolyte functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphenes will be reviewed. The application of LbL self-assembly for the development of multilayer nanostructured materials for use in electrochemical supercapacitors will also be reviewed and discussed (250 references).
Yan Xiang
Prof. Yan Xiang received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from Sichuan Univ., China in 2001. She joined Beihang University in 2001 and spent one year on green catalysis as a postdoc in Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Now she is the full professor of Materials Chemistry at School of Chemistry & Environment, Beihang University, and is a chief faculty member of Beijing Key Laboratory for Advanced Functional Materials and Thin Film Technology. Her main current research interests involve key energy materials development and its application.
Shanfu Lu
Dr Shanfu Lu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry (Electrochemistry) from Wuhan University, in 2008. After one and half years as a postdoctoral fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, working with Prof. S. P. Jiang, he joined Prof. Xiang's group, and is currently an associate professor in Electrochemistry and Energy Materials at School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, China. His main current research interests involve nanomaterials and polyelectrolytes for energy storage and conversion.
San Ping Jiang
Prof. San Ping Jiang is a full professor in Chemical Engineering and deputy director of Fuels and Energy Technology Institute, Curtin University, Australia. Dr Jiang obtained his BEng in Materials Science and Engineering from South China University of Technology and PhD in Electrochemistry from The City University, London under Prof, Alfred C. C. Tseung. Before joining Curtin in 2010, he worked in CSIRO Materials Science and Manufacturing in Melbourne, Australia and Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His main research interests are on the fundamentals understanding and development of nanostructured materials for use in fuel cells and supercapacitors.
1 Introduction
Layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly technology is one of the most effective synthesis tools to fabricate highly-ordered nanoscale structures or patterns with extended functionalities and activities. The LbL technique was established by Iler in 19661 based on the LB membrane invented by Blodgett2 and Langmuir.3 However, the concept did not attract great attention until pioneering works on the development of self-assembly techniques and applications by Decher4–6 in the 1990s. The LbL self-assembly deposition at a surface is largely controlled by a charge compensation mechanism.7 In this technique, two oppositely charged polymers or polyelectrolytes (PEs) dissolved in aqueous solution are alternatively deposited on a support surface by means of electrostatic attraction. After each dipping cycle, the surface charge is reversed, which enables deposition of a subsequent layer. The process leads to the formation of a final multilayer structure that is stabilized primarily by strong electrostatic force. Fig. 1 shows a typical LbL self-assembly process of a multilayer thin film structure by sequential adsorption of oppositely charged PEs. LbL deposition can also be driven by hydrogen bonding.8–10
 Fig. 1  Schematic of layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly of a multilayer coating by sequential adsorption of oppositely charged PEs. 
LbL has quickly received growing attention as an effective, simple and environmentally benign way to develop advanced surface coatings, novel materials with nanoscopically controlled structure and nanopatterns, and mesoporous and nanoparticles-based materials for catalytic applications.11,12 The major advantage of the LbL self-assembly is its simplicity and low cost. The variability of the applicable materials is another of the most prominent advantages of this method. In addition to conventional PEs and block polymers,13–15 various biomaterials, especially water-soluble proteins, have charged sites on their surface, can be self-assembled by electrostatic LbL adsorption, such as proteins,16,17 DNA18–20 and charged polysaccharides.21,22 LbL self-assembly has emerged as a powerful tool for the immobilization of biomolecules with preserved bioactivity.23 and responsive materials for drug release.24 Charged inorganic substances, including colloidal nanoparticles,25–27 clays,28,29 heteropolyacids (HPAs),30,31 and metal nanoparticles,32–34 can also been used for the LbL self-assembly process. The unique advantages of the LbL self-assembly techniques are its great adaptability with precise microstructural control and high repeatability, extensive possibility in wide range applications, liquid–liquid phase reaction and its nontoxic and environmental-friendly nature.35,36
Energy is one of the biggest challenges that mankind faces over the next 50–100 years. The ever-growing demand for energy is coupled with environmental concerns associated with the excessive and accelerated use of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. Consequently there are urgent needs to increase electricity generation efficiency and to develop clean and efficient means of energy conversion and storage such as solar cells, fuel cells, supercapacitors and advanced batteries. As a versatile bottom-up nanofabrication technique, the LbL self-assembly technique has been explored in the development of multiscale and highly active materials such as nanostructured titania for solar cells,37,38 hierarchically structured mesoporous and nanosheet electrodes for lithium-ion batteries,39–41 mesoporous carbon supports and catalysts for fuel cells42,43 and hierarchical and porous carbon or oxide nanostructure for supercapacitors.44–46 As a remarkable example, Li et al.47 constructed a self-assembled nanofilm of graphene/quantum dots as a photovoltaic device which reached the best performance of carbon/quantum dot solar cells, with IPCE of 16% and 1.08 mA cm−2 under light illumination of 100 mW cm−2. For recent development of advanced and nanostructured materials via LbL self-assembly technique for solar cells and batteries, readers are encouraged to refer to recent reviews.15,48,49
Fuel cells are one of the leading technologies for future power generation.50 Fuel cells are electrochemical energy conversion devices which transform the chemical energy of fuels such as hydrogen, natural gas, methanol, etc. to electricity, and hence, fuel cells inherently have a significantly higher efficiency than that of conventional energy conversion technologies such as the internal combustion engine (ICE). Fuel cells are considered to be the most efficient and less polluting power-generating technology, and are thus potential and viable candidates to moderate the fast increase in power requirements and to minimize the impact of the increased power consumption on the environment. Fuel cells are also versatile devices ranging from room-temperature fuel cells such as proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) to high-temperature (500–1000 °C) solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). The other advantages of fuel cells are their quiet operation and flexible modulability.
Among various fuel cells, PEMFCs are considered to be the most promising power sources for applications ranging from portable electronic devices, vehicle transportation to station power due to their low operating temperature and fast start-up and shut-down cycle.51,52 The core component of a PEMFC is a membrane-electrode assembly (MEA) with the electrocatalytic anode and cathode separated by a proton exchange membrane. The challenges in PEMFCs arise from the need for inexpensive, more active and durable proton exchange membranes (PEM) and electrocatalysts. The PEM has the essential function of a proton-conductive medium as well as a barrier to prevent the mixing between fuel and oxidant. The state-of-the-art PEMs are based on perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) such as Nafion®, invented in the 1970s by DuPont.53 The structure of Nafion, with a unique skeleton of a hydrophobic C–F backbone combined with hydrophilic –SO3H graft chains, imparts exceptional oxidative and chemical stability and high proton conductivity. However, in the case of PEMFCs using liquid methanol fuel or direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs), methanol readily migrates from the anode, through the Nafion membrane, to the cathode, reducing the open-circuit potential (OCP) by as much as 0.15–0.2 V and poisoning the electrocatalysts at the cathode.54 The methanol crossover of Nafion based membranes can be suppressed by use of conventional hybrid composites or surface modification such as by surface deposition with a Pd-based thin film,55 recasting with inorganic nanoparticles to form Nafion/sulfonated montmorillonite composite,56 formation of multilayered Nafion/sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone) (SPEEK),57 and composite membranes such as Nafion/silica.58 The modification of Nafion membrane in general reduces the methanol crossover. However, the incorporation of inorganic nanoparticles such as montmorillonite and silica inevitably alter the microstructure of Nafion, resulting in the deterioration in mechanical properties and proton conductivity, particularly in the case of non-conducting inorganic particles. Pt-based electrocatalysts synthesized with conventional techniques such as sol–gel method59,60 generally show poor microstructure and high agglomeration with little control on the nanoparticle distribution.
Compared with conventional hybrid and synthesis methods, LbL self-assembly provides an alternative technique to develop and synthesize multiscale and nanostructured films or nanosized catalysts particles with molecular level control. For example, it has been demonstrated that LbL self-assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayered thin films is very effective to substantially suppress the methanol permeability of Nafion membranes with minimum detrimental effect on the proton conductivity properties, as compared to conventional hybrid composite methods.61–63 Under acidic environments, only Pt-based electrocatalysts have the high catalytic activity and stability to meet the requirement of PEMFC. However, the high cost and scare resources of precious metals impose serious challenges of the commercial viability of the electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies. How to reduce the loading of precious metal catalysts or to find alternative non-precious metal catalysts is a most critical issue for PEMFC development. LbL self-assembly offers alternative approaches for the development and synthesis of highly dispersed and novel Pt-based electrocatalysts, which would significantly reduce the usage of Pt and thus the cost of PEMFCs. For instance, Jiang et al.64 reported the development of uniformly distributed Pt nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with average size of 2 nm and high Pt loading of 60–80 wt% using a self-assembly process, which would not be possible with conventional deposition methods.
This review will start with the brief outline of the LbL self-assembly processes commonly used in fuel cells and supercapacitors. The synthesis of new PEMs based on LbL self-assembled multilayer films and surface modification of PFSA-based PEMs such as Nafion to enhance the resistance to the methanol crossover will be reviewed in detail. This is followed by the most recent developments in the synthesis and demonstration of new and highly effective electrocatalysts based on LbL self-assembled Pt-based nanoparticles on functionalized carbon nanotubes and graphenes. The development of novel high-temperature PEMs for operation at elevated temperatures and new electrode materials for electrochemical supercapacitors via the self-assembly synthesis principle will also be discussed.
2 Factors in LbL self-assembly process
Self-assembly is essentially driven by non-bonding interactions (electrostatic, dispersive, hydrogen bonding, coordination interactions) without the disruption of the existing bonds within the organic or inorganic molecular building block. Although the practical application of LbL self-assembly has progressed very rapidly due to its simplicity and high versatility, the interactions that drive the self-assembly process, such as electrostatic and hydrogen bonding, are still not fully understood from the theoretical point of view. For example, it is still open to question as to the extent to which the stabilization energy of such an assembly is governed by electrostatic interactions, or whether charge-transfer between proton donating and accepting groups is an essential factor for hydrogen bonding.65 Fundamental and theoretical understanding of the self-assembly is beyond the scope of the present review. In this context, a recent review by Otero et al. on the extensive use of scanning tunneling microscopy offers some insight on the molecular arrangement and interactions of organic materials on solid surfaces.66 Thus in this section, only the main factors such as the molecular structure of PEs, as well as the pH and ionic strength on the electronic and/or ionic conducting properties, multilayer structure and stability of LbL self-assembled multilayers will be discussed.
2.1 PEs
There are a significant number of PEs which can be used as building blocks in the LbL self-assembly process. Fig. 2 shows some of the most common PEs used in fuel cells and electrochemical supercapacitors. PEs with different degrees of hydrophilicity, basicity and charge density will significantly affect their assembly behavior. In general, the less hydrophobic the PEs, the more conductive to H+ they are. For instance, the PDDA–PSS couple (proton conductivity, σ < 10−9 S cm−1) is characterized by a strong hydrophobic electrostatic interaction between the ternary ammonium group [–N–+] of PDDA and the sulfonate group [–SO32−] of PSS, leaving no space for proton conduction across the PE segments. Replacing the PDDA by LPEI, which has a heteroatomic backbone consisting of secondary ammonium groups [–NH–+] that are more hydrophilic, induces weaker interactions with the sulfonate group of PSS and proton transportation is moderately facilitated across the medium. Farhat and Hammond showed that when PSS was replaced by PAA, LPEI/PAA deposited on a nucleopore substrate has a conductivity of 3.26 × 10−5 S cm−1, higher than 1.23 × 10−5 S cm−1, measured at 23 ± 1 °C, 100% RH on LPEI/PSS films, as PAA is more hydrophilic than PSS.67 In addition, the amide group would also act as a hydrating agent, adsorbing water molecules generated at the cathode and thus enriching the LbL film with water channels across which the hydronium ions can readily propagate.67 PDDA/PAMPS possesses a hydrophobic electrostatic interaction between the tertiary ammonium group of PDDA and the sulfonate group of PAMPS, however, it delivers approximately four times the power of LPEI/PSS with the same thickness of multilayers, as PAMPS possesses a polar amide group [–CO–NH–] that is strongly hydrophilic.68
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of polyelectrolytes commonly used to assemble multilayer films. Polycations: poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH), linear poly(ethylene imine) (LPEI), poly(4-vinylpyridiine) (P4VP), poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA). Polyanions: Nafion, poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS), poly(1-(4-(3-carboxy-4-hydroxyphenylazo)benzene sulfonaimdo)-1,2-ethanediyl, sodium salt) (PAZO), sulfonated poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (sPPO), poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), poly(vinyl sulfate) (PVS). 
Moreover, the proton conductivity of a LbL self-assembled multilayer composite membrane is influenced by both the concentration and mobility of the proton carrier. Highly charged PEs would lead to an improvement in the number of proton carriers which will promote proton conduction along the membrane.69 The charge density can be expressed in terms of the number of ion pairs per number of carbon atoms in the repeating unit of the complex formed by the polycation and polyanion. Recently, Yilmaztürk et al.70 pointed out that the proton conductivity of self-assembled PAH/PVS with five bilayers, (PAH/PVS)5 was nearly twice that obtained on (PAH/PSS)5 due to the higher charge density of PAH/PVS as compared to that of PAH/PSS.
On the other hand, the growth mechanism of the LbL self-assembled PE multilayer is related to the structure of the PEs, and this in turn strongly affects the methanol permeability and proton conductivity of LbL self-assembled Nafion membranes. Jiang and Tang71 studied LbL self-assembly of PEs on Nafion membrane by UV-vis spectroscopy. Fig. 3 shows the UV-vis spectra of LbL self-assembly of PE bilayers on Nafion 112 with PDDA (polycation) and polyanions of PSS, PAZO, PAMPS and PAA as a function of the number of bilayers.71 For PDDA–PSS bilayers (Fig. 3a), absorbance at 229 nm is most likely related to the characteristic wavelength of 228 nm for the sodium styrene sulfonate ionomers.72 Since PDDA is almost transparent in the UV-vis spectral range, the increase in absorbance was attributed to the absorption of PSS on the previously self-assembled PDDA layer. The absorbance at 229 nm as a function of the number of PDDA–PSS bilayers increases linearly with the number of LbL self-assembled PDDA–PSS bilayers, which indicates that the same amount of PE is deposited in each dipping cycle and the multilayer is formed in a regular manner. A linear dependence of the absorbance on the number of bilayers was also observed for the LbL self-assembled PDDA–PAZO and PDDA–PAMPS bilayers on Nafion (Fig. 3b and c).
 Fig. 3  UV-Vis spectra of a LbL self-assembly of PE bilayers on Nafion 112 with PDDA polycation and polyanions of (a) PSS, (b) PAZO, (c) PAMPS and (d) PAA. The inset is the plot of the intensity of characteristic absorbance as a function of number of PE bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. ©2012, Elsevier. 
However, in the case of LbL self-assembly of PDDA–PAA bilayers on Nafion, the intensity of the absorbance does not follow the linear relationship as observed for other PDDA–polyanion bilayers. Rather, the absorbance increases exponentially with the number of self-assembled PDDA–PAA bilayers, which suggests the exponential growth of the self-assembled bilayer. In other words, subsequently deposited layers contain more PE material than the previous one, which indicates a very different structure of the multilayers in comparison with that of the linear growth.73,74 Consequently, the exponential growth process of PDDA–PAA bilayer films on Nafion resulted in the best methanol-blocking ability among the polyanions investigated. Overall, in the case of linear growth process, the PEs from the solution interact solely with the outer layers of the film without diffusing into its multilayer architecture.75 However, in the case of the exponential growth process, the thickness and mass of the bilayers increase exponentially with the number of the deposition steps.76 This shows that methanol migration or diffusion through the LbL self-assembled PE bilayer on Nafion is very much dependent on the PE bilayer structures.
Besides PDDA–PSS multilayers, PAH/PSS multilayers deposited on Nafion 117 membrane also exhibit a linear increase absorbance with the number of the deposited bilayers. Moreover, the UV-vis absorbance value of the self-assembled composite membranes increase in the order of 10−1 > 10−2 > 10−3 monomol PE concentration, which due to the fact that more concentrated PE solutions provide more electrostatic adsorption of PSS and Nafion molecules.77 In other words, the higher the concentration of the PE, the thicker will be the deposited bilayers. On the other hand, with the increase in thickness of deposited bilayers, the proton conductivity of the composite membrane would decrease due to effectively blocked charge carriers. Thus, it is expected that a high monomol concentration would cause a reduction on proton conductivity of Nafion-based multilayer composite membranes. Nevertheless, the proton conductivity of self-assembled membranes with five bilayers of PAH (pH 5.5)/PSS (pH 1.8) was 2.02 × 10−2, 1.65 × 10−2 S cm−1 deposited in assembly solutions of 10−1, 10−3 PE monomol concentrations, respectively. That is contributed to the reduced concentration of sulfonic groups of PSS that would facilitate the proton transfer through the self-assembled composite membrane.77
The exponential growth of thickness of bilayers is mainly caused by the interdiffusion of building blocks during the assembly, and diffusivity is determined by interactions that can be controlled by assembly conditions such as pH and salt concentration, as shown recently by Yuan and Li on the LbL self-assembly of pH-sensitive hierarchical nanoporous polymeric films for enhanced responsive drug release.78
2.2 pH
Modulating assembly pH can influence film composition as well as morphology and cross-link density due to changes in degree of ionization with pH. Increasing the charges of PEs by reducing the pH values results in an extended chain conformation in solution; this leads to changes in its composition in the LbL film. In LPEI/PAA films, PAA ionization increases and LPEI ionization decreases with raised pH, which in turn increases the proportion of LPEI in the bilayer and decreases the proportion of PAA. Therefore, at low pH, LPEI is fully ionized, and thick PAA layers will be deposited, and on the other hand at high pH PAA ionization increases and thick LPEI layers will be deposited. It was found that at an optimum pH of 4, both LPEI and PAA are partially ionized, and thick bilayers can be formed through adsorption.68
Low pH is beneficial to the degree of ionization of the polar groups of many PEs such as the amino groups in PAH and LPEI.79 The amino groups of PAH dissolved at low pH are all protonated80 so that the adsorption of PAH leads to high concentration of positive charges at the membrane surface. Consequently, more polyanions such as PSS, will be absorbed in the subsequent dipping step. Furthermore, a higher pH value of PAH results in partial protonation80 and adsorption of less negatively charged PE on the membrane surface so that the self-assembled multilayers will be thinner, which in turn leads to minimal detrimental effect on proton conductivity of the composite membrane. For instance, multilayer films with 10 bilayers deposited on Nafion at PAH (pH 1.8)/PSS (pH 1.8) were much thicker than that of films of PAH (pH 5.5)/PSS (pH 1.8), whereas the proton conductivity is 1.37 × 10−2 S cm−1, 1.88 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 25 °C, respectively.77 Similarly, at low pH, LPEI charge density increases due to increasing secondary amine protonation, whereas at more basic pH, LPEI charge density decreases. Thus, when pH is less than 2 in a strong polyacid system, LPEI/PAMPS and LPEI/Nafion LbL films were thinner than 1 nm per bilayer, while when pH increased to the most favorable value at pH 4, the films were 5–20 nm per bilayer.68
Self-assembly of biomaterials is also very sensitive to pH of the assembly solutions. Xiang et al.61 showed that the pH of the assembly solution impacts both the charge and attitude of purple membrane (PM) pitches via zeta potential (Fig. 4a). The zeta-potential value is positive at relatively low pH values while as the pH values reaches above the isoelectric point, the zeta-potential gradually decreases and becomes negative after the solution becomes alkaline. On the other hand, as the pH value increased from 6 to 10, the absorbance of PDDA/PM bilayers at 568 nm increased sharply with increase of the pH of the PM solution until it reaches a maximum at pH 9.4, as shown in Fig. 4b, and a dense, homogenous multilayers was formed on both sides of Nafion membrane after alternating assembly of PDDA and PM (Fig. 4c). Either higher or lower pH caused the PM fragments to agglomerate or shrink, which results from the fact that PM in acidic and neutral media is insufficient to generate enough coulombic force to sufficiently interact with the cationic charges in the PDDA layer.81
 Fig. 4  (a) Zeta-potential of PM solution as a function of pH, (b) UV-vis adsorption spectra of (PDDA/PM)4 with various pH values of PM solution and (c) SEM cross-sectional image of (PDDA/PM)DF multilayer film with 30 bilayers deposited on Nafion membrane surface at pH 9.4 of PM solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. ©2011, Elsevier. 
2.3 Ionic strength
Ionic strength and types are also essential factors that affect the film growth, proton conductivity and methanol permeability of assembled multilayer films. The addition of salt to the assembly solutions shields charge on the deposited PE film, resulting in thicker bilayers and higher growth rates as well as lower ionic cross-linking densities. Fig. 5 shows the growth rate of PDDA/sPPO films on glass slides.82 The growth rate increased from 6.91 nm/bilayer with no salt in either assembly solution to 42.9 nm/bilayer when assembled in 0.2 M NaCl in both assembly solutions. Films assembled in 0.5 M salt in assembly baths have a growth rate of 62.2 nm/bilayer, showing the variation of the growth of this system through modulation of the ionic strength of the assembly solutions. In addition, when 0.5 M NaCl was added to sPPO assembly solution, PDDA/sPPO films grew at 24.0 nm/bilayer which is higher than that of the films without salt but lower than that when 0.5 M NaCl was present in assembly solutions.82 The increase in thickness is termed screening-enhanced adsorption, and is generally attributed to a change in PE solution conformation; upon charge screening, the PE transforms from an extended conformation to a more globular, coiled conformation that deposits more quickly. The reduction in thickness is called screening-reduced adsorption, and it is generally attributed to binding competition and Coulombic shielding at the deposition surface from highly concentrated small ions, which effectively block PE adsorption.68
 Fig. 5  Growth curves for PDDA/sPPO at several different assembly conditions. The salt concentration given is for all assembly baths, both polymer solution and all rinse water, except for one film made with only salt in the sPPO solution (*). All films exhibit linear growth after a delayed growth period of 5–10 bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. ©2010, The Royal Science of Chemistry. 
The proton conductivity could be simply varied by salt condition during the LbL self-assembly process. Durstock and Rubner studied self-assembly of PAH/PSS films and achieved a maximum conductivity of 3.0 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 90% RH and 21 °C.83 The results indicate the dependence of ion transport on assembly conditions and water plasticization in those systems. Farhat and Schlenoff84 showed that doping the multilayers with additional ions after self-assembly could accelerate the ion transport. Under conditions of high salt concentration and strong polymer ion pairing, the exchanger site concentration is proportional to the solution salt concentration. When multilayers were deposited with salts, the proton conductivity was significantly improved because of the reduction of ionic cross-linking. Moreover, the proton conductivity of multilayers would decrease when the ion type was inverted from the proton form to the salt form. The transportation mechanism of methanol molecules and protons through Nafion-like perfluorosulfonated ionomers depends on the ion type and equivalent weight of membranes,85–87 and the proton transport by the hopping mechanism is facilitated by the increase of the alcohol content and the decrease of the molecular weight.88 The mobility of proton forms is 6–9 times higher than that of other alkali cations, such as Na+ and Mg2+. Yilmazturk et al.89 observed significant improvements on conductivity from 2.1 × 10−2 to 8.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 when the LbL self-assembled (PAH/PSS)5 composite membranes were inverted from (PAH/PSS)5–Na+ in salt form to (PAH/PSS)5–H+ in proton form at 22 ± 1 °C. On the other hand, the higher the salt concentration, the lower the proton conductivity of the multilayer films would be, because the number of proton carriers and the mobility of the inverted salt form are reduced. That is probably the reason why the proton conductivity of (PAH/PSS)5–Na+ containing 1.0 M NaCl is 1.3 × 10−2 S cm−1, lower than 2.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 measured on (PAH/PSS)5–Na+ containing 0.1 M NaCl at 22 ± 1 °C.89
Besides film growth and proton conductivity, the methanol diffusion rate also changes with ion concentration and salt types. In Nafion-based PEMs, methanol diffusion rate and the proton conductivity are in a trade-off relationship with each other as they have a similar transportation mechanism in the Nafion membrane.90 Salt ions are primarily associated with –SO3− clusters on the Nafion membrane surface, and would block the channel of methanol transportation. It is reported that the cationic form (Na+etc.) of Nafion strongly reduces the methanol and water permeability values as compared to that of the proton form.91 Therefore, the addition of salt ions to the PE solutions has a positive effect on reducing the methanol crossover.92 Thus, the methanol permeation rates of the composite membranes containing salt decrease with the number of adsorbed layers.70 Furthermore, different salt ions also affect the methanol permeation in multilayered composite membranes. Buron et al. showed that divalent ions have a strong influence on the amount of PE adsorbed. Despite the significant differences in the nature of the divalent ions (e.g., Ba2+ or Zn2+), divalent salt ions form thicker multilayers than monovalent salt ions.93 However, the increase of the salt concentration may reduce the methanol blocking effect, as the presence of high amounts of salt ions on the membrane surface will cause more uptake of water and methanol.92
3 PEMs by LbL self-assembly
In the development of DMFCs technologies, high methanol permeation of PEM is a critical concern, which not only reduces the cell voltage due to a mixed potential at the cathode, but depresses fuel cell efficiency and poisons cathode catalysts.94 Although increase of thickness of the membrane can lead to the reduction in methanol crossover, use of thick membranes will increase the membrane cost and also increase the membrane resistance and swelling.95 There is a continuing effort in the modification on Nafion based PEMs to suppress the methanol permeability based on the conventional hybrid composite membrane approach.56–58 The modification of Nafion membranes in general reduces the methanol crossover. However, the incorporation of inorganic nanoparticles such as montmorillonite and silica inevitably alters the microstructure of Nafion, resulting in the deterioration in mechanical properties and proton conductivity, particularly in the case of non-conducting inorganic particles. Recent results showed that negative-charged microscale protein patches, for example purple membrane (PM), polypeptide self-assembly on the surface or in the bulk of Nafion membrane, are very effective to inhibit methanol crossover through the membrane.96,97 In this section, the modifications and fabrication of PEMs via electrostatic LbL self-assembly technique are reviewed with respect to the enhanced properties towards the methanol crossover and proton conductivity.

Table 1 lists various self-assembled PEs multilayers and their effect on proton conductivity and methanol-blocking properties.
Table 1 Various PEs combinations for self-assembly multilayers and their effect on proton conductivity and methanol crossover




Substrate
PE
Test conditions
Proton conductivity/m S cm−1
Methanol permeability/cm2 s−1
Ref.





a Through-plane conductivity.
b In-plane conductivity.





Nucleoporea
(LPEI/PSSM)40
23 ± 1 °C, 90–95% RH
9.6 × 10−4
 

67



(LPEI/PSS)40
0.012
 


(LPEI/PAMPS)40
0.016
 


(LPEI/PAA)40
0.033
 


Nafion 117b
(PAH/PVS)5
22 ± 1 °C in water
68.8
41.6 × 10−8

70



Nafion 112b
(PAH/PSS)5
30 ± 1 °C in water
27.0
7.67 × 10−8

92



Nafion 1135b
(PDDA–PSS)8
30 °C in water
106
 

63



(PDDA/PAZO)5
71.0
 


(PDDA/sPPO)30
30 °C, 98% RH
35.3
2.18 × 10−8

98



(PAH/sPPO)30
4.23
0.57 × 10−8


(LPEI/sPPO)30
2.12
1.38 × 10−8


(P4VP/sPPO)30
1.65
0.84 × 10−8


Nafion 117b
(CS/SPAEK-C)5
25 °C in water
77.0
79.0 × 10−8

99




c-(CS/SPAEK-C)5
70.0
27.0 × 10−8


Nafion 212a
(PDDA/PM)5
23 °C in water
3.29
31.6 × 10−8

61



(PDDA/HPW)3
4.10
110 × 10−8

62



SPAEK-Cb
(CS/HPW)4
25 °C, 100% RH
81.0
15.0 × 10−8

30



(PPy/HPW)4
20 °C in water
21.0
2.53 × 10−8

100



(PANI/HPW)5
25 °C, 100% RH
93.0
4.60 × 10−8

101





3.1 Standalone PEMs
The simplicity and efficiency of the LbL technique has resulted in a wide range of applications of multilayers for fuel cells. With the LbL self-assembly technique, a ultrathin composite PEM structure of self-assembled LPEI/PAA on plasma-etched nucleopore membrane was synthesized as supporter for use in a hydrogen fuel cell.67 The LPEI/PAA membrane multilayer films deposited on the nucleopore membrane with regular 100 nm diameter pores has a total membrane thickness of 10 μm. At 100% RH, water fills the pores of the nucleopore membrane, enhancing ion conduction within the PEM, while the LPEI/PAA multilayers isolate hydrogen and air and conduct protons efficiently. The resulting hydrogen–air fuel cell, operating at 55–75% RH, yields a power density of 5.5 mW cm−2 and PEM conductivity of 3.26 × 10−5 S cm−1. Fig. 6 shows an SEM image of the LbL self-assembled LPEI/PAA multilayers and the corresponding performance of the cell in H2.67 Though the reported LPEI/PAA proton conductivity is three orders of magnitude less than that of Nafion at similar conditions, it produces higher power than a conventional single cell based on volume. Patterned layer-by-layer fuel cells are attractive as power sources for microelectronic processes.
 Fig. 6  (a) An LbL film absorbed on a nucleopore membrane with pore size 100 nm; (b) polarization curve for a hydrogen fuel cell using an LbL-nucleopore membrane as PEM; (○) PEO-PAA, (▲) PDAC-PAMPS, (△) LPEI-PAA LbL films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. ©2005, John Wiley and Sons. 
3.2 Surface engineering and enhancement of PEMs

3.2.1 PE multilayer modified PEMs. 
Jiang and co-workers63 applied LbL self-assembly techniques to modify the surface of Nafion membranes to reduce the methanol permeation. Very different from the conventional approaches to incorporate hygroscopic metal oxide particles such as SiO2, TiO2 and zirconium phosphate into the hydrophilic domains of the PFSA membranes to enhance the resistance to methanol permeability at the cost of durability,102–105 the LbL self-assembled PE multilayer films on Nafion has no detrimental effect on the thermal and chemical stability of the Nafion membranes. Fig. 7 shows the scheme of the LbL self-assembled multilayer on Nafion membranes and the power output from LbL self-assembled multilayer modified Nafion membrane cells in methanol.63 Nafion has a dual structure with hydrophobic regions interspersed with ion-rich hydrophilic domains, and methanol diffuses primarily through the hydrophilic water-rich domains.106 Thus, blocking the water-rich domains, which are primarily associated with –SO3− clusters on the Nafion-membrane surface, would inhibit methanol crossover. Owing to the existence of a negatively charged sulfonic acid group, SO3−, on the surface of the Nafion membrane, self-assembly of positively charged polycation occurs as the result of the electrostatic interaction (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of a LbL self-assembly of oppositely charged polycations and polyanions on a Nafion electrolyte membrane, showing blocking of the methanol crossover; (b) polarization curves and power output of a DMFC using an unmodified N1135 membrane, and N1135 membranes modified with LbL self-assembled PDDA–PSS and PDDA–PAZO bilayers, measured at 30 °C in 2 M CH3OH, 0 psi; cathode, oxygen, 10 psi. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. ©2006, John Wiley and Sons. 
With an increasing number of PDDA–PSS bilayers, the OCP is 0.56 V, slightly higher than 0.54 V for the cell with an unmodified N1135 membrane. This is most likely owing to the reduction of methanol crossover. The best performance was observed for the DMFC that used an N1135 membrane with four self-assembled PDDA–PSS bilayers, achieving a power density of 37 mW cm−2 (Fig. 7b). This is an increase of 42% in power output when compared to the cell using an unmodified N1135 membrane (26 mW cm−2).
The proton conductivity of Nafion membrane normally declines with the increase of LbL self-assembly of PE multilayers. However, compared to other methanol blocking methods, the loss with LbL self-assembly multilayer in the proton conductivity appears to be relatively small. After the self-assembly of eight PDDA–PSS bilayers, the proton conductivity was 1.06 × 10−1 S cm−1, a decrease of 15% compared with that of a pristine Nafion 1135 membrane.63 However, the detrimental effect of the LbL self-assembled polyelectrolyte bilayers on the conductivity of the membrane also depends on the nature of the polyelectrolyte bilayers. In the case of a Nafion 1135 membrane modified with self-assembly of five PDDA–PAZO bilayers, the reduction in conductivity is 43%, significantly higher than that with PDDA–PSS bilayers. The most likely reason could be that PAZO is a comb-like polymer, and its layer thickness is greater than that of PSS, which contains smaller monomeric blocks.107 The much smaller decrease on the conductivity in the case of self-assembled PDDA–PSS bilayers could also result from the fact that the PSS contains a sulfonic acid group, which may serve as a proton conductor. Overall, the negative effect on the proton conductivity can be reduced by an appropriate combination of polycation and polyanion pairs.
Hammond et al.98 assembled sPPO on Nafion with different polyanions with various degrees of hydrophilicity and basicity ranging from LPEI, PAH, PDDA (or PDAC) and P4VP (Fig. 8). With the optimized assembly conditions, the sPPO/PDAC achieved high conductivity values of 3.53 × 10−2 S cm−1 and methanol permeability values two orders of magnitude lower than Nafion 1135. Assembly of a LbL film of sPPO and PDAC to a Nafion 1135 membrane resulted in the DMFC power output at 0.3 V improving by 53.2%.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM cross-sectional image of Nafion 1135 coated with 50 bilayers of PDAC/sPPO and (b) power curves of single MEA DMFCs comparing unmodified Nafion devices with Nafion membranes coated with LbL films of LPEI/sPPO and PDAC/sPPO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. ©2008, John Wiley and Sons. 
Although sulfonated PEs are often used in LbL self-assembly processes due to their high proton conductivity and low methanol permeability, high proton conductivity is often accompanied with high water swelling because of the high sulfonation degree, which means a loss of membrane mechanic strength and stability. Cross-linking is an effective method to increase strength and stability of the LbL self-assembled multilayers. For instance, PAH/PAA could be cross-linked by heating these membranes forming amide bonds.108 Similarly, chitosan (CS) and sulfonated poly(aryl ether ketone) bearing carboxyl groups (SPAEK-C) also has been assembled as effective methanol blocking agents on the Nafion surface followed by cross-linking treatment. Cross-linking between ammonium groups of CS and carbon groups of SPAEK-C occurs by formation of an amide bond. After cross-linking between CS and SPAEK-C, the water swelling and methanol permeability were drastically reduced as compared to PEC-coated and Nafion membranes.99
Besides PEs, some proteins also can be oriented on the membrane surface as effective methanol-blocking agents. Purple membrane was first self-assembled onto Nafion 212 surface via LbL self-assembly technique. A linear increase at 568 nm with typical protein UV-vis absorbance and SEM morphology suggested highly-ordered PM multilayers, as shown in Fig. 4.61 Xiang et al. studied the effects of two-sides and only anode-side PM modification on conductivity and cell performance and reported a substantial reduction in methanol crossover up by 73.4%.61 Cell performance with PM single-layer modified Nafion membrane was improved by 48.4%. This is probably the first report about successful application of functional proteins on fuel cell membranes. This biological composite membrane demonstrated performance stability over 400 h operation time which further identified its stability and feasibility in self-assembly modification of PEMs for use in fuel cells.


3.2.2 Nanoparticles (NPs) modified PEMs. 
Although individual PE bilayers self-assembled on PEMs have effective methanol blocking properties, it is generally achieved at the cost of the reduced proton conductivity of the composite membranes. However, the negative effect on the proton conductivity can be reduced or eliminated by using an appropriate combination of polycation and polyanion. One class of highly proton conducting agents is heteropolyacids. HPAs are supersonic conductors in their fully hydrated states.109,110 HPAs are solid crystalline materials with polyoxometalate inorganic cage structures, which may adopt the Keggin form with general formula H3MX12O40, where typically M = P or Si, and X = W or Mo. The highest stability and strongest acidity is observed for phosphotungstic acid (H3PW12O40, abbreviated as HPW or PWA). PWA exhibits high proton conductivity up to 0.1 S cm−1 at 25 °C.111 Therefore, HPAs could substitute the non-proton conducting PEs in the LbL self-assembled multilayer through electrostatic interaction to suppress the methanol diffusion while maintaining high proton conductivity.
Yang et al.62 self-assembled PWA and PDDA onto the surface of Nafion membrane, and found that the reduction in proton conductivity is relatively low as compared with PE multilayer without proton conductor constituent, while the methanol permeability decreased sharply with three PDDA–PWA bilayers. The cell performance was increased by 103% with the self-assembled PDDA/PWA-Nafion membrane as compared to that of the pristine Nafion. Besides Nafion membranes, other sulfonated polymers, for example sulfonated poly(aryl ether ketones) bearing carboxylic pendant groups can be considered as supports for the assembly of PEs. Chitosan with both amino and hydroxyl groups and polypyrrole (PPy) that has high catalytic activity for the methanol oxidation, have been assembled with PWA respectively onto the surface of SPAEK-C membrane. The CS/PWA30 and PPy/PWA100 multilayers on SPAEK-C have a similar effect to PDDA/PWA in the Nafion system in proton conductivity and methanol blocking properties. On the other hand, polyaniline (PANI), an electro-conducting polymer, when self-assembled with PWA to SPAEK-C, exhibited a proton conductivity of 9.3 × 10−2 S cm−1 with five PANI/PWA bilayers while the proton conductivity of pristine SPAEK-C was only 7.4 × 10−2 S cm−1.101 Since PANI and PWA have strong affinity toward water, the PANI/PWA multilayers can give rise to hydrophilic regions on the membrane support and the hydrophilic areas formed around the cluster of polycation and polyanion lead to absorption of water, enabling easy proton transfer. Therefore, protons passing through the hydrophilic regions of the multilayers are responsible for the increase in proton conductivity for the modified SPAEK-C membranes in comparison with pristine SPAEK-C membrane.
Some metal nanoparticles, such as palladium, gold and platinum have been used as methanol-blocking agents for Nafion membranes. Palladium has the unique properties that are permeable to protons, but resistant to methanol transport. Protons can be discharged at the interface between the anode catalytic surface and electrolyte. The discharged protons can be chemically absorbed as hydrogen onto the surface of the hydrogen permeable metal and the metal is transformed into the metal hydride. In order for the hydride system to maintain neutrality, a proton is ejected. Hydrogen atoms diffuse across these metal hydrides, and the protons are generated when hydrogen molecule is stripped of two electrons.112 Thus, Pd films sandwiched between Nafion membranes113 or coated on the Nafion surfaces114,115 act as a methanol barrier. Nevertheless, Pd films increased the overall cell resistance, and unavoidable phase boundary and separation also reduce the cell performance and stability. Pd NPs through ion exchange and chemical reduction were also added into Nafion to reduce the methanol permeation. Unfortunately, the Pd NPs dispersed in the Nafion membrane altered the microstructure of the Nafion membrane resulting in the deterioration of cell performance and stability.112
A more effective route is to self-assemble Pd NPs onto the surface of Nafion membrane. Charged Pd NPs can be prepared by reducing the metallic ions with alcohol in the presence of a PE such as PDDA. The Nafion membrane was alternately dipped into the Pd–PDDA solution and Nafion solution. The self-assembly of Pd–PDDA NPs occurs due to the electrostatic interaction between the positively charge Pd–PDDA NPs and negatively charged sulfonic acid functional sites at the membrane surface. Once the sulfonic sites were covered by the Pd NPs, the methanol diffusion channels would be obstructed.116Fig. 9 shows general principle of the self-assembly of metallic NPs on the PEM surface via electrostatic attraction.
 Fig. 9  Self-assembly mechanism of metallic NPs via electrostatic on PEM substrate surface. 
Au NPs functionalized with PDDA were also self-assembled onto the Nafion surface (PDDA/Au–Nafion) as methanol crossover barriers.117 Au–PDDA NPs with appropriate size (4 nm) can be anchored onto the sulfonic group clusters upon entering into the Nafion membrane, and effectively block methanol crossover; after Au–PDDA NP modification, the methanol limiting current density of Nafion membrane decreasing from 168 to 18 mA cm−2, measured in 2 M methanol at 60 °C. Moreover, the Au-PDDA self-assembled Nafion PEMs have higher OCV and better performance than pristine Nafion 212 membrane.117
Moreover, PE functionalized Pt NPs can also be self-assembled to the sulfonic acid functional sites, SO3− at the Nafion membrane surface, forming a MEA with ultralow Pt loading (Fig. 10).118,119 Such MEA structure is also denoted as a catalyst coated membrane (CCM). In conventional MEA structure, not all Pt NPs supported on high surface area carbon are accessible to the Nafion electrolyte and the reactant gases, leading to low utilization of Pt catalyst.120,121 When Pt NPs were self-assembled directly to the surface of Nafion membrane and then sandwiched between two carbon gas diffusion electrodes as backing layer and hot pressed to form the membrane-electrode assembly, the self-assembled PE-stabilized Pt NPs are essentially in intimate contact with Nafion electrolyte and reactant gases (see Fig. 10), which is close to the ideal situation of the triple access of the Pt catalyst to the protons, electrons and reactants.122,123 For instance, MEA with Pt loading of 2.8 μg cm−2 achieved a power output of 2.3 mW cm−2 under H2/O2 at room temperature, corresponding to a Pt utilization of 821 W g−1.118,124 The self-assembled Pt–PDDA/Nafion PEMs also showed an excellent ability in reducing the methanol crossover.119 Overall, the performance of the self-assembled MEA was comparable to that prepared by sputtering deposition,125 indicating the promising potential of the development of highly efficient Pt catalysts in fuel cells via the self-assembly technology. However, one limitation of the self-assembled MEA is that the positively charged PE-stabilized Pt NPs are electrostatically attracted to the negatively charged sulfonic acid sites on Nafion membrane surface, that is, further assembly of additional Pt NPs would be retarded due to the coverage of the acid sites.
 Fig. 10  Nafion 1135 membrane (a) before and (b) after self-assembly process in Pt-PDDA colloid solutions and cleaning process. (c) Schematic diagram of the self-assembled monolayer structure of Pt NPs on Nafion membrane surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. ©2005, The Electrochemical Society. 
In summary, it is effective to inhibit methanol permeation of PEM by blocking the water-rich domains on the sulfonated polyelectrolyte membrane surface with LbL self-assembled multilayers. Furthermore, cross-linking increases strength and stability of the LbL self-assembled multilayers, while assembly of proton conductor heteropolyacids or metallic nanoparticles onto the substrate can significantly reduce the negative effect on the proton conductivity of modified PEMs.

4 Novel PEMs structures synthesized via self-assembly techniques
The self-assembly principle has also been applied in the development of novel PEMs structure with high proton conductivity and stability under elevated temperatures. High-temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFC) operated at temperatures above 100 °C has several advantages compared with conventional PEMFC with operation temperatures <80 °C, including fast electrode kinetics, high CO tolerance, better heat efficiency and thermal management and simplified humidification systems.126 However, the performance of PFSA membrane deteriorates at elevated temperatures (above 90 °C) and under relatively low humidification because of the loss of water in the membrane.127 Considerable efforts have been conducted to improve the proton conductivity of the membrane in low humidification and high temperatures. One effective way is to recast Nafion membrane with hygroscopic oxides128–130 to increase the water retention at high temperatures.
Nafion-based composite membranes are usually prepared either by recasting of mixture of Nafion ionomer and inorganic particles,131,132 or by impregnation of membranes with a solution of inorganic precursors, followed by in situ sol–gel reaction.133,134 The distribution of inorganic particles is not so homogeneous so that the agglomeration of inorganic fillers and formation of cracks on the surface of the composite membrane is often observed.135 In contrast, the electrostatic self-assembly LbL technique can effectively control the microstructure of the composite membrane via building organized aggregates, networks, or patterns with hierarchical structure inside the matrix and avoid the aggregation of nanoparticles and improve the uniformity of inorganic additives, which is in favor of improving the transportation of protons as well as increasing the water retention under high temperature and low humidification.
4.1 Oxide NPs composite PEMs
It is well known that incorporation of hygroscopic metal oxide particles could improve the thermal stability and water-retention properties of PFSA membranes such as Nafion at elevated temperatures. However, interface compatibility between the inorganic NPs and the PEM is critical for the water-retention property and durability of the composite membranes. Well developed hybrid membranes require the uniformly and well distributed additives in the membrane to minimize the interfacial resistance of the matrix and doped agents. The Nafion composite membranes prepared by the conventional blending method reduce the methanol crossover and improve the water retention properties, however, the distribution of inorganic particles is not satisfactory and phase segregation is a serious concern.136 Tang et al.137 developed a novel Nafion–SiO2 composite membrane based on self-assembled Nafion–SiO2 NPs with average size of 2.8 ± 0.5 nm (see Fig. 11). With the assistance of Nafion ionomers, self-assembly occurs between the positively charged inorganic particles (SiOH2+etc.) and Nafion with negatively charged sulfonated end groups, –SO3−, by electrostatic forces in acidic conditions.138 The Nafion assembled on the silica NPs surface reverses the surface charge, stabilizing the nanoparticles and preventing particle cohesion and grain growth. An intimate interface between the Nafion–SiO2 particles and the Nafion matrix was achieved, which resulted in much better durability of the composite membrane than that of Nafion 212 and conventional Nafion–SiO2 composite membranes under an accelerated wet/dry RH cycling test. Moreover, the cell performance of the self-assembled Nafion–SiO2 composite membrane were significantly enhanced by 46.3% as compared to that of Nafion 212 membranes at cell/humidifying temperatures of 100/60 °C under a current density of 600 mA cm−2 in H2/air.
 Fig. 11  Scheme illustration for the synthesis of Nafion-stabilized SiO2 NPs by the self-assembly route. The inset shows the TEM image of Nafion–SiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. ©2007, Elsevier. 
The size of Nafion–SiO2 NPs mainly depends on the concentration of Nafion. Pan et al. investigated the relationship between formation of silica NPs and the Nafion concentration.139 Silica NPs were formed in Nafion dispersions by in situ hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) precursor in an acidic environment. When the concentration of Nafion is too low to prevent the interaction between initially formed silica NPs, further aggregation of silica NPs would occur. With the increase of Nafion concentration, self-assembled Nafion layer on the silica surface stabilizes the initially formed silica nanoparticles, forming uniformly distributed Nafion-silica NPs. Further increasing concentration of Nafion resulted in the formation of silica NP clusters.139 Moreover, the hydrolysis procedure has also significant influence on the size and distribution of SiO2 NPs and the quality and performance of the composite membrane. Although water acts as both reagent and solvent in the hydrolysis reaction, excess water in the solution would dilute the Nafion content, reducing the self-assembly between the silica particles and Nafion ionomers. Best results were obtained on the Nafion–SiO2 composite membrane recast from Nafion–SiO2 (5 wt%) NPs with a H2O:TEOS ratio of 4:1.140
Besides silica, other metal oxide NPs141–143 such as zirconia and titania formed through sol–gel process in Nafion dispersion via self-assembly technique also showed promising results in high-temperature PEMs. The doped metal oxide NPs did not affect the crystallinity and structure of Nafion in the membrane significantly while the inorganic–organic hybrid membranes exhibited better water maintain properties in comparison with pure Nafion membrane. For example, at a temperature of 100 °C, the proton conductivity of ZrO2 doped PEM is close to 0.01 S cm−1 without external humidification,141 while the proton conductivity of TiO2 doped Nafion membrane is five times higher than that of recast Nafion membrane.143
Compared with TiO2 NPs, the addition of TiO2 nanotubes changes more markedly the physical properties of the composite electrolyte, a feature which is probably related to the intrinsic hydration and proton conductivity of the nanotubes.144 Titania nanotubes contain a large amount of hydroxyl groups that contribute to the higher water absorption of TiO2 nanotubes than TiO2 NPs.145 More specifically, TiO2 nanotubes, with a stacking of lamellar TiO2 octahedra intercalated with alkali cations or protons, stores water in different configurations, either as crystallographic or physically adsorbed molecules.146,147 Moreover, TiO2 is dispersed uniformly in TiO2 nanowire-reinforced Nafion composite membranes by self-assembly between TiO2 and Nafion at low pH condition. Proton conductivity of pure recast Nafion membrane drastically decreased from 1.37 × 10−1 S cm−1 (80 °C, 100% RH) to 8.9 × 10−2 S cm−1 (90 °C, 50% RH), whereas the conductivity of the nanowires-TiO2–Nafion composite membrane was stable at 1.21 × 10−1 S cm−1 under the same conditions.148 Self-assembled TiO2 nanowires also enhance the stability of the composite membrane during fuel cell operation.
4.2 Novel proton conductor composite PEMs
Self-assembled HPA particles, being both hydrophilic and proton conducting, are effective to increase the water retention of PEMs in high-temperature and low-humidity conditions, which would increase the proton conductivity and cell performance of the composite PEM under elevated temperatures. Honma and Yamada149 constructed the PWA-encapsulated material by the self-assembly of PSS on to the PWA surface through recasting the PWA–PSS mixed solution onto a Teflon plate at 70 °C for 24 h. In the PSS matrix, PWA molecules were encapsulated by –SO3H in PSS with a self-assembled structure and fast anhydrous proton transportation occurred between –SO3H and PWA. The –SO3H in the PSS molecule accepts the free proton from the PWA molecule and forms the protonated sulfonic acid group, such as –SO3H2+ (Fig. 12a) and the transport of the proton also occurs from the protonated –SO3H to a nonprotonated –SO3H (Fig. 12b). The encapsulated material demonstrated a high anhydrous proton conductivity of 1.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 180 °C and a maximum power density of approximately 3 mW cm−2 was obtained at 160 °C.149
 Fig. 12  (a) Anhydrous proton-conducting mechanism at the interface between PWA and –SO3H. (b) Proton conduction of nanodispersed PWA-encapsulated material. Arrows indicate the proton transfer of molecular rotation on the PWA nanoparticles of the encapsulated materials. The backbone of PSS chains have been omitted in this model for clarity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. ©2006, The American Chemical Society. 
Sakamoto et al.150 developed an inorganic proton conductor based on self-assembly of PWA and PDDA on negatively charged phenylsilsesquioxane PhSiO3/2 particles. Before the deposition of the PWA layer, (PDDA–PSS)2 layers were deposited onto the surface of PhSiO3/2 particles in order to increase the surface charge density. PWA was then self-assembled on the PDDA-functionalized PhSiO3/2 particles. Then the resultant core–shell particles were pressed to form an almost transparent and monolithic pellet membrane. The proton conductivity of PWA-deposited samples is ∼10−4 S cm−1 at 80 °C and 80% RH, four orders of magnitude higher as compared with unmodified samples.151 PWA can be substituted by Nafion, however, the proton conductivity of PDDA/Nafion-multilayer-coated PhSiO3/2 particles is still too low to be used as PEMs for fuel cell.152 In order to increase the proton conductivity of the hybrid nanoparticles, a high proton conducting polymer of poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propane sulfonic acid) (PAMPS) was deposited on the (Ph2SiO) particles via LbL self-assembly. A flexible sheet-like electrolyte was obtained from the resulting PAMPS deposited particles by pressing, which showed a proton conductivity of 1.0 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 80 °C and 80% humidity.153 However, no cell performance was reported for PAMPS functionalized Ph2SiO membranes.
Mesoporous materials such as mesoporous silica have attracted a great deal of attention because of the tunable mesoporous structure. High specific surface area, nanosized channels or frameworks with an ordered and interconnected internal structure, and high structural stability allow for their potential applications as proton exchange membranes operating at elevated temperatures.154–159 The key issue is, how to anchor and assemble proton conducting carriers into the mesopores or channels of the host. Lu et al. developed PEMs based on highly ordered mesoporous MCM-41 functionalized with proton conducting HPW (i.e., PWA) nanoparticles by the vacuum-assisted impregnation method (VIM).160 The HPW Keggin unit contains three negative charges, which are neutralized in the acid solution by protons in the form of acidic hydroxyl groups at the exterior of the structure. As a result, HPW molecules are negatively charged in water.160 On the other hand, the presence of the highly acidic HPW would significantly increase the proton adsorption reaction of Si–OH, forming positively charged SiOH2+ groups.138 Thus, HPW molecules/clusters would be self-assembled into a positively charged inner surface of the mesoporous of MCM-41, forming anchored HPW nanoparticles/clusters. Fig. 13 shows the procedure for the synthesis of mesoporous silica and HPW-functionalized meso-silica by impregnation.161
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of mesoporous silica and HPW-functionalized meso-silica by impregnation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. ©2011, The American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 14 shows TEM micrographs of siliceous MCM-41 host and MCM-41 with self-assembled HPW by VIM and conventional impregnation method (CIM).160 MCM-41 is characterized by highly ordered 2D nanochannels and the wall thickness of nanochannels is ∼2 nm (thick black lines in the inset in Fig. 14a). In the case of vacuum-assisted HPW-assembled MCM-41, the TEM images clearly provide direct observation of the morphology and distribution of HPW nanoparticles in the MCM-41 host, indicated by the ordered but not continuous black dots sandwiched between continuous channels. However, for the HPW/MCM-41 mesoporous silica assembled under normal conditions without vacuum treatment, HPW nanoparticles/clusters are mainly distributed at open ends or edges of the nanochannels of mesoporous silica (Fig. 14e). The proton conductivity of HPW/MCM-41 composite PEMs is quite stable (Fig. 14f), indicating the stability of assembled HPW nanoclusters in the mesoporous silica by electrostatic attractive forces. Best conductivity is 4.5 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 150 °C and the cell performance with a 30 wt% HPW/MCM-41 nanocomposite PEMs achieved a maximum power density of 95 mW cm−2 in H2/O2 at 100 °C and 100% RH.160
 Fig. 14  TEM image of MCM-41 (a, b) and 30 wt% HPW/MCM-41 electrolyte by VIM (c, d), viewed either normal (a, c) or along (b, d) the pore axis; inset: high-resolution images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. ©2010, John Wiley and Sons. 
Further development demonstrated that the HPW/meso-silica nanocomposite PEMs with an ordered framework can be obtained through a one-step self-assembly route assisted with a structure-directing block copolymer surfactant.162,163Fig. 15 shows the principle of the self-assembly of the HPW/meso-silica via a one-step synthesis route.164 The presence of acidic HPW decreases the pH of the precursor, significantly increasing the proton adsorption of SiOH groups and forming positively charged SiOH2+. When HPW molecules, silica precursor and TEOS are mixed in water, self-assembly will occur between the positively charged silica and the negatively charged HPW by electrostatic forces. With the addition of structure-directing block copolymer, Pluronic P123, the tube-cumulated mesoporous HPW-silica with the template of P123 surfactant is formed through the cooperative hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction between the HPW-silica structure and P123 surfactant.165 With the phase separation of P123, the colloidal complex forms ordered mesoporous silica with the HPW self-assembled in the mesoporous structure. The surfactant template is then removed by heat treatment at 400 °C. The conductivity of the HPW–meso-silica nanocomposite membrane depends strongly on the HPW content, the threshold of the HPW content in the nanocomposite is 5 wt% with best conductivity obtained on 25 wt% HPW with a proton conductivity of 6.0 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 75 °C and 100% RH. The conductivity also depends on the microstructure of the meso-silica framework. A large pore size of the host meso-silica would lead to a high loss of the conductivity as the HPW was leached by water.161
 Fig. 15  Scheme of the synthesis route of HPW–meso-silica nanocomposites via self-assembly assisted with a structure-directing Pluronic P123 surfactant. The inset is the structure of Keggin unit of HPW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. ©2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Fuel cells with self-assembled HPW-silica mesoporous nanocomposite PEMs also showed high proton conductivity and performance. Tang et al. studied the conductivity and performance of self-assembled HPW-silica mesoporous nanocomposite PEMs for direct methanol and ethanol fuels.166 When the temperature was increased to 200 °C without external humidification, the proton conductivity reached 5.0 × 10−2 S cm−1. A fuel cell based on a 165 μm thick HPW-silica nanocomposite membrane achieved a maximum power output of 128.5 and 112.0 mW cm−2 for methanol and ethanol fuels at 200 °C, that is 6.6 and 3 times higher than that at 80 °C, respectively (see Fig. 16).166 The DMFC performance based on a high-temperature HPW/silica nanocomposite proton conducting membrane and low Pt catalyst loading (1.0 mg cm−2) is close to that of advanced DMFCs (100–200 mW cm−2).167 The cell performance is stable for direct alcohol fuels with no noticeable change in the cell voltage, in contrast to the commonly observed significant drop in performance for direct alcohol fuel cells at low temperatures.168 These results show the promising potential of the self-assembly of the HPW/meso-silica with uniformly distributed HPW as novel PEMs for operation at elevated temperatures and low humidity conditions.
 Fig. 16  Performance and stability of single cells assembled by 25 wt% HPW/silica mesoporous nanocomposite electrolyte membranes for direct alcohol fuel cells in the absence of external humidification. The stability of the cell was measured at a constant current of 300 mA cm−2 at 200 °C. Pt black (1.0 mg cm−2) was used as the anode and cathode electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. ©2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In conclusion, hygroscopic oxides can be dispersed homogenously via a self-assembly technique in the bulk of PFSA, which increases the water retention at high temperature. Besides, proton conducting HPA can be assembled with polyelectrolyte or mesopores of meso-silica matrix to form inorganic composite membrane for HT-PEMFC, which not only improve the water retention, but also enhance the proton conduction of the composite membrane at high temperatures.
5 Self-assembly of NP electrocatalysts for PEMFC applications
Owing to their unique electric, magnetic, optical and catalytic properties, precious metal NPs have been regarded as the most active catalyst material of fuel cells and supercapacitors. To maximize precious metal utilization, the particle size, distribution and electrocatalytic activity of NPs need to be optimized. Traditionally, precious metal NPs such as Pt and Pt alloys dispersed on high surface area carbon are used as electrocatalysts for low-temperature fuel cells. Many kinds of high surface area carbon materials have been investigated as catalyst supports, such as carbon blacks, CNTs, carbon nanofibers, carbon microspheres and graphene. Among them, CNTs and graphene have been considered as the most promising potential catalyst supports for low-temperature fuel cells due to their excellent properties such as high specific surface area, high electronic conductivity, and outstanding chemical and electrochemical stability.
In this section, recent progress in the preparation of precious-metal NPs/CNTs and precious-metal NPs/graphene electrocatalysts via the self-assembly technique is reviewed and discussed.
5.1 Standalone precious-metal NPs catalysts
Polymer or PE-stabilized precious metal NPs often act as excellent homogeneous catalysts and show interesting catalytic properties. For low-temperature fuel cell applications, the polymer matrix might provide an efficient pathway for electron and protonic species. Ye and Crooks studied hydroxyl-terminated PAMAM dendrimer-encapsulated Pt NPs and found that dendrimer-encapsulated Pt NPs were electrocatalytically active for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).169 Bensebaa et al. synthesized poly(pyrroledi(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate) (PPyDEHS) stabilized PtRu catalysts and the polymer-embedded PtRu catalyst showed certain activity for methanol oxidation reaction (MOR).170 Jiang et al. studied systematically the effect of various PEs such as PSS, PAH, PAA, PAMP and PVP, stabilized Pt NPs, on the NP formation and electrocatalytic activity of PE-stabilized Pt NPs for methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions.171,172 The self-assembly of PE on Pt NPs reduced in situ stabilizes the Pt NPs and improves the distribution and dispersion of Pt NPs. PE-stabilized Pt NPs have a particle diameter range of 2–4 nm and the distribution and dispersion of Pt NPs appear to be related to the PEs applied. Fig. 17 shows that the electrochemical activity of PE-stabilized Pt NPs for MOR depends strongly on the nature of PEs.171 The electrocatalytic activities of PE-stabilized Pt NPs and Pt black reference catalysts decreases in the order of PDDA–Pt > PSS–Pt > Pt black > Nafion–Pt > PAMP–Pt > PAA–Pt > PVP–Pt > PAH–Pt. Thus PDDA–Pt and PSS–Pt NPs showed better electrocatalytic properties than that of the commercial Pt black catalysts. The results indicate the significant enhancing effect of the NH4+ and SO3− functional groups of the PEs on the electrocatalytic activities of Pt NPs for both MOR and ORR.173 Self-assembled PDDA–Pt nanoparticles not only show high electroactivity for the O2 reduction and H2 or methanol oxidation reactions for PEMFC,118 but also dramatically reduce the methanol crossover while having little detrimental effect on the high proton conductivity and microstructure of the membrane for direct methanol fuel cells.119
 Fig. 17  Cycle voltammograms of PE-stabilized Pt, PVP-Pt and Pt black NPs for the methanol oxidation reaction in 1 M H2SO4 + 2 M CH3OH under a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. ©2007, Elsevier. 
Moreover, the electrocatalytic activity, dispersion and distribution of PE–Pt NPs are a strong function of PE concentration.174 It has been reported that the optimal molar ratio of PDDA to Pt is 3:1 for the best morphology and distribution of PDDA–Pt NPs. PDDA–PT NPs synthesized with PDDA to Pt ratio of 3:1 shows better catalytic activity for the methanol oxidation reaction in comparison to a commercial Pt/C catalyst, while the excess PDDA will inhibit the electrocatalytic activity of Pt NPs due to a shielding effect.175 Pt NPs chains prepared by EDTA-directed self-assembly was also reported by Chen et al.176
5.2 Metal NPs supported on CNTs
CNTs have received extensive attraction after their discovery by Iijima in 1991.177 In recent years, CNTs have been increasingly considered as an advanced catalyst support for PEMFCs, owing to their outstanding physical and mechanical characteristics.178 However, it is well known that for CNTs without surface modification or functionalization, there are insufficient active sites for anchoring the precursors of metal ions or metal nanoparticles, which usually leads to poor dispersion and large metal nanoparticles, especially under high loading conditions. Chemical oxidation using a concentrated mixture of HNO3 and H2SO4 is generally used to functionalize and generate active sites on the CNTs sidewalls and tube tips.179,180 However, such harsh chemical oxidation method also reduces the electrical conductivity and corrosion resistance of CNTs which would decrease the catalyst performance.
One of the better alternative approaches is non-covalent functionalization via PE self-assembly. Hsin et al. reported in situ polymerization of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) whose main chains are linked with CNTs through breaking the double bonds of MWCNTs, and then used this PVP-functionalized CNTs as supports to deposit Pt and Pt–Ru NPs.181 Using PDDA as functionalizing agent it was found that surface modification or functionalization of CNTs by PDDA via self-assembly technique occurs through non-bonding interaction without detrimental effects on its intrinsic physical and electronic properties.182 PDDA is a water-soluble quaternary ammonium salt and strong PE. The strong adsorption of the positively charged PDDA on CNTs is believed to be due to the π–π interaction between PDDA and the basal plane of graphite of CNTs.183 Pt NPs were then in situ synthesized on the PDDA-functionalized CNTs (PDDA-MWCNTS) via the self-assembly between negatively charged Pt precursors and positively charged functional groups of PDDA. As illustrated in Fig. 18, because of the high density and positive surface charge, a large amount of negatively charged Pt precursor can be anchored onto MWCNTs surface via electrostatic interaction. The subsequent reduction by ethylene glycol (EG) gives Pt NPs with uniform distribution and high density.
 Fig. 18  PDDA functionalization of CNTs and in situ synthesis of Pt NPs on PDDA-functionalized CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. ©2008, Institute of Physics. 
Further development showed that non-covalent functionalization using PDDA can produce Pt NPs/PDDA/MWCNTs catalysts with average particle size of Pt NPs of 1.8 ± 0.4 nm, uniform distribution and Pt loading of 10–93 wt% (see Fig. 19).64 The results show that the increase in the Pt NP loading on MWCNTs leads to the enhancement of the electrocatalytic activity for CO oxidation, methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction, demonstrating a close correlation between the electrocatalytic activities of Pt NPs catalysts and the interconnectivity of Pt NPs on CNTs. PtRu and PtSn NPs can also be self-assembled to non-covalent functionalized CNTs.184,185
 Fig. 19  TEM micrographs of Pt NPs on PDDA/MWCNTs with Pt loadings of (a) 10, (b) 20, (c) 30, (d) 40 , (e) 50, (f) 69, (g) 81.6, (h) 86 and (i) 93 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. ©2009, The American Chemical Society. 
In addition to Pt, PtRu and PtSn NPs, HPAs such as HPW can also be self-assembled to PDDA-functionalized MWCNTs to enhance the electrocatalytic activity of precious metal catalysts.186 In this method, negatively charged HPW was self-assembled on positively charged PDDA-MWCNTs via electrostatic forces, followed by Pd deposition and reduction onto the HPW assembled PDDA-MWCNTs (Pd/HPW-PDDA-MWCNTs) (Fig. 20). The Pd NPs (average particle size about 2 nm) in the HPW assembled PDDA-MWCNTs showed a homogeneous dispersion with narrow particle size distribution. The assembly and incorporation of HPW significantly reduced the size and enhanced the distribution of Pd NPs on MWCNTs. The electrocatalytic activity of Pd/HPW-PDDA-MWCNTs for oxygen reduction reaction is compatible to that of Pt/C.186 Besides PDDA, chitosan was also used as positively changed polymer to self-assemble HPW onto CNTs187 and Pt/C.188 The obtained PtRu/HPW-CS-CNTs and Pt/C-CS-HPW catalyst showed high electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation.
 Fig. 20  Scheme of self-assembly of HPW onto PDDA-functionalized MWCNTs and synthesis of Pd NPs on HPW assembled PDDA-MWCNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. ©2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhang et al.189 also self-assembled Pt NPs onto PAH-functionalized CNTs and showed very good catalytic activity towards oxygen reduction reaction. Nakashima's group190,191 synthesized Pt/PBI/MWCNTs with self-assembly technology, and the as-synthesized Pt catalysts exhibited higher utilization efficiency of Pt NPs as compared to the Pt/MWNT, as well as commercially available Pt/C catalyst.
CNTs were also functionalized with a hemimicelle self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules based on hydrophobic interaction, which showed extremely good solubility and stability when used as the supports for metal NPs.192–194 CNTs were decorated with dense and uniform Pd NPs with a mean diameter of 2 nm; these Pd-coated CNTs193 showed superiority toward methanol electrocatalytic oxidation and the current intensity was nearly 25 times higher (3540 mA cm−2 mg−1) than that of previously reported MWCNT-Pd assemblies.195
The high conductivity, chemical and thermal stability of ionic liquids (ILs) as well as their wide electrochemical window make them attractive for research in fuel-cell technology. Niu's group developed an effective method to attach IL to CNTs.196 In this method amine-terminated ionic liquids (NH2-IL) were grafted to the carboxyl-functionalized MWCNTs (MWCNTs-COOH) by formation of the amide linkage between MWCNTs-COOH and NH2-IL (Fig. 21). Then a gold salt [AuCl4]− was self-assembled and absorbed on the IL-functionalized CNTs via electrostatic interaction and ion exchange. Au NPs with uniform dispersion and narrow size distribution were then produced by in situ reduction on CNTs. Imidazolium-salt-based ionic liquids (IS-ILs) were used as linkers.
 Fig. 21  Illustration of the procedure for the assembly of MWCNT/IL/Au hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. ©2008, Elsevier. 
Guo et al. also used IS-ILs-functionalized CNTs as supports for Pt NPs.197 It was found that IS-ILs on the surface of CNTs could effectively enrich PtCl62− by a coupling effect and promote the nucleation of Pt NPs due to their low interface energy and enhance the eletron transport pathway between CNTs and NPs. The as-prepared Pt/IS-ILs/CNTs nanohybrids exhibited 2.9 times higher electrocatalytic activity (0.47 A mg−1) towards the methanol oxidation reaction than the commercial E-TEK Pt/C catalyst due to fine Pt NPs with uniform particle size (∼3 nm) on IS-ILs/CNTs.
It is well known that alloying Pt with another metal or depositing Pt on the surface of another metal can modify the electronic structure and enhance the electrocatalytic activity of Pt-based NPs, based on the d-band center theory developed by Norskov et al.198,199 For example, PtSn alloy nanoparticles have been demonstrated to show significantly improved electrocatalytic activity for the methanol oxidation reaction.200 Due to their different electronegativities, Sn will donate electrons to Pt leading to a downshifted d-band center of Pt, which thus would weaken the chemisorption energy with poisoning CO intermediates. However, there are limited studies on the anchoring groups connecting metal NPs and the support material, which may be equally important in tuning the electroactivity of Pt NPs. Wang et al. investigated the modification of the electronic structure of Pt NPs via charge transfer by specific functional groups on CNTs (see Fig. 22).201 Electrochemical characterization and DFT calculation revealed that polyanions having electron-rich functional groups would donate electrons to Pt-atoms, causing a substantial increase in electron density around the Pt-site and downshift of d-band center of Pt. This results in a weaker chemisorption of oxygen-containing species or CO. On the other hand, polycations having electron-poor functional groups would have the opposite effect. The results show that the electrocatalytic activity of methanol oxidation could be tuned by modifying the electronic structures of Pt NPs via functional groups of attached PEs.
 Fig. 22  (A) The possible effect of charged functional groups of polyanions (PSS and PAA) and polycations (PDDA) and PAH) on the electron donor–acceptor behavior of Pt NP; and (B) correlation between the adsorption energy of O and the d-band center of Pt slabs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. ©2010, Elsevier. 
5.3 Metal NPs supported on graphene
Graphene, a new kind of two-dimensional (2D) carbon material with a single (or a few) atomic layers, has attracted the great attention of researchers worldwide for both fundamental science and applied research since its discovery in 2004.202,203 Due to its high surface area, high conductivity and unique graphitized basal plane structure, graphene and graphene derivatives such as graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are regarded as promising alternative catalyst supports for fuel cell applications. Similar to CNTs, in order to uniformly disperse the metal NPs, graphene needs to be functionalized.
Zhang et al.204 used positively charged PDDA as both a reducing agent and a stabilizer during the formation of graphene nanosheets. Pt NPs were then self-assembled on PDDA-functionalized graphene nanosheets, forming Pt NPs by reduction in situ by NaBH4. Pt NPs on PDDA–graphene exhibited excellent activity toward formic acid oxidation. PtAu bimetallic NPs were also self-assembled on the PDDA-functionalized graphene and high electrocatalytic activity and stability for formic acid oxidation were demonstrated.205 Meanwhile, Wang et al.206 deposited Pt and Au NPs simultaneously on PDDA-functionalized graphene catalysts using a self-assembly method. The results suggested that a low Pt:Au NPs ratio and high PtAu NPs loading are the most important factors for substantial enhancement of the electrocatalytic activity of simultaneously assembled PtAu/PDDA-graphene catalysts for formic acid oxidation reaction.
In addition to PDDA, other polycations such as PVP,207 PPy208 and poly[2,20-(p-oxydiphenylene)-5,50-bibenzimidazole] (OPBI)209 were also used to functionalize graphene for the self-assembly of metallic NPs. Guo et al. demonstrated for the first time a wet-chemical approach for the synthesis of high-quality three-dimensional (3D) Pt-on-Pd bimetallic NPs supported on PVP-functionalized graphene, forming Pt-on-Pd nanodendrites (Fig. 23).207 The Pt-on-Pd nanodendrite catalysts exhibited an enlarged ECSA and had a much higher catalytic activity than conventional E-TEK Pt/C electrocatalysts for methanol electrooxidation. The Pd/PPy–graphene catalyst synthesized by Zhao and co-workers208 showed higher electrocatalytic activity and stability for methanol oxidation, probably due to the high utilization of Pd NPs on the PPy–graphene supports.
 Fig. 23  TEM (a–c) and HRTEM (d, e) images of TP-BNGN at different magnifications. The circled parts in panel d denote Pd NPs. FFT pattern (f) of the HRTEM image shown in panel e (circled part). Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. ©2010, The American Chemical Society. 
Similarly to CNTs, ionic liquids (IL) have also been utilized to functionalize graphene. Zhu et al.210 succeeded in constructing a hybrid 3D nanocomposite film [(G-IS-IL/Pt NPs)n] by alternatively assembling graphene modified by IS-IL and Pt NPs. The nanocomposite film exhibited high electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen reduction. Hollow AuPd alloy nanostructures were self-assembly fabricated onto graphene with the assistance of ionic liquid units under moderate conditions in a one-step method (Fig. 24).211 The resulting hybrid nanomaterials exhibited higher electrocatalytic activity than hollow AuPd NPs, IL-graphene–hollow-Pd NPs and solid Pd NPs for electrooxidation of formic acid, indicating that graphene is a good candidate as a support for building high performance catalysts for fuel cell applications. Li et al. found that chemically converted graphene or rGO, displays better tolerance towards CO poisoning during methanol oxidation compared to CNTs because the residual oxygenated functional groups of rGO can react and remove carbonaceous species.212 The better performance arises from the large specific area of graphene and its high conductivity for electron and ion transport. However, Brownson’s group213 observed that graphene exhibits slow electron transfer towards the electrochemical probes studied, effectively blocking underlying electron transfer of the supporting electrode substrate, likely due to its large basal and low edge plane content.
 Fig. 24  Illustration of the formation of hollow AuPd alloy nanoparticles and IL-CCG–hollow-AuPd nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. ©2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Table 2 lists selected reports on the particle sizes and activity of precious-metal NPs supported on CNTs and graphene via the self-assembly technique.
Table 2 Particle sizes and electrocatalytic activity of noble-metal NPs in representative noble-metal NPs/CNTs and noble-metal NPs/graphene nanohybrids




Support material
Metal NP

d
av/nm
Functional material
Current densitya
Reactionb
Ref.





a Current density under different reaction types and key parameters.
b MOR: methanol oxidation reaction; ORR: oxygen reduction reaction: FAOR: formic acid oxidation reaction.
c 
I
k was normalized by the electrochemical surface area of the metal catalyst obtained from the CO stripping.





CNTs
Pt
1.47–2.6
PDDA
104.5 mA cm−2 mgPt−1
MOR

64, 182



 
 
2.8
PAH
32.4 mA mgPt−1(@0.9 V vs. RHE, 1600 rpm)
ORR

189



 
 
4.1 ± 1.5
PBI
480 mA mgPt−1
MOR

191



 
 
3.0
IS-IL
460 mA mgPt−1
MOR

197



 
Pd
2.0
HPW-PDDA
6 mA cm−2 mgPd−1 (@0.8 V vs. RHE, 2500 rpm)c
ORR

186



 
Au
3.3
NH2-IL
 
ORR

196



 
 
4.7 ± 1.1
PDDA-PEI
 
ORR

214



 
 
4.0–7.0
PEI
 
ORR

215



 
PtRu
3.1
HPW-CS
178 mA mgmetal−1
MOR

187



 


Graphene
Pt
3.0
PDDA
500 mA mgPt−1
FAOR

204



 
Pd
6.0
PPy
359 mA mgPd−1
MOR

208



 
PtAu
3.3 ± 0.2
PDDA
2310 mA mgPt−1
FAOR

205



 
PtRu
2.0
PMO12
2028 mA cm−2 mgPt−1
MOR

216





5.4 Self-assembly of novel catalysts structures
Self-assembly of NPs by electrostatic interaction has been investigated as an effective approach in the synthesis and development of novel macroscopic structures.217–221 The interplay of repulsive interactions among NPs with the same charge and attractive interactions between outer and inner layer NPs with opposite charges result in the self-assembly of these NPs into highly ordered structures. In contrast to atomic systems, electrostatic self-assemblies are not limited by charge neutrality, which allows us to obtain a great diversity of new binary structures.217
Cargnello et al.222 successfully prepared dispersible Pd@CeO2 core–shell nanostructures by exploiting the self-assembly between functionalized Pd nanoparticles and cerium(IV) alkoxides (Fig. 25). The Pd@CeO2 core–shell nanostructures are effectively dispersible in a range of organic solvents without any sign of agglomeration. They demonstrated that the size of the metal core and the thickness of the oxide layer can be tuned and these nanostructures are interesting precursors for the preparation of active heterogeneous catalysts.
 Fig. 25  Schematic representation of the procedure to obtain dispersible Pd@CeO2 core–shell nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. ©2010, The American Chemical Society. 
Zhang et al.223 synthesized a novel Pt-around-Au nanocomposite by electrostatic self-assembly. PDDA and citrate were used as polycation and polyanion. Pt-around-Au NPs showed significantly enhanced activity and high stability towards formic acid oxidation as compared with Pt NPs and Au NPs.223 The high electrocatalytic activity of Pt-around-Au NPs indicates a significant synergistic effect of Au on the activity of Pt NPs for the formic acid oxidation reaction.
6 LbL self-assembly technique for supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, also known as ultracapacitors or electrochemical capacitors, electrochemically store and deliver energy at high charge–discharge rates and are a key emerging technology for energy storage.224 Supercapacitors have attracted much attention because of their pulse power supply, long cycle life (>100000 cycles), simple principle, and high dynamics of charge propagation.225–227 They can complement or replace batteries in electric energy storage and harvesting applications when high power delivery or uptake is required. Currently, supercapacitors are widely used in consumer electronics, memory back-up systems and industrial power and energy management.
Generally, on the basis of the energy storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be classified into two categories. One is the electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC), where the capacitance comes from the pure electrostatic charge accumulated at the electrode/electrolyte interface, therefore it is strongly dependent on the surface area of the electrode materials that is accessible to the electrolyte ions. The other is the pseudocapacitor, in which fast and reversible faradaic processes take place due to electro-active species. These two mechanisms can function simultaneously depending on the nature of the electrode materials. Progress towards supercapacitor technologies can benefit from the fundamental understanding of charging storage mechanism and the development of advanced nanostructured materials.228
Transition metal oxides such as ruthenium oxide,44 manganese oxide,229 cobalt oxide,230,231 and tin oxide232 are the important materials for pseudocapacitors. However, several problems such as high cost, low electrical conductivity and poor stability limit the practical applications of metal oxides as supercapacitor electrodes. The LbL self-assembly technique offers an excellent opportunity for the interface engineering of multilayer thin film structures or nanostructured building blocks, which can result in significantly improved electronic conductivity and high electrochemical performance of supercapacitors. Inorganic nanosheets such as MnO2 nanosheets with thickness at nanoscale and conductive carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene can be used as building blocks for the fabrication of multilayer thin film structure based supercapacitors by the LbL self-assembly technique.

Table 3 lists selected literature reports where the self-assembly technique has been utilized as main fabrication techniques in the development of advanced supercapacitors.
Table 3 Specific capacitance of selected electrode materials for supercapacitors applications




Electrode material
Specific capacitance/F g−1
Electrolyte
Ref.




CNT/PPy/MnO2
281
1.0 M Na2SO4

233



LbL-(PEI/MONS)10
288
2.0 M KCl

234



LbL-MWCNT/PDDA/MONS
581
0.1 M Na2SO4

235



LbL-MWCNT/MnO2
290
 

236



SAM-HNTS/PPy
522
0.5 M Na2SO4

237



LbL-(PEI-graphene/MWCNT-COOH)9
120
1.0 M Na2SO4

238



LbL-(PDDA/MWCNT)/PDDA/MONS
 
1.0 M Na2SO4

239



LbL-(CoOOHNW/MONS)2
856
0.1 M Na2SO4

240



Self-assembly carbon sphere/graphene
198
6.0 M KOH

44



LbL-MWCNT/rGO
157 ± 18
0.5 M Na2SO4

241



LbL-(graphene/QP4VP-CO-PCN)9
49
1.0 M Na2SO4

242





Zhang's group234 fabricated multilayer thin films of MnO2 nanosheets (MONS) with poly(ethylene imine) (PEI) polyelectrolyte by the LbL self-assembly technique. UV-Vis absorption spectra showed that approximately equal amounts of manganese oxides were incorporated into the films for each deposition cycle (see Fig. 26). The multilayer thin film showed a good electrochemical performance, which could be attributed to the special microstructure of the film electrode. The specific capacitance value of 288 F g−1 for (PEI/MONS)10 film on ITO-coated substrate was obtained at a current density of 1.25 A g−1. The LbL self-assembly provides a simple and effective method for preparing thin-film electrodes for electrochemical capacitors.
 Fig. 26  UV-Vis absorption spectra of multilayer films of (PEI/MNS)n prepared on quartz glass substrates. The insert shows the dependence of absorbance at 320 nm as a function of deposition cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. ©2008, Elsevier. 
As discussed earlier, the high chemical stability, good mechanical property, excellent electronic conductivity and high surface area of CNTs makes them particularly attractive for electrochemical capacitors.243,244 Recent studies show that electrode materials with a high supercapacity and rate capability of the metal oxide can be achieved when MnO2 nanostructures are loaded uniformly with CNTs.233,235,236 The addition of CNT to MnO2 materials is expected to not only significantly improve the electronic conductivity but also provide much better mechanical robustness for the composite.
Zheng and co-workers fabricated sandwiched films of MONS and MWCNTs using the LbL self-assembly method.235 Sandwiched films of MONS/MWCNT were assembled via electrostatic interaction of positively-charged PDDA and negatively-charged MONS and MWCNT. The fabrication of the multilayer thin film was initiated by immersing an acid-treated ITO flat substrate with a layer of positively charged PDDA to introduce a uniform distribution of positive charges in the substrate surface. Fig. 27 shows the fabrication procedures of sandwiched films of MONS and MWCNT and the electrochemical performance of sandwiched multilayer film electrodes of PDDA/MWCNT, PDDA/MONS and PDDA/MONS/PDDA/MWCNT on ITO substrates. UV-Vis results show the stepwise and regular film growth process. Electrochemical results revealed that the multilayer film had an excellent electrochemical capacitance because the CNT layers in the multilayer film not only provides a large surface area for the dispersion of MONS, but also improves the electronic conductivity of the film. The CV curve of the (PDDA/MWCNT)4 electrode (curve (1) in Fig. 27b) shows a typical double-layer capacitive behavior with near-ideal rectangular profile. In the case of (PDDA/MONS)4 electrode, a broad peak around 0.62–0.84 V on the positive going sweep and a peak centre at 0.68 V on the negative going sweep, which originates as pseudo-capacitance from the Mn4+/Mn3+ reversible redox process, can be observed. As seen in Fig. 27b, the capacitive current of ITO/(PDDA/MWCNT/PDDA/MONS)2 electrode was much larger than those of either ITO/(PDDA/MWCNT)4 or ITO/(PDDA/MONS)4 electrodes. This clearly indicates that CNT contributed significantly to the enhanced capacitance of the composite electrode. The mechanism of CNT/MONS thin film for electrochemical capacitance was further studied and the specific capacitance and energy density increased by increasing the number of MWCNT layers.239 Zheng et al. also developed a new type of multilayer films consisting of MWCNTs and cobalt oxyhydroxide nanoflakes (CoOOHNFs) by alternate electrostatic self-assembly and electrodeposition technique; multilayer films of MWCNT/CoOOHNF on ITO glass reached a specific capacitance of 389 F g−1.231 The high electrochemical performance is considered due to the effective microporous structure, large specific surface-area and good electrical conductance.
 Fig. 27  (a) Scheme of fabrication of sandwiched film of MONS and MWCNT and (b) CV of sandwiched multilayer film electrodes of (1) ITO/(PDDA/MWCNT)4; (2) ITO(PDDA/MONS)4 and (3) ITO/(PDDA/MONS/PDDA/MWCNT)2, measured in 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. ©2009, Elsevier. 
Lee et al. also synthesized LbL-assembled MWCNT/MnO2 in which the LbL-MWCNT films were created by alternating adsorption of positively charged MWCNTs (MWCNTNH3+) and negatively charged MWCNTs (MWCNT-COO−) (see Fig. 28).236 In this scheme, positively charged MWCNTs (MWNT-NH3+) and negatively charged MWCNTs (MWNT-COO−) were prepared using surface functionalization processes. The LbL-MWCNT films on ITO-coated glass slides were alternately dipped into a MWNT-NH3+ solution and MWNT-COO− solution. The structure of the LbL-MWCNT/MnO2 electrodes shows uniformly distributed MnO2 nanoparticles on interconnected MWCNTs in a random network. The multilayer electrodes showed high volumetric capacitance (the specific capacitance of MnO2 is 940 F g−1 as compared to a theoretical capacitance of MnO2 of 1370 F g−1) and remarkable rate capability which were attributed to the electrode microstructure, where nanoscale MnO2 particles were supported on a high-packing density, porous MWCNT network with good access to electrons and ions in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 28  LbL self-assembly of MWNT (LbL-MWNT) film via alternate dipping of substrate into positively charged(MWNT-NH3+) and negatively charged (MWNT-COO−) MWNTs, and preparation of LbL-MWNT/MnO2 electrodes through dipping of the LbL-MWNT film into permanganate ion (MnO4−) solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. ©2010, The American Chemical Society. 
In addition to CNTs, graphene has also been proposed as an attractive material for supercapacitor applications.245–248 Zhang et al. reported a synthesis of composites of FRGO-p (PDDA functionalized reduced graphene oxide) and MnO2 nanosheets (FRGO-p-MnO2) by anchoring negatively charged manganese dioxide MnO2 nanosheets on positively charged FRGO-p via an electrostatic co-precipitation method (see Fig. 29).249 FRGO-p-MnO2 exhibited enhanced capacitive performances relative to those of pure FRGO-p and Na/MnO2 sheets, attributed to the contributions of the good electrical conductivity of FRGO-p and the pesudocapacitance of the MnO2 nanosheets. Additionally, over 89% of the original capacitance was retained after 1000 cycles. This was attributed to the fact that self-assembly of the MnO2 nanosheets on FRGO-p effectively prevents the agglomeration of MnO2, thus facilitating the ion transport in the electrode material and improving the electric double-layer capacitance.
 Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the assembling process of FRGO-p-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. ©2011, The American Chemical Society. 
Recently, several attempts have been made to fabricate hybridized carbon materials with good performance. For example, Guo and Li employed the electrostatic self-assembly method to fabricate a hierarchical nanostructure comprising 0-D carbon spheres and 2-D graphene nanosheets (see Fig. 30).44 The SEM image illustrates that functionalized carbon spheres play a role as nanospacers to separate graphene nanosheets. Moreover, the lateral dimension of the graphene sheets in the nanostructure is continuous, which favors electron transport. The nanostructure significantly enhances the capacitance of the graphene supercapacitor by more than 70% (up to 198 F g−1), while achieving a high power density of 15.4 kW kg−1 and long cycle life.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of self-assembled hierarchical nanostructures comprised of graphene and carbon spheres and (b) SEM image of the hierarchical nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. ©2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In supercapacitor applications, the combination of 1-D and 2-D carbon materials can be applied to tune the pore structure of hybrid films and enhance the structural stability. In hybrid films, as with the pure graphene structures described in the preceding section, CNTs can be used to physically separate the graphene sheets to help preserve the high surface area. Using LbL self-assembly techniques, graphene/CNT hybrid films have been prepared with an interconnected network of carbon structures.238 Supercapacitors prepared from such films show a specific capacitance of 120 F g−1 even at scan rate of 1 V s−1. Byon et al. developed a carbon-only electrode based on self-assembly of MWCNT-NH2 (amine-functionalized MWCNT) and rGO, using hydrazine vapor treatment of the assembled MWCNT/rGO (see Fig. 31).241 In this multilayer structure, MWCNTs served as pillars to separate rGO layers, making the surfaces of graphene sheets electrochemically active. These assembled MWCNT/rGO electrodes showed higher specific (up to 175 F g−1) and high volumetric (up to 160 F cm−3) capacitance.
 Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of (a) the LbL assembly of MWCNT/rGO and (b) hydrazine treatment process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. ©2011, Elsevier. 
7 Concluding remarks
LbL self-assembly technology is a fast growing field with promising applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage such as in fuel cells and supercapacitors. What makes the LbL self-assembly technique particularly attractive is that any multiply charged (or hydrogen-bonded) species can be incorporated including electrocatalytic species such as heteropolyacids, precious metal ionic species as well as functional, structural and biomaterials such as colloidal nanoparticles, CNTs, graphene, purple membrane and chitosan. The LbL self-assembly of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes on a Nafion membrane shows a significant effect on the reduction in methanol crossover and on the enhancement of the performance of DMFCs. The unique advantages and versatility of the LbL self-assembly technique are also clearly demonstrated by the surface engineering and modification of high-surface area carbon supports such as CNTs and graphenes, the deposition and synthesis of new and highly efficient Pt and Pt alloy electrocatalysts, and novel HPW-functionalized mesoporous silica based HT-PEM for fuel cells. Integration of polymeric or PE LbL self-assembly and inorganic and catalytically active nanomaterials such as HPAs would also offer promising potential in the development of non-precious metal catalysts for fuel cells.
LbL self-assembly technique has also become one of the most promising new methods for the interface engineering of multilayer thin film structures or nanostructured building blocks for the development of advanced supercapacitors with significantly improved electronic conductivity and high electrochemical performance. The tunable nature of the technique allows for the incorporation and manipulation of electrochemically active species such as nanostructured transition-metal oxides and highly conducting carbon materials including CNTs and graphenes. Further progress can be achieved by fundamental understanding of the LbL self-assembly processes and interfaces, and by optimization of the multilayer structures of building blocks of electrochemically active materials as well as highly electronic conducting materials.
Despite the considerable progress, many challenges still remain for the practical application and scale up of the LbL self-assembly technique for electrocatalysts, electrode and membrane materials for fuel cells and supercapacitors: (1) although the LbL self-assembly requires only simple procedures, its assembling mechanism is still not fully understood. For instance, computational modeling could be an effective tool to predict and explain how the LbL assembled films could affect the methanol crossover and proton transfer under fuel cell operation conditions. Better understanding of the structure–property relationship of the LbL self-assembled structure/films would highly benefit this attractive research area and significantly accelerate the development of advanced electrode catalysts and electrolyte materials for fuel cells and supercapacitors. (2) Tailoring of the nano-, micro- and surface structure and distribution of active sites is still difficult. As exemplified by Pt-based NPs, control of the size and shape can significantly promote the catalytic activity due to the fact that open-structure surfaces with high-index planes have high density of atomic steps and kinks, which serve as active sites for breaking chemical bonds.250 Although there are many studies on single crystals, it is important to synthesize NPs or structures with preferential orientation. (3) Many LbL self-assembly syntheses processes will be hard to scale up. Non-covalent functionalization of CNTs or graphenes by PEs takes hours or even days to achieve. Multiscaled nanostructured films take many repeated steps and such problem could prevent the viable scale up of the synthesis of such materials. (4) Last but not least, cost needs to be reduced. Most research on the synthesis of LbL self-assembled nanostructured materials emphasizes the structure and novelty with little consideration of the expensive precursors used or the cost of processes to produce them. In the long run for future applications, cost is a critical issue. We believe that significant efforts should be made to solve these challenges and problems for the LbL self-assembled nanostructured materials for use in fuel cells and supercapacitors.
List of abbreviations

CCMcatalyst coated membrane
CIMconventional impregnation method
CNTcarbon nanotube
CoOOHNFscobalt oxyhydroxide nanoflakes
CSchitosan
DCCdicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DMFCdirect methanol fuel cell
EDLCelectrical double layer capacitor
EDTAethylenediamine tetraacetic acid
EGethylene glycol
FAORformic acid oxidation
FRGO-pPDDA functionalized reduced graphene oxide
GOgraphene oxide
rGOreduced graphene oxide
HPAsheteropolyacids
HPW (PWA)phosphotungstic acid
HT-PEMFChigh-temperature proton-exchange membrane fuel cells
ILionic liquid
IPCEincident photo-to-current efficiency
IS-ILsimidazolium-salt-based ionic liquids
LbLlayer-by-layer
LPEIlinear poly(ethylene imine)
MEAmembrane-electrode assembly
MONSMnO2 nanosheets
MORmethanol oxidation reaction
MWCNTsmultiwall carbon nanotubes
NPsnanoparticles
OCPopen-circuit potential
OCVopen circuit voltage
OPBIpoly[2,20-(p-oxydiphenylene)-5,50-bibenzimidazole]
ORRoxygen reduction reaction
P4VPpoly(4-vinylpyridine)
PAApoly(acrylic acid)
PAHpoly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PAMAMpoly(amidoamine)
PAMPSpoly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid)
PANIpolyaniline
PAZOpoly(1-(4-(3-carboxy-4-hydroxyphenylazo)benzene sulfonaimdo)-1,2-ethanediyl, sodium salt)
PDDA(PDAC)poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride)
PEpolyelectrolyte
PECpolyelectrolyte complexes
PEIpoly(ethylene imine)
PEOpoly(ethylene oxide)
PEMproton exchange membrane
PEMFCproton exchange membrane fuel cell
PFSAperfluorosulfonic acid
PMpurple membrane
sPPOsulfonated poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide)
PPypolypyrrole
PPyDEHSpoly(pyrroledi(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate)
PSSpoly(sodium styrene sulfonate)
PVPpoly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone)
PVSpoly(vinyl sulfate)
RHrelative humidification
SEMscanning electron microscopy
SPEEKsulfonated poly(ether ether ketone)
SPAEK-Csulfonated poly(aryl ether ketone) bearing carboxyl groups
TEMtransition electron microscopy
TEOStetraethoxysilane
VIMvacuum-assisted impregnation

Acknowledgements
This research was financial supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21073010, 21003007, 51108014, U1137602, U1134001), National Basic Research Program (973 program) (2011CB935700), Beijing Novel Program (2008B12), Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China and Australia Research Council (DP120102325, DP120104932), Australia. The contribution and assistance from Mr Zhang Jin and Mr Lan Fei are deeply appreciated.
References
R. K. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569–594 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Blodgett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1934, 56, 495 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Blodgett and I. Langmuir, Phys. Rev., 1937, 51, 0964–0982 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, J. Maclennan, J. Reibel and U. Sohling, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 617–619 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 1430–1434 CAS .
G. Decher, J. D. Hong and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210–211, 831–835 CrossRef .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Wang, Z. Q. Wang, X. Zhang, J. C. Shen, L. F. Chi and H. Fuchs, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1997, 18, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Li, C. Y. Wu, H. Y. Li and Y. C. Chao, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2011, 33, 3447–3454 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. M. Ji, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319–2340 RSC .
K. Zhu, D. G. Wang and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2010, 2, 1–29 CrossRef .
X. Qu, G. Lu, E. Tsuchida and T. Komatsu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 10303–10308 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lutkenhaus and P. T. Hammond, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 804–816 RSC .
M. C. Orilall and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520–535 RSC .
Y. H. Song, L. L. Wan, Y. Wang, S. C. Zhao, H. Q. Hou and L. Wang, Bioelectrochemistry, 2012, 85, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Engler, D. K. Bonner, H. G. Buss, E. Y. Cheung and P. T. Hammond, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5627–5637 RSC .
R. J. Pei, X. Q. Cui, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Biomacromolecules, 2001, 2, 463–468 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, J. J. Li, C. A. Wang, J. Zhang, X. F. Li and X. C. Le, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6464–6467 CAS .
Z. S. Lu, C. M. Li, Q. Zhou, Q. L. Bao and X. Q. Cui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 314, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Wang, X. Y. Yao, X. X. Lian, Z. K. Wu and Y. F. Xiong, Acta Polym. Sin., 2012, 012, 199–206 CrossRef .
J. Almodovar, L. W. Place, J. Gogolski, K. Erickson and M. J. Kipper, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2755–2765 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gribova, R. Auzely-Velty and C. Picart, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 854–869 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Wohl and J. F. J. Engbersen, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 158, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Gorin, A. M. Yashchenok, A. O. Manturov, T. A. Kolesnikova and H. Mohwald, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12529–12534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, S. Choi, R. Velu, S. Kim and H. J. Lee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5417–5426 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Yuan, Z. S. Lu and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5148–5155 RSC .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, E. A. Olivetti, E. A. Verploegen, B. M. Cord, D. R. Sadoway and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8515–8521 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhuk, R. Mirza and S. Sukhishvili, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8790–8799 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhao, H. D. Lin, Z. M. Cui, X. F. Li, H. Na and W. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yanagida, A. Nakajima, T. Sasaki, T. Isobe, Y. Kameshima and K. Okada, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 366, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, I. Kim, H. Shin, S. Kim and J. Cho, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 185704–185710 CrossRef .
S. H. Hou, Z. M. Ou, Q. Chen and B. Y. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 33, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Yuan and C. M. Li, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7578–7585 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, S. A. Jones and Y. M. Lvov, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2003, 39, 23–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. El-Hashani and B. Tieke, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1710–1717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nedelcu, S. Guldin, M. C. Orilall, J. Lee, S. Huttner, E. J. W. Crossland, S. C. Warren, C. Ducati, P. R. Laity, D. Eder, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1261–1268 RSC .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813–2819 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, G. Lee, B. H. Kim, Y. S. Huh, G. W. Lee and H. J. Kim, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2012, 19, 627–631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. L. Huang, J. S. Lian, D. Xu, L. M. Wang and X. B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2844–2847 RSC .
E. Kang, Y. S. Jung, G. H. Kim, J. Chun, U. Wiesner, A. C. Dillon, J. K. Kim and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yılmaztürk, T. Gümüşoğlu, G. A. Arı, F. Öksüzömer and H. Deligöz, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 88–94 CrossRef .
H. J. Liu, X. M. Wang, W. J. Cui, Y. Q. Dou, D. Y. Zhao and Y. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4223–4230 RSC .
C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4504–4507 CAS .
J. Balach, M. M. Bruno, N. G. Cotella, D. F. Acevedo and C. A. Barbero, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, T. Zhao, C. Z. Li and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3818–3823 RSC .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Topham, A. J. Parnell and R. C. Hiorns, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1131–1156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2791–2808 RSC .

          S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, in Handbook of Solid State Electrochemistry, ed. V. V. Kharton, Wiley-VCH,  2011, vol. II, pp. 179–264 Search PubMed .
S. J. Peighambardoust, S. Rowshanzamir and M. Amjadi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9349–9384 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sopian and W. R. W. Daud, Renewable Energy, 2006, 31, 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kerres, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 185, 3–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, S. Srinivasan and V. Antonucci, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 133–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prabhuram, T. S. Zhao, Z. X. Liang, H. Yang and C. W. Wong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1390–A1397 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Rhee, H. K. Kim, H. Chang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miyake, J. S. Wainright and R. F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A905–A909 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsaprailis and V. I. Birss, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A348–A352 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Yang, Y. H. Yang, Y. L. Liu, G. L. Shen and R. Q. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1125–1131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. B. Guo and S. F. Lu, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 367, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, S. F. Lu, J. L. Lu, S. P. Jiang and Y. Xiang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1434–1436 RSC .
S. P. Jiang, Z. C. Liu and Z. Q. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, S. P. Jiang, T. J. White, J. Guo and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18935–18945 CAS .
S. J. Grabowski, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 2597–2625 CrossRef CAS .
R. Otero, J. M. Gallego, A. L. V. de Parga, N. Martin and R. Miranda, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5148–5176 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 945–954 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .
L. Krasemann and B. Tieke, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yilmaztürk, H. Deligöz, M. Yilmazoglu, H. Damyan, F. Öksüzömer, S. N. Koç, A. Durmus and M. Ali Gürkaynak, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 703–709 CrossRef .
S. P. Jiang and H. L. Tang, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 407, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zapotoczny, M. Golonka and M. Nowakowska, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1049–1054 CrossRef CAS .
N. Laugel, C. Betscha, M. Winterhalter, J. C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and V. Ball, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19443–19449 CrossRef CAS .
C. Picart, P. Lavalle, P. Hubert, F. J. G. Cuisinier, G. Decher, P. Schaaf and J. C. Voegel, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7414–7424 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Casson, D. W. McBranch, J. M. Robinson, H. L. Wang, J. B. Roberts, P. A. Chiarelli and M. S. Johal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11996–12001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Picart, J. Mutterer, L. Richert, Y. Luo, G. D. Prestwich, P. Schaaf, J. C. Voegel and P. Lavalle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 12531–12535 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deligoz, S. Yilmazturk, T. Karaca, H. Ozdemir, S. N. Koc, F. Oksuzomer, A. Durmus and M. A. Gurkaynak, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 326, 643–649 CrossRef .
W. Y. Yuan and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9161–9163 RSC .
D. G. Abebe and T. R. Farhat, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1325–1335 CAS .
M. K. Park, S. X. Deng and R. C. Advincula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13723–13731 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. He, L. Samuelson, L. Li, J. Kumar and S. K. Tripathy, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 1674–1679 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Ashcraft, A. A. Argun and P. T. Hammond, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6250–6257 RSC .
M. F. Durstock and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7865–7872 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and J. B. Schlenoff, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okada, H. Satou, M. Okuno and M. Yuasa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1267–1273 CrossRef CAS .
T. Okada, N. Arimura, H. Satou, M. Yuasa and T. Kikuchi, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3569–3575 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saito, K. Hayamizu and T. Okada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3112–3119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saito, S. Tsuzuki, K. Hayamizu and T. Okada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24410–24417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yilmazturk, H. Deligoz, M. Yilmazoglu, H. Damyan, F. Oksuzomer, S. N. Koc, A. Durmus and M. A. Gurkaynak, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 343, 137–146 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Barragan, C. Ruiz-Bauza, J. P. G. Villaluenga and B. Seoane, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Godino, V. M. Barragan, J. P. G. Villaluenga, C. Ruiz-Bauza and B. Seoane, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 181–186 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deligoz, S. Yilmazturk, M. Yilmazoglu and H. Damyan, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 351, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Buron, C. Filiâtre, F. Membrey, C. Bainier, L. Buisson, D. Charraut and A. Foissy, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2611–2617 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, M. Yang, Z. B. Guo and Z. Cui, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 337, 318–323 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Liu, T. S. Zhao, Z. X. Liang and R. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. Lan, D. W. Liang, Y. X. Xiao, S. F. Lu and Y. Xiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 382, 300–354 CrossRef .
M. B. Saab, E. Estephan, T. Cloitre, R. Legros, F. J. G. Cuisinier, L. Zimanyi and C. Gergely, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5159–5167 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, J. N. Ashcraft and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1539–1543 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Lin, C. J. Zhao, W. J. Ma, H. T. Li and H. Na, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 345, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Lin, C. J. Zhao, W. J. Ma, H. T. Li and H. Na, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9795–9801 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhao, H. D. Lin, Q. A. Zhang and H. Na, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 10482–10488 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramani, H. R. Kunz and J. M. Fenton, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 232, 31–44 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Shao, H. F. Xu, M. Q. Li and I. M. Hsing, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 779–785 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Li, R. H. He, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4896–4915 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Jia, M. C. Lefebvre, J. Halfyard, Z. G. Qi and P. G. Pickup, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 529–531 CrossRef .
J. Divisek, M. Eikerling, V. Mazin, H. Schmitz, U. Stimming and Y. M. Volfkovich, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2677–2683 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Johal, J. L. Casson, P. A. Chiarelli, D. G. Liu, J. A. Shaw, J. M. Robinson and H. L. Wang, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8876–8881 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Harris, P. M. DeRose and M. L. Bruening, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1978–1979 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Kozhevnikov, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 171–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Misono, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1987, 29, 269–321 CAS .
U. Mioc, M. Davidovic, N. Tjapkin, P. Colomban and A. Novak, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 46, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, W. C. Choi, S. I. Woo and W. H. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3227–3234 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pu, W. H. Huang, K. L. Ley and E. S. Smotkin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L119–L120 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Choi, J. D. Kim and S. I. Woo, J. Power Sources, 2001, 96, 411–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yoon, G. H. Hwang, W. I. Cho, I. H. Oh, S. A. Hong and H. Y. Ha, J. Power Sources, 2002, 106, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tang, M. Pan, S. P. Jiang, Z. H. Wan and R. Z. Yuan, Colloids Surf., A, 2005, 262, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Mu, H. L. Tang, Z. H. Wan, M. Pan and R. Z. Yuan, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1143–1147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, H. L. Tang, S. P. Jiang and Z. C. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1081–A1088 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, L. Li, Z. C. Liu, M. Pan and H. L. Tang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A574–A576 CrossRef CAS .
R. O'Hayre, D. M. Barnett and F. B. Prinz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A439–A444 CrossRef CAS .
P. Berg, A. Novruzi and O. Volkov, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2008, 5, 021007–021016 CrossRef .
C. K. Witham, W. Chun, T. I. Valdez and S. R. Narayanan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 497–500 CrossRef .
H. Kim and B. N. Popov, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A71–A74 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, H. L. Tang, S. P. Jiang and Z. C. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. O'Hayre, S. J. Lee, S. W. Cha and F. B. Prinz, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 483–493 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bose, T. Kuila, X. L. N. Thi, N. H. Kim, K. T. Lau and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 813–843 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, P. Costamagna, S. Srinivasan, J. Benziger and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Power Sources, 2001, 103, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhang, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao, S. G. Bian and Y. Z. Meng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4379–4386 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B322–B326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Shao, P. Joghee and I. M. Hsing, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 229, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Slade, J. R. Smith, S. A. Campbell, T. R. Ralph, C. P. de Leon and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6818–6829 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Slade, T. R. Ralph, C. P. de Leon, S. A. Campbell and F. C. Walsh, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 567–574 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Adjemian, S. J. Lee, S. Srinivasan, J. Benziger and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A256–A261 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Teng, Y. T. Zhao, J. Y. Xi, Z. H. Wu, X. P. Qiu and L. Q. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 341, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panero, P. Fiorenza, M. A. Navarra, J. Romanowska and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2400–A2405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhai, H. M. Zhang, J. W. Hu and B. L. Yi, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 280, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Z. Wan, M. Pan and S. P. Jiang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2003–2008 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pettersson and J. B. Rosenholm, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8447–8454 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Pan, H. I. Zhang and M. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 326, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tang and M. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11556–11568 CAS .
K. Li, G. B. Ye, J. J. Pan, H. N. Zhang and M. Pan, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 347, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Pan, H. N. Zhang, W. Chen and M. Pan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2796–2801 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Ye, K. Li, C. A. Xiao, W. Chen, H. N. Zhang and M. Pan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 120, 1186–1192 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Matos, E. I. Santiago, J. F. Q. Rey, A. S. Ferlauto, E. Traversa, M. Linardi and F. C. Fonseca, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1061–1068 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, M. Carravetta, A. N. Kulak and F. C. Walsh, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2458–2465 CrossRef CAS .
E. Morgado, P. M. Jardim, B. A. Marinkovic, F. C. Rizzo, M. A. S. De Abreu, J. L. Zotin and A. S. Araujo, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 495710–495719 CrossRef .
Z. B. Wang, H. L. Tang and M. Pan, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 369, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada and I. Honma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20486–20490 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakamoto, Y. Daiko, K. Katagiri, H. Muto, M. Sakai and A. Matsuda, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5942–5946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Daiko, K. Katagiri, K. Shimoike, M. Sakai and A. Matsuda, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 621–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Daiko, H. Sakamoto, K. Katagiri, H. Muto, M. Sakai and A. Matsuda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B479–B482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Daiko, S. Sakakibara, H. Sakamoto, K. Katagiri, H. Muto, M. Sakai and A. Matsuda, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, S185–S188 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Athens, Y. Ein-Eli and B. F. Chmelka, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2580–2587 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Colomer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 371–374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada, D. L. Li, I. Honma and H. S. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13092–13093 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Li and M. Nogami, Chem. Commun., 2003, 236–237 RSC .
L. M. Xiong and M. Nogami, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 972–973 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Halla, M. Mamak, D. E. Williams and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Lu, D. L. Wang, S. P. Jiang, Y. Xiang, J. L. Lu and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 971–976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng and S. P. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11854–11863 CAS .
H. L. Tang, M. Pan, S. F. Lu, J. L. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4351–4353 RSC .
S. Alwin, S. D. Bhat, A. K. Sahu, A. Jalajakshi, P. Sridhar, S. Pitchumani and A. K. Shukla, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B91–B98 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, H. Tang, S. Lu, H. Wu and S. P. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6668–6676 RSC .
Y. Wan and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2821–2860 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, M. Pan and S. P. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5220–5227 RSC .
S. C. Thomas, X. M. Ren, S. Gottesfeld and P. Zelenay, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3741–3748 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wasmus and A. Kuver, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 461, 14–31 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Ye and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4930–4934 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bensebaa, A. A. Farah, D. S. Wang, C. Bock, X. M. Du, J. Kung and Y. Le Page, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15339–15344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Tian, S. P. Jiang, Z. C. Liu and L. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1613–1618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Q. Tian and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1213–1220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Modrow, S. Bucher, J. Hormes, R. Brinkmann and H. Bonnemann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3684–3689 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Liu and S. P. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, Z. C. Liu, H. L. Tang and M. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5721–5730 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Chen, J. S. Xie, J. Q. Hu, X. M. Feng and A. Q. Li, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 115403–115408 CrossRef .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Wu, Y. J. Kuang, X. H. Zhang and J. H. Chen, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 75–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Tian, S. P. Jiang, Y. M. Liang and P. K. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5343–5350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prabhuram, T. S. Zhao, Z. K. Tang, R. Chen and Z. X. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Hsin, K. C. Hwang and C. T. Yeh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9999–10010 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 265601–265606 CrossRef .
D. Q. Yang, J. F. Rochette and E. Sacher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4481–4484 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Wang, S. F. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2964–2971 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, X. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10505–10512 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Wang, S. F. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2058–2060 RSC .
Z. M. Cui, C. M. Li and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16349–16357 RSC .
D. Wang, S. Lu, Y. Xiang and S. P. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 103, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2826–2830 RSC .
T. Fujigaya, M. Okamoto and N. Nakashima, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3227–3232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okamoto, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, Small, 2009, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richard, F. Balavoine, P. Schultz, T. W. Ebbesen and C. Mioskowski, Science, 2003, 300, 775–778 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mackiewicz, G. Surendran, H. Remita, B. Keita, G. Zhang, L. Nadjo, A. Hagege, E. Doris and C. Mioskowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8110–8111 CrossRef CAS .
E. Contal, A. Morere, C. Thauvin, A. Perino, S. Meunier, C. Mioskowski and A. Wagner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5718–5722 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Zheng, Y. Li, S. Chen and P. K. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, Q. X. Zhang, D. Kuehner, X. Y. Xu, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1687–1692 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Guo, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1269–1272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mavrikakis, B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2819–2822 CrossRef .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, S. Srinivasan and V. Antonucci, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 1–29 CrossRef .
S. Y. Wang, F. Yang, S. P. Jiang, S. L. Chen and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1646–1649 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, H. G. Liao, M. H. Engelhard, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1785–1791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, H. G. Liao, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1079–1081 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, X. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7187–7195 Search PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. J. Dong and E. W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhao, L. Zhan, J. N. Tian, S. L. Nie and Z. Ning, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1967–1972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. X. Shi, J. H. Fang, H. J. Xu and J. Yin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1199–1207 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Zhu, S. J. Guo, Y. M. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7614–7618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chai, F. H. Li, Y. W. Hu, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17922–17929 RSC .
Y. J. Li, W. Gao, L. J. Ci, C. M. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. C. Brownson, L. J. Munro, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 978–988 RSC .
X. G. Hu, T. Wang, L. Wang, S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6352–6357 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Hu, T. Wang, X. H. Qu and S. J. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 853–857 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Li, X. H. Zhang, H. L. Pang, C. T. Huang and J. H. Chen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 2267–2274 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Leunissen, C. G. Christova, A. P. Hynninen, C. P. Royall, A. I. Campbell, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij and A. van Blaaderen, Nature, 2005, 437, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Grzybowski, A. Winkleman, J. A. Wiles, Y. Brumer and G. M. Whitesides, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kalsin, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, S. K. Smoukov, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2006, 312, 420–424 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kolny, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 361–364 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cargnello, N. L. Wieder, T. Montini, R. J. Gorte and P. Fornasiero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1402–1409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2211–2214 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2664–2668 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Zheng, J. Cao, S. T. Liao, J. S. Liu, H. Q. Chen, Y. Zhao, W. J. Dai, G. B. Ji, J. M. Cao and J. Tao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3887–3894 CAS .
H. J. Zheng, F. Q. Tang, M. Lim, T. Rufford, A. Mukherji, L. Z. Wang and G. Q. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 930–934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3338–3344 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sivakkumar, J. M. Ko, D. Y. Kim, B. C. Kim and G. G. Wallace, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7377–7385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. S. Yang and D. G. Evans, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 695–700 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zheng, F. Q. Tang, Y. Jia, L. Z. Wang, Y. C. Chen, M. Lim, L. Zhang and G. Q. Lu, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1534–1542 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, J. Kim, S. Chen, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3889–3896 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, P. Liu and Y. Q. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6857–6864 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Yu and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zheng, W. Kang, Z. Fengming, F. Q. Tang, T. E. Rufford, L. Z. Wang and C. N. Ma, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1690–1696 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zheng, F. Q. Tang, M. Lim, A. Mukherji, X. X. Yan, L. Z. Wang and G. Q. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 680–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Byon, S. W. Lee, S. Chen, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Carbon, 2011, 49, 457–467 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Wang and X. G. Wang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2007–2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Rouse and P. T. Lillehei, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 59–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, B.-S. Kim, S. Chen, Y. Shao-Horn and P. T. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J. H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vivekchand, C. Rout, K. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
J. T. Zhang, J. W. Jiang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6448–6454 CAS .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou and S. G. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19801–19817 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Yan Xiang
	Prof. Yan Xiang received her PhD in Physical Chemistry from Sichuan Univ., China in 2001. She joined Beihang University in 2001 and spent one year on green catalysis as a postdoc in Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Now she is the full professor of Materials Chemistry at School of Chemistry & Environment, Beihang University, and is a chief faculty member of Beijing Key Laboratory for Advanced Functional Materials and Thin Film Technology. Her main current research interests involve key energy materials development and its application.

Shanfu Lu
	Dr Shanfu Lu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry (Electrochemistry) from Wuhan University, in 2008. After one and half years as a postdoctoral fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, working with Prof. S. P. Jiang, he joined Prof. Xiang's group, and is currently an associate professor in Electrochemistry and Energy Materials at School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, China. His main current research interests involve nanomaterials and polyelectrolytes for energy storage and conversion.

San Ping Jiang
	Prof. San Ping Jiang is a full professor in Chemical Engineering and deputy director of Fuels and Energy Technology Institute, Curtin University, Australia. Dr Jiang obtained his BEng in Materials Science and Engineering from South China University of Technology and PhD in Electrochemistry from The City University, London under Prof, Alfred C. C. Tseung. Before joining Curtin in 2010, he worked in CSIRO Materials Science and Manufacturing in Melbourne, Australia and Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His main research interests are on the fundamentals understanding and development of nanostructured materials for use in fuel cells and supercapacitors.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly of a multilayer coating by sequential adsorption of oppositely charged PEs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of polyelectrolytes commonly used to assemble multilayer films. Polycations: poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH), linear poly(ethylene imine) (LPEI), poly(4-vinylpyridiine) (P4VP), poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA). Polyanions: Nafion, poly(sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS), poly(1-(4-(3-carboxy-4-hydroxyphenylazo)benzene sulfonaimdo)-1,2-ethanediyl, sodium salt) (PAZO), sulfonated poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (sPPO), poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), poly(vinyl sulfate) (PVS).	 

 	Fig. 3  UV-Vis spectra of a LbL self-assembly of PE bilayers on Nafion 112 with PDDA polycation and polyanions of (a) PSS, (b) PAZO, (c) PAMPS and (d) PAA. The inset is the plot of the intensity of characteristic absorbance as a function of number of PE bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. ©2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Zeta-potential of PM solution as a function of pH, (b) UV-vis adsorption spectra of (PDDA/PM)4 with various pH values of PM solution and (c) SEM cross-sectional image of (PDDA/PM)DF multilayer film with 30 bilayers deposited on Nafion membrane surface at pH 9.4 of PM solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. ©2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Growth curves for PDDA/sPPO at several different assembly conditions. The salt concentration given is for all assembly baths, both polymer solution and all rinse water, except for one film made with only salt in the sPPO solution (*). All films exhibit linear growth after a delayed growth period of 5–10 bilayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. ©2010, The Royal Science of Chemistry.	 


Nucleoporea	(LPEI/PSSM)40	23 ± 1 °C, 90–95% RH	9.6 × 10−4	 	
67

(LPEI/PSS)40	0.012	 
(LPEI/PAMPS)40	0.016	 
(LPEI/PAA)40	0.033	 
Nafion 117b	(PAH/PVS)5	22 ± 1 °C in water	68.8	41.6 × 10−8	
70

Nafion 112b	(PAH/PSS)5	30 ± 1 °C in water	27.0	7.67 × 10−8	
92

Nafion 1135b	(PDDA–PSS)8	30 °C in water	106	 	
63

(PDDA/PAZO)5	71.0	 
(PDDA/sPPO)30	30 °C, 98% RH	35.3	2.18 × 10−8	
98

(PAH/sPPO)30	4.23	0.57 × 10−8
(LPEI/sPPO)30	2.12	1.38 × 10−8
(P4VP/sPPO)30	1.65	0.84 × 10−8
Nafion 117b	(CS/SPAEK-C)5	25 °C in water	77.0	79.0 × 10−8	
99


c-(CS/SPAEK-C)5	70.0	27.0 × 10−8
Nafion 212a	(PDDA/PM)5	23 °C in water	3.29	31.6 × 10−8	
61

(PDDA/HPW)3	4.10	110 × 10−8	
62

SPAEK-Cb	(CS/HPW)4	25 °C, 100% RH	81.0	15.0 × 10−8	
30

(PPy/HPW)4	20 °C in water	21.0	2.53 × 10−8	
100

(PANI/HPW)5	25 °C, 100% RH	93.0	4.60 × 10−8	
101


 	Fig. 6  (a) An LbL film absorbed on a nucleopore membrane with pore size 100 nm; (b) polarization curve for a hydrogen fuel cell using an LbL-nucleopore membrane as PEM; (○) PEO-PAA, (▲) PDAC-PAMPS, (△) LPEI-PAA LbL films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. ©2005, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of a LbL self-assembly of oppositely charged polycations and polyanions on a Nafion electrolyte membrane, showing blocking of the methanol crossover; (b) polarization curves and power output of a DMFC using an unmodified N1135 membrane, and N1135 membranes modified with LbL self-assembled PDDA–PSS and PDDA–PAZO bilayers, measured at 30 °C in 2 M CH3OH, 0 psi; cathode, oxygen, 10 psi. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. ©2006, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM cross-sectional image of Nafion 1135 coated with 50 bilayers of PDAC/sPPO and (b) power curves of single MEA DMFCs comparing unmodified Nafion devices with Nafion membranes coated with LbL films of LPEI/sPPO and PDAC/sPPO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. ©2008, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Self-assembly mechanism of metallic NPs via electrostatic on PEM substrate surface.	 

 	Fig. 10  Nafion 1135 membrane (a) before and (b) after self-assembly process in Pt-PDDA colloid solutions and cleaning process. (c) Schematic diagram of the self-assembled monolayer structure of Pt NPs on Nafion membrane surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. ©2005, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Scheme illustration for the synthesis of Nafion-stabilized SiO2 NPs by the self-assembly route. The inset shows the TEM image of Nafion–SiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. ©2007, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Anhydrous proton-conducting mechanism at the interface between PWA and –SO3H. (b) Proton conduction of nanodispersed PWA-encapsulated material. Arrows indicate the proton transfer of molecular rotation on the PWA nanoparticles of the encapsulated materials. The backbone of PSS chains have been omitted in this model for clarity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. ©2006, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of mesoporous silica and HPW-functionalized meso-silica by impregnation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. ©2011, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM image of MCM-41 (a, b) and 30 wt% HPW/MCM-41 electrolyte by VIM (c, d), viewed either normal (a, c) or along (b, d) the pore axis; inset: high-resolution images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. ©2010, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  Scheme of the synthesis route of HPW–meso-silica nanocomposites via self-assembly assisted with a structure-directing Pluronic P123 surfactant. The inset is the structure of Keggin unit of HPW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. ©2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Performance and stability of single cells assembled by 25 wt% HPW/silica mesoporous nanocomposite electrolyte membranes for direct alcohol fuel cells in the absence of external humidification. The stability of the cell was measured at a constant current of 300 mA cm−2 at 200 °C. Pt black (1.0 mg cm−2) was used as the anode and cathode electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. ©2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Cycle voltammograms of PE-stabilized Pt, PVP-Pt and Pt black NPs for the methanol oxidation reaction in 1 M H2SO4 + 2 M CH3OH under a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. ©2007, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  PDDA functionalization of CNTs and in situ synthesis of Pt NPs on PDDA-functionalized CNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. ©2008, Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM micrographs of Pt NPs on PDDA/MWCNTs with Pt loadings of (a) 10, (b) 20, (c) 30, (d) 40 , (e) 50, (f) 69, (g) 81.6, (h) 86 and (i) 93 wt%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. ©2009, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Scheme of self-assembly of HPW onto PDDA-functionalized MWCNTs and synthesis of Pd NPs on HPW assembled PDDA-MWCNTs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. ©2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Illustration of the procedure for the assembly of MWCNT/IL/Au hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. ©2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) The possible effect of charged functional groups of polyanions (PSS and PAA) and polycations (PDDA) and PAH) on the electron donor–acceptor behavior of Pt NP; and (B) correlation between the adsorption energy of O and the d-band center of Pt slabs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. ©2010, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  TEM (a–c) and HRTEM (d, e) images of TP-BNGN at different magnifications. The circled parts in panel d denote Pd NPs. FFT pattern (f) of the HRTEM image shown in panel e (circled part). Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. ©2010, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Illustration of the formation of hollow AuPd alloy nanoparticles and IL-CCG–hollow-AuPd nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. ©2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


CNTs	Pt	1.47–2.6	PDDA	104.5 mA cm−2 mgPt−1	MOR	
64, 182

 	 	2.8	PAH	32.4 mA mgPt−1(@0.9 V vs. RHE, 1600 rpm)	ORR	
189

 	 	4.1 ± 1.5	PBI	480 mA mgPt−1	MOR	
191

 	 	3.0	IS-IL	460 mA mgPt−1	MOR	
197

 	Pd	2.0	HPW-PDDA	6 mA cm−2 mgPd−1 (@0.8 V vs. RHE, 2500 rpm)c	ORR	
186

 	Au	3.3	NH2-IL	 	ORR	
196

 	 	4.7 ± 1.1	PDDA-PEI	 	ORR	
214

 	 	4.0–7.0	PEI	 	ORR	
215

 	PtRu	3.1	HPW-CS	178 mA mgmetal−1	MOR	
187

 
Graphene	Pt	3.0	PDDA	500 mA mgPt−1	FAOR	
204

 	Pd	6.0	PPy	359 mA mgPd−1	MOR	
208

 	PtAu	3.3 ± 0.2	PDDA	2310 mA mgPt−1	FAOR	
205

 	PtRu	2.0	PMO12	2028 mA cm−2 mgPt−1	MOR	
216


 	Fig. 25  Schematic representation of the procedure to obtain dispersible Pd@CeO2 core–shell nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. ©2010, The American Chemical Society.	 

CNT/PPy/MnO2	281	1.0 M Na2SO4	
233

LbL-(PEI/MONS)10	288	2.0 M KCl	
234

LbL-MWCNT/PDDA/MONS	581	0.1 M Na2SO4	
235

LbL-MWCNT/MnO2	290	 	
236

SAM-HNTS/PPy	522	0.5 M Na2SO4	
237

LbL-(PEI-graphene/MWCNT-COOH)9	120	1.0 M Na2SO4	
238

LbL-(PDDA/MWCNT)/PDDA/MONS	 	1.0 M Na2SO4	
239

LbL-(CoOOHNW/MONS)2	856	0.1 M Na2SO4	
240

Self-assembly carbon sphere/graphene	198	6.0 M KOH	
44

LbL-MWCNT/rGO	157 ± 18	0.5 M Na2SO4	
241

LbL-(graphene/QP4VP-CO-PCN)9	49	1.0 M Na2SO4	
242


 	Fig. 26  UV-Vis absorption spectra of multilayer films of (PEI/MNS)n prepared on quartz glass substrates. The insert shows the dependence of absorbance at 320 nm as a function of deposition cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. ©2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Scheme of fabrication of sandwiched film of MONS and MWCNT and (b) CV of sandwiched multilayer film electrodes of (1) ITO/(PDDA/MWCNT)4; (2) ITO(PDDA/MONS)4 and (3) ITO/(PDDA/MONS/PDDA/MWCNT)2, measured in 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. ©2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  LbL self-assembly of MWNT (LbL-MWNT) film via alternate dipping of substrate into positively charged(MWNT-NH3+) and negatively charged (MWNT-COO−) MWNTs, and preparation of LbL-MWNT/MnO2 electrodes through dipping of the LbL-MWNT film into permanganate ion (MnO4−) solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. ©2010, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic representation of the assembling process of FRGO-p-MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249. ©2011, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of self-assembled hierarchical nanostructures comprised of graphene and carbon spheres and (b) SEM image of the hierarchical nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. ©2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of (a) the LbL assembly of MWCNT/rGO and (b) hydrazine treatment process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. ©2011, Elsevier.	 
CCM	catalyst coated membrane
CIM	conventional impregnation method
CNT	carbon nanotube
CoOOHNFs	cobalt oxyhydroxide nanoflakes
CS	chitosan
DCC	dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
DMFC	direct methanol fuel cell
EDLC	electrical double layer capacitor
EDTA	ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid
EG	ethylene glycol
FAOR	formic acid oxidation
FRGO-p	PDDA functionalized reduced graphene oxide
GO	graphene oxide
rGO	reduced graphene oxide
HPAs	heteropolyacids
HPW (PWA)	phosphotungstic acid
HT-PEMFC	high-temperature proton-exchange membrane fuel cells
IL	ionic liquid
IPCE	incident photo-to-current efficiency
IS-ILs	imidazolium-salt-based ionic liquids
LbL	layer-by-layer
LPEI	linear poly(ethylene imine)
MEA	membrane-electrode assembly
MONS	MnO2 nanosheets
MOR	methanol oxidation reaction
MWCNTs	multiwall carbon nanotubes
NPs	nanoparticles
OCP	open-circuit potential
OCV	open circuit voltage
OPBI	poly[2,20-(p-oxydiphenylene)-5,50-bibenzimidazole]
ORR	oxygen reduction reaction
P4VP	poly(4-vinylpyridine)
PAA	poly(acrylic acid)
PAH	poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
PAMAM	poly(amidoamine)
PAMPS	poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid)
PANI	polyaniline
PAZO	poly(1-(4-(3-carboxy-4-hydroxyphenylazo)benzene sulfonaimdo)-1,2-ethanediyl, sodium salt)
PDDA(PDAC)	poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride)
PE	polyelectrolyte
PEC	polyelectrolyte complexes
PEI	poly(ethylene imine)
PEO	poly(ethylene oxide)
PEM	proton exchange membrane
PEMFC	proton exchange membrane fuel cell
PFSA	perfluorosulfonic acid
PM	purple membrane
sPPO	sulfonated poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide)
PPy	polypyrrole
PPyDEHS	poly(pyrroledi(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate)
PSS	poly(sodium styrene sulfonate)
PVP	poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone)
PVS	poly(vinyl sulfate)
RH	relative humidification
SEM	scanning electron microscopy
SPEEK	sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone)
SPAEK-C	sulfonated poly(aryl ether ketone) bearing carboxyl groups
TEM	transition electron microscopy
TEOS	tetraethoxysilane
VIM	vacuum-assisted impregnation

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
