Semiconductor nanostructure -based photovoltaic solar cells  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1NR10152H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1NR10152H
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2430-2443Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSemiconductor nanostructure-based photovoltaic solar cells

        
          
            Genqiang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Scott 
            Finefrock
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daxin 
            Liang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gautam G. 
            Yadav
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haoran 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haiyu 
            Fang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yue 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. E-mail: yuewu@purdue.edu;  Fax: +1 765-494-0805;   Tel: +1 765-494-6028
bState Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, 130012, PR China
Received 
      10th February 2011
    , Accepted 10th March 2011First published on 28th April 2011AbstractSubstantial efforts have been devoted to design, synthesize, and integrate various semiconductor nanostructures for photovoltaic (PV) solar cells. In this article, we will review the recent progress in this exciting area and cover the material chemistry and physics related to all-inorganic nanostructure solar cells, hybrid inorganic nanostructure-conductive polymer composite solar cells, and dye-sensitized solar cells.Genqiang ZhangGenqiang Zhang received BS degree in Materials Chemistry in 2004 and PhD degree in Condensed Matter Physics in 2009, both from University of Science and Technology of China supervised by Prof. Xiaoguang Li. After that he became a research associate in Chemical Engineering of Purdue University with Prof. Yue Wu. He is interested in the solution phase synthesis, property study and device applications of nanostructured thermoelectric materials and solar cells.Yue WuProf. Yue Wu received his bachelor degree in chemistry with best thesis award from University of Science and Technology of China in 2001. Then, he went to Harvard University and studied for his doctoral degree under the supervision of Prof. Charles M. Lieber. He received his doctoral degree in June, 2006 and was awarded the Miller Fellowship from University of California at Berkeley. At Berkeley, he worked with Prof. A. Paul Alivisatos for three years and joined School of Chemical Engineering at Purdue University as an assistant professor in August, 2009. Prof. Wu's research interest is focusing on the broadly defined nanostructured materials for their potential applications in nanoscale devices and renewable energy-related field.
The worldwide demand for energy is causing a dramatic environmental impact on the global climate due to the combustion of fossil fuels. In order to improve the sustainability of our society, photovoltaic solar cells, as a significant low-carbon energy source, have received tremendous attention recently. For over the past two decades, crystalline silicon based single junction solar cells, also known as first generation solar cells, have dominated the photovoltaic (PV) market with an efficiency of ∼25%,1 quite close to the theoretical limit value of ∼31%.2 Recently, thin film solar cells, also known as second generation solar cells, utilizing a much thinner absorbing layer have been considered as a possible solution to lower the solar cell cost compared with established silicon technology. Until now, the maximum efficiencies for second generation solar cells are ∼19.9% for the Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGS) system, ∼16.5% for the CdTe system, ∼15% for amorphous Si film.3,4 The reasons for the lower efficiency in thin film solar cells are mainly the absorption of less of the solar spectrum due to the thinner cell and higher density of non-radiative recombination centers due to the polycrystalline or amorphous features.5 Among the various types of solar cells, semiconductor nanostructure-based PV devices are promising candidates for the third generation solar cells because they have several advantages over the traditional single crystal or thin film solar cells including low temperature processing, scalability, and low cost manufacturing. These benefits could be capitalized upon if advanced synthesis methods and device fabrication techniques are used to create devices with efficiency comparable to single crystal and/or thin film solar cells. Many semiconductor nanostructures have been demonstrated for applications in photovoltaic devices, for example, cadmium chalcogenides (CdTe, CdSe, CdS), lead chalcogenides (PbTe, PbSe, PbS), I–III–VI2 material systems (CuInSe2 based semiconductors), zinc chalcogenides (ZeTe, ZnO), I2–VI semiconductors (Cu2O, Cu2S), iron pyrite (FeS2), etc.6–10 In this review article, we give a comprehensive introduction to the representative synthesis process, size and shape control, self-assembly behavior and electrical characterization of those promising nanostructures that have been built into PV devices in the previous literatures.
1. The synthesis of semiconductor nanostructures for photovoltaic devices
1.1. 
          Nanocrystal synthesis

1.1.1. 
            Thermal decomposition process. 

Thermal decomposition synthesis, which has been broadly applied to synthesize semiconductor nanocrystals, generally involves reactions in an organic solvent under air-free conditions using a Schlenk line. In this method, the organometallic compounds or metal-surfactant complexes usually act as the precursors and a subsequent hot injection of precursor solution into organic solvent with a surfactant is necessary to obtain high quality nanocrystals of various materials, including semiconductor nanostructures for photovoltaic devices. The thermal decomposition synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals was pioneered by Bawendi and co-workers,11 who used dimethylcadmium (Me2Cd) as the Cd source, bis(trimethylsilyl) [(TMS)2E] (E = Te, Se, S) or tri-n-octylphosphine tellurium (TOPTe) and TOPSe as the chalcogen source and mixed phosphine/phosphine oxide solution as the coordinating solvent. The rapid injection of precursor solution into the hot solvent led to a short burst of homogeneous nucleation and a subsequent slow growth process, which could possibly be due to the sudden temperature drop associated with the introduction of room temperature reagents, generated monodisperse CdE nanocrystals. The obtained nanocrystals could be well dispersed in organic solvents and fine tuning of their diameters resulted in a notable quantum confinement effect. This work provided a new rationale for the synthesis of high quality semiconductor nanocrystals. Subsequently, Peng et al. successfully obtained high quality CdE nanocrystals using the more convenient and less harmful CdO as a precursor.12,13 Up to date, various monodisperse nanocrystals have been synthesized through the hot injection process based on the thermal decomposition reaction. For example, shape controlled CdSe nanocrystals with different aspect ratios have been achieved, which greatly benefit the application of CdSe in PV devices.14–17Fig. 1 gives the typical transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images for CdSe nanocrystals with aspect ratios ranging from 1 to 10, which were achieved by adjusting the initial monomer concentrations.12 Through similar procedures, shape controlled CdTe nanocrystals have also been synthesized.11,18–22
 Fig. 1  Well-defined CdSe nanocrystals with tunable aspect ratios, the scale bar in (C) is for (A)–(C). Further details are described in ref. 14. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As a family of promising candidates for thin film PV applications, the synthesis of the copper indium diselenide (CIS) based materials has long attracted intense interest.23–30 However, the products synthesized through previously reported routes have limitations in dispersion, impurities, difficult compositional and structural control, etc. Fortunately, great progress has been reached in some recent literatures through the thermal decomposition routes.31–37 For example, the Hillhouse group developed an effective solution synthesis of phase selective CuInSe2 nanocrytals,31 in which the order of Se precursor injection into oleylamine solution was varied in order to induce different crystal structures in the final products. The results indicated that sphalerite nanocrystals were obtained if Se precursor was added into the solution of CuCl and InCl3 in oleylamine at 285 °C due to abrupt supersaturation of the reaction mixture and a subsequent rapid nucleation and growth process, while pure chalcopyrite nanocrystals were obtained when the Se precursor was injected along with other precursors at 130 °C, followed by a higher temperature growth process. Fig. 2A and B show typical TEM and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of the as-synthesized chalcopyrite CuInSe2 nanocrystals, indicating the good crystallinity of the products. In addition, CuInSe2 nanorings were formed (Fig. 2C and D) through a secondary ligand during the nanocrystal growth by dissolving the precursors in TOP and hot injection into oleylamine. This method has also been extended to other CIS based ternary and quaternary nanocrystals.32–34,36 In addition, Korgel and co-workers reported the synthesis of monodisperse, solution-stable chalcopyrite CuInSe2 nanocrystals with trigonal pyramidal morphology, as shown in Fig. 2E and F. The synthetic procedure, which was similar to previous literatures, required the following procedures: InCl3 and CuCl were first combined in oleylamine under air-free conditions and heated to 130 °C, followed by the addition of selenourea at 100 °C. Then, the reaction mixture was heated up to 240 °C for nanocrystal growth. The critical modification in this method was the use of selenourea as the Se source, which decided the final shape of the products. The trigonal pyramidal nanocrystals exhibited a well defined arrangement on the TEM grid (Fig. 2E) and single crystal nature according to microstructure analysis (Fig. 2F).
 Fig. 2  Shape controlled synthesis of CuInSe2 nanocrystals: (A, C and E) TEM images; (B, D and F) corresponding HRTEM analysis. Further details are described in ref. 31 and 37. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
As a candidate material that contains both earth abundant elements and environmentally friendly, copper(I) sulfide has been well studied in PV devices since the 1960s.38–43 Cu2S nanostructures with various morphologies, including nanoparticles, nanodisks, nanorods/wires and hexagonal platelets have been synthesized by different chemical routes. Using the thermal decomposition method, shape and size controlled Cu2S nanocrystals have also been achieved. For example, Cu2S nanocrystals, nanorods and nanodisks with chain-like arrangement were obtained by the Korgel group, as shown in Fig. 3.44–46 In addition, size tunable Cu2S spherical nanocrystals have been achieved by simply adjusting the reaction time.47
 Fig. 3  Typical TEM images of shape controlled synthesis of Cu2S nanocrystals. Further details are described in ref. 46. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 


1.1.2. Nonaqueous sol–gel process. 
The conventional sol–gel process has been widely adopted to synthesize oxide particles by hydrolysis and condensation of precursors in acidic or basic aqueous medium.48 Generally, the products obtained through this method have limitations in size and shape control, broad size distribution, etc., due to the polarity of H2O that is used as a medium.49 The nonaqueous sol–gel process, which involves only metal oxide precursors and organic solvents, has been well developed for the synthesis of high quality metal oxide nanostructures.50,51 For semiconductor oxide nanostructures that could be used as solar cell building blocks, TiO2 spherical and rod-shaped nanocrystals have been obtained using several alternative routes with different organic solvents, precursors under different growth mechanisms including aminolysis and reactions with alcohols.52–58 In addition, various ZnO nanostructures including spheres, hexagons and rod/wire-shaped nanocrystals with controlled aspect ratios can also be obtained through this method by adjustment of experimental parameters such as precursor, solvent, reaction time, temperature, etc.59–67


1.1.3. Other available methods. 
Although the dominant routes for the synthesis of high quality semiconductor nanocrystals are the thermal decomposition based on hot injections and the nonhydrolytic sol–gel process, there are a variety of alternative routes including the hydro/solvothermal process, polyol synthesis and the aqueous solution method, etc. Through these methods, various semiconductor nanostructures that are applicable in photovoltaic devices have been obtained. For example, a general hydrothermal based strategy has been developed to effectively synthesize the nanocrystals of CdSe, PbS and CdS.68 Shape controlled PbTe nanostructures and PbSe hollow spheres were obtained through an ethylene glycol based polyol process with different experimental procedures.69,70 Furthermore, aqueous phase synthesis has been recently developed to obtain various semiconductor nanocrystals such as CdTe, CdSe, CdS and their heterostuctures.71–75

1.2. One-dimensional nanostructure synthesis
One-dimensional (1D) nanowires and nanotubes represent another group of building blocks for nanostructured photovoltaic solar cells. Compared to the nanocrystal-based approach, one significant advantage of these 1D nanostructures possess is the more continuous electrical transport. Many demonstrations of nanowire or nanotube based PV devices have been explored as promising ways to improve the energy conversion efficiency. Generally, there are two types of design approaches: one is based on nanowire/nanotube arrays for large scale application and the other is the single nanowire devices that have been considered as a possible high efficiency, robust and integrated nanoscale power source.76 Previous literatures have demonstrated that Si, GaN, and ZnO nanowires and TiO2 nanotubes could be successfully applied as building blocks in PV devices. In this section, we introduce the current synthesis methods for these 1D nanostructures and heterostructures.

1.2.1. Vapor-phase synthesis of nanowires. 
The vapor phase deposition process is the dominant route for synthesizing Si and GaN nanowires as well as their axially or radially modulated nanowire heterostructures. Most of this nanowire growth is based on the vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism and the diameter of the nanowires is defined by the size of the liquid alloy droplets formed by gas precursors and catalyst particles that create a surface energy difference to favor the 1D growth.77–81 For example, the Lieber group obtained molecular-scale Si nanowires with controlled diameters using silane in hydrogen as reactant and various sizes of gold nanoclusters as catalyst.80Fig. 4a–c give a typical HRTEM analysis of Si nanowires with diameters of 13.2, 5.7 and 3.5 nm, respectively. One can see that the nanowires are single crystals with no obvious amorphous oxide layers.
 Fig. 4  
              HRTEM images of Si nanowires with different diameters. The scale bars are 5 nm. Further details are described in ref. 80. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
In order to build Si-based solar cells, one needs to fabricate a p-type/n-type (p–n) or p-type/intrinsic/n-type (p–i–n) junction structure in axial or radial geometry. The previous success in the area of controlled synthesis of Si nanowires has greatly benefited the work on special architecture fabrication. In the growth of coaxial (radial) nanowire heterostructures, the Lieber group designed and successfully synthesized coaxial Si nanowires in a p–i–n geometry, as shown in Fig. 5A and B.82 They first fabricated p-type Si nanowires according to the previous literatures, followed by the deposition of an intrinsic Si shell at a higher temperature and lower pressure compared with p-type Si core growth. It should be noted that phosphine was used as a reactant in order to achieve n-type doping of the outer shell to create a p–i–n junction. Recently, wide band gap III–V alloy based coaxial nanowires have also been indicated as promising candidates for single nanowire PV devices with large open circuit voltage.83 Their synthesis has been achieved in previous literatures by the Lieber group as shown in Fig. 6,84–86 in which both the element line scanning result and dark-field TEM image indicate the formation of GaN/InxGa1-xN/GaN/AlGaN multi-shell structure.84
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) SEM images in back-scattered electron mode of p–i–n Si coaxial nanowires. The scale bars are 1 μm (top) and 200 nm (bottom), respectively. Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of cross-sectional view for the GaN based radial heterostructure nanowires. (B) Bright-field TEM cross-sectional image, (C) normalized EDS line profiles and (D) dark-field scanning TEM image of a GaN/InxGa1-xN/GaN/AlGaN CMS nanowire. Scale bars are 100 nm in (B) and 50 nm in (D). Further details are described in ref. 84. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Besides the radial nanowire heterostructures, axial p–i–n Si nanowire heterostructures have also been obtained by simply switching dopant precursor gases at different stages of the growth. Fig. 7 shows a typical Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of an axially modulated p–i–n Si nanowire.87 In addition, the SEM image of the nanowire after selective wet etching, as shown in Fig. 7C, provides clear evidence to verify the formation of an axial p–i–n nanostructure.87
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) SEM image of axial p–i–n Si nanowire; (C) SEM images of a p–i–n axial NW after selective wet etching, the scale bars are 1 μm. Further details are described in ref. 87. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 


1.2.2. Solution phase method. 
Recently, the solution phase method has also been applied for synthesis of aligned Si nanowires which can be used in PV devices after further modifications. Fig. 8 gives a typical SEM image and HRTEM characterization of large scale Si nanowire arrays on silicon wafers that were synthesized through a facile chemical etching technique based on galvanic displacement reactions.88–91 In a typical synthesis, the cleaned silicon wafers were immersed into an aqueous HF/silver nitrate solution in a sealed vessel and treated at 50 °C for a set amount of time.88 The synthetic conditions and procedures are simple compared with those of vapor phase deposition and the products appear as aligned nanowire arrays with a single crystalline nature, as shown in Fig. 8. However, the obtained Si nanowires need post-treatments, such as the removal of the Ag and oxide layers generated during the synthesis and deposition of n-type shell materials to form the p–n junction geometry for application in photovoltaic devices.92
 Fig. 8  (A) Typical SEM image of the aligned Si nanowire arrays and (B) corresponding HRTEM analysis and ED pattern (the inset). Further details are described in ref. 91. Reprinted with permission from Wiley. 

            ZnO
            nanowire arrays can also be obtained through a solution phase synthesis on an ITO substrate. In order to obtain aligned ZnO nanowires, the substrate was first decorated with a ZnO layer and then immersed in an aqueous solution containing appropriated zinc nitrate hexahydrate, hexamethylenetetramine and polyethyleneimine for about 30–60 min at 90 °C.93,94 The products can be built into nanowire array photovoltaic devices after decoration by Cu2O or TiO2 particles or shell layers.94,95

1.3. 
          TiO2
nanotube synthesis
The outstanding performance of TiO2 nanoparticle dye-sensitized solar cells has attracted great attention to the synthesis of TiO2 nanotubes and nanotube arrays and a variety of effective methods have been developed, such as porous alumina template assisted deposition,96–99 organic precursor based sol–gel process,100,101hydrothermal reaction,102–104etc. Among these synthetic routes, the anodization of titanium process which was first reported by Grimes and co-workers in 2001,105 has proven to be the most successful strategy and was greatly modified to obtain high quality TiO2 nanotube arrays with remarkable properties enabling their application in PV devices.106–114 The growth of vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays can be achieved on a fluorine doped tin oxide coated glass substrate,114 and the length of the nanotube could reach 20 micrometres and the pore diameter was about 95 nm with a wall thickness of about 10 nm, as shown in Fig. 9A and B. The images shown in Fig. 9C indicate that the TiO2 nanotube array films are transparent, which will allow photons to interact with the dye molecules more efficiently. In addition, the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern proved that the products were single crystalline with an anatase phase.
 Fig. 9  (A and B) Typical SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays; (C) digital images of transparent TiO2 nanotube array films with different thicknesses; (D) TEM image of a single nanotube and the corresponding SAED pattern. Further details are described in ref. 114. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
1.4. 
          Nanocrystal
assembly

The controlled assembly of the as-synthesized nanocrystals or nanorods will be the prerequisite for their applications in various nanodevices. There are several available techniques to assemble nanostructures, including self-assembly by slow evaporation of solvents,115–118 Langmuir–Blodgettry (LB),119 layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition,120,121etc. Bawendi and co-workers first carried out the self-assembly of spherical CdSe nanocrystals in octane and octanol to create a superlattice structure through selective solvent evaporation under reduced pressure.115 There have been many other reports on the study of self-assembly behavior of semiconductor nanostructures.122–124 For example, Fig. 10A gives the SEM image of self-assembled 3-D colloidal crystals of Cu2S nanodisks and Fig. 10B gives the TEM image of self-assembled 2-D layers of CdSe/CdS nanorods.46,123 In general, self-assembly behavior requires high quality of nanocrystals or nanorods, such as monodispersity, regular shape (spherical, cubic, or regular rods), and small diameters. The LB technique has been demonstrated as a low cost, high-throughput and easily integrated method for controlled assembly of various nanocrystals and nanowires. The assembly of nanocrystals through this method is usually achieved in a water-filled trough equipped with a mobile barrier and a pressure sensor. The organic solution containing dispersed nanoparticles is spread dropwise onto the water surface and self-organization is formed at the high surface pressures when the nanocrystal solution was pushed to form a close packed monolayer on the water surface.119 The LBL deposition method, which involves the repeated process of dip-coating a thin layer of nanocrystals followed by chemical treatment after each new layer, has been broadly applied to fabricate nanostructured film based PV devices. Fig. 11 gives an example of the morphology of PbSe nanocrystal film prepared by LBL dip-coating process.
 Fig. 10  (A) SEM image of self-assembled three dimensional colloidal crystals of Cu2S nanodisks; (B) TEM image of self-assembled two dimensional layers of CdSe/CdS nanorods, the scale bar is 50 nm. Further details are described in ref. 46 and 123. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  
            SEM images of PbSe NC films prepared by layer-by-layer dip-coating onto ITO substrates. (a) Plan view. The scale bar is 50 nm. (b) Cross-section. The scale bars are 100 nm. Further details are described in ref. 121. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
2. Semiconductor nanostructure based solar cells
2.1. All inorganic nanocrystal based solar cells
Several semiconductor nanocrystals have been utilized as building blocks for all inorganic nanocrystal solar cells. Generally, to fabricate a device, semiconductor nanocrystals dispersed in a solvent were deposited on an appropriate substrate, such as indium tin oxide (ITO) glass or a plastic substrate by spin-casting, dip-coating, or other techniques to form a homogenous nanocrystal film with high density. Various semiconductor nanocrystals have been applied in the fabrication of photovoltaic devices, including CdSe, CdS, PbSe, PbS, Cu2S, Cu(In, Ga)Se2, Cu2ZnSnS4, etc.125–127 For example, the Alivisatos group built PV devices based on a CdSe/CdTe bilayer film by spin casting from CdSe and CdTe nanorod colloidal solutions.128 It was proposed that the photovoltaic conversion of their device was based on a donor–acceptor mechanism according to the energy diagram of CdSe and CdTe shown in Fig. 12A, in which photoexcitations experienced an energetic driving force for the charge transfer process and the exciton will separate into electrons and holes at the interface. A typical SEM image showed that the formed film was homogenous and pinhole-free (Fig. 12B). The I–V curve in the dark and in the light indicates that the device showed strong photoresponse and diode rectification behavior (Fig. 12C). The cell also exhibited a notable photovoltaic effect: the short circuit current (Isc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) were as high as 0.58 mA cm−2 and 0.41 V, respectively. The post-annealing process and the top contact electrode greatly influence the device properties and an AM1.5 power conversion efficiency of 2.9% has been achieved by choosing a Ca 20 nm/Al 80 nm layer as the electrode.
 Fig. 12  (A) An energy diagram of valence and conduction band levels for CdTe and CdSe. (B) Typical SEM image of the nanocrystal film through spin-casting process, the scale bar is 1 μm. (C) I–V characteristics for the CdSe/CdTe nanorods based device in the dark (dotted) and under simulated one-sun AM1.5G illumination (solid). Further details are described in ref. 128. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Schottky junction based solar cells, which separate the photogenerated carrier due to the energy barrier at the metal–semiconductor interface, have also been well studied recently in all inorganic nanocrystal PV devices, especially on those based on lead chalcogenides.33,129–134 For example, Nozik and co-workers fabricated PbSe nanocrystal solar cells through a LBL technique on ITO glass substrate as shown in Fig. 13A.120 In the fabrication process, small molecules, such as 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), are used to replace the long alkyl chain surfactants on the PbSe nanocrystal surface to improve the charge transport, while the electrons and holes were separated by a Schottky barrier at the interface between the evaporated metal electrode and nanocrystal film (Fig. 13B). Similar devices have also been fabricated using PbS nanocrystal films.135 The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of these devices resembles the absorption spectra in the visible and near-infrared spectral regions and typically peak at 55–65% below 800 nm, as shown in Fig. 13C. In addition, the results indicated that the Voc of the device strongly depended on the nanocrystal particle sizes and metal work functions; their relationships are demonstrated in Fig. 13D and E.
 Fig. 13  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PbSe nanocrystal based device with a structure of ITO/NC film/metal contact, the scale bar is 100 nm. (B) Proposed equilibrium band diagram. (C) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of a device with a 140 nm thick film. (D) The relationship between Voc and nanocrystal particle sizes. (E) The dependence of Voc with metal work function.113 Further details are described in ref. 120. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 

Copper(I) sulfide with an indirect gap of 1.2 eV has been broadly studied in thin film PV devices when combined with CdS.38–42 The Alivisatos group has developed the PV devices based on high quality Cu2S nanocrystals with an average size of about 5.4 nm (Fig. 14A). The absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 14B indicated that the Cu2S nanocrystals exhibited a wide absorption up to about 1000 nm and the photoluminescence (PL) characterization showed a single peak at 1.32 eV. Cu2S–CdS bilayer photovoltaic devices have been fabricated by spin-casting a 300 nm Cu2S layer and a 100 nm CdS layer on ITO glass substrates. A typical I–V curve of the device (Fig. 14C) indicated that the Voc and Isc of the solar cell can reach up to 0.6 V and 5.63 mA cm−2, respectively, corresponding to a power conversion efficiency of 1.6% with a fill factor of 40%. Another important feature was that the device can also be built on a flexible plastic substrate, which only showed a slight decrease of efficiency (∼8%) even being bent to a curvature of 105 °C (Fig. 14D). This feature may greatly expand the application of nanocrystals based solar cells for flexible power generation in mobile devices.
 Fig. 14  (A) TEM, high resolution TEM (top inset) image and (B) the typical UV-vis absorption spectrum of the as-synthesized of Cu2S nanocrystals. (C) I–V curve of the Cu2S–CdS nanocrystal based photovoltaic devices under zero (black) and standard illumination (red). (D) The I–V curve of the Cu2S–CdS nanocrystal based photovoltaic device on the plastic substrate under zero (black) and standard (red) illumination with a curvature of 105°, and I–V curve after released to flat (green). Further details are described in ref. 133. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
I–III–VI2 compounds have been demonstrated as promising candidates for high efficiency PV devices in thin film solar cells.136 Therefore, the I–III–VI2 and related nanocrystal based PV devices have also attracted a lot of attention.31–34,36 For example, the Hillhouse group recently fabricated PV devices based on thermally sintered CuInSe2 nanocrystal films using CuInSe2 nanocrystal ink through drop-casting (Fig. 15A), followed by chemical bath deposition of a CdS layer and RF sputtering of 50 nm intrinsic ZnO and 300 nm ITO layers. The devices had a power conversion efficiency and fill factor of 2.8% and 39% respectively under standard AM1.5 illumination; the corresponding I–V curve is shown in Fig. 15B. As a further development in this group of PV devices, researchers have been trying to find more cost-effective materials that possess efficiencies similar to those of I–III–VI2 compounds. One of the key challenges is to replace indium, which is the most expensive and least abundant element in the formula. Cu2ZnSnS4 with a band gap and an absorption coefficient both similar to those of Cu(In, Ga)Se2 may fit the demands of high-efficiency and low cost, and the fabrication of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanostructure-based PV devices has been explored by the Hillhouse group recently as well.33
 Fig. 15  (A) SEM images of the thermal treated CuInSe2 nanocrystal film on Mo coated soda lime glass. (B) The I–V curve of the CuInSe2 based photovoltaic device.24 Further details are described in ref. 31. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
2.2. 
          Polymer–nanocrystal hybrid solar cells
Hybrid solar cells are usually made from conjugated polymers and inorganic semiconductor nanocrystal composites, which possess the beneficial features of both materials and hold great potential for large-scale cost-effective manufacturing. Typically, the organic semiconducting polymers in hybrid devices are the electron donors and hole-transport medium while the inorganic nanocrystals usually act as the electron acceptors and electron-transport medium. In previous literatures, various hybrid solar cells have been studied and much progress has been achieved, including devices that utilized polymer in conjunction with CdSe nanocrystals14,137 and hyperbranched nanostructures,138 CdS nanowires,139,140PbSe, PbS nanoparticles,141–145CuInS2, Si nanocrystals146 and ZnO and TiO2 nanostructures.147,148 The Alivisatos group demonstrated the CdSe nanocrystal/poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) hybrid solar cells and systematically studied the influence of nanocrystal diameter and length on device efficiency.14 The device fabrication involved spin-casting a solution of 90 wt% CdSe nanorods in P3HT onto an ITO glass substrate coated with polystyrene sulfonic acid doped poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT:PSS) and aluminium as the top contact. Fig. 16A lists the different EQEs of the devices based on CdSe nanocrystals with different aspect ratios. It is very clear that the EQE has notably enhanced by a factor of approximately 3 when the aspect ratio of nanocrystals increased from 1 to 10 and reached up to 55% in a device made from 7 nm by 60 nm nanorods under 0.1 mW cm−2 illumination at 485 nm.14 The diameter of the nanocrystals also plays an important role on the device efficiency as shown in Fig. 16B, in which the absorption edge of CdSe nanocrystal films was effectively tuned from 650 nm to 720 nm when the diameter increased from 3 to 7 nm. In this device, a high power conversion efficiency of 6.9% has been obtained under a 0.1 mW cm−2 illumination at 515 nm using the blend containing 7 nm by 60 nm CdSe nanorods. In addition to simple nanocrystals, the Alivisatos group also built hybrid solar cells based on CdSe hyperbranched nanostructures with the purpose of solving the unpredictable and irreproducible morphology in the nanocomposite blend.138 The hyperbranched CdSe nanostructures spontaneously formed a 3-D array on the substrates and an improved power conversion efficiency of 2.18% under a AM1.5 illumination has been demonstrated.138
 Fig. 16  External quantum efficiency of solar cell based 7 nm diameter CdSe nanorods with lengths of 7, 30 and 60 nm respectively. (B) Photocurrent spectra for two devices with 60 nm long nanorods with diameters 7 and 3 nm.7 Further details are described in ref. 14. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Infrared nanocrystal based hybrid solar cells have also been broadly characterized recently in order to generate photocurrent using lower energy photons. McDonald et al. recently investigated the infrared photovoltaic properties of a nanocomposite where PbS nanocrystals were incorporated into the polymer matrix of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy-pphenylenevinylene)] (MEH-PPV).141 The obtained nanocomposites were then deposited on a poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) coated ITO glass substrate to form a sandwich structure device that showed a photovoltaic effect with an internal quantum efficiency of ∼0.0006% and an external quantum efficiency of ∼0.0008%, as shown in Fig. 17. However, the efficiency under a −5 bias can be enhanced to about 3%, which is about 500 times higher than when under zero bias.141 They subsequently fabricated an improved PbS nanocrystal based hybrid solar cell through a poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT)-nanocrystal bi-layer structure on a PEDOT:PSS coated ITO glass substrate.144Fig. 18A gives the curves of EQE as functions of wavelength for four devices with different P3OT layer thicknesses (160, 115, 80, 0 nm) together with a 160 nm PbS nanocrystal layer. The EQE was clearly dependent on the P3OT layer thickness and reached to a maximum value of about 1.8% at the wavelength of 720 nm, with a calculated internal quantum efficiency of 11.3% when the P3OT layer thickness was 115 nm (Fig. 18B). In addition to PbS nanocrystals, PbSe nanocrystals have also been used in hybrid solar cells.143 Xu and co-workers built hybrid solar cells employing 6 nm PbSe nanocrystals blended with P3HT and obtained an internal quantum efficiency of 21% and power conversion efficiency of 0.14% under AM1.5 illumination.143
 Fig. 17  (A) Dark current and photocurrent curves near zero bias, the inset is the proposed simplified band diagram depicting the relative energy alignment after the magnesium electrode deposition. (B) Short-circuit current (circles) and corresponding internal quantum efficiency (squares) as a function of incident power. Inset: stability of the short-circuit current as a function of time for a sample with much lower photovoltaic response than in (A). Further details are described in ref. 141. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 18  (A) External quantum efficiency as a function of wavelength for all four devices based on P3OT layer with different thicknesses (Devices A, B, C, D: 160, 115, 80 and 0 nm, respectively) and 160 nm PbS nanocrystal layer. The inset shows the absorption spectrum of P3OT. (B) Measured external quantum efficiency and calculated internal quantum efficiency at the first 1260 nm and the onset of the third exciton peaks (720 nm).137 Further details are described in ref. 144. Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics. 
Bulk silicon has long been used in first generation solar cells. Recently, silicon nanocrystal based hybrid solar cells have also been investigated.146 The Kortshagen group built PV devices by spin-coatingSi nanocrystal/P3HT blended film with thickness of about 100 nm onto ITO coated glass substrate with aluminium as the top contact. The I–V curve of the hybrid solar cell in Fig. 19A shows a power conversion efficiency of 1.15% and a fill factor of about 46%. The Isc density and Voc of the device reach 3.3 mA cm−2 and 0.75 eV, respectively. The data clearly showed that the hybrid solar cell possesses enhanced properties compared with those of the P3HT solar cell, as shown in the inset of Fig. 19A. In addition, the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the device reaches as high as 26% near the wavelength of 500 nm in Fig. 19B, but most of the collected current was contributed by the P3HT absorption while the Si nanocrystal absorption only boosted the IPCE above the wavelength of 500 nm.
 Fig. 19  (A) I–V curves of a 35 wt% 3–5 nm Si nanocrystals/P3HT hybrid solar cell and P3HT-only solar cell (the inset) under 100 mW cm−2AM1.5 illumination. (B) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectrum of a 35 wt% 3–5 nm Si NCs/P3HT solar cell. Further details are described in ref. 146. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Besides the traditional group V and compound semiconductors, nanostructured semiconducting oxides have also been proposed as promising candidates for hybrid solar cells. Until now, most of the researches have been focusing on ZnO and TiO2 nanostructure based hybrid solar cells.149–156 Among these nanostructures, the composites containing nanorod/wire arrays have been considered a more interesting architecture for solar cells due to the optimal effect of light trapping and more continuous electrical transport.147 For example, NREL researchers fabricated P3HT/ZnO rod based photovoltaic devices and obtained a Isc of 2.2 mA cm−2, a Voc of about 0.44 V and a fill factor of 56% with a power conversion efficiency of 0.53%.157 The Ravirajan and Peiro group built P3HT and hydrothermally synthesized ZnO nanorod arrays based PV devices and a power conversion efficiency of 0.2% was achieved in their reports.158,159 Recently, the Yang group studied ZnO/TiO2 core/shell nanorod array/P3HT based hybrid solar cells.147 In their study, they first fabricated ZnO nanorod arrays through a two-step solution method on an ITO glass substrate followed by the deposition of a TiO2 shell using an atomic layer deposition (ALD) system.160Fig. 20A gives the typical SEM image of the ZnO/TiO2 core/shell nanorod array filled with P3HT with a TiO2 shell thickness of 7 nm and a total film thickness of about 600 nm. The I–V curves in Fig. 20B showed the Isc and Voc of the device to be 0.77 mA cm−2 and 0.51 V, with a fill factor of about 51% and a power conversion efficiency of about 0.23%. The external quantum efficiency shown in the inset of Fig. 20B is about 8.5% at the P3HT absorption peak of 495 nm.147
 Fig. 20  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of a ZnO–TiO2 array grown on silicon and then infiltrated with P3HT and annealed at 220 °C for 1 h. (B) I–V curves of a ZnO–TiO2 nanorod/P3HT hybrid solar cells with a 7 nm shell (circles) and a P3HT/TiO2 bilayer cell (triangles) in the dark (open symbols) and under 100 mW cm−2AM1.5 simulated illumination (closed symbols). The inset is the external quantum efficiency of the nanorod cell. Further details are described in ref. 147. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
2.3. 
          TiO2
nanotube
dye-sensitized solar cells

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been considered as the most close-to-commercialization nanostructured PV devices due to the advantages of high performance, shorter energy pay-back time, lower sensitivity to light angle of incidence, insensitivity to temperature changes, easy fabrication on rigid and flexible substrate, etc.161 The efficiency of DSCs has been enhanced to 11.18% after the first report of a power conversion efficiency of about 7.12%.162,163 In earlier literatures, the DSCs were fabricated using a high-surface-area titania anatase nanoparticle film on the transparent conducting oxide (TCO) glass as the photoanode, a monolayer of a light-absorbing chromophore, a platinum coated-TCO glass counter-electrode, and an iodide electrolyte. Recently, TiO2 nanotube array based DSCs have received increasing interest because this kind of nanoarchitecture has many features which could enhance efficiency. For example the highly ordered structure could improve photogenerated charge carrier lifetimes, the adjustable geometrical feature could allow devices to achieve specific light absorption and propagation characteristics, and the oriented nature makes them attractive electron percolation pathways for vertical charge transfer between interfaces, and so on.164 It has been reported that the TiO2 nanotube array based solar cells possess higher charge-collection and light-harvesting efficiencies due to the enhanced light-scattering properties of nanotubes.165 In addition, the electron diffusion length of the TiO2 nanotube could be at least three times better than in previous nanoparticle film based DSCs.166 All these features have undoubtedly stimulated the research on TiO2 nanotube array based DSCs and significant progress has been achieved in recent studies. For example, the Durstock group fabricated PV devices using sol–gel template synthesized TiO2 nanotube arrays as the working electrode according to the architecture shown in Fig. 21A.113Fig. 21B gives the performance of the devices using TiO2 nanotubes with an average outer diameter, length and wall thickness of 295 nm, 15.3 μm and 42 nm, respectively. As can be seen, the device exhibited an Voc of about 0.61 V and a Isc density of 8.26 mA cm−2 with a fill factor as high as 70%. The overall power conversion efficiency of the device was calculated as about 3.5%. In addition, their results indicate that the IPCE of the device exhibits a peak of about 20% at a wavelength of 520 nm. The Grimes group has fabricated several devices based on electrochemically synthesized TiO2 nanotube arrays.106,109,110,114 In order to obtain high quality TiO2 nanotube arrays, titanium films were first deposited on glass substrates using magnetron sputtering, followed by an electrochemical process involving electrolytes consisting of 2–4 vol% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and 0–4 vol% water under different voltages for controlled pore diameters and wall thicknesses of the resulting nanotubes.114Fig. 22 shows the performance of their devices fabricated from as synthesized TiO2 nanotube arrays of various lengths. Fig. 22A shows the power conversion efficiency and fill factor of the devices are notably dependent on the length of the TiO2 nanotubes. Among these devices, the DSC built with 17.6 μm long nanotubes fabricated with 20 μm thick titanium films possesses a power conversion of 6.9% with a Voc of 0.73 V and a Isc of 15.8 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 59%. The power conversion efficiency of TiO2 nanotube based PV devices is still lower than that of nanoparticle film based devices, partially due to the roughness of the nanotubes. However, it should be noted that the dye used in these devices is the commercially available N719 without any purification while high purity dyes were needed in nanoparticle film devices in order to achieve high efficiency. Also, there was no scattering layer here that is a precondition in nanoparticle film DSCs.
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of TiO2 nanotube array based DSCs. (B) I–V curves for the TiO2 nanotube array based device in the dark (black squares) and under 1.5 AM illumination (red circles). Further details are described in ref. 113. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  Performance of the transparent nanotube array film based DSCs with different nanotube lengths: (A) I–V curves; (B) IPCE as a function of wavelength.107 Further details are described in ref. 114. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, DSCs capitalizing on Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) have been synthesized to increase the quantum yields for red/IR photons which account for 33% of the solar energy received on earth's surface.167,168 For example, the Grimes group saw a four-fold increase in quantum yield in the red/NIR region using a TiO2 nanowire array surrounded by N719 and a FRET donor dye, zinc 2,9,16,23-tetra-tert-butyl-29H,31H-phthalocyanine (ZnPc-TBB). Using this concept, the Grimes group built a DSC in which a TiO2 nanotube array transported electrons, intercalated spiro-OMeTAD transported holes, 5-carboxyl-2-[[3-[(1,3-dihydro-3,3-dimethyl-1-ethyl-2H-indol-2-ylidene)-methyl]-2-hydroxy-4-oxo-2-cyclobuten-1-ylidene] methyl]-3,3-trimethyl-1-octyl-3H-indolium (SQ-1) organic dye absorbed red/NIR photons and acted as a FRET acceptor, and 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran absorbed visible light and acted as a FRET donor. The device efficiency was 1.64%.169 However, this did not surpass their earlier work on a DSC consisting of a TiO2 array intercalated with the p-type conducting polymer P3HT and sensitized by SQ-1, which achieved an efficiency of 3.2%.167 In this DSC, FRET has been hypothesized to occur from the P3HT to SQ-1, but this has not been confirmed.
2.4. Single nanowire solar cells
Single nanowire based photovoltaic devices have been proposed as high-efficiency, robust, integrated nanoscale power sources. There are several advantages of single nanowire solar cells, which include: (1) the bottom-up synthetic techniques allow for the rational control of nanomaterial parameters which may influence the efficiencies of the devices; (2) single nanowire devices could be applied as building blocks for conventional and nanoscale electronics power sources for low-power applications. Two kinds of single nanowire solar cells have been developed, which consist of p–i–n dopant modulation in axial and radial geometries. For p–i–n axial nanowire solar cells, the electron–hole pairs are usually generated through the absorption of photons with energies equal to or greater than the band gap of nanowire. The carrier generation and separation are most efficient within the depletion region due to the built-in field across the p–i–n junction.87 In the axial p–i–n nanowire, the role of the p-type and n-type region is to provide contact to the junction embedded within the nanowire and their lengths can therefore be made quite short which may enhance the integration of single nanowire solar cells. The Lieber group recently built single nanowire PV devices using p–i–n silicon axial nanowires obtained by VLS growth.87Fig. 23A gives the room temperature I–V measurement of devices based on p–i–n silicon axial nanowires with different i-region thicknesses under dark conditions. It clearly indicated that the devices exhibited well-defined rectification behavior with a current onset in forward bias at about 0.6 V. The effect of i-region thickness on photovoltaic properties of the devices is shown in Fig. 23B, which indicates that the Voc and Isc for the devices with an i-region of 0, 2 and 4 μm were 0.12 V and 3.5 pA, 0.24 V and 14 pA, and 0.29 V and 31.1 pA, respectively, and clearly illustrates that a systematic improvement in both Voc and Isc was achieved along with the increasing i-region lengths. The fill factor for the 4 μm i-region device is about 51% and could yield a maximum power output per nanowire of 4.6 pW The power conversion efficiency was estimated to be about 0.5% based on a device with projected active area of 4 μm i-region under AM1.5 illumination, which is close to the value reported for single Si nanowire with metal–semiconductor junctions.170
 Fig. 23  (A) Dark I–V characteristics of p–i–n silicon single nanowire with different i-region lengths (red, green, and black curves correspond to i-segment lengths of 0, 2, and 4 μm, respectively). (The inset is the SEM image of single nanowire device with i-length of 2 μm; the scale bar is 4 μm.) (B) Light I–V curves for the i-length of 0, 2, and 4 μm devices in panel (A); the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2, AM1.5G. Further details are described in ref. 87. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Compared to the p–i–n axially modulated single nanowire cells, the p–i–n radially modulated nanowire photovoltaic devices may possess different benefits. For example, in radially modulated single nanowire devices, the carrier separation could be reached in the radial direction versus the longer axial direction and the carrier collection distance should be much smaller or comparable to the minority carrier diffusion length, so the photogenerated carriers should reach the p–i–n junction with higher efficiency. The Lieber group exploited effective routes for the fabrication of radially modulated single nanowire solar cells.82 In order to obtain the devices, the core/shell silicon nanowires were selectively etched using KOH solution to expose the p-core in a lithographically defined region, followed by the deposition of metal contacts on the p-core and the n-shell. Typical SEM images of the architectures can be seen in Fig. 24. The performance of the p–i–n coaxial silicon nanowire devices under AM1.5G illumination is shown in Fig. 25A–C. The representative I–V curves of the best device shown in Fig. 25A indicate a Voc of 0.26 V and an Isc of 0.503 nA with a fill factor of 55.0%. In addition, the power output for the coaxial silicon single nanowire device reaches 72 pW with excellent stability. The I–V results recorded using contacts to different positions from the p-core contact (Fig. 25B) exhibited the same photovoltaic response, thus indicating that the n-shell is equipotential with radial carrier separation occurring uniformly along the entire length of the core/shell silicon nanowire device. The Lieber group also studied the effect of nanowire length on device performance, as shown in Fig. 25C. As can be seen, the Isc of the devices exhibits a linearly increasing behavior with increasing nanowire lengths while Voc is essentially independent of the nanowire length. The linear behavior of the Isc with nanowire lengths suggests that the photogenerated carriers are collected uniformly along the length of these radial nanostructures, and that scattering of light by the metal contacts does not have a major contribution on the observed photocurrent. The overall power conversion efficiency reaches 3.4%, which is much higher compared with that of axially modulated silicon nanowire solar cells. In addition, they studied the performance of the interconnected devices in series and in parallel, as shown in Fig. 25D. Notably, the Voc and Isc of the interconnected devices are approximately the sum of the two, which may provide an effective route to enhanced power output for future scalable applications.
 Fig. 24  Typical SEM images of the radial modulated single nanowire photovoltaic device, the scale bars are 100 nm (left), 200 nm (middle) and 1.5 μm (right). Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 25  (A–C) characterization of the p–i–n coaxial silicon nanowire photovoltaic devices: (A) I–V curves under dark and light; (B) Light I–V curves for two different n-shell contact locations, the inset is the optical microscopy image of the device, scale bar: 5 mm. (C) Isc and Jsc of the devices as a function of device lengths; (D) light I–V curves of two silicon coaxial nanowire devices individually and connected in series and in parallel. Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides Si nanowire based devices, III–V related coaxial single nanowire photovoltaic devices have also been successfully fabricated and their performance was systematically studied by Dong et al. The Voc and Isc of the device ranged from 1.0–2.0 V and 0.39–0.059 mA cm−2 with varying composition of the nanowire and the maximum power conversion efficiency reached about 0.19%.83
3. Conclusion
We have discussed the state of the art of various nanostructure based solar cell devices, together with a brief introduction of nanostructure synthesis and nanocrystal assembly methods. The nanostructure based solar cells have achieved exciting progress due to both the great advancement of nanostructure synthesis methods and device fabrication techniques. In addition, there have been many reports related to the optimization of device performance by post-treatment. However, the most important challenge regarding nanostructured solar cells is how to enhance the conversion efficiency of the devices in order to reach the goal of scalable applications and promising market foreground. It is true that there are still difficulties in the development of nanostructure based solar cells, particularly on how to take the full advantage of the unique electrical and optical properties of the nanostructures. Currently there are many studies on how to improve the device efficiency by converting the nanostructured film into microstructures using high temperature thermal annealing or sintering. Such an approach, in our opinion, has no obvious benefit because of the similar energy consumption during device fabrication yet the PV devices fabricated in such a way typically have much lower performance comparing to the traditional thin film devices.
Acknowledgements
Yue Wu thanks the DuPont Young Faculty Award and the new faculty start-up funding from Purdue University. Daxin Liang thanks the fellowship support from the Chinese Scholar Council.
References
J. Zhao, A. Wang, M. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .

          X. Wu, J. C. Keane, R. G. Dhere, C. DeHart, D. S. Albin, A. Duda, T. A. Gessert, S. Asher, D. H. LKevi and P. Sheldon, Proceedings of the 17th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference,  2001, p. 995.
U. Rau and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsakalakos, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 62, 175 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, D. L. King, S. Igari and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 287 CAS .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Hillhouse and M. C. Beard, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 245 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 325 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3958 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huynh, J. Dittmer and A. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsakalakos, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 62, 175 CrossRef .
S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160, 315 CrossRef .
L.-s. Li, J. Hu, W. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 349 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. Fromer, M. Geier and A. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, S. Kudera, E. Carlino, W. J. Parak, C. Giannini, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 748 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. G. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fiore, R. Mastria, M. G. Lupo, G. Lanzani, C. Giannini, E. Carlino, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, Y. Li, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2274 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Xie, J. X. Huang and Y. T. Qian, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Wu, X. Mo, W. C. Yu, Y. Xie and Y. T. Qian, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 2964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Qu, S. W. Yuan, B. Xie, S. Y. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 2805 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Ding, X. M. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Mater. Res. Bull., 2001, 36, 2649 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Xiao, Y. Xie, R. Tang and Y. T. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 161, 179 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Xiao, Y. Xie, Y. J. Xiong, R. Tang and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1417 RSC .
H. Grisaru, O. Palchik, A. Gedanken, V. Palchik, M. A. Slifkin and A. M. Weiss, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 7148 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Choi, E.-G. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2520 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, S. J. Kim, M. Kar, W. N. Shafarman, R. W. Birkmire, E. A. Stach, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2982 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3060 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, R. N. Patel and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1962 CrossRef CAS .
C. Steinhagen, M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12554 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, R. N. Patel and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3134 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rothwarf and A. M. Barnett, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1977, 24, 381 CrossRef .
K. W. Böer, J. Cryst. Growth, 1982, 59, 111 CrossRef .
W. D. Gill and R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1970, 41, 3731 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Fahrenbr and R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 1264 CrossRef .
F. Pfisterer, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431, 470 CrossRef .
A. Rothwarf, Sol. Cells, 1980, 2, 115 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Saunders, A. Ghezelbash, D. M. Smilgies, M. B. Sigman and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2959 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Larsen, M. Sigman, A. Ghezelbash, R. C. Doty and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5638 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Sigman, A. Ghezelbash, T. Hanrath, A. E. Saunders, F. Lee and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, H. Z. Wang, W. W. Xu, H. L. Si, X. J. Tao, S. Y. Lou, Z. L. Du and L. S. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 330, 483 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, AcademicPress, Boston,  1990 .
J. Park, J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, Y. Jang and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4630 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5292 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-w. Jun, J.-s. Choi and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kominami, J. Kato, Y. Takada, Y. Doushi, B. Ohtani, S. Nishimoto, M. Inoue, T. Inui and Y. Kera, Catal. Lett., 1997, 46, 235 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Deng and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niederberger, M. H. Bartl and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garnweitner, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Chem. Commun., 2005, 397 RSC .
G. Li, L. Li, J. Boerio-Goates and B. F. Woodfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8659 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhong, T.-P. Ang, J. Luo, H.-C. Gan and A. Gedanken, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6814 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Goel, M. Y. Chiang, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1992, 271, 3 CAS .
D. Koziej, F. Fischer, N. Kranzlin, W. R. Caseri and M. Niederberger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1097 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bilecka, I. Djerdj and M. Niederberger, Chem. Commun., 2008, 886 RSC .
N. Pinna, G. Garnweitner, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5608 CrossRef CAS .
G. Clavel, M. G. Willinger, D. Zitoun and N. Pinna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3159 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Demir, R. Munoz-Espi, I. Lieberwirth and G. Wegner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2940 RSC .
S. K. N. Ayudhya, P. Tonto, O. Mekasuwandumrong, V. Pavarajarn and P. Praserthdam, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2446 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Panchakarla, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Cluster Sci., 2007, 18, 660 CrossRef CAS .
J. Buha, I. Djerdj and M. Niederberger, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, W. Wang, Q. X. Yu and X. G. Li, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 969 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. Lu, W. Wang and X. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, H. F. Qian and J. C. Ren, Chem. Commun., 2005, 528 RSC .
Z. Y. Gu, L. Zou, Z. Fang, W. H. Zhu and X. H. Zhong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 135604 CrossRef .
L. Zou, Z. Y. Gu, N. Zhang, Y. L. Zhang, Z. Fang, W. H. Zhu and X. H. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2807 RSC .
M. N. Kalasad, A. K. Rabinal and B. G. Mulimani, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12729 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Law, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, H. Ding, R. Hu, W. W. Zhao and P. N. Prasad, Small, 2009, 5, 1302 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16 RSC .
M. Yazawa, M. Koguchi, A. Muto, M. Ozawa and K. Hiruma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 61, 2051 CrossRef CAS .
J. Westwater, D. P. Gosain, S. Tomiya, S. Usui and H. Ruda, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1997, 15, 554 Search PubMed .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Cui, L. Huynh, C. J. Barrelet, D. C. Bell and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 433 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, W. Lu, S. Jin and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Tian, X. L. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. F. Yu, G. H. Yu, J. L. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Dong, B. Z. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C. Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Xiang, F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Wu, H. Yan, D. A. Blom and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1468 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian and C. M. Lieber, 2007 Ieee Leos Annual Meeting Conference Proceedings, 2007, vols 1 and 2, 831 Search PubMed .
T. J. Kempa, B. Z. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. S. Hu, X. L. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, Y. J. Yan, S. P. Gao and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1164 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, J. J. Hu, Y. J. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Fang, Y. Xu, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 387 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, Z. P. Huang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. J. Yan, S. T. Lee and J. Zhu, Small, 2005, 1, 1062 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Garnett and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, J. Goldberger and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yuhas and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3756 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hoyer, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1411 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, P. K. Dorhout and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 9 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imai, Y. Takei, K. Shimizu, M. Matsuda and H. Hirashima, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 9 Search PubMed .
A. Michailowski, D. AlMawlwai, G. S. Cheng and M. Moskovits, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 349, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, H. Kobayashi, K. J. C. van Bommel, S. Shinkai and T. Shimizu, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, N. Hamasaki, M. Suzuki, M. Kimura, H. Shirai and K. Hanabusa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6550 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, W. Z. Zhou, G. H. Du and L. H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1208 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Yao, Y. F. Chan, X. Y. Zhang, W. F. Zhang, Z. Y. Yang and N. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 281 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gong, C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese, W. Hu, R. S. Singh, Z. Chen and E. C. Dickey, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 3331 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451 RSC .
N. K. Allam, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3942 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chanmanee, A. Watcharenwong, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, P. Kajitvichyanukul, N. R. de Tacconi and K. Rajeshwar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 965 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, J. Bandara, M. Paulose, H. Wietasch, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. J. LaTempa, M. Thelakkat and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. H. Wang and L. T. Li, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 3086 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, W. D. Jehng, L. L. Li and E. W. G. Diau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, C304 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Kang, A. P. Smith, B. E. Taylor and M. F. Durstock, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 601 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 1995, 270, 1335 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Collier, T. Vossmeyer and J. R. Heath, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 371 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3358 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1581 RSC .
A. R. Tao, J. X. Huang and P. D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. O. Reese, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luther, M. Law, Q. Song, C. Perkins, M. Beard and A. Nozik, Acs Nano, 2008, 2, 271 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Kang, C. W. Lai, H. C. Peng, J. J. Shyue and P. T. Chou, Acs Nano, 2008, 2, 750 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmed and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L. Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, Y. Jia, S. S. Wang, Z. Li, C. Y. Ji, J. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, D. H. Wu, E. Z. Shi, Y. Fang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3583 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, J. B. Gao, M. T. Lloyd, O. E. Semonin, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3704 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham and E. H. Sargent, Acs Nano, 2008, 2, 833 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. D. Klem, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3433 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Anderson, A. J. Breeze, J. D. Olson, L. Yang, Y. Sahoo and S. A. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063101 CrossRef .
K. Johnston, A. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. Clifford, S. Myrskog, D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 151115 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. L. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. M. Luther, H. M. Zheng, Y. Wu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1699 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Clifford, K. W. Johnston, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 253117 CrossRef .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235 CAS .
K. Palaniappan, J. W. Murphy, N. Khanam, J. Horvath, H. Alshareef, M. Quevedo-Lopez, M. C. Biewer, S. Y. Park, M. J. Kim, B. E. Gnade and M. C. Stefan, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3845 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lee, W. Lee, S. H. Han, T. G. Kim and Y. M. Sung, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 231 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Liao, S. Y. Chen and D. M. Liu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6558 CrossRef CAS .
S. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. Cyr, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Gunes, K. P. Fritz, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, in European Conference on Hybrid Organic Solar Cells (ECHOS 06), Paris, France,  2006, p. 420 Search PubMed .
D. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111 CrossRef .
A. Maria, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klern, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213112 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233101 CrossRef .
C. Y. Liu, Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 449 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kniprath, J. P. Rabe, J. T. McLeskey, D. Y. Wang and S. Kirstein, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Kwong, W. C. H. Choy, A. B. Djurisic, P. C. Chui, W. Cheng and W. K. Chan, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1156 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Zeng, Y. Y. Lin, H. H. Lo, C. W. Chen, C. H. Chen, S. C. Liou, H. Y. Huang and W. F. Su, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5387 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk and J. M. Kroon, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–52, 634 CrossRef .
P. A. van Hal, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, L. H. Slooff, W. J. H. van Gennip, P. Jonkheijm and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 118 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arango, L. R. Johnson, V. N. Bliznyuk, Z. Schlesinger, S. A. Carter and H. H. Horhold, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1689 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, W. J. van Strien, W. J. E. Beek and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1297 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2985 RSC .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiro, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Peiro, P. Ravirajan, K. Govender, D. S. Boyle, P. O'Brien, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2088 RSC .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. A. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. G. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451 RSC .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, A. Ghicov, L. M. Peter, P. Schmuki and A. B. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13364 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, S. Kim, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, J. Basham and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4250 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, J. Basham, M. Paulose, S. Kim, O. K. Varghese, A. Vaish, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2387 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, X. Feng and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 788 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 710 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Genqiang Zhang	Genqiang Zhang received BS degree in Materials Chemistry in 2004 and PhD degree in Condensed Matter Physics in 2009, both from University of Science and Technology of China supervised by Prof. Xiaoguang Li. After that he became a research associate in Chemical Engineering of Purdue University with Prof. Yue Wu. He is interested in the solution phase synthesis, property study and device applications of nanostructured thermoelectric materials and solar cells.
Yue Wu	Prof. Yue Wu received his bachelor degree in chemistry with best thesis award from University of Science and Technology of China in 2001. Then, he went to Harvard University and studied for his doctoral degree under the supervision of Prof. Charles M. Lieber. He received his doctoral degree in June, 2006 and was awarded the Miller Fellowship from University of California at Berkeley. At Berkeley, he worked with Prof. A. Paul Alivisatos for three years and joined School of Chemical Engineering at Purdue University as an assistant professor in August, 2009. Prof. Wu's research interest is focusing on the broadly defined nanostructured materials for their potential applications in nanoscale devices and renewable energy-related field.

 	Fig. 1  Well-defined CdSe nanocrystals with tunable aspect ratios, the scale bar in (C) is for (A)–(C). Further details are described in ref. 14. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Shape controlled synthesis of CuInSe2 nanocrystals: (A, C and E) TEM images; (B, D and F) corresponding HRTEM analysis. Further details are described in ref. 31 and 37. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical TEM images of shape controlled synthesis of Cu2S nanocrystals. Further details are described in ref. 46. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  
              HRTEM images of Si nanowires with different diameters. The scale bars are 5 nm. Further details are described in ref. 80. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) SEM images in back-scattered electron mode of p–i–n Si coaxial nanowires. The scale bars are 1 μm (top) and 200 nm (bottom), respectively. Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic illustration of cross-sectional view for the GaN based radial heterostructure nanowires. (B) Bright-field TEM cross-sectional image, (C) normalized EDS line profiles and (D) dark-field scanning TEM image of a GaN/InxGa1-xN/GaN/AlGaN CMS nanowire. Scale bars are 100 nm in (B) and 50 nm in (D). Further details are described in ref. 84. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration and (B) SEM image of axial p–i–n Si nanowire; (C) SEM images of a p–i–n axial NW after selective wet etching, the scale bars are 1 μm. Further details are described in ref. 87. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Typical SEM image of the aligned Si nanowire arrays and (B) corresponding HRTEM analysis and ED pattern (the inset). Further details are described in ref. 91. Reprinted with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A and B) Typical SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays; (C) digital images of transparent TiO2 nanotube array films with different thicknesses; (D) TEM image of a single nanotube and the corresponding SAED pattern. Further details are described in ref. 114. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) SEM image of self-assembled three dimensional colloidal crystals of Cu2S nanodisks; (B) TEM image of self-assembled two dimensional layers of CdSe/CdS nanorods, the scale bar is 50 nm. Further details are described in ref. 46 and 123. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  
            SEM images of PbSe NC films prepared by layer-by-layer dip-coating onto ITO substrates. (a) Plan view. The scale bar is 50 nm. (b) Cross-section. The scale bars are 100 nm. Further details are described in ref. 121. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) An energy diagram of valence and conduction band levels for CdTe and CdSe. (B) Typical SEM image of the nanocrystal film through spin-casting process, the scale bar is 1 μm. (C) I–V characteristics for the CdSe/CdTe nanorods based device in the dark (dotted) and under simulated one-sun AM1.5G illumination (solid). Further details are described in ref. 128. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PbSe nanocrystal based device with a structure of ITO/NC film/metal contact, the scale bar is 100 nm. (B) Proposed equilibrium band diagram. (C) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of a device with a 140 nm thick film. (D) The relationship between Voc and nanocrystal particle sizes. (E) The dependence of Voc with metal work function.113 Further details are described in ref. 120. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) TEM, high resolution TEM (top inset) image and (B) the typical UV-vis absorption spectrum of the as-synthesized of Cu2S nanocrystals. (C) I–V curve of the Cu2S–CdS nanocrystal based photovoltaic devices under zero (black) and standard illumination (red). (D) The I–V curve of the Cu2S–CdS nanocrystal based photovoltaic device on the plastic substrate under zero (black) and standard (red) illumination with a curvature of 105°, and I–V curve after released to flat (green). Further details are described in ref. 133. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) SEM images of the thermal treated CuInSe2 nanocrystal film on Mo coated soda lime glass. (B) The I–V curve of the CuInSe2 based photovoltaic device.24 Further details are described in ref. 31. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  External quantum efficiency of solar cell based 7 nm diameter CdSe nanorods with lengths of 7, 30 and 60 nm respectively. (B) Photocurrent spectra for two devices with 60 nm long nanorods with diameters 7 and 3 nm.7 Further details are described in ref. 14. Reprinted with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Dark current and photocurrent curves near zero bias, the inset is the proposed simplified band diagram depicting the relative energy alignment after the magnesium electrode deposition. (B) Short-circuit current (circles) and corresponding internal quantum efficiency (squares) as a function of incident power. Inset: stability of the short-circuit current as a function of time for a sample with much lower photovoltaic response than in (A). Further details are described in ref. 141. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) External quantum efficiency as a function of wavelength for all four devices based on P3OT layer with different thicknesses (Devices A, B, C, D: 160, 115, 80 and 0 nm, respectively) and 160 nm PbS nanocrystal layer. The inset shows the absorption spectrum of P3OT. (B) Measured external quantum efficiency and calculated internal quantum efficiency at the first 1260 nm and the onset of the third exciton peaks (720 nm).137 Further details are described in ref. 144. Reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) I–V curves of a 35 wt% 3–5 nm Si nanocrystals/P3HT hybrid solar cell and P3HT-only solar cell (the inset) under 100 mW cm−2AM1.5 illumination. (B) Incident photon-to-current efficiency spectrum of a 35 wt% 3–5 nm Si NCs/P3HT solar cell. Further details are described in ref. 146. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of a ZnO–TiO2 array grown on silicon and then infiltrated with P3HT and annealed at 220 °C for 1 h. (B) I–V curves of a ZnO–TiO2 nanorod/P3HT hybrid solar cells with a 7 nm shell (circles) and a P3HT/TiO2 bilayer cell (triangles) in the dark (open symbols) and under 100 mW cm−2AM1.5 simulated illumination (closed symbols). The inset is the external quantum efficiency of the nanorod cell. Further details are described in ref. 147. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of TiO2 nanotube array based DSCs. (B) I–V curves for the TiO2 nanotube array based device in the dark (black squares) and under 1.5 AM illumination (red circles). Further details are described in ref. 113. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Performance of the transparent nanotube array film based DSCs with different nanotube lengths: (A) I–V curves; (B) IPCE as a function of wavelength.107 Further details are described in ref. 114. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Dark I–V characteristics of p–i–n silicon single nanowire with different i-region lengths (red, green, and black curves correspond to i-segment lengths of 0, 2, and 4 μm, respectively). (The inset is the SEM image of single nanowire device with i-length of 2 μm; the scale bar is 4 μm.) (B) Light I–V curves for the i-length of 0, 2, and 4 μm devices in panel (A); the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2, AM1.5G. Further details are described in ref. 87. Reprinted with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Typical SEM images of the radial modulated single nanowire photovoltaic device, the scale bars are 100 nm (left), 200 nm (middle) and 1.5 μm (right). Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A–C) characterization of the p–i–n coaxial silicon nanowire photovoltaic devices: (A) I–V curves under dark and light; (B) Light I–V curves for two different n-shell contact locations, the inset is the optical microscopy image of the device, scale bar: 5 mm. (C) Isc and Jsc of the devices as a function of device lengths; (D) light I–V curves of two silicon coaxial nanowire devices individually and connected in series and in parallel. Further details are described in ref. 82. Reprinted with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
