Tunable electronic properties of BSe–MoS 2 /WS 2 heterostructures for promoted light utilization   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP00709B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP00709B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10081-10096Tunable electronic properties of BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures for promoted light utilization†

        
          
            Honglin 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lijuan 
            Ye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuanqiang 
            Xiong
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuren 
            Zhou
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wanjun 
            Li
          
        
      *
      College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, P. R. China. E-mail: liwj@cqnu.edu.cn; xyq.0810@163.com
Received 
      15th February 2021
    , Accepted 1st April 2021First published on 19th April 2021AbstractWith applications in high performance electronics, photovoltaics, and catalysis, two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) attract extensive attention due to their extraordinary physical properties. People have focused on TMDC-based materials for years, while the low mobility greatly hinders their further application. TMDC-based heterostructures with tunable band alignment have been experimentally confirmed to be feasible for photoelectronic devices or photocatalysts. Based on the density functional theory (DFT), there are four discoveries in this work: (1) we propose two new heterostructures based on BSe and MoS2/WS2 that have quite low mismatches and intrinsic type-II alignments. (2) Even though the VBM of BSe–MoS2 are completely contributed by BSe, the heterostructure is still endowed with a lower effective mass and a better transport characteristic in comparison with pristine structures. (3) A promoted absorption ability and a better transport characteristic oppose each other and the two characteristics cannot be obtained at the same time. (4) Tension strained structures can induce promoted light absorption in the solar spectrum and the predicted efficiency of the BSe–MoS2 bilayer can be as high as ∼19.3%, when the external electric field is applied. This theoretical survey proves that BSe–MoS2/WS2 with high flexibility and tunability are potential candidates for novel electronic devices and photocatalysts.
Introduction
The study of 2D structured materials has long been the most promising fields in nanoscience and nanotechnology since the successful exfoliation of graphene for their rich and various physicochemical characteristics.1–3 In the scope of TMDC compounds, WS2 and MoS2 are two most important components. Their inlayer atoms are connected by strong covalent bonds, which leads to a remarkable structural stability. In experimental characterizations and theoretical calculations, the transition of the bandgap from indirect to direct exists in most TMDCs such as WS2/MoSe2 when exfoliated from the bulk to the monolayer.4,5 With these electronic and mechanical features, TMDCs demonstrate their considerable potential application in photoelectron,6,7 energy harvesting,8 and catalysis.9,10 Also, the intrinsic spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect in TMDC monolayers make them favorable for the purpose of spintronic and valleytronic utilizations.11,12 Monolayer MoS2/WS2 all have a direct bandgap and decent absorption ability in the visible range, high on/off ratio, and a pretty well structural stability.13–15 However, their relative low mobility, susceptible mechanical features, and rapid carrier recombination affect the further exploration to some extent.16 Improvement through some approaches is necessary for the better use of materials and a possible route is through heterostructure techniques to achieve type-II alignment.17 Different parts of materials in the composite structure contribute different bands; thus, the electron/hole carriers are naturally located in different sections and an internal electric field can form spontaneously across the entire heterostructure, which contributes a better separation characteristic. The above electron–hole separation process does not require additional doping treatment and can avoid the problems of impurities.18 However, the design of an ideal heterojunction is not an easy task since the selected materials have to meet two requirements. First, the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) should originate from different parts and the optimal band alignment is type-II, which will achieve an efficient separation of the carriers after irradiation. Taking TMDCs as an example, the band alignment of the opposite part should be elaborately selected to ensure the type-II offset. Also, the bandgap of the opposite part should be sufficiently large to guarantee the good preservation of band edges. Second, carriers’ mobility should be at least higher than that of pristine TMDCs to maintain a practicable internal quantum efficiency of the fabricated heterostructures.19,20
The 2D vdW heterostructure shows many interesting properties far beyond that of individual components and is regarded as a field full of life.21–23 The mismatches of most 2D heterostructures can be controlled to a low degree and will provide broad possibilities for the manufacture of new nanoelectronic devices.24 The physical and chemical properties of materials largely depend on the band alignment around the interface, and appropriate adjustments to the band structure will provide new ideas and methods for the design and application of nanocomposites. Theoretical and experimental works of 2D heterostructures have been well studied. Hong et al.25 experimentally fabricated nano-thin MoS2–WS2 composite structures, and for the first time observed the ultra-fast charge transfer phenomenon through femtosecond pump probe spectra and photoluminescence spectra. The results show that the MoS2–WS2 composite structure coupled by the vdW forces exhibits a fast carrier transfer rate within 50 fs after excitation. Tang et al.26 calculated the electronic and optoelectronic properties of the black phosphorus (BP)-MoS2 heterostructure; the results revealed that a high photodetection responsivity exists in the corresponding composite and is in good accordance with the reported results. Both linear dichroism and the high carrier mobility of the freestanding BP can be preserved in this heterostructure. Their work illustrates the outstanding electronic/optoelectronic properties that can be achieved through composite BP with MoS2. Opoku et al.27 explored the roles of m-BiVO4–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures for use in hydrogen evolution and catalytic degradation. The electronic properties and photocatalytic activity of the related structures are discussed in detail. The results prove that the type-II alignment, narrowed bandgap, and built-in potential of the composite are beneficial for the separation and transfer of carriers and finally enhance the photocatalytic activity. These outstanding works have greatly stimulated people's research interest in 2D composite materials.
More recently, a certain degree of research has been performed on monolayer BSe. Its thermal stability has been discussed based on the theoretical calculations.28 BSe is a semiconductor with indirect bandgap. It shares the same hexagonal crystal structure (Pm2) with MoS2/WS2 and reveals small lattice mismatch after the composite with MoS2/WS2 in subsequent calculations.29 There are reasons to predict that the heterostructure of BSe and MoS2/WS2 would be generated in experiments under certain conditions. It is thus meaningful to learn how BSe and monolayer MoS2/WS2 can form stable 2D heterostructures and whether they have potential value in practical applications.
Previously, S. Demirci et al.30 investigated the structural, mechanical, and electronic properties of group III–VI binary monolayers with the 2D hexagonal structure, MX (M = B, Al, Ga, In and X = O, S, Se, Te), based on the DFT. The structural optimization calculations and phonon spectrum analysis indicate that all the binary compounds are thermally stable. The obtained electronic band structures show that the BSe monolayer is a semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.61 eV. They considered that the unique characteristics of group III–VI binary monolayers were suitable for high-performance device applications in nanoelectronics and optics. Taking these into consideration, we perform a further study of MX-based heterostructures. After a series of careful calculations, we found that BSe and MoS2/WS2 can form perfect heterostructures with small lattice mismatch and well-defined type-II alignments. For all we know, the structural properties and physical/chemical attributes of BSe–MoS2/WS2 are still unknown. The aim of this study is to obtain an understanding as comprehensive as possible of the basic characteristics and their response to external effects. We focus on the band edges variation and unique electronic properties endowed by their type-II alignments. It turns out that the contact type of BSe–MoS2/WS2 can be effectively regulated and have broad prospects in photocatalysis and photovoltaic utilization. The next section introduces the construction method and the modeling process of two heterostructures, and the related calculation approaches are described in detail. After that, we demonstrate electronic structure and band realignment of BSe–MoS2/WS2 through the applied external electric field and uniaxial/biaxial strain. The final section gives a brief summary.
Results and discussion
Under the premise of the 2D periodic structure, the mismatch between BSe and MoS2/WS2 should be strictly controlled at a low level.31Fig. 1a and d show the schematic configuration of BSe–MoS2/WS2 composites with different twisted angles. It can be seen from the figure that a torsion occurs between BSe and MoS2/WS2. The top view in Fig. 1a shows the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure, in which the B/Se atoms are covered by Mo/S atoms and the hexagonal ring can be clearly identified. This configuration is defined as the 0° rotated structure and its lattice mismatch is calculated to be 0.87%. For the remaining 19.11°, 30°, and 40.89° twisted structures, the mismatches are 2.44%, 2.16%, and 1.15%, respectively, all greater than the 0° twisted structure. Therefore, we adopt the first 0° twisted formalization in the subsequent calculations. Similarly, Fig. 1d shows that the 0° twisted BSe–WS2 heterostructure presents the lowest mismatch of 0.96%. Since no strong interaction exists between BSe and MoS2/WS2, the weak vdW interaction will play a major role.32 All obtained parameters including bond angles and atomic distances for pristine BSe/MoS2/WS2 structures meet well with that of the previous reports, ensuring the reliability of this work and we will not make a special statement.33,34
 Fig. 1  (a and d) Schematic of the BSe–MoS2 and BSe–WS2 heterostructures with four rotated angles and the corresponding mismatches. (b and e) Binding energy curves of the two heterostructures. Strain-BSe, strain-MoS2/WS2, and strain-equally are three modeling approaches. (c and f) Vibrations of the Mo–S/W–S and B–Se bond lengths versus the simulation time of 3000 ps and the evolution of free energy. 

Fig. 1b and e are graphs showing the relationship between the binding energy and the relative spacing (d0), where d0 is defined as the distance between adjacent Se and S atomic layer in the heterostructure. It clearly shows that under different strain approaches, BSe–MoS2/WS2 tend to form three most stable configurations. The binding energy is often used to initially explore the conditions under which the heterostructure is the most stable. The binding energy is defined as E(hetero) − E(BSe) − E(MoS2/WS2), where E(hetero), E(BSe), and E(MoS2/WS2) are the total energy of BSe–MoS2/WS2, BSe, and MoS2/WS2 in the freestanding mode, respectively. When the binding energy is negative, it indicates that the corresponding structure is thermodynamically stable. A wide range of negative values shown in the figure means that the two heterostructures are theoretically possible to form. In this work, we take three modeling types into full consideration, namely, strain-equally, strain-MoS2/WS2, and strain-BSe. Fig. 1b and e show the binding energy curves under the three strain modes. It can be clearly observed that the globally most stable configuration of BSe–MoS2 appears in the case of strain-BSe; the corresponding binding energy is −56 meV and its interlayer spacing is 4.89 Å. BSe–WS2 can obtain its globally most stable configuration when BSe is strained; the corresponding binding energy is −76 meV and its interlayer spacing is 4.65 Å. The calculated binding energies of the two heterostructures with globally the most stable configuration above are all smaller or can be compared to other heterostructure formalizations. For example, the BP-blue phosphorene heterostructure (from −18 meV to −39 meV),35 InSe–GaTe vdW heterobilayer (from −11 meV to −19 meV),36 or GaTe–MoS2 van der Waals heterostructure (from −12 meV to −16 meV).37 Now, we have obtained two heterostructures with high-confidence through careful constructions and precise calculations, which not only have the lowest mismatches but also have the lowest binding energies. The above-mentioned series of modeling work is a powerful guarantee for the subsequent calculation of the properties. Besides, we further perform molecular dynamics simulations at room temperature (300 K) to test the thermal stability of BSe–MoS2/WS2. The results shown in Fig. 1c and f show that during the entire 3000 fs simulation process, the two heterostructures maintain structural integrity without sharp energy fluctuations and bond breaking; thus, the two heterostructures are dynamically stable.
In order to determine the initial parameters of pristine structures, monolayers BSe/MoS2/WS2 shown in Fig. 2 are optimized and agree well with the previous results.33,34 Since the electronic structures of a semiconductor have a marked impact on certain applications, the band structure of the three pristine structures should be identified first. As is known, the relativistic effect increases with the increase in Z2 (Z represents the atomic number) and has a significant influence on the compound of the fifth period. Herein, we take SOC (red curve) into consideration in all the subsequent calculations. Fig. 2a shows the band structure of pristine BSe. BSe is a hexagonal lattice crystal, composed of four layers of atoms, and is a stable 2D structure. The lattice constant of the hexagonal BSe is a = b = 3.25 Å. The Se states constitute the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) of BSe; the s states of B are mainly located in the deep level of the valence band and have little effect on the material. Fig. 2a shows that the bandgap of the pristine BSe is about 2.63 eV under PBE, while the split of the BSe caused by SOC is 0.11 eV. Previous studies have shown that single-layer BSe is a semiconductor with a bandgap of about 2.61 eV.30 The calculated results here are consistent with those reported in the literature, which further ensures the credibility of subsequent calculations.
 Fig. 2  (a–c) Top/side views of pristine BSe, MoS2, and WS2, respectively. The B, Se, Mo, W, and S atoms are presented by green, light green, purple, gray, and orange balls, respectively. The calculated band structures of the pristine structures are shown below. Black curves present the standard PBE results while red denotes the SOC corrected data. 
We also present the band structure of monolayer MoS2 and WS2 calculated by PBE and SOC functionals. The band structure of MoS2 shown in Fig. 2b is significantly different from that of the above-mentioned BSe. The PBE bandgap of MoS2 is 1.72 eV, which is smaller than that of BSe. SOC caused an additional split of ∼0.06 eV, in which the position of the CBM remains unchanged while the VBM at M moves slightly upward. The band structure of WS2 is shown in Fig. 2c, which is roughly similar to that of MoS2. The PBE gap of WS2 is 1.88 eV, which drops to 1.64 eV after considering the SOC effect. Generally, reducing the bandgap can improve the utilization of light energy to a certain extent, which is also the aim of the doping technique. However, the doping approach will inevitably introduce foreign atoms and turn them into recombination centers to reduce light-generated carriers. Therefore, the heterogeneous structure seems to be a better choice. When a semiconductor is irradiated by light, electrons will be excited to CB, leaving holes in the VB. Part of the carriers will recombine spontaneously and no longer participate in the subsequent reactions. The other will quickly migrate to the outer space to react with surrounding ions and participate in subsequent physical/chemical reactions. The ideal situation is the second part of the carriers involved in the relevant reactions as much as possible and inhibit the recombination of the carriers in the first part.
As shown in Fig. 3, the bands of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures are obtained by projecting electron states onto different atomic species. Red and blue lines denote the contribution from BSe and MoS2/WS2, respectively. The different color gradient of the lines signifies the weight of contribution. Clearly, BSe and MoS2/WS2 form typical type-II alignments with a perfect separation of the carriers. The VBM is totally contributed by BSe, while the CBM comes from MoS2/WS2. A further observation is that the bandgap of the BSe–MoS2 drops to 1.21 eV, which is clearly narrower than that of pristine BSe/MoS2. This indicates that the formation of a heterostructure and its band structure is fundamentally different from that of pristine structures. The different color of the edges signifies the narrowed bandgap, which is induced by the staggered band alignment, in which the VBM and CBM belongs to BSe and MoS2, respectively. This special band alignment can spontaneously separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and is very beneficial for the fabrication of high-efficiency optoelectronic devices.38,39 The bandgap of the BSe–WS2 shown in Fig. 3b reduces to 1.47 eV, which is also smaller than that of pristine structures. In the freestanding state, BSe–WS2 has a clear type-II alignment and the CBM/VBM of BSe is higher than that of WS2. Both BSe and WS2 can absorb photons after irradiation, which further excite electrons in the VB to the CB and leave the holes in VB. The BSe will inject the light-induced electrons into the CB of WS2 and the holes will quickly accumulate in the VBM of BSe. The above processes can effectively reduce the electron–hole recombination and enhance the utilization of light energy. Also, the built-in electric field can further separate the light-induced carriers. These unique mechanisms of type-II are all beneficial for the fabrication of high-performance photocatalysts or photovoltaic cells that we will elaborate later.40,41
 Fig. 3  The projected band structures of (a) BSe–MoS2 and (b) BSe–WS2. The lower/upper figures are the decomposed charge density of the VBM/CBM. 
In order to explore the charge redistribution in the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, the Fermi level (Ef) of BSe, MoS2, and WS2 relative to 0 eV should be precisely defined. The calculated values are 4.7, 5.2, and 4.9 eV, respectively. The difference in the Ef of these three monolayers will induce charge redistribution in the heterostructures. Therefore, BSe and MoS2/WS2 will be positively charged and negatively charged near the interface. This is because the Ef of MoS2/WS2 is lower than that of BSe; thus, the direction of electron movement is from BSe to MoS2/WS2. Fig. 4a and b show the averaged electrostatic potential of the xy plane along the z direction. Clearly, BSe exhibits a different potential compared with that of MoS2/WS2 and promotes electron transfer from the BSe to MoS2/WS2. The calculated stage across the composite is 5.4, 2.9, and 3.1 eV for BSe, MoS2, and WS2, respectively. Based on the above analysis, the excitonic behaviors of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures are clearly distinguished from that of pristine BSe/MoS2/WS2 for the corresponding potential gradient, which could effectively separate the electrons and holes.42
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Potential profile across the BSe–MoS2/WS2 interfaces, respectively. (c and d) Charge difference density of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, respectively. Red and blue denote Δρ > 0 and Δρ < 0 regions, respectively. (e and f) Black/red curves stand for plane-averaged charge difference Δρ and the transferred charge ΔQ(z), respectively. 
In order to further qualitatively illustrate the charge transfer inside BSe–MoS2/WS2, we calculated the charge density difference (CDD) of the two composite structures. As shown in Fig. 4c and d, CDD is obtained by subtracting the charges of BSe/MoS2/WS2 from the charge of the corresponding heterostructures. The blue and red areas in the figure represent the charge depletion and accumulation areas in the heterostructures. Obviously, charge transfer mainly occurs between the Se atomic layer of BSe and the contact S atomic layer of MoS2/WS2. The established polarized electric field can effectively separate the light-induced carriers. As mentioned above, the direction of electron transfer in the composite structure is from BSe to MoS2/WS2; thus, the direction of the built-in electric field is from BSe to MoS2/WS2. Fig. 4e and f are the plane-averaged charge density difference, which is given by the formula: , where S represents the unit cell area that is parallel to the xy plane and the normal direction z is the calculation direction of the averaged value. It can be seen from the figure that the charge transfer mainly occurs near the contact areas of BSe and MoS2/WS2. Since no strong chemical bonds such as dangling bonds exist in the composite structure, the interaction between two parts is relatively weak and the properties of the materials are mainly affected by the separation/transfer of the charges.43 The black and red lines in the figure signify the CDD and the transferred charges around the interface, respectively. Obviously, the electrons in the composite are transferred from BSe to MoS2/WS2, resulting in n- or p-doping in MoS2/WS2 or BSe. Based on quantitative analysis, it is calculated that the electrons transferred from BSe to MoS2/WS2 per unitcell are 0.12 e and 0.17 e, respectively.44 For freestanding BSe, its large bandgap is not conducive for effective use in solar energy.45Fig. 3 has proved that BSe–MoS2/WS2 both have a well-defined type-II alignment, which is a positive factor for the better utilization of solar energy under certain circumstances. Reports have pointed out that the coupling between graphene and TMDCs can quickly transfer electrons from the electrodes to active TMDCs, and the formed charge-rich environment can effectively promote chemical reactions.46 Hence, a moderate bandgap and a suitable direction of charge transfer brings great prospects for these applications.
As mentioned above, appropriate bandgap and alignment are two key factors for the effective use of light energy. Reports have pointed out that band regulation through an external electric field is a tentative approach to achieve this goal.47Fig. 5 shows the band variation of two heterostructures under different electric fields to adjust the CBM/VBM alignment in order to maximize the photocatalytic efficiency. Fig. 5a and d show that the bandgaps of BSe/MoS2/WS2 in the composite change a little under the applied electric field but the positions of the CBM/VBM are significantly affected. Specifically, when an electric field is applied, the edge positions of MoS2/WS2 move upward, while that of the BSe move downward. Therefore, the reduced bandgaps of BSe–MoS2/WS2 can make better use of light energy. Since the pristine BSe/MoS2/WS2 are symmetrical while BSe–MoS2/WS2 composites are asymmetrical, the direction of the built-in electric field from BSe to MoS2/WS2 is defined as the positive direction.
 Fig. 5  (a and d) The band edges alignment of BSe–MoS2/WS2 under electric fields from −0.3 V Å−1 to 0.3 V Å−1. 1, 2, 3, and 4 represent the metallic, type-II-A, type-I, and type-II-B region, respectively. (b and e) The evolution of bandgaps for the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures. (c and f) The evolution of projected band structures for BSe–MoS2/WS2 under several specific electric fields. 
It can be clearly seen from the figure that the bandgaps of two heterostructures show a significant change under different electric fields, while it does not affect the bandgap of BSe/MoS2/WS2. For BSe–MoS2 shown in Fig. 5b, the bandgap will linearly decrease as the external electric field decreases. When the external electric field reaches −0.15 V Å−1, the bandgap will linearly decrease to 0 eV. When increasing the electric field, the bandgap increases to a maximum of 1.76 eV and then linearly decreases until 0.35 V Å−1. When the whole range is divided into four parts, we notice something interesting. The underpainting of four parts are light gray (1, metallic), light blue (2, type-II-A), pink (3, type-I), and light green (4, type-II-B). Here, we make a simple explanation: type-II-A denotes the band edges of BSe higher than that of MoS2 and thus the VBM(CBM) of BSe(MoS2) acts as the VBM(CBM) of the BSe–MoS2, respectively. As for BSe–MoS2 shown in Fig. 5b, it reaches the maximum bandgap of 1.76 eV at 0.15 V Å−1 and exhibits type-II-A character from −0.15 to 0.05 V Å−1. BSe–WS2 reaches its maximum bandgap of 1.72 eV at 0.05 V Å−1 shown in Fig. 5e and shows type-II-A character from −0.18 to 0.05 V Å−1. When the region enters into 0.05–0.15 V Å−1, it clearly shows that the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure transfers into the type-I property. This region is 0.05–0.12 V Å−1 for the BSe–WS2 heterostructure. Usually, the straddling type-I band alignment will produce a prominent recombination rate, which goes against an efficient photocatalytic process.48 However, the rapid recombination of carriers in the type-I heterostructure can be applied to certain optoelectronic devices and also has wide application potential.49,50 At last, the band turns into type-II-B formalization between 0.15 and 0.35 V Å−1 for BSe–MoS2. Here, type-II-B signifies the band edges of MoS2 higher than that of BSe and the VBM(CBM) of MoS2(BSe) act as the VBM(CBM) of the BSe–MoS2, respectively. Up to now, the band alignment of the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure has experienced three stages in the scope of semiconductor: type-II-A, type-I, and type-II-B. We note that this transfer is much different from the following strain induced variation, which will be elaborated later. The corresponding featured band structures of BSe–MoS2 are illustrated in Fig. 5c. Clearly, when it reaches −0.05 and 0 V Å−1, the composite becomes a standard type-II-A with VBM of BSe and CBM of MoS2 acting as the VBM and CBM, respectively. When the electric field equals 0.1 V Å−1, the band alignment changes to type-I and the bands of BSe straddle the bands of MoS2. When the electric field equals 0.2 V Å−1, it changes back to type-II-B. As for the BSe–WS2 heterostructure, its bandgap also undergoes a linear reduction process and gradually transfers from the semiconductor to the metal as the electric field changes from 0.05 to −0.18 V Å−1. The situation of BSe–WS2 is generally the same as that of the above BSe–MoS2 and also includes three transfer stages in the scope of the semiconductor; thus, we won't describe too much for a similar trend.
The manipulation of band alignment lets us have a preliminary understanding of the diversity and flexibility of the electric field regulation. We next further explore how external strain can influence the band alignment of different heterostructures. First, the inner strain ε can be expressed as ε = (a − a0)/a0, where a and a0 represent the lattice constants under strain-stress and freestanding states, respectively. Fig. 6 shows the strain energy per cell Es = (Estrained − Efreestanding)/n, where n represents the unit cell. Apparently, all the curves are quasi-quadratic, which means that the pristine and the heterogeneous structures are all flexible and reversible under a small structural deformation. According to Hooke's law, the relationship between the elastic constant and the modulus can be written as (1)When an external strain-stress is applied, the change in the physical properties of a typical 2D crystal can be described by a specific expression. Cij(i,j = 1,2,6) represents the in-plane stiffness tensor, which is numerically equal to the second derivative of ES-ε (strain energy–strain). Using standard Voigt notation, it can be expressed as C = (1/S0)(∂2ES/∂εi∂εj),51 where S0 represents the equilibrium area of the system. In this case, Cij can be calculated based on first-principles by the expression52 (2)where, the definition of ε is the same as that above. After applying uniaxial strain towards the specific direction, the following values can be obtained: εyy = 0 (εxx = 0) and . Es(ε)–ε is fitted by a quadratic polynomial and then the elastic constants C11/C22 can be calculated from the coefficients of the quadratic term after fitting. In order to compute the elastic stiffness constant reasonably and reliably, we set the strain range to −2% ≤ ε ≤ 2% and the increment equals 0.5% when the target Es–ε curves are calculated. In order to initially verify the reliability of the above approach, we first calculated the Young's modulus of graphene and compared it with the reported value. The result revealed that the value of graphene equals 343.67 GPa·nm, which agrees well with the previous 340 GPa·nm and proves that the involved parameters and procedures all have high credibility.53,54 The modulus values of pristine BSe, MoS2, and WS2 are calculated to be 162, 196, and 182 GPa·nm, respectively. For BSe–MoS2/WS2, the modulus is equal to 414 and 386 GPa·nm. It suggests that the modulus of two heterostructures is at least 2 times larger than that of the pristine structures. Therefore, composite BSe with MoS2/WS2 can significantly enhance the structural stability of the active materials in the relevant reaction process and prevent the possible degradation or inactivation.
 Fig. 6  (a–c) 3D plots of pristine structures’ strain-energy surface. (d) The strain energy per cell vs. strain ε for pristine and freestanding heterostructures. (e and f) 3D plots of strain-energy for BSe–MoS2/WS2, respectively. 

Fig. 7 shows a panoramic view of CBM/VBM under two different applied strain approaches (uniaxial and biaxial), which provides meaningful reference to manipulate the band alignment of heterostructures and maximizes the utilization of light energy. It can be seen from the figure that the gaps of BSe–MoS2/WS2 decrease after the strain is applied; both show that gaps change with the variation of external strain. As shown in Fig. 7a and b, when uniaxial strain is applied to BSe–MoS2, its gap decreases significantly as the external strain increases. The VBM of the heterostructure is the VBM of BSe while the CBM of the heterostructure is the CBM of MoS2, which presents the characteristic of type-II-A alignment in the whole strain range. The featured band structures shown in Fig. 7c also confirm this situation. As for BSe–MoS2 when biaxial strain is applied, as shown in Fig. 7d and e, the band alignments show some difference compared with the above uniaxial strain applied structures. When biaxial strain ε changes from −0.08 to 0.06, BSe–MoS2 shows type-II-A alignment, while when biaxial strain exceeds 0.06, it turns into type-I semiconductor. As for the uniaxial strain applied BSe–WS2 shown in Fig. 7g and h, the bandgap has a similar scope for type-II-A alignment as that for BSe–MoS2, except for a small type-I region from −0.15 to −0.12. In this type-I region, both CBM/VBM of the heterostructure are contributed by the BSe. In conclusion, the electronic properties of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures will be significantly affected by the external strain-stress. We conducted detailed analysis and discussion on how the strain affects the band edges and gaps. The adjustable band alignment of the two heterostructures indicates that the type-II-A range can exist in a relatively wide range when the strain is applied, which provides a reference for further study.
 Fig. 7  (a, b and d, e) Band edges and bandgaps evolution of BSe–MoS2 as function of uniaxial and biaxial strain ε imposed within the strain of −0.18 to 0.18, respectively. (g, h and j, k) are band edges and bandgaps evolution of BSe–WS2 as function of imposed uniaxial and biaxial strain ε. The right figures are the corresponding specific decomposed band structures. Blue and orange/magenta curves denote BSe and MoS2/WS2, respectively. 
Next, we explore the adsorption variations of BSe–MoS2/WS2 when different strains (uniaxial and biaxial) are imposed. The optical absorption as a function of photon energy of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures are presented in Fig. 8. It is known that interactions between photons and electrons in a semiconductor can be understood as time-dependent perturbations in the ground state of electronic states. The inter-band excitations’ transition can induce the common optical spectra originated from the states between the occupied/unoccupied states and the corresponding optical properties are largely determined by the dielectric function ε. Taking the transition momentum matrix into consideration, summing all possible transitions from the unoccupied to the occupied wave functions can obtain the imaginary part ε2 within the selection rules since the imaginary part has strong correlation with the absorption spectrum, which is important for optoelectronic devices.55 The real part ε1 can then be computed by ε2 using the Kramer–Kronig relationship. Then the absorption coefficient α(ω) can be computed by ε1 and ε2: . Fig. 8a and b show that after strain is applied to BSe–MoS2, its absorption is strengthened in the solar spectrum, represented by the light gray background. The adsorption under the unstrained case starts from 1.5 eV, which shows that this structure is promising in 2D photodetectors with a shorter wavelength than that of red light. What needs to be noted is that the solar radiant energy is mainly within the visible region (1.6–3.3 eV); thus, we focus on this part and a higher energy is not included. When the strain is imposed, absorption shows two distinct states. First, when the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure is compressed, the start energy slightly increases and is higher than 1.5 eV. The adsorption of the compressed heterostructure is generally lower than that of the freestanding structure from 1.5 to 2.7 eV, which is exactly the main energy region of the solar spectrum. This trend continues until an energy higher than 2.7 eV. While when BSe–MoS2 is stretched, the situation is just the reverse. The adsorption of the stretched heterostructure is generally higher than that of the freestanding structure from 1.5 to 2.7 eV. As for biaxial strain imposed BSe–MoS2, the curves also agree well with the above analysis and just the energy point moves to 2.6 eV. Fig. 8c and d indicate that the adsorption of the BSe–WS2 heterostructure have the same tendency as the uniaxial strain imposed BSe–MoS2. When the corresponding structures are stretched, its absorption shows a considerable increase. This is because the vdW coupling effect and the subsequent charge transfer induce the overlapped valence band and the increment of absorption.56 Based on the above conclusions, we believe that BSe–MoS2/WS2 may be a better choice in terms of solar energy utilization when the heterostructures are stretched, no matter whether uniaxially or biaxially, in comparison with freestanding heterostructures.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) The calculated optical absorption spectrums under different strains of the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure. The solar spectrum is presented as the gray background. (c and d) The calculated optical absorption spectra of the BSe–WS2 heterostructure. 
In addition to the optical absorption characteristics discussed above, the transport behavior of the carriers also has an important effect on promoting the performance of a specific photocatalyst or a photodevice. It has long been considered that the quantum efficiency in photocatalytic reactions is closely related to the separation of carriers.57 The photoinduced carriers must migrate to active sites and participate in the following reactions on the active surface. The mobility of the photoinduced carriers can be obtained by the associated effective mass. Qualitatively, the recombination rate of the electron–hole will decrease when the mobility increases.58 The effective hole mass (mh*) or electron mass (me*) can be obtained by fitting a parabola to the VBM or CBM. According to semiconductor theory, the me* or mh* of a semiconductor can be obtained by the formula:59, where E is the energy and k is the wave vector. In the first Brillouin zone shown in Fig. 9b, the directions are determined to be G → K and G → M.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) Effective masses evolution of BSe–MoS2 and BSe–WS2 as function of imposed uniaxial and biaxial strain ε within −0.16 to 0.16, respectively. The inset denotes the Brillouin zone. The light green regions signify the strain-imposed region where the heterostructure's mh* and me* all are lower than that of the pristine structures. (e and f) 3D VBM and CBM bands under the same energy span when uniaxial and biaxial strain equal to ε = 0 and −0.06, respectively. 

Table 1 summarizes me* or mh* of pristine BSe/MoS2/WS2 along different directions. As discussed above, a smaller effective mass will induce a higher mobility. Generally, the density of carriers and mobility are two essential factors for the photo-based devices and are highly correlated with the effective mass. The carrier density is proportional to the effective mass and can be expressed as: , where kB, T, gv, and φ are the Boltzmann constant, temperature, degeneracy, and the energy difference between EF and the band edge, respectively. However, mobility is inversely proportional to the effective mass and can be written as , where e, m*, and τ are the unit charge, effective mass, and the relaxation time, respectively.60 Therefore, the variation trend of n and μ could be just reversed when the effective mass is set as the only variable. Table 1 shows that the mh* of pristine BSe along the G → K and G → M directions are smaller than all of MoS2/WS2, indicating that its hole carriers can migrate to the materials’ surface faster and act as an oxidizing agent. When it comes to the G → K direction, the me* of pristine BSe becomes much larger than that of MoS2/WS2. An explanation of this situation can be deduced from Fig. 2a. In principle, the distinctively dispersive character of a semiconductor at the band edges signifies a small effective mass and a high mobility of the photoinduced carriers, while a relatively flat band edges implies an opposite property. Fig. 2a clearly illustrates that the band edge along the G → K direction is much flatter than that along the G → M direction, which can be directly reflected in Table 1 for the me* of BSe along the G → K direction (67.518 m0). The data also shows the anisotropy of me* and mh*, which is proved by the different values in different directions. Based on the above discussion, it can be concluded that pristine BSe possesses the lowest mh* value and the optimal hole mobility while MoS2/WS2 have much lower me* along the two directions. Therefore, pristine MoS2/WS2 may have a better reducing performance than that of BSe. This is exactly the fundamental purpose for us to composite BSe and MoS2/WS2 together so as to comprehensively utilize the advantages of the two semiconductors. Next, we further explore how strain can influence the effective masses of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures.
Table 1 Effective mass of the electron and the hole in m0 along the G → K and G → M directions; m0 represents mass of the free electron






BSe/mh*
BSe/me*
MoS2/mh*
MoS2/me*
WS2/mh*
WS2/me*





G → K
0.560
67.518
4.298
4.516
3.248
1.186



G → M
0.559
0.694
4.295
2.857
3.246
1.039





Fig. 9a to d present a panorama of strain-induced effective mass variation of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures. Overall, the effective masses are all lower than mh* of pristine BSe along the G → K direction (67.518 m0). This is because the CBM of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures originate from MoS2/WS2, as revealed in Fig. 3a. When it comes to tension strain imposed BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, the variation shows different behaviors. We mainly herein analyze the uniaxial strain imposed BSe–MoS2 shown in Fig. 9a. The first thing to note is the relatively low me* value. In the full range of uniaxial strain imposed BSe–MoS2, the me* can maintain a very low value of about 0.2 m0. The maximum value is only 0.529 m0, which is smaller than that of BSe and MoS2 along the two directions. This is a very interesting phenomenon, even though the VBM is completely contributed by BSe, as exhibited in Fig. 3a, the composited BSe–MoS2 heterostructure is still endowed with a lower effective mass and a better transport characteristic in comparison with that of pristine BSe, let alone MoS2 (4.298 m0 along G → K direction and 4.295 m0 along G → M) as well as WS2 (1.186 m0 along G → K direction and 1.039 m0 along G → M). We believe this fact is mainly due to the weak vdW force that influences the corresponding band structure. When it comes to mh* represented by a red hollow circle, the max value of 3.36 m0 appears at ε = 0.02. When the imposed strain moves left and exceeds ε = −0.04 (2.123 m0) or move right and exceeds ε = 0.04 (2.343 m0), the mh* will become smaller than that of MoS2, where mh* equals to 2.857 along the G → M direction. So far, we have elaborately analyzed the evolution of the effective masses (me*/mh*) of the strain imposed heterostructures. Obviously, this heterogeneous form does have a practical value for comprehensively exerting the advantages of the original structures and its performance can even surpass that of single individuals in specific conditions. We herein take uniaxial strain imposed BSe–MoS2 as the example. The light green colored background of Fig. 9a signifies the strain-imposed region where the heterostructure's mh* and me* all lower than the pristine BSe and MoS2. The two ε imposed regions are from −0.16 to −0.03 and from 0.03 to 0.16. In the two regions, the heterostructure can output a much better carrier transport characteristic in comparison with the pristine structures. The analysis procedure of the other three structures shown in Fig. 9b–c are the same as the discussion above and we will not repeat them again for clarity. Overall, Fig. 9a–d definitely show that heterostructures can exhibit a lower effective mass and a better carrier transport characteristic in comparison with pristine BSe/MoS2/WS2 when the strain is imposed within a certain range. However, the adsorption of stress–strain imposed heterostructures are weaker than that of tension strain imposed heterostructures shown in Fig. 8. That is to say, a promoted absorption ability and a better transport characteristic oppose each other and these two characteristics cannot be obtained at the same time. Fig. 9e and f display the 3D CBM and VBM under the same energy span. Herein, we only elaborate ε = −0.06 imposed heterostructures. Obviously, when the uniaxial or biaxial stress strains are imposed on the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, VBMs are all dramatically higher than that of the freestanding structures, indicating a more de-localized feature and a smaller effective mass of me*. The CBMs are also de-localized to different degrees. As a result, this high dispersion results in a high mobility along all the directions.
In Fig. 8, we have mentioned that after applying tension to the heterostructures, their absorptions in majority of the solar spectrum is better than that of pristine structures. The heterostructures also have a broad potential when it comes to solar cell-related applications, and it is considered to be a competitive photovoltaic material with low cost and high efficiency.61 Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a further exploration and research on the application of heterostructure-based solar cells. According to definitions, the performance of a heterogeneous solar cell can be evaluated by calculating the power conversion efficiency (PCE).62 (3)A brief description of this equation is as follows: the constant 0.65 is the fill factor, P(ℏϖ) represents the relationship between the solar energy flux (W m−2 eV−1), and the photon energy (ℏϖ) under AM1.5 conditions,63 and Eg and ΔEc are the bandgap of the donor and conduction band offset (CBO), respectively. (Eg − ΔEc − 0.3) is the estimated value of the maximum open circuit voltage (Voc, eV). It can be concluded from the above that the band alignment of the heterostructure can directly determine the value of PCE. Fig. 10 is the calculated PCE contour map under six conditions, including two types of external effects. The x-axis and y-axis of the PCE map are the bandgap of the donor and CBO, respectively, and each contour line represents a constant PCE value. This work mainly focusses on the CBO in the range of 0–1 eV. The following discussion is divided into two parts. The first is how the PCE changes with the variation in the applied external electric field.
 Fig. 10  The 2D shaded contour PCE map as a function of the donor bandgap of CBO. Considering the actual situation, the efficiency is limited to 20%. 

Fig. 10a shows the PCE of BSe–MoS2 after an external electric field is applied. In Fig. 5, we have divided the entire range into 4 regions. 1 to 4 respectively represent different properties of the composite, which are metallic, type-II-A, type-I, and type-II-B, respectively. Herein, we are mainly concerned with the type-II alignment; thus, only the PCE trend of the 2nd area (red line) and the 4th area (green line) are plotted. According to the observation in Fig. 5a, the red curve appears in Fig. 10a only when the electric field is greater than 0.05 V Å−1 in the 2nd area and its PCE is always lower than 8%. Therefore, when the electric field changes in the 2nd area, the PCE is very small and is not suitable for solar cell applications. When the electric field is applied in in the 4th area, the situation changes. The green PCE curve directly runs through the entire contour map, indicating that BSe–MoS2 outputs a rather high PCE value in the region from 0.15 V Å−1 to 0.35 V Å−1. Even when the electric field equals 0.15 V Å−1, the PCE is as high as 19.3%. This value is very close or even better than the reported heterostructures used in the solar cells, such as PCBM/CBN (10–20%),62 g-SiC/GaN (12–20%),64 SnO2/TiO gradient heterojunction (18.08%),65 2D GaX/SnS2 (16%),66 perovskite based heterostructure (21.02%),67 and BP/SnSe (17.24%).68 In other words, when an electric field of 0.15 V Å−1 is applied to BSe–MoS2, it not only maintains the type-II characteristic but can also output a relatively high PCE. This is mainly due to the increase in the CBM of MoS2 and the decrease in the CBM of BSe. This tendency also occurs on BSe–WS2 in Fig. 10d. The difference is that the PCE value of the 2nd region in BSe–WS2 has been improved to a certain extent. Its highest value appears at 0.05 V Å−1, which reaches 12.6%. As a comparison, the changes in the electric field in 4th area can only output the maximum PCE of 16.9%. In short, the above results prove that the use of electric field is an effective way to manipulate the PCE. The specific form of band alignment has an important influence on the solar cells. In addition to reducing the bandgap, the donor material should also be carefully selected to promote the efficiency of solar cells to a higher degree. Next, we continue to discuss the specific variation in PCE after the external strain is applied.
For the strain applied states, we also focus on the type-II range, which is marked in lavender in Fig. 7. The green arrow in Fig. 10b represents the direction of strain in Fig. 7 from left to right. When uniaxial stress is applied to BSe–MoS2, its PCE is always lower than 6.8%, indicating that the applied uniaxial stress is not reasonable. Fig. 10e is the trend when the biaxial stress is applied. It can be seen that the PCE has only been weakly enhanced and the PCE increases slightly to 7.5% within the full range. The above proves that when the BSe–MoS2 is applied to solar cells, the external strain cannot significantly promote its PCE. This situation has been significantly improved in BSe–WS2. Fig. 10c is the PCE curve after uniaxial pressure is applied to BSe–WS2. Clearly, its efficiency has been significantly improved. When −8% pressure is applied to this composite, the PCE is remarkably enhanced and reaches the highest value of 14.5%, which is already close to the maximum value of the above-mentioned electric field applied condition. In the case of biaxial stress, the maximum value appears at a pressure of −6% and its PCE value reaches up to 12.3%. The above analysis shows that when the BSe–WS2 composite structure is applied to the solar cells, the treatment of external pressure can significantly improve its PCE. Based on the above, it can be concluded that applying an external electric field or stress to the heterostructure are two feasible and reasonable approaches to perfect the corresponding PCE, which has great potential the application in solar cells.
Conclusion
From recent theoretical and experimental studies, TMDC-based heterostructures have shown a broad prospect. After combining two specific materials, it will be expected to meet people's requirements for structure and performance. In this work, we proposed a new BSe-XS2 heterostructure that possesses intrinsic type-II alignment and systematically explored the electronic structure, band alignment, charge spatial distribution, light absorption, and strain response of two heterostructures through first-principles calculations. In freestanding states, the band structures of the two composites are flexible and adjustable and very beneficial for the application of photocatalytic materials or optoelectronic devices. A proper interfacial charge spatial distribution can further facilitate the separation of carriers around the interfacial region and inhibits the recombination of electron–hole pairs to achieve better light energy utilization. We studied the regulation of the structural and electronic properties of the two heterostructures by the external effects, which provides a valuable reference for experimental research. It shows that the band edge alignment and absorption characteristics of the two heterostructures can be effectively manipulated by the external electric field and strain-stress. The absorption spectrum shows that they are more sensitive to photons of red wavelength in the solar spectrum when they are stretched. The predicted PCE of the BSe–MoS2 bilayer reaches as high as ∼19.3% after the external electric field is applied and is expected to be used in solar cells. In short, we believe the modeling process and the calculation procedures in terms of the efficient use of solar energy involved in this work can provide valuable guidance for other 2D vdW heterostructures.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11947105, 11904041, and 51472038), the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing (Grant No. cstc2020jcyj-msxmX0557, cstc2020jcyj-msxmX0533 and cstc2019jcyj-msxmX0237) and the Science and Technology Research Project of Chongqing Education Committee (Grant No. KJQN201800501, KJQN201900542, and KJQN20200051).
References
W. Yao, B. Wu and Y. Liu, Growth and Grain Boundaries in 2D Materials, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(8), 9320–9346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Zheng, J. Yao, J. Li and G. Yang, Non-layered 2D materials toward advanced photoelectric devices: progress and prospects, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2185–2207 RSC .
Z. Guan and S. Ni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 53067–53075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Peimyoo, W. Yang, J. Shang, X. Shen, Y. Wang and T. Yu, Chemically driven tunable light emission of charged and neutral excitons in monolayer WS2, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(11), 11320–11329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rivera, J. R. Schaibley, A. M. Jones, J. S. Ross, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, P. Klement, K. Seyler, G. Clark and N. J. Ghimire, Observation of long-lived interlayer excitons in monolayer MoSe2–WSe2 heterostructures, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 1–6 Search PubMed .
N. H. Attanayake, S. C. Abeyweera, A. C. Thenuwara, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, Y. Sun and D. R. Strongin, Vertically aligned MoS2 on Ti3C2 (MXene) as an improved HER catalyst, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(35), 16882–16889 RSC .
G. Kioseoglou, A. T. Hanbicki, M. Currie, A. L. Friedman, D. Gunlycke and B. T. Jonker, Valley polarization and intervalley scattering in monolayer MoS2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101(22), 221907 CrossRef .
M. Li, J.-S. Chen and M. Cotlet, Efficient light harvesting biotic–abiotic nanohybrid system incorporating atomically thin van der Waals transition metal dichalcogenides, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6(6), 1451–1457 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, K. Bai, Y. Ding, X. Wang, E. Li and J. Zheng, Phys. E, 2020, 123, 114207 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, C. Luo, Y. Deng, Z. Huang, G. Zhou, W. Lv, Y. B. He, Y. Wan, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Optimized Catalytic WS2–WO3 Heterostructure Design for Accelerated Polysulfide Conversion in Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(15), 2000091 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guan and S. Ni, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22735–22742 RSC .
S. Wang, F. R. Pratama, M. S. Ukhtary and R. Saito, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 081414 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Khan, T. Lu, W. Ma, Y. Lu and Y. Liu, Tunable Optoelectronic Properties of WS2 by Local Strain Engineering and Folding, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6(4), 1901381 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. S. Ukhtary and R. Saito, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 033340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Cheng, F. Cheng, L. Wang, N. Liu, L. Li, J. Su and Y. Gao, In situ TEM observation of controlled growth of two-dimensional WS2 with vertically aligned layers and high-temperature stability, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, P. Cao, Z. Zhang, F. Ning, S.-s. Zheng, J. He and Z. Zhang, Grain-size-controlled mechanical properties of polycrystalline monolayer MoS2, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(2), 1543–1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Obaidulla, M. R. Habib, Y. Khan, Y. Kong, T. Liang and M. Xu, MoS2 and Perylene Derivative Based Type-II
Heterostructure: Bandgap Engineering and Giant Photoluminescence Enhancement, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7(3), 1901197 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Linghu and C. Wu, Gas Molecules on Defective and Nonmetal-Doped MoS2 Monolayers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 124(2), 1511–1522 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, Y. Shao, F. Ma, Y. Wu, B. Huang and X. Hao, Band-gap-matched CdSe QD/WS2 nanosheet composite: Size-controlled photocatalyst for high-efficiency water splitting, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. Si, Z. Zhang, Z. Kang, P. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, All-Inorganic Perovskite Quantum Dot-Monolayer MoS2 Mixed-Dimensional van der Waals Heterostructure for Ultrasensitive Photodetector, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(12), 1801219 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Si, P.-Y. Liao, G. Qiu, Y. Duan and P. D. Ye, Ferroelectric field-effect transistors based on MoS2 and CuInP2S6 two-dimensional van der Waals heterostructure, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(7), 6700–6705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, R. S. Chen and G. Yao, Tunable Electronic Properties and Potential Applications of 2D GeP/Graphene van der Waals Heterostructure, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6(3), 1901024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahammed, M. S. Islam, I. Mia and J. Park, Lateral and flexural thermal transport in stanene/2D-SiC van der Waals heterostructure, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31(50), 505702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Son, J. Kwon, S. Kim, Y. Lv, J. Yu, J.-Y. Lee, H. Ryu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and R. Garrido-Menacho, Atomically precise graphene etch stops for three dimensional integrated systems from two dimensional material heterostructures, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Ultrafast charge transfer in atomically thin MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(9), 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tang, W. Qi, Y. Li and T. Wang, Electronic properties of van der Waals heterostructure of black phosphorus and MoS2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(12), 7027–7032 CrossRef CAS .
F. Opoku, K. K. Govender, C. G. C. E. van Sittert and P. P. Govender, Role of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers on photocatalytic hydrogen production and the pollutant degradation of monoclinic BiVO4: A first-principles study, New J. Chem., 2017, 41(20), 11701–11713 RSC .
P. Mishra, D. Singh, Y. Sonvane and R. Ahuja, Two-dimensional boron monochalcogenide monolayer for thermoelectric material, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4(5), 2363–2369 RSC .
B.-J. Wang, X.-H. Li, R. Zhao, X.-L. Cai, W.-Y. Yu, W.-B. Li, Z.-S. Liu, L.-W. Zhang and S.-H. Ke, Electronic structures and enhanced photocatalytic properties of blue phosphorene/BSe van der Waals heterostructures, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(19), 8923–8929 RSC .
S. Demirci, N. Avazlı, E. Durgun and S. Cahangirov, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 115409 CrossRef .
K. Ren, J. Yu and W. Tang, Two-dimensional ZnO/BSe van der Waals heterostructure used as a promising photocatalyst for water splitting: A DFT study, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 812, 152049 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, J. Yin, X. Liu, H. Wu, J. Li, X. Li and W. Guo, Probing van der Waals interactions at two-dimensional heterointerfaces, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14(6), 567–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Pham, L. V. Tan, M. Idrees, B. Amin, N. N. Hieu, H. V. Phuc, L. T. Hoa and N. V. Chuong, Electronic structures, and optical and photocatalytic properties of the BP–BSe van der Waals heterostructures, New J. Chem., 2020, 44(35), 14964–14969 RSC .
V. Urbanová, P. Lazar, N. Antonatos, Z. k. Sofer, M. Otyepka and M. Pumera, Positive and Negative Effects of Dopants toward Electrocatalytic Activity of MoS2 and WS2: Experiments and Theory, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(18), 20383–20392 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Du, K. Zheng, H. Cui, Y. Wang, L. Tao and X. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 28777–28785 RSC .
Y. Fan, X. Ma, X. Liu, J. Wang, H. Ai and M. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27803–27810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Zhao, X. Yuan, G. Hu, X. Yuan and J. Ren, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 25136–25142 RSC .
J. Shang, L. Pan, X. Wang, J. Li, H.-X. Deng and Z. Wei, Tunable electronic and optical properties of InSe/InTe van der Waals heterostructures toward optoelectronic applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(27), 7201–7206 RSC .
Z. Zheng, X. Zu, Y. Zhang and W. Zhou, Rational Design of Type-II Nano-heterojunctions for Nanoscale Optoelectronics, Mater. Today Phys., 2020, 100262 CrossRef .
C. Xia, J. Du, W. Xiong, Y. Jia, Z. Wei and J. Li, A type-II GeSe/SnS heterobilayer with a suitable direct gap, superior optical absorption and broad spectrum for photovoltaic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(26), 13400–13410 RSC .
Y. Almadori, N. Bendiab and B. Grevin, Multimodal Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy Investigations of a Photovoltaic WSe2/MoS2 Type-II Interface, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(1), 1363–1373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, S. Wang, C. Li and F. Wang, Strain engineering for C2N/Janus monochalcogenides van der Waals heterostructures: Potential applications for photocatalytic water splitting, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 536, 147845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Houssa, K. Iordanidou, A. Dabral, A. Lu, R. Meng, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas' ev and A. Stesmans, Contact resistance at graphene/MoS2 lateral heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114(16), 163101 CrossRef .
X. Liu, J. Pei, Z. Hu, W. Zhao, S. Liu, M.-R. Amara, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Manipulating charge and energy transfer between 2D atomic layers via heterostructure engineering, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(7), 5359–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. Zhang, X. Zang, X. Li and H. Zhu, Photo-promoted platinum nanoparticles decorated MoS2@graphene woven fabric catalyst for efficient hydrogen generation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(17), 10866–10873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Sun and W. Peng, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides and graphene-based ternary composites for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and pollutants degradation, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7(3), 62 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bafekry, C. Stampfl and M. Ghergherehchi, Strain, electric-field and functionalization induced widely tunable electronic properties in MoS2/BC3,/C3N and/C3N4 van der Waals heterostructures, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31(29), 295202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, Z. Ni, P. Li and Z. Wu, A general method for
type I and type II gC3N4/gC3N4 metal-free isotype heterostructures with enhanced visible light photocatalysis, New J. Chem., 2015, 39(6), 4737–4744 RSC .
Q. Gao, C. Xia, W. Xiong, J. Du, T. Wang, Z. Wei and J. Li, Type-I Ca(OH)2/α-MoTe2 vdW heterostructure for ultraviolet optoelectronic device applications: electric field effects, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(47), 12629–12634 RSC .
Z.-P. Huang, B. Ma, H. Wang, N. Li, R.-T. Liu, Z.-Q. Zhang, X.-D. Zhang, J.-H. Zhao, P.-Z. Zheng and Q. Wang, In situ growth of 3D/2D (CsPbBr3/CsPb2Br5) perovskite heterojunctions toward optoelectronic devices, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(15), 6007–6015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Andrew, R. E. Mapasha, A. M. Ukpong and N. Chetty, Mechanical properties of graphene and boronitrene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85(12), 125428 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, J. Zhou, Q. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Kawazoe and P. Jena, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112(8), 2372–2377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the elastic properties and intrinsic strength of monolayer graphene, Science, 2008, 321(5887), 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsafack and B. I. Yakobson, Thermomechanical analysis of two-dimensional boron monolayers, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93(16), 165434 CrossRef .
M. S. Wheeler, J. S. Aitchison and M. Mojahedi, Coated nonmagnetic spheres with a negative index of refraction at infrared frequencies, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73(4), 045105 CrossRef .
F. Wu, Y. Liu, G. Yu, D. Shen, Y. Wang and E. Kan, Visible-light-absorption in graphitic C3N4 bilayer: enhanced by interlayer coupling, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3(22), 3330–3334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, S. Wang, H. Shu, J.-P. Chou, K. Ren, J. Yu and M. Sun, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2020, 35, 125008 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ren, J. Yu and W. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 812, 152049 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Phuc, N. N. Hieu, B. D. Hoi, N. V. Hieu, T. V. Thu, N. M. Hung, V. V. Ilyasov, N. A. Poklonski and C. V. Nguyen, Tuning the Electronic Properties, Effective mass and carrier mobility of MoS2 monolayer by strain engineering: first-principle calculations, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47(1), 730–736 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, D. Esseni, G. Snider, D. Jena and H. Grace Xing, Single particle transport in two-dimensional heterojunction interlayer tunneling field effect transistor, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115(7), 074508 CrossRef .
T. T. Nguyen, M. Patel, S. Kim, R. A. Mir, J. Yi, V.-A. Dao and J. Kim, Transparent photovoltaic cells and self-powered photodetectors by TiO2/NiO heterojunction, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 228865 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Semiconducting monolayer materials as a tunable platform for excitonic solar cells, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(11), 10082–10089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Kurtz, D. Myers, T. Townsend, C. Whitaker, A. Maish, R. Hulstrom and K. Emery, Outdoor rating conditions for photovoltaic modules and systems, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, 2000, 62(4), 379–391 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Zhou, Y.-F. Zhang and L.-M. Wu, SiC2 siligraphene and nanotubes: novel donor materials in excitonic
solar cells, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(11), 5431–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, X. Chen, S. Yang, C. Li, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, A Band-Edge Potential Gradient Heterostructure to Enhance Electron Extraction Efficiency of the Electron Transport Layer in High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(27), 1700878 CrossRef .
H. Y. Wu, K. Yang, Y. Si, W. Q. Huang, W. Hu and G. F. Huang, Two-Dimensional GaX/SnS2 (X= S, Se) van der Waals Heterostructures for Photovoltaic Application: Heteroatom Doping Strategy to Boost Power Conversion Efficiency, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13(5), 1800565 CrossRef .
S. Heo, G. Seo, K. T. Cho, Y. Lee, S. Paek, S. Kim, M. Seol, S. H. Kim, D. J. Yun and K. Kim, Dimensionally Engineered Perovskite Heterostructure for Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(45), 1902470 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dou, A. Huang, Y. Ji, X. Yang, Y. Xin, H. Shi, M. Wang, Z. Xiao, M. Zhou and P. K. Chu, Strain Enhanced Power Conversion Efficiency of BP/SnSe van der Waals Heterostructure, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 14787–14795 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp00709bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a and d) Schematic of the BSe–MoS2 and BSe–WS2 heterostructures with four rotated angles and the corresponding mismatches. (b and e) Binding energy curves of the two heterostructures. Strain-BSe, strain-MoS2/WS2, and strain-equally are three modeling approaches. (c and f) Vibrations of the Mo–S/W–S and B–Se bond lengths versus the simulation time of 3000 ps and the evolution of free energy.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) Top/side views of pristine BSe, MoS2, and WS2, respectively. The B, Se, Mo, W, and S atoms are presented by green, light green, purple, gray, and orange balls, respectively. The calculated band structures of the pristine structures are shown below. Black curves present the standard PBE results while red denotes the SOC corrected data.	 

 	Fig. 3  The projected band structures of (a) BSe–MoS2 and (b) BSe–WS2. The lower/upper figures are the decomposed charge density of the VBM/CBM.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Potential profile across the BSe–MoS2/WS2 interfaces, respectively. (c and d) Charge difference density of the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, respectively. Red and blue denote Δρ > 0 and Δρ < 0 regions, respectively. (e and f) Black/red curves stand for plane-averaged charge difference Δρ and the transferred charge ΔQ(z), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and d) The band edges alignment of BSe–MoS2/WS2 under electric fields from −0.3 V Å−1 to 0.3 V Å−1. 1, 2, 3, and 4 represent the metallic, type-II-A, type-I, and type-II-B region, respectively. (b and e) The evolution of bandgaps for the BSe–MoS2/WS2 heterostructures. (c and f) The evolution of projected band structures for BSe–MoS2/WS2 under several specific electric fields.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) 3D plots of pristine structures’ strain-energy surface. (d) The strain energy per cell vs. strain ε for pristine and freestanding heterostructures. (e and f) 3D plots of strain-energy for BSe–MoS2/WS2, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a, b and d, e) Band edges and bandgaps evolution of BSe–MoS2 as function of uniaxial and biaxial strain ε imposed within the strain of −0.18 to 0.18, respectively. (g, h and j, k) are band edges and bandgaps evolution of BSe–WS2 as function of imposed uniaxial and biaxial strain ε. The right figures are the corresponding specific decomposed band structures. Blue and orange/magenta curves denote BSe and MoS2/WS2, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) The calculated optical absorption spectrums under different strains of the BSe–MoS2 heterostructure. The solar spectrum is presented as the gray background. (c and d) The calculated optical absorption spectra of the BSe–WS2 heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) Effective masses evolution of BSe–MoS2 and BSe–WS2 as function of imposed uniaxial and biaxial strain ε within −0.16 to 0.16, respectively. The inset denotes the Brillouin zone. The light green regions signify the strain-imposed region where the heterostructure's mh* and me* all are lower than that of the pristine structures. (e and f) 3D VBM and CBM bands under the same energy span when uniaxial and biaxial strain equal to ε = 0 and −0.06, respectively.	 


G → K	0.560	67.518	4.298	4.516	3.248	1.186

G → M	0.559	0.694	4.295	2.857	3.246	1.039
	(3)

 	Fig. 10  The 2D shaded contour PCE map as a function of the donor bandgap of CBO. Considering the actual situation, the efficiency is limited to 20%.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp00709b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
