Towards high-efficiency nanoelectrocatalysts for oxygen reduction through engineering advanced carbon nanomaterials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00414D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00414D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273-1307Towards high-efficiency nanoelectrocatalysts for oxygen reduction through engineering advanced carbon nanomaterials

        
          
            Ming 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hsing-Lin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Shaojun 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *c
aKey Laboratory of Polyoxometalate Science of Ministry of Education, Faculty of Chemistry, and National & Local United Engineering Laboratory for Power Batteries, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130024, P. R. China. E-mail: zhoum739@nenu.edu.cn
bPhysical Chemistry and Applied Spectroscopy, Chemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA. E-mail: hwang@lanl.gov
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering & Department of Energy and Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: guosj@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      21st May 2015
    First published on 8th December 2015AbstractOne of the critical issues in the industrial development of fuel cells (e.g., proton exchange membrane fuel cells, direct methanol fuel cells and biofuel cells) is the high cost, serious intermediate tolerance, anode crossover, sluggish kinetics, and poor stability of the platinum (Pt) as the preferred electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode. The development of novel noble-metal-free electrocatalysts with low cost, high activity and practical durability for ORR has been considered as one of the most active and competitive fields in chemistry and materials science. In this critical review, we will summarize recent advances on engineering advanced carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions for the rational design and synthesis of noble-metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalysts including heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials, transition metal-based nanoparticle (NP)–carbon nanomaterial composites and especially the stable iron carbide (Fe3C)-based NP–carbon nanomaterial composites. Introducing advanced carbon nanomaterials with high specific surface area and stable structure into the noble-metal-free ORR field has not only led to a maximized electrocatalyst surface area for the electron transfer but also resulted in enhanced electrocatalyst stability for long-term operation. Therefore, the rational design and synthesis of noble-metal-free electrocatalysts based on heteroatoms, transition metal-based NPs and Fe3C-based NP functionalized carbon nanomaterials are of special relevance for their ORR applications, and represents a rapidly growing branch of research. The demonstrated examples in this review will open new directions on designing and optimizing advanced carbon nanomaterials for the development of extremely active and durable earth-abundant cathodic catalysts for fuel cell applications.
Ming Zhou
Ming Zhou is currently a Professor at Northeast Normal University (NENU). He received BS (2004) and MS (2007, Prof. Liping Guo's group) from NENU and PhD (2011, Prof. Shaojun Dong's group) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. Then, he did postdoctoral work with Prof. Joseph Wang at the University of California, San Diego (2011), Prof. Liming Dai at Case Western Reserve University (2012), Prof. Bo Zhang at the University of Washington (2013–2014), and Dr Hsing-Lin Wang at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2015). He has published >40 papers with >2800 citations (H-index: 25). His research interests include nanomaterials for analysis and energy applications.
Hsing-Lin Wang
Hsing-Lin Wang is now a senior scientist, team leader and project leader in Physical Chemistry and Spectroscopy group, Chemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory. He received his PhD in Chemistry in 1992 from the University of South Florida. Then, he moved to the University of Pennsylvania as a Postdoctoral Fellow from 1993–1995. He came to Los Alamos National Laboratory as a Postdoctoral Fellow in 1995 and became a Scientist in 1998. He has published over 160 papers with >6200 citations (H-index: 38) and 19 issued patents. His research interests include the synthesis, processing and applications of organic molecules and nanomaterials.
Shaojun Guo
Shaojun Guo is currently a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, and Energy & Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University. He received his BSc in chemistry from Jilin University (2005) and PhD from Chinese Academy of Sciences (2011). He did his postdoctoral research at Brown University (2011–2013), worked as an Oppenheimer Distinguished Fellow at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2013–2015). In both 2014 and 2015, he was selected as one of the World's Highly Cited Researchers by Thomson Reuters. He has published over 150 papers with >10000 citations (H-index: 54). His research interests are in engineering nanocrystals for catalysis, renewable energy, optoelectronics and biosensors.
1. Introduction
The rapid increase in the global energy consumption and the environmental impact of traditional energy resources pose serious challenges to human health, energy security, and environmental protection.1,2 With the ever-increasing demand for next generation renewable and sustainable energy conversion technologies, it is undoubted that the substitution of economic and sustainable clean energy for traditional fossil fuels is becoming a necessity.3–8 Fuel cells are clean and efficient energy conversion devices that can directly convert the chemical energy of fuels to electricity through electrochemical processes.9–16 The first fuel cells were separately invented by Welsh physicist William Grove17 and German physicist Christian Friedrich Schönbein18 in the 1830s. The first commercial use of fuel cells came more than a century later in Gemini mission by National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to generate power for probes, satellites and space capsules in the 1960s.19–21 By using hydrogen (H2) or methanol as fuels and oxygen (O2) as reductants, fuel cells can be operated at close to room temperature, and are considered as promising power solutions for future electric vehicles and portable electronic devices, Fig. 1A.22–38 The cathodic reaction on fuel cells is the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). In the conventional fuel cell technology, the noble-metal platinum (Pt) is used as a preferred and effective four-electron transfer (rather than the ineffective two-electron pathway) ORR electrocatalyst under both alkaline and acidic conditions (Fig. 1B), mainly because of its excellent electrocatalytic activity.32,36,39–54
 Fig. 1  (A) The typical fuel cells with methanol or H2 as fuel. (B) ORR pathways in alkaline and acidic media. 
In spite of recent significant technological advances, a couple of major challenges remain on the way to the widespread application of Pt as the ORR electrocatalyst:32,36,39–62 (i) scarcity. The total loading and total content of Pt proposed by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Fuel Cell Technologies Program in 2013 are 0.15 mg cm−2 and 0.14 g kW−1, respectively.63,64 On the basis of Pt price revised by U.S. DOE, the cost of Pt electrocatalysts still accounts for 49% of the proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack cost and 24% of the 80 kWnet proton exchange membrane fuel cell system cost.63–65 Therefore, the cost of fuel cells is directly linked to the price of Pt in the volatile and highly monopolized precious metal market; (ii) easy deactivation by carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning. Pt electrocatalysts are very sensitive to CO that cannot be completely separated from H2 fuel by current engineering technology; even trace amounts of CO can be adsorbed preferentially onto the electrocatalytic active sites of Pt, resulting in a diminished catalytic activity; (iii) the fuel crossover effect caused by undesired catalytic oxidation of leaked fuel. In relation to the use of methanol as fuel in direct methanol fuel cells, methanol steam can permeate into the cathode chamber and poison Pt electrocatalysts due to the presence of crossover effects, thus greatly reducing electrocatalysts' lifespan; (iv) durability issues for Pt electrocatalysts are particularly critical because of the highly aggressive conditions of low pH, dissolved molecular oxygen, and the high positive potentials at which they operate.60–62,66–69 Pt nanoparticles (NPs) can dissolve and redeposit on other Pt NPs, and Pt can deposit in the membrane through the reduction of Pt2+ by H2 diffusing from the anode (hydrogen crossover).60,61,66,70–72 Therefore, in one word, all the above drawbacks prevent the large-scale practical application of fuel cells, though alkaline fuel cells with Pt as an ORR electrocatalyst were successfully developed for the Gemini and the Apollo lunar missions carried by NASA in the1960s.19–21,73–76
At this juncture, how to reduce the costs by decreasing cathode Pt loadings or replacing Pt with other materials and meantime maintain the high performance is the crucial subject of most current ORR electrocatalytic research studies. Recently, much effort has been devoted to developing low-cost and high-efficiency ORR electrocatalysts through decreasing Pt content by synthesizing Pt-cheap metal composites,43,53,77–80 developing transition metal-based NP electrocatalysts,77,78,81–92 or fabricating metal-free NP electrocatalysts.93–167 Among these directions, a major trend in fuel cell research and development (R&D) is the development of noble-metal-free electrocatalysts [e.g., metal-free NPs, noble-metal-free transition metal-based NPs, and especially the stable iron carbide (Fe3C)-based NPs] with outstanding features of low cost, high activity, high tolerance to deactivation by CO and a crossover effect by methanol, and long durability for ORR.8,42,55–58,168–176 Carbon offers the unmatched versatility among the elements of the periodic table.177–181 By combining the advantages of carbon materials with those of nanostructured materials, the advanced carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions have been widely used as the nanoscale support in the design and synthesis of electrocatalysts with superior performance.8,23,42,55–58,169–175,178–180,182–196 In recent years, it has been reported that the introduction of advanced carbon nanomaterials into the noble-metal-free ORR field will further boost the ORR performance of these noble-metal-free electrocatalysts, which results in a fast growing branch of ORR electrocatalysts, Fig. 2.65,77,78,81–167,176,194–204
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the high-efficiency carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalysts, which combine the advantages of carbon nanomaterials with large surface area/stable structure and heteroatom/transition metal-based NP/Fe3C-based NPs with high ORR electrocatalytic activity. 
The metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials are a new class of promising ORR electrocatalysts because they exhibit comparable or higher electrocatalytic activity, long-term stability, and better tolerance against fuel crossover and CO poisoning effects compared to the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst.93,95–167,205–214 Both theoretical calculations and experimental results suggest that the substitution of carbon atoms with heteroatoms in the sp2 lattice of graphitic carbon can change the electronic arrangement of the carbon-based material and tailor their electron donor properties, and subsequently create favorable sites for oxygen adsorption or splitting, thus offering improved ORR electrocatalytic activity.8,42,55–58,169–173,176,215 Therefore, the development of advanced carbon nanomaterials being doped by single or multiple heteroatoms for the production of low-cost heteroatom-doped carbon-based nanomaterials with superior ORR electrocatalytic activities is highly desired.
In addition to the heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials, advanced carbon nanomaterials supported transition metal-based NPs is another kind of popular noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for enhancing ORR.77,78,81–87,89–92 By introducing carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions into transition metal-based NPs, the attractive assembly of transition metal-based NPs supported on carbon nanomaterials exhibits higher activity and stability in the ORR relative to their unsupported counterparts. Such superior performance would be attributed to the synergetic effect between carbon nanomaterials with a large surface area/stable structure and the transition metal-based NPs with high ORR electrocatalytic activities, which in turn leads to stable and robust transition metal-based NP/carbon nanomaterial composite surfaces with superior electrocatalytic ORR performances.77,78,81–87,89–92,174,175
Owing to the harsh ORR conditions especially in acidic media, only a few types of materials have been found to be active and durable towards the ORR, such as metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials95,105 and the noble-metal-free transition metal-based NP functionalized carbon nanomaterials mentioned above.14,65,83,88,175,216 Among them, the best one is the transition metal-based NP functionalized carbon nanomaterials (e.g., Fe–N–C) where the active sites are believed to involve surface nitrogen coordinated with iron.14,65,202,217 Three main types of sites in Fe–N/C have been identified:60,177,199 (i) FeN4/C sites where N is a nitrogen atom of the pyrrolic type; (ii) FeN4/C sites where N is a nitrogen atom of the pyridinic type, and (iii) C–N sites. Among these three sites, the most active one is the FeN4/C of the pyridinic type for which Fe is coordinated to the carbon support by four pairs of electrons, one pair per pyridinic nitrogen atom.218 However, the leaching problem and low active site density (optimum iron content in Fe–N/C electrocatalysts is usually <0.2 wt%219) may cause a relatively poor durability, especially in acidic medium. Recently, a novel spherical ORR electrocatalyst based on graphitic shell encased Fe3C NPs was reported to be highly active and stable for ORR.182,200,202 On the surface of these electrocatalysts, little nitrogen or metallic functionality was detected while the electrocatalysts exhibited high activity and stability towards the ORR during rotating disk electrode measurements.202 Also, the inner Fe3C NPs, being protected by outer graphitic layers, play a synergetic role in activating the outer graphitic layers towards ORR.202 These nanomaterials have emerged as a kind of exciting “rising star” ORR electrocatalysts with superior and stable performance.
Advanced carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free electrocatalysts are currently of great interest for chemistry, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, electrochemical energy and storage and electroanalysis. Several reviews were published recently on the topic of either heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials55,56,168,170,171,176,194–196 or transition metal-based NPs174,175 for oxygen reduction. However, most of the existing reviews concentrate on the advances on heteroatoms or transition metal-based NPs in ORR. Our review focuses on the most recent development of advanced carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions as the support for heteroatoms, transition metals-based NPs and especially Fe3C-based NPs for the rational design and synthesis of high-efficiency noble-metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. This review has taken into consideration of the most recent developments and presented comprehensive discussion of the rational design of the growing family of advanced carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts in order to provide insights for developing novel and high-efficiency noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts.
2. Engineering carbon nanomaterials for ORR
2.1 Heteroatom-doped zero-dimensional (0D) fullerene
The 0D C60 fullerene is deemed to being formed by wrapping up two-dimensional (2D) graphene (GN).220 Since C60 was discovered in 1985,221 the increasing interest and significance of the work in the fullerene field have generated the award of the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to the discoverers, Smalley, Curl, and Kroto.222–224 C60 has been found to exhibit a wide range of interesting properties, with respect to electrical conductivity,225 charge transport,226 and photophysical behavior.227 Besides C60 was extensively used as an electron acceptor, it also reveals a rich electrochemistry because of the unique dimensional and electronic structures.228

Nitrogen-doped carbon shells (N-carbon shells). 
By utilizing the first-principles spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations, it was predicted that the full catalytic ORR cycles could be completed energetically on 0D heteroatom-doped C60 fullerene, i.e., nitrogen-doped C60 (N-C60).94 This has recently been experimentally proven that the fullerene-like nitrogen-doped carbon shells (N-carbon shells), produced by deliberately pyrolyzing fallen gingko leaves under a N2 atmosphere at high temperature, could be applied as the effective ORR electrocatalyst.93 The red circles in Fig. 3A indicate the sharp turns with the ring structure of the N-carbon shells, which may result from the integration of nitrogen into the graphitic structure and accordingly would lead to more active sites than the basal plane of graphitic carbons. The ORR experimental results show that the obtained N-carbon shells exhibit high electrocatalytic activity for ORR, which is comparable to the commercial Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 3B). The electron-transfer number per oxygen molecule on N-carbon shells is 4.1, indicating a four-electron transfer process of ORR (Fig. 3C). The theoretical calculations were also explored to better understand the effect of nitrogen doping on the ORR of N-carbon shells. Due to the limited number of atoms that can be introduced in the model calculation, the N-C60 with the molecular formula of C59N was explored as a model for this study (Fig. 3D). Quantum mechanics calculations with B3LYP density functional theory (Gaussian03) indicate that oxygen adsorption may process on the HH Pauling site (HH1), HP Pauling site, and HH C–C site of N-C60 (Fig. 3E). Because the carbon atoms adjacent to nitrogen dopants possess a considerably higher positive charge to counterbalance the strong electronic affinity of the N atom, a free O2 molecule can be adsorbed onto HH1 more easily compared to other two sites, suggesting that HH1 is a more likely adsorption mode for an O2 molecule at the N-C60. The N-induced charge delocalization can facilitate the optimal chemisorption mode of O2, aside-on adsorption (HH1 Pauling site, Fig. 3F), onto the N-C60. The biased diatomic adsorption can effectively weaken the O–O bonding and lower the adsorption energy to facilitate ORR at N-C60. As such, doping carbon fullerene with nitrogen heteroatoms as in the N-C60 can effectively create the metal-free active sites for the electrochemical reduction of O2.94
 Fig. 3  (A) TEM image of N-carbon shells. (B) Rotating ring-disk electrode tests for N-carbon shells and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with the rotating rate of 1600 rpm and the scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Id: disk current; Ir: ring current. (C) Electron-transfer numbers per oxygen molecule for N-carbon shells and Pt/C. (D) Calculated charge density distribution for N-C60 with the molecular formula of C59N as an example. (E) Schematic representations of three possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule on C59N: HH1 Pauling model (I), HH2 Pauling model (II), and HHV Pauling model (III), respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.) 

2.2 Heteroatom-doped 1D carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
1D CNTs can be considered as a 2D GN sheet rolled up into a nanoscale tube (which are single-walled CNTs), or with additional GN sheets around the core of single-wall CNTs (called multi-wall CNTs).220 These CNTs have the diameters in the range between fractions of nanometers and tens of nanometers and lengths up to several centimetres. Since their initial discovery by Iijima in 1991, they were produced from a cathode by a carbon-arc discharge method similar to that used for preparing C60.229 Because of their unique structural, electronic properties, high chemical stability, and extremely high mechanical strength and modulus,230 CNTs have exhibited a wide range of potential applications including use as a high sensitivity microbalance,231 gas detector,232 catalyst support,233 electron source in fields of emission mode for display,234 tiny tweezers for nanoscale manipulation,235 and probe tips for scanning probe microscopy.236

2.2.1 Single heteroatom-doped CNTs. 
Nitrogen doped CNTs (N-CNTs). 
In 2009, Dai and co-workers reported that vertically aligned N-CNTs (Fig. 4A) produced by the pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanine237 could be used as an effective electrocatalyst for ORR in alkaline electrolytes.107 The half-wave potentials for ORR at the vertically aligned N-CNT electrode is comparable to that at the commercial Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 4B). Control experiments suggest that compared with the nonaligned N-CNTs, the superior electrocatalytic performance of the vertically aligned N-CNTs is attributed to their large surface area with all of the nanotube top-ends falling on one plane at the interface between the aligned nanotube and electrolyte solution that facilitates the electrolyte/reactant diffusion. The as-prepared N-CNTs also show lower overpotential, smaller crossover effect, and better long-term operation stability. Quantum mechanics calculations with the B3LYP hybrid density functional suggest that carbon atoms adjacent to nitrogen dopants possess a substantially higher positive charge density to counterbalance the strong electronic affinity of the nitrogen atom (Fig. 4C). A redox cycling process reduces the carbon atoms that naturally exist in an oxidized form by the action of the electrochemical cycling, followed by reoxidation of the reduced carbon atoms to their preferred oxidized state upon O2 absorption. The nitrogen-induced charge delocalization can also change the chemisorption mode of O2 from the usual end-on adsorption (Pauling model) at the CNT surface (top, Fig. 4D) to a side-on adsorption (Yeager model) onto the N-CNTs (bottom, Fig. 4D). The parallel diatomic adsorption can effectively weaken the O–O bonding to facilitate ORR at the N-CNTs. It should be noted that herein the N-CNTs were produced by the pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanine237 with the residual Fe NPs.95,105,107 Although great care was taken during the electrochemical purification of N-CNTs before the ORR tests, the possible effects of metal contaminants on ORR remains a matter of controversy.238–241 In this regard, it will be a significant advancement to develop a metal-free growth process to produce N-CNTs in order to confirm that the electroactivity of N-CNTs for ORR was indeed caused by the induction of nitrogen sites rather than the iron residue. In order to mitigate this issue, a combination of plasma-etching with chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technology was used to generate N-CNTs by using SiO2 NPs as metal-free electrocatalysts (Fig. 5A).104 The ORR results suggest that the onset potential for the N-CNTs shifts to a more positive value than that of CNTs (Fig. 5B), consistent with the previous report on vertically aligned N-CNTs produced by the metal-catalytic growth.107 The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule on the N-CNTs is 3.52–3.92 at the potential ranging from −0.1 V to 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, Fig. 5C), suggesting a four-electron process for ORR at the N-CNT electrode. Owing to the metal-free growth, the observed electrocatalytic activity toward ORR for the newly produced N-CNTs could be exclusively attributed to the incorporation of nitrogen into the CNT structure. This provides solid evidence that nitrogen doping is able to dramatically enhance electrocatalytic activity of CNTs for ORR,107 by creating the net positive charge on adjacent carbon atoms in the nanotube structure to readily attract the electrons from the anode for facilitating the ORR.
 Fig. 4  (A) SEM image of vertically aligned N-CNTs. (B) Linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the Pt/C (curve 1), vertically aligned CNTs (curve 2), and vertically aligned N-CNT modified glassy carbon electrodes (curve 3). (C) Calculated charge density distribution for the N-CNTs. (D) Schematic representations of possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule at the CNTs (top) and N-CNTs (bottom). (Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science.) 
 Fig. 5  (A) Metal-free growth of N-CNTs for ORR. (B) LSV curves of the N-CNTs and CNTs in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (C) LSV curves of the N-CNT in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 at different rotating rates of 100, 400, 900, and 1600 rpm at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The inset in Fig. 5C shows the Koutecky–Levich plots of the N-CNTs derived from LSV curves. (Adapted with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) 
Different single heteroatom (such as boron102 or sulfur96)-doped CNTs were also explored as the metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR.96,102 (i) Boron-doped carbon nanotubes (B-CNTs). B-CNTs with a tunable boron content of 0.86, 1.33, and 2.24 at% (denoted as B1-CNTs, B2-CNTs, and B3-CNTs) were produced using CVD technology with benzene and triphenylborane as precursors and ferrocene as a catalyst.102 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results show a rich collection of boron chemical states in B-CNTs, including BC3, BCO2, and BC2O moieties. The resulting B-CNTs show the interesting boron content-dependent ORR activity with B3-CNTs exhibiting the biggest peak current density (8.0 mA mg−1) and most positive peak position at −0.35 V vs. saturated calomel electrode (SCE) (Fig. 6A). Similar trends are also observed for the steady-state diffusion currents and the half-wave potentials in the LSV curves (Fig. 6B). Theoretical calculations indicate that the electrocatalytic activity of B-CNTs for ORR stems from conjugation between the vacant 2pz orbital of boron and the π orbital of carbon. The accumulated electrons in the 2pz orbital are active as a result of the small electronegativity of boron, and therefore become the HOMO electrons in B-CNTs (Fig. 6C), suggesting boron doping plays a crucial role in achieving advanced metal-free ORR catalysts. Although the performance of B-CNTs is not yet as good as the commercial Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% and 40 wt% Pt loading, Fig. 6B), the proportional relationship between the ORR performance and boron content suggests the great potential of B-CNTs for further improvement. (ii) Sulfur doped CNTs (S-CNTs). S-CNTs are another interesting type of non-Pt catalysts for enhancing ORR. S-CNTs were synthesized by directly annealing oxidized CNTs and benzenedithiol (BDT) under a N2 atmosphere for ORR in alkaline medium.96 Experimental results indicate that S-CNTs prepared at 900 °C using the CNT/BDT mass ratio of 1:2 exhibit much higher diffusion-limiting current and the more positive onset potential for ORR than those prepared using 1:1 and 1:3 under the same conditions. The onset potential of S-CNTs (−0.082 V vs. Ag/AgCl) is slightly negative to Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading, −0.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl), suggesting the excellent ORR electrocatalytic performance of S-CNTs. Similar to the metal-free N-CNTs,95,104,105,107 B-CNTs and S-CNTs both show smaller crossover effect and better long-term operation stability than the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) in alkaline electrolytes.
 Fig. 6  (A) CV curves of CNTs and different B-CNTs in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (B) LSV curves of CNTs, different B-CNTs and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation speed of 2500 rpm. (C) Important molecular orbitals involved in the O2 adsorption on B-CNTs (5,5). (a) Spin-down HOMO−1 of B-CNTs (5,5). (b) LUMO of the triplet O2. (c) Spin-down HOMO−2 of O2-B-CNTs (5,5). (Adapted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


2.2.2 Multiple heteroatom-co-doped CNTs. 
Besides the single heteroatom-doped CNTs, multiple heteroatoms (such as boron and nitrogen,103 phosphorus and nitrogen,101 sulfur and nitrogen,97,242 nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine98 or silicon and nitrogen137)-co-doped CNTs exhibit significantly improved ORR due to their synergistic coupling effect between different heteroatoms that can facilitate the electrocatalytic reduction of oxygen.10,11
Boron and nitrogen co-doped CNTs (BN-CNTs). 
Vertically aligned CNTs were first used as the advanced carbon nanomaterial support to achieve the co-doping concept for enhancing ORR.103 By the pyrolysis of melamine diborate, the vertically aligned BN-CNTs with a fairly uniform length of ∼15 μm were prepared on the SiO2/Si substrate (Fig. 7A). Among the chemically bonded carbon, boron, and nitrogen atoms in vertically aligned BN-CNTs, the carbon content (85.5%) dominates over boron (4.2%) and nitrogen (10.3%). The high carbon content in vertically aligned BN-CNTs ensures high conductivity for electrochemical applications, while the presence of boron and nitrogen can significantly enhance the ORR activity. The LSV curves in Fig. 7B show the vertically aligned CNTs support the two-step reaction pathway for ORR at around −0.28 and −0.65 V (vs. SCE). Vertically aligned B-CNTs show a similar profile to vertically aligned CNTs, but with an overall better ORR activity (a more positive onset potential and higher current density), which was attributed to the facilitated chemisorption of O2 by boron doping.243,244 For vertically aligned N-CNTs and vertically aligned BN-CNTs, they show a single-step platform, indicating a four-electron ORR process. In particular, the half-wave potential of the vertically aligned BN-CNTs (−0.25 V vs. SCE) is much more positive than that of vertically aligned B-CNTs (−0.5 V vs. SCE) and vertically aligned N-CNTs (−0.3 V vs. SCE). These clearly indicate that boron and nitrogen co-doping significantly improves the electrocatalytic activity of CNTs due to a synergetic effect arising from co-doping of CNTs with both boron and nitrogen atoms. As is known, the nitrogen is an electron-rich dopant (with an electron lone pair) but boron is an electron-deficient one (without an electron lone pair). Due to the compensation effect between the electron-rich and electron-deficient dopants, two cases may exist, which can impact the conjugation system in very different ways: (i) boron and nitrogen are bonded together, and (ii) boron and nitrogen locate separately, corresponding to totally different electronic structures. Based on this hypothesis, two kinds of boron and nitrogen co-doped CNTs [bonded boron and nitrogen (B-N-CNTs) or separated boron and nitrogen (B-CNTs-N)] were synthesized by different procedures.99 For B-N-CNTs, the deterioration of ORR performances with increasing B/N ratio indicates that the bonded boron and nitrogen contribute little to the ORR activity (Fig. 7C). In contrast, the B-CNTs-N can boost the ORR catalytic ability with increasing B/N ratio (Fig. 7D). DFT calculations demonstrate the HOMO plot shows a weak interaction between O2 and the B-N-CNTs with little charge transferred to O2, leading to low ORR activity (Fig. 7E and F). To further understand such phenomena, the second-order orbital perturbation analysis was applied on both situations. For B-N-CNTs, the lone-pair electrons from a nitrogen dopant are largely neutralized by the vacant orbital of the boron dopant, and few electrons or vacant orbitals are left to conjugate with the carbon π system. With little conjugation, the activation of carbon π electrons can hardly occur. In contrast, the situation for the B-CNTs-N is totally different. The separation of boron from nitrogen prevents the neutralization between the electron donor (nitrogen) and acceptor (boron), making CNTs have excellent ORR activity (synergetic effect).
 Fig. 7  (A) SEM image of vertically aligned BN-CNTs. (B) LSV curves of various catalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1000 rpm. (C) LSV curves of different vertically aligned BN-CNTs and CNTs in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The B/N ratio order: B3-N-CNTs > B2-N-CNTs > B1-N-CNTs. (D) LSV curves of N-CNTs, different BN-CNTs and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation speed of 2500 rpm. The B/N ratio order: B3-CNTs-N > B2-CNTs-N > B1-CNTs-N. (E) Bonded B and N co-doped CNTs (5,5). (F) HOMO plot of the corresponding O2 adsorption configuration (isodensity value of 0.007 a.u.). N, blue; B, pink; C, black; H, gray; O, red. (Parts A and B adapted with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts D–F adapted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) 
Followed by the B,N co-doping concept for ORR, several groups have tried to co-dope with the combination of various dual elements (e.g., phosphorus and nitrogen,101 sulfur and nitrogen,242 and silicon and nitrogen137) into CNTs for further optimizing ORR performance. Phosphorus and nitrogen co-doped CNTs (NP-CNTs). An injection-assisted CVD method was recently used to make NP-CNTs.101 Owing to the synergetic effect arising from co-doping CNTs with both phosphorus and nitrogen, the resultant NP-CNTs show a significantly enhanced electrocatalytic activity toward ORR with respect to CNTs doped by phosphorus or nitrogen only. Sulfur and nitrogen co-doped CNTs (NS-CNTs). In addition to NP-CNTs, NS-CNTs were synthesized by annealing a mixture of N-CNTs and sulfur.242 The onset potential of NS-CNTs for ORR is almost the same as that of Pt/C catalysts (20 wt% Pt loading), and more positive than that of N-CNTs in alkaline medium, suggesting that NS-CNTs exhibit excellent performance in alkaline medium, which is due to the co-doping of sulfur and nitrogen has changed the chemical environment, making the graphitic nitrogen species more preferable for ORR. The NS-CNTs with enhanced ORR performance can also be made by ball-milling CNTs with thiourea, followed by thermal treatment.97 Such incorporation of sulfur and nitrogen took place in defect sites of CNTs. When the graphitic structure of CNTs collapses, the amount of nitrogen actually incorporated into the C–C network can be increased by co-doping with sulfur. The ORR activity of NS-CNTs increases with the increasing content of heteroatoms, both in acid and alkaline media. As a consequence, co-doping with nitrogen and sulfur results in more active electrocatalysts for ORR in acid media as sulfur promotes the incorporation of surface nitrogen. Silicon and nitrogen co-doped CNTs (NSi-CNTs). The co-doping concept has also been well demonstrated on NSi-CNTs for promoting ORR. With the help of CVD technology, NSi-CNTs were synthesized by Liu, Peng and co-workers (Fig. 8A).137 In alkaline media, the onset potential of NSi-CNTs (−0.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl) is slightly lower than that of commercial Pt/C catalysts, 47.6 wt% Pt loading (−0.001 V vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 8B). Theoretical calculations indicate that compared to single heteroatom-doped or un-doped counterparts, silicon and nitrogen co-doping changes the O2 chemisorption mode from the usual end-on adsorption to a relatively easy side on adsorption onto the material surface, making the electrons considerably easy to be excited and transferred to O2 (Fig. 8C–F). Nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine co-doped CNTs (FNS-CNTs). In addition to dual doping onto CNTs, more recently, the research interest has moved to dope three kinds of elements (i.e., nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine) into the CNT surface for further optimizing ORR, by first the adsorption of heteroatom-containing ionic liquids on the walls of CNTs, followed by carbonization (Fig. 9A).98 The resultant FNS-CNTs display one of the best performances among heteroatom-doped nanocarbon electrocatalysts in terms of half-wave potential and kinetic current density. The four-electron selectivity and the exchange current density of the FNS-CNTs are comparable to those of the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). Furthermore, an alkaline fuel cell that employs FNS-CNTs as the cathode electrocatalyst shows very high current and power densities (Fig. 9B).
 Fig. 8  (A) SEM image of SiN-CNTs. (B) LSV curves of CNTs, N-CNTs, SiN-CNTs and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. The net charge distributions of C, Si and N atoms in pure GN (C), Si-doped GN with one silicon (D) or two silicon atoms (E) and Si, N-co-doped GN (F). (Adapted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2015 Royal Chemical Society.) 
 Fig. 9  (A) Synthesis of the FNS-CNTs. (B) The performance of MEAs that employ FNS-CNTs, CNTs, or Pt/C as the cathodes in alkaline fuel cells at 50 °C; open and closed circles correspond to the cell voltages and power densities, respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 

2.3 Heteroatom-doped 2D graphene (GN)
GN is a 2D monolayer of carbon atoms parked into a dense hexagonal network structure,245 and can be considered as the basic building block for graphitic materials of all dimensions because it can be wrapped up into 0D C60, rolled into 1D CNTs, or stacked into 3D graphite.192,220 Since the substance was first isolated in 2004,245 GN has been attracting considerable attention due to its fascinating physical and chemical properties and the explosive interest from experimentalists and theoreticians.246,247 GN exhibits remarkable electronic, optical, thermal and mechanical properties.192,248–253 These attractive properties generate huge interest to explore the potential applications of biomedicine,254,255 reinforced composites,256 electronics and transparent electrodes for displays, solar cells,257–260 and especially metal-free ORR catalysts.8,42,55–58,168–173,176

2.3.1 Single heteroatom-doped GN. 
Nitrogen-doped GN (N-GN). 
In 2010, the first example on the use of N-GN as metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR was demonstrated by Liu, Dai and co-workers.133 In this work, the N-GN was synthesized by CVD of methane in the presence of ammonia. The resultant N-GN film can be readily etched off from the substrate by dissolving the residual Ni electrocatalyst layer in HCl,261 allowing the freestanding N-GN sheets to be transferred onto different substrates suitable for subsequent electrochemical investigation (Fig. 10A). The catalytic current density at the N-GN is found to be ∼3 times higher than that of the Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) over a large potential range in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (Fig. 10B). The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule at the N-GN electrode is 3.6–4 at the potential ranging from −0.4 to −0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). Later, with the help of nanocasting technology, the N-GN sheets with the size between 200 nm to several micrometers and the thickness of ∼18 nm were obtained.130 This material exhibits a one step, four-electron transfer pathway with a high kinetic current density of 7.3 mA cm−2, which is superior to that of the Pt/C catalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading (5.4 mA cm−2). Further studies reveal that both the electrical conductivity and the content of pyridinic nitrogen are two vital factors for achieving high-performance nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials for ORR as they have a huge impact on the electron transfer to electrodes and oxygen reduction at active sites. More recently, the N-GN sheets, derived from a polyacrylonitrile brush118 with high nitrogen doping content of up to 11.2 wt% and high specific surface area of up to 217 m2 g−1 show the four-electron transfer mechanism for ORR with higher kinetic limiting current and diffusion limiting current density than the commercially available Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) in alkaline medium. A more interesting N-GN with size-defined mesopores (Fig. 10C) was recently synthesized by employing a GN/silica nanosheet template.114 The N-GN sheets with the nitrogen doping content of 3.5% have a lot of 22 nm mesopores on their surface, providing much more active sites for boosting ORR. The ORR results show that the N-GN sheets with mesopores exhibit a diffusion-limiting current approaching that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading, 5.45 vs. 5.78 mA cm−2), and even a more positive onset and half-wave potential [−0.01 and −0.11 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)] than those of Pt/C in alkaline medium (Fig. 10D). Around the same time, an eco-friendly method based on silica-protected pyrolysis process was developed to prepare N-GN sheets with binary mesopores at 2.1 and 7.5 nm, allowing to facilitate O2 and electrolyte diffusion onto the catalyst surface.119 The onset potential of ORR at GN commences at around −0.22 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), whereas the onset potential at N-GN sheets with binary mesopores shifts positively to −0.13 V with the limiting diffusion current density at −0.70 V being ∼1.5 times larger than that of GN. N-GN quantum dots. Besides the mesoporous N-GN, N-GN quantum dots are also very promising for ORR. The synthesis of N-GN quantum dots with the nitrogen/carbon atomic ratio of 4.28% has been demonstrated through the electrochemical etching of filtration-formed GN film in acetonitrile containing nitrogen-containing tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP).205 The diameter of the N-GN quantum dots is ∼2–5 nm (Fig. 10E). The GN was further employed to support N-GN quantum dots for promoting ORR. In alkaline solution, the ORR onset potential of N-GN quantum dots supported on GN was at ∼−0.16 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) with a reduction peak at ∼−0.27 V (Fig. 10F), which is close to those of the Pt/C electrocatalyst, indicating an optimized catalytic ability of N-GN quantum dots for ORR. Later, by the hydrothermal treatment of willow leaves, the N-GN quantum dots with the height of ∼1–4 nm and the nitrogen/carbon atomic ratio of 4.28% were synthesized.262 Though such N-GN quantum dots exhibit more negative onset and half-wave potentials (−0.002 and −0.244 V vs. Hg/HgO) than those of Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (0.07 and −0.129 V) in alkaline medium, they still show a four-electron process for ORR over a wide potential range. Recent studies try to understand the effect of the size of N-GN quantum dots on ORR performance, showing that the N-GN quantum dots with the smaller size led to a more negative onset potential and a lower ORR current.128 This can be explained by the smaller-size N-GN quantum dots have the elevated HOMO level, which makes the electrons harder to be excited and transfer to O2, hence hinders the ORR.
 Fig. 10  (A) A digital photo image of a transparent N-GN film floating on water. (B) LSV curves of GN (red line), Pt/C (green line), and N-GN (blue line) in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1. Mass(GN) = Mass(Pt/C) = Mass(N-GN) = 7.5 μg. (C) TEM image of N-GN with mesopores. (D) LSV curves of N-GN with mesopores and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) TEM image of N-GNQDs. (F) LSV curves of N-GN quantum dots in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with different speeds. The inset shows the Koutecky–Levich plots derived from the LSV measurements. (Parts A and B adapted with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. Parts A–D adapted with permission from ref. 114 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts E–F adapted with permission from ref. 205 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Besides the N-GN, different single heteroatom (such as sulfur,109,120,123,124 iodine,121,122 chlorine121 or bromine121)-doped GNs were also found to be good candidates as the effective metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR. Sulfur doped GN (S-GN). The edge-selectively S-GN sheets were first synthesized by a simple yet efficient dry ball-milling graphite in the presence of sulfur.120 The limiting current density for ORR of edge-selectively S-GN sheets (4.47 mA cm−2) approaches 93.4% (4.79 mA cm−2) of commercial Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (Fig. 11A). The first-principles study by DFT methods on the electronic structure of edge-selectively S-GN sheets suggest that the catalytic activity of the doped GN is closely related to spin and charge distributions on the graphitic framework. Sulfur, covalently bound to the zigzag and armchair edges of GN, can induce both charge and spin densities on the GN. As a result, those carbon atoms with high positive charge and spin densities can serve as active sites for promoting the catalytic activity. Furthermore, the sulfur atom itself is also an active site for ORR, since the charge density of sulfur at the zigzag edge is increased as high as 0.22 (circle in Fig. 11B). Furthermore, the study of the HOMO and the LUMO distributions on GN suggests that the HOMO and the LUMO are strongly polarized by the covalently bonded sulfur atoms at the edge of GN (Fig. 11C). These polarized zones should serve as the active sites for ORR. Besides the ball-milling method,120 several other approaches were also reported for S-GN synthesis. The prominent examples include the successful fabrication of S-GN with a sulfur content of 1.53% by directly annealing GO and benzyl disulfide in argon,123 the synthesis of S-GN with a high surface area via the thermal reaction between GO and the H2S guest gas at high temperature,124 the use of a green and cost-effective method for preparing S-GN achieved by the continuous charge/discharge cycling of GN–sulfur composites in lithium–sulfur batteries,109 the synthesis of crumpled and sheet-like S-GN via magnesiothermic reduction based on the low-cost, nontoxic CO2 and Na2SO4 as the carbon and sulfur sources, respectively. All the above S-GNs show enhanced ORR activity with a nearly four-electron transfer pathway. Iodine, chlorine or bromine-doped GN (I-GN, Cl-GN or Br-GN). In addition, I-GN, Cl-GN or Br-GN sheets were also explored as effective electrocatalysts for ORR, showing that they can be doped into GN nanosheets by a specially designed method. The obtained I-GN, Cl-GN or Br-GN nanosheets show the remarkable electrocatalytic activities toward ORR in alkaline medium.121 First-principles density-functional calculations reveal that the edges of halogenated GN have favorable binding affinity with an oxygen molecule, and the O–O bond strengths are weakened as a result of the halogenation-induced charge transfer (Fig. 11D and E), being in good agreement with the experimental observations.122 Boron, phosphorous or oxygen-doped GN (B-GN, P-GN or O-GN). By combining the experimental data and DFT calculations, Qiao and co-workers systematically investigated the nature and origin of ORR activity of a series of heteroatom (N, B, P, O or S)-doped GN catalysts.263 The results predict that the electrocatalytic ORR performance of an ideal heteroatom-doped GN possesses the exchange current density of 2.1 × 10 μA cm−2, an onset potential of 0.33 V (vs. normal hydrogen electrode, NHE) and an almost 100% 4-electron pathway selectivity, which are comparable with or even better than those of the state-of-the-art Pt catalyst. These combined computational and experimental studies reveal the nature of ORR electrocatalysis for GN-based materials, paving the new way to the molecular design of highly efficient GN-based metal-free catalysts with their ORR performance surpassing that of the state-of-the-art Pt catalyst.
 Fig. 11  (A) LSV curves of the graphite, S-GN and Pt/C electrodes in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (B) HOMO distribution of S-GN. (C) LUMO distribution of S-GN. (D) The optimized O2 adsorption geometries onto Cl-GN, Br-GN and I-GN, in which halogen is covalently linked to two sp2 carbons. (E) The projected density of electronic states onto O2: (d) Cl-GN; (e) Br-GN; and (f) I-GN for the cases of corresponding (a), (b), and (c), respectively. (Parts A–C adapted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts D–E adapted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.) 


2.3.2 Multiple heteroatom-co-doped GN. 
Co-doping of two different elements into GN is one of the unique approaches to achieve the effective earth-abundant materials for ORR. Sulfur and nitrogen co-doped GN (NS-GN). NS-GN was synthesized by annealing a mixture of GO and a poly[3-amino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole] composite.116 Due to the synergistic effect between sulfur and nitrogen, the half-wave potential of NS-GN is comparable to that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), and the limiting current density of NS-GN sheets even surpasses that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) at −0.28 V (vs. SCE) in alkaline solution. The electron-transfer number for NS-GN sheets is close to 3.6 at the potentials ranging from −0.5 to −0.7 V (vs. SCE), suggesting that the ORR process mainly proceeds via a four-electron pathway. With a similar annealing method but changing the sulfur precursor to dipyrrolemethane108 or ethylene glycol,112 NS-GNs can be also prepared and exhibit a remarkable electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR, further supporting the conclusion that co-doping of sulfur and nitrogen can make ORR catalysts more effective.108,112 This co-doping concept has been extended to other two multielement-doped GN for highly efficient non-noble metal catalysts for ORR. Boron and nitrogen co-doped GN (BN-GN). For example, BN-GN has been prepared by simple thermal annealing of GO in the presence of boric acid and ammonia for producing the efficient ORR electrocatalyst.126 The half-wave potential of BN-GN sheets (B12C77N11 in the work) for ORR is at ∼−0.25 V (vs. SCE) in a 0.1 M KOH solution, which is close to that of the Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading, Fig. 12A). The first-principles calculations were performed to better understand the origin of high catalytic capability of BN-GN (Fig. 12B). As is known, a small HOMO–LUMO gap implies the low kinetic stability and high chemical reactivity because the smaller energy gap means that the state of the GN is energetically favorable to add electrons to a high-lying LUMO and to extract electrons from a low-lying HOMO, and thus the facile formation of activated complexes for any potential reaction.264 Compared to pure GN, the substitution of carbon by boron and nitrogen leads to a smaller HOMO–LUMO energy gap. However, overdoping of B and N can lead to a significant increase in the HOMO–LUMO energy gap. As a result, B38C28N34H26 has the highest HOMO–LUMO energy gap.126,265 Recently, much effort has been invested to design more complex BN-GN sheets with mesopores for providing more active sites to boost ORR.113 One interesting example is that the mesoporous BN-GN was made by annealing the GO-based polyaniline nanosheets functionalized with boronic acid followed by CO2 activation. Benefiting from their high surface area (363 m2 g−1), unique 2D structure, and high heteroatom-doping contents (5.4 wt% boron and 5.3 wt% nitrogen), the mesoporous BN-GN exhibits excellent ORR activity in alkaline media with a half-wave potential (−0.27 V vs. Ag/AgCl) close to that of Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (−0.18 V vs. Ag/AgCl). BN-GN quantum dots also exhibit great potential in enhancing ORR due to their nanoscaled size compared to BN-GN as well as the synergetic effect between boron and nitrogen. In order to demonstrate this concept, NS-GN quantum dots were prepared with an electrochemical etching method111 and the combustion flame technique,110 respectively. As expected, these two kinds of NS-GN quantum dots show high catalytic activities for the ORR in alkaline medium. Phosphorous, sulfur and nitrogen co-doped GN (NPS-GN). Recently, NPS-GN, prepared by employing thiourea as a single source of nitrogen and sulfur, and triphenylphosphine as phosphorous precursors, has been considered to be a more effective system for further boosting ORR.115 Additional phosphorous doping causes a remarkable synergistic effect on binary NS-GN sheets by generating active phosphorous–nitrogen species. The optimized NPS-GN exhibits excellent ORR activity, which is ∼2 times better than that of binary NS-GN sheets, and ∼5 times better than that of single phosphorous-doped GN sheets. The catalytic activity of the ternary-doped GN sheets is superior than the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) in alkaline medium.
 Fig. 12  (A) LSV curves of BN-GN with different compositions and Pt/C catalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (B) Experiment ORR activities vs. DFT-predicated HOMO–LUMO energy gap for BN-GN. (Adapted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 

2.4 Heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials
Till now, various heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials have been reported for the effective oxygen reduction.8,42,55–58,93,134–173,176,194–196,206,207,209,212,214 To clarify the information and make this section easy to follow and understand, Table 1 summarizes the related heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials for ORR, which are discussed in this section below.
Table 1 Summary of heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials reported for ORR




Element
Nanomaterial
Ref.




Single heteroatom-doped
N-doped
N-GN-based nanomaterials
N-GN framework

160



Nanoporous N-GN

151



Mesoporous N-GN

117



N-GN/N-CNTs composite

145



N-GN foams

166



Nitrogen-doped porous carbons
N-OMCs

167



N-mesoporous carbon cubes

143



N-nanoporous carbons

157



N-hierarchically porous carbons

153



Other N-porous carbons based nanomaterials

138, 141 and 148



Other kinds of nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials
N-carbon nanofiber aerogel

266



N-carbon capsules

159



N-carbon nanocages

163



N-carbon nanospheres

154



N-carbon nanoleaf networks

142



Other single element-doped
P-OMCs

161



Se-GN/Se-CNT networks

162







Multiple heteroatom-co-doped
N and S co-doped
N and S co-doped porous carbon-based nanomaterials
NS-porous carbons

155



NS-trimodal porous carbons

149



NS-mesoporous carbons

140



Mesoporous NS-GN

127



NS-GN sheets-mesoporous carbon composite

147



NS-GN nanomesh foams

144



N and P co-doped
NP-mesoporous carbon foams

135



P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers

136



N, S and O co-doped
NOS-OMCs

156



NPS-porous carbons

150






2.4.1 Single heteroatom-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials. 
2.4.1.1 N-GN-based 3D nanomaterials. 
There are several different designs on N-GN-based 3D nanomaterials for promoting ORR. (i) N-GN framework. A versatile, ultralight 3D N-GN framework has recently been made for enhancing ORR because it has the obvious merits in fire resistance, ultra-low density (∼2.1 mg cm−3) as well as the unique 3D pore-rich structure with maximum access to the nitrogen sites within highly exposed GN (Fig. 13A–D).160 In a 0.1 M KOH solution, the onset potential for ORR on the GN framework (∼−0.18 V vs. Ag/AgCl) is slightly lower than that on the Pt/C catalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 13E). The electron-transfer number per oxygen molecule involved in ORR is determined to be ∼3.7, indicating the ORR proceeds via a nearly four-electron pathway. In addition, the peroxide yield on the GN framework is less than 20% in all the potential range and decreases to 13% at −0.8 V (Fig. 13F). These results indicate that the N-GN framework is indeed a promising metal-free electrocatalyst for ORR in an alkaline solution. (ii) Nanoporous N-GN. A nanoporous Ni-based CVD method to synthesize free-standing 3D nanoporous N-GN sheets with tunable pore sizes (Fig. 14A).151 The optimized 3D nanoporous N-GN sheets show the onset potential of ∼−0.08 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and the kinetic current density of 8.2 mA cm−2 at −0.40 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (higher than that of Pt/C, 5.4 mA cm−2 under the same potential) in alkaline media (Fig. 14B and C). Such excellent electrochemical activity for ORR is attributed to the unique physicochemical properties of free-standing 3D nanoporous N-GN sheets including the high electrical conductivity of GN and the 3D nanostructure fully exploiting the intrinsic large effective surface area for high catalytic efficiency made by the open porosity. (iii) Mesoporous N-GN. In 2014, a mesoporous N-GN was successfully prepared by directly annealing the pre-synthesized GO-polydopamine.117 The content of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen in the obtained N-GN sheets is 88.8%, 3.2% and 8.0%, respectively. The resulting mesoporous N-GN shows the onset potential of −0.06 V (vs. Hg/Hg2Cl2) vs. −0.20 V at GN for ORR, which is closer to that of the commercial Pt/C with unmentioned wt% Pt loading (0.10 V). (iv) N-GN/N-CNT composite. A facile solution self-assembly method was demonstrated to 3D N-GN/N-CNT composite by heating the mixture of GN, CNTs and melamine (as a nitrogen-rich source) at 900 °C under an Ar atmosphere.145 SEM and TEM images indicate that CNTs and GN sheets combine together and they are well linked together. By taking advantage of the abundant highly active sites from N-GN and the 3D conductive network from N-CNTs for efficient mass and electron transport, the N-GN/N-CNT composite in alkaline medium demonstrates their potential as low-cost efficient ORR electrocatalyst. (v) N-GN foams. 3D porous N-GN foams were prepared by using silica spheres as hard temperature.166 With a 3D macroporous morphology and high surface area for both enhanced electrolyte–electrode interactions and electrolyte–reactant diffusion, the 3D porous N-GN foams exhibit both remarkable ORR activity and long-term stability in both alkaline and acidic solutions, and their ORR activity is even better than that of the Pt-based electrocatalyst in alkaline medium.
 Fig. 13  (A and B) Photographs of the as-prepared superlight N-GN framework, and one with a piece of N-GN framework size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (C and D) SEM images of the N-GN framework. Scale bars: (C) 10 mm, (D) 100 nm. (E) LSV curves of the N-GN framework and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (F) The curve of peroxide yield on the N-GN framework electrode. (Adapted with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of 3D nanoporous N-GN (a–c); and the ORR catalyzed by 3D nanoporous N-GN. (B) LSV curves of 3D nanoporous N-GN grown at different CVD temperatures and un-doped nanoporous GN. G-1000: 3D un-doped nanoporous GN deposited at 1000 °C; N-1000: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 1000 °C; N-900: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 900 °C; N-800L: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 800 °C for longer time; N-800S: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 800 °C for shorter time. (C) Koutecky–Levich plots at −0.40 V with the electron transport number (n) per oxygen molecule. (Adapted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 
Nitrogen-doped 3D porous carbons. (i) Nitrogen-doped 3D ordered mesoporous carbons (N-OMCs). 
N-OMCs were first fabricated on the basis of a metal-free nanocasting technology with SBA-15 as the template and N,N′-bis(2,6-diisopropyphenyl)-3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide as the source of both carbon and nitrogen.167 Being similar with the ordered mesoporous carbons (OMCs), the N-OMCs with a N doping amount of 2.7% exhibit the 2D hexagonal arrangements as well as the high BET surface area (510 cm2 g−1) and total pore volume (0.61 cm3 g−1). The onset potential of N-OMCs for ORR in alkaline medium is −0.13 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), which is nearly the same as that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). The calculated kinetic current density of N-OMCs at 0.35 V (9.15 mA cm−2) is more than twice as high as that of commercially Pt/C catalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading (4.44 mA cm−2 at 0.35 V). These suggest the superior ORR activity of N-OMCs. Later, another novel N-OMCs with both higher surface areas (up to 1500 m2 g−1) and higher nitrogen content (12 wt%) were synthesized for further enhancing ORR by the use of ionic liquids and nucleobases as the source of carbon and nitrogen.165 The onset potential for ORR on the N-OMCs is 0.035 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl) in alkaline medium, corresponding to an overpotential ∼0.025 V higher than the commercial Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). In an acid electrolyte, N-OMCs exhibit an onset potential at 0.573 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and an overpotential of 0.197 V as compared with the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). Recently, to improve the ORR activity of a nitrogen-doped carbon-based semiconductor (i.e., graphitic-C3N4, g-C3N4), an electron-conductive material of OMCs was applied as a support for the g-C3N4 catalyst.164 Compared with mesoporous g-C3N4 and the mixed g-C3N4 + OMCs, the obtained composite of g-C3N4@OMCs exhibit the enhanced electron transfer efficiency with lower onset potential and higher ORR current density (Fig. 15A). To better understand the effect of OMCs on the ORR activity of g-C3N4@OMCs, the first-principles calculations were applied. As shown in Fig. 15B(a), the free energy plots of ORR and optimized configurations of adsorbed species on the g-C3N4 surface with zero, two, and four-electron participation are demonstrated as paths I, II, and III. The free energy of each proposed ORR state, including the initial reactant O2 adsorbed g-C3N4 (O2@g-C3N4), the intermediate product OOH− on g-C3N4 (OOH@g-C3N4), and the final product OH− in the solution with pristine g-C3N4 (OH−/g-C3N4). As illustrated in path I, oxygen cannot be reduced spontaneously on the pristine g-C3N4 surface without the electron participation (Fig. 15B(b)) due to the existence of two insurmountable barriers in the free energy plot at the states of intermediate and final products. Since g-C3N4 is a semiconductor, as illustrated in Fig. 15B(c), the active sites facilitating ORR on g-C3N4 are limited to very narrow zones of the electrode–electrolyte–gas three-phase boundaries. One effective way to increase the number of electrons accumulated on the g-C3N4 surface is adding an electron-conductive material as a support for g-C3N4. Predictably, as shown in Fig. 15B(d), the active sites facilitating ORR on g-C3N4 with a conductive support can spread over the whole surface of the electrocatalyst due to the increased electron transfer efficiency in the composite, which in turn facilitates an efficient four-electron transfer process for ORR. Therefore, the ORR active sites on g-C3N4 with a conductive support (e.g., OMCs) can spread over the whole surface of the catalyst due to the increased electron transfer efficiency in the composite, which in turn facilitates an efficient four-electron pathway. (ii) Nitrogen-doped 3D mesoporous carbon cubes (N-mesoporous carbon cubes). 3D hollow-structured N-mesoporous carbon cubes were first synthesized through a magnesium thermal reduction approach in CO2.143 One important feature of N-mesoporous carbons cubes for ORR is economical and applicable to large-scale synthesis. Although the onset potential of N-mesoporous carbon cubes was lower than that of the commercial Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) in a 0.1 M KOH solution, they encouragingly show the comparable limit current density with the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). (iii) Nitrogen-doped 3D nanoporous carbons (N-nanoporous carbons). A new type of 3D N-doped nanoporous carbon was made by a hydrothermal treatment of plant Typha orientalis at 180 °C for 12 h, followed by annealing them in a NH3 atmosphere at 800 °C.157 Due to its high BET surface area (898 m2 g−1), abundant pores, high content of nitrogen atoms (9.1 at%), and a 3D interpenetrated network structure, the N-nanoporous carbon exhibits similar catalytic activity for ORR as compared to the commercial Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) catalyst in alkaline media, and show excellent catalytic ability in acidic media. (iv) Nitrogen-doped 3D hierarchically porous carbons (N-hierarchically porous carbons). By using polydopamine (PDA)-modified mixed cellulose ester filter film as a sole template, N-hierarchically porous carbon with hierarchical micro-, meso-, and macroporosity in one structure was constructed.153 Such a unique structure leads to a super-high surface area of 2191 cm2 g−1. After being further stimulated by KOH activation, the N-hierarchically porous carbon shows a nearly equal ORR activity to the Pt/C catalysts (20 wt% Pt loading) in alkaline solution. The ORR catalytic activity of N-hierarchically porous carbons is among the highest reported activities of metal-free nitrogen-doped carbon nanoelectrocatalysts. (v) Other N-porous carbon based nanomaterials. Following different protocols, various 3D porous nitrogen-doped carbons with their unique physicochemical properties were also synthesized, all of which show the outstanding activities for ORR in alkaline medium.138,141,148
 Fig. 15  (A) LSV curves of various electrocatalysts at 1500 rpm in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (B) (a) Free energy plots of ORR and optimized configurations of adsorbed species on the g-C3N4 surface with zero, two, and four electron participation demonstrated as paths I, II, and III. Energy levels are not drawn to scale. Gray, blue, red, and white small spheres represent C, N, O, and H, respectively. (b–d) Schemes of ORR's pathway on pristine g-C3N4 without electron participation, pristine g-C3N4 with two-electron participation, and g-C3N4/conductive support composite with 4e− participation, respectively (red areas represent the active sites facilitating ORR). (Adapted with permission from ref. 165 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) 
2.4.1.2 Other kinds of nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials. 
In addition to N-GN-based 3D nanomaterials and nitrogen-doped 3D porous carbons discussed above, different types of nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials also show superior ORR activity. (i) Nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanofiber aerogel (N-carbon nanofiber aerogel). A highly active 3D N-carbon nanofiber aerogel, prepared by direct pyrolysis of a mass-producible biomass of bacterial cellulose, and followed by NH3 activation, was first used as an advanced metal-free electrocatalyst for ORR.266 The prepared N-carbon fiber aerogel exhibits the high density of N-containing active sites of 5.8 at% and a high BET surface area of 916 m2 g−1, resulting in the excellent ORR activity (half-wave potential of 0.80 V vs. RHE), and excellent electrochemical stability (only 20 mV negative shift of half-wave potential after 10000 potential cycles) in alkaline media. Importantly, when used as a cathode electrocatalyst of Zn–air batteries, the N-carbon fiber aerogel exhibits high voltages of 1.34 and 1.25 V at the discharge current densities of 1.0 and 10 mA cm−2, respectively, which are highly comparable with the state-of-the art Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading), indicating the great potential of this metal-free electrocatalyst as a promising alternative to the Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) for alkaline fuel cells and metal–air batteries. However, due to the very low amount of nitrogen in the raw material of bacterial cellulose, additional ammonia gas annealing step is required to introduce more nitrogen into the material in order to realize the excellent ORR performance. To simplify the synthesis process, the prawn shells with a high nitrogen content were applied as the raw material instead of bacterial cellulose to produce the N-carbon nanofiber aerogel.139 By this way, only one-step pyrolysis of carbonization is required to get the 3D N-carbon fiber aerogel. Such a 3D N-carbon fiber aerogel exhibits a high N doping level of 5.9%, and a high surface area of 526 m2 g−1. As an electrocatalyst, the resultant 3D N-carbon fiber aerogel exhibits superior electrocatalytic activity towards ORR with a more positive ORR onset potential, better stability and high resistance to crossover effect compared to the commercial Pt/C (unmentioned wt% Pt loading). (ii) Nitrogen-doped 3D carbon capsules (N-carbon capsules). Combining the solvothermal reaction with the carbonization was used to make the N-carbon capsules with a nitrogen content (∼13 at%) and a high BET surface area of ∼595 m2 g−1 using melamine and glyoxal as precursors.159 In alkaline medium, the electron-transfer number per oxygen molecule of ORR at the applied potential between −0.50 and −0.80 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) on N-carbon capsules is 3.7, indicating a predominant oxygen reduction process of four-electron pathway. Specially, the measured H2O2 yield for highly N-carbon capsules was below 16%, similar to that of the commercial Pt/C (12 wt% Pt loading), indicating the electron-transfer number of ∼4 as well. Such excellent ORR activity can be due to the large surface area and the high-level nitrogen doping of N-carbon capsules. Later the same group reported another kind of N-carbon capsules with bamboo-like CNT whiskers.152 Due to the combined advantageous features of a high surface area of 985 m2 g−1, abundant active sites (from the structural defects of the pore edges and bamboo-shaped CNTs and nitrogen doping) and easy access to medium and favorable mass transport, N-carbon capsules exhibit the same onset potential as that of the Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), but higher reaction current density in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (iii) Nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanocages (N-carbon nanocages). By the use of an in situ generated MgO template method and pyridine as the precursor, N-carbon nanocages with a high specific surface area of 1393 m−2 g−1 and high nitrogen content (∼10%) were produced.163 In an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, the electron-transfer number per oxygen molecule (3.27 at −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and the onset potential (−0.13 V) of N-CNs for ORR are comparable to the Pt/C electrocatalyst, 20 wt% Pt loading (3.92 at −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl and −0.03 V), but the diffusion-limiting current of N-carbon nanocages is higher than that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). (iv) Nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanospheres (N-carbon nanospheres). Using the fermented rice as the raw resource, a green approach was developed to synthesize N-carbon nanospheres,154 which have very high specific surface areas of 2105.9 m2 g−1, high porosity of 1.14 cm3 g−1 and higher nitrogen content of 6.2 at%. Although the onset potential of N-carbon nanospheres (−0.06 V vs. Hg/HgO) is slightly lower than that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), their onset potential is positively shifted compared with that of the directly carbonized products of unfermented rice and fermented rice. In addition, N-carbon nanospheres exhibit the four-electron process for ORR with long-term stability and excellent resistance to crossover effects and CO poisoning. (v) Nitrogen-doped 3D carbon nanoleaf networks (N-carbon nanoleaf networks). A simple method was used to construct N-carbon nanoleaf networks by using CNTs as a single precursor.142 The resultant N-carbon nanoleaf networks can act as ORR electrocatalysts with superb electrocatalytic activity. The excellent ORR activity is attributed to the synergistic effect of the N-doped, nanoporous structure, structural integrity, high surface area (380–497 m2 g−1) and good conductivity (up to 112 S m−1), originating from the unique bridged structure of the CNTs and graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), ensuring the rapid electron transfer and mass.
Other important elements have also been explored to dope 3D carbon nanomaterials for ORR. Selenium-doped 3D CNT-GN networks (Se-GN/Se-CNT networks). One interesting example is Se-GN/Se-CNT networks by directly annealing CNTs, GN and diphenyl diselenide in Ar.162 The obtained Se-GN/Se-CNTs exhibit slightly negative onset potential and higher current density (at −0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl) compared with the Pt/C electrocatalyst (47.6 wt% Pt loading), suggesting that doping Se into 3D carbon nanomaterials can provide a good opportunity for boosting ORR. This is because that selenium has an evidently larger atomic size than carbon, the introduction of selenium atoms into carbon materials may cause higher strain at their edges, thus facilitating charge localization and associated chemisorption of oxygen. Phosphorus-doped 3D OMCs (P-OMCs). In 2012, P-OMCs with different lengths were synthesized using a metal-free nanocasting method of SBA-15 mesoporous silica as a template and triphenylphosphine and phenol as phosphorus and carbon sources, respectively (Fig. 16A).161 The experimental results indicate the P-OMCs with shorter length (0.7 μm) exhibit higher ORR performance compared to those of longer channels (1.0 and 1.5 μm) in alkaline medium, which is likely because O2 molecules have less resistance in shorter channels. The onset potential and the limiting current at P-OMCs with the channel length of 0.7 μm are both comparable with those at Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (Fig. 16B). Later, on the basis of the principle that P-OMCs with short mesochannels can greatly improve the ORR activity mentioned above,161 the same concept was further extended to fabricate a kind of thin disk-type or plate-type P-OMCs with shorter mesochannels for ORR,146 which outperform P-OMCs with the channel length of 0.7 μm.161
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of P-OMCs. (B) LSV curves for OMCs, P-OMCs-1 (P-OMCs with the length of 1.5 μm and the thickness of 0.2 μm), P-OMCs-2 (P-OMCs with the length of 1.0 μm and the thickness of 0.4 μm), P-OMCs-3 (P-OMCs with the length of 0.7 μm and the thickness of 0.6 μm) and Pt/C on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. LSV curve for P-OMCs-3 on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode in a N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (Adapted with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 


2.4.2 Multiple heteroatom-co-doped 3D carbon nanomaterials. 
2.4.2.1 Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped 3D porous carbon-based nanomaterials. 
(i) Hierarchical nitrogen and sulfur co-doped porous carbons (NS-porous carbons). 
A green approach was used to prepare NS-porous carbons with hierarchical-porous structure and high surface area by using organic ionic liquid as nitrogen, sulfur and carbon sources and the eutectic salt as the template.155 The onset potential for optimized NS-porous carbons is close to that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading), but their current density is higher than that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). The DFT calculations reveal that the dual doping of nitrogen and sulfur atoms lead to the redistribution of spin and charge densities, which may be responsible for the formation of a large number of carbon atom active sites. (ii) NS-trimodal porous carbons. A self-sponsored co-doping approach to facilely control the doping of nitrogen and sulfur into a graphitic carbon network structure has been recently demonstrated,149 in which the required carbon and dopant (nitrogen and sulfur) sources are self-sponsored by a sole precursor (1-allyl-2-thiourea) without the need for the catalysts. The optimized NS-porous carbons with the large BET surface area of 572 m2 g−1 and trimodal pore (i.e., microporous, mesoporous and macroporous) structure possesses an onset potential of −0.035 V for ORR, almost identical to that of commercial Pt/C (unmentioned wt% Pt loading). The excellent ORR activity of NS-porous carbons can be attributed to the synergistic effect caused by sulfur, nitrogen heteroatoms doping as well as the presence of macropores in the trimodal-porous network. (iii) Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped 3D mesoporous carbons (NS-mesoporous carbons). By using honeysuckles as the single precursor, an economic strategy has been explored for the preparation of NS-mesoporous carbons with the specific surface area of 802.8 m2 g−1, the mesopore size of ∼4.1 nm, and the nitrogen and sulfur contents of 1.95 at% and 0.75 at%.140 In alkaline medium, the onset potential of NS-mesoporous carbons for ORR is 0.046 V (vs. Hg/HgO), similar to that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading). The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule of NS-MCs at −0.3 V (vs. Hg/HgO) is 3.60, demonstrating that the ORR proceeds on NS-mesoporous carbons via a four-electron pathway. (iv) Mesoporous NS-GN. In 2012, a one-step doping/annealing process was designed to prepare the mesoporous NS-GN with benzyl disulfide and melamine as sulfur and nitrogen precursors, respectively.127 The thickness of the NS-GN sheets is 1–1.5 nm, indicating 3–6 carbon atomic layers. The mesoporous size of NS-GN is 10–40 nm. The NS-GN displays a very high ORR onset potential of −0.06 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), close to that of commercial Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (−0.03 V vs. Ag/AgCl) and much more positive than those of N-GN, S-GN, or GN (∼−0.18 V vs. Ag/AgCl) in alkaline medium (Fig. 17A). Also, the electron-transfer number per oxygen molecule is between 3.3 and 3.6 over the potential range from −0.4 to −0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, Fig. 17B), suggesting a four-electron process for ORR. These indicate that this material has clearly better catalytic performance, which further supports the proposed synergistic effect caused by dual sulfur and nitrogen doping. The DFT calculations reveal that the synergistic performance enhancement results from the redistribution of spin and charge densities brought about by the dual doping of sulfur and nitrogen atoms (Fig. 17C). (v) Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped 3D graphene sheet-mesoporous carbon (NS-GN sheet-mesoporous carbon) composite. NS-mesoporous carbon-GN sheets with the BET surface area of 281 m2 g−1 were synthesized by using nano-casting technology with mesoporous silica/GN nanosheets as hard templates, and cystine as heteroatom and carbon precursors.147 Though the ORR activity of NS-GN-mesoporous carbon composite in alkaline medium is not as good as the Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), it shows the outstanding long-term stability, superior to the Pt/C electrocatalyst. (vi) Nitrogen and sulfur co-doped GN nanomesh foams (NS-GN nanomesh foams). A kind of 3D NS-GN nanomesh foams, composed of GN sheets with in-plane nanopores, was synthesized by Zhao et al.144 With hierarchical pore arrangement, favorable mass transport and the richly available GN edges, the 3D NS-GN nanomesh foams exhibit a comparable onset potential of ∼0.04 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) but higher limiting current for ORR in alkaline medium compared to the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading, ∼0.05 V vs. Ag/AgCl).
 Fig. 17  (A) LSV curves of mesoporous NS-GN, mesoporous S-GN, mesoporous N-GN, mesoporous GN and Pt/C at 1600 rpm. (B) Electron-transfer numbers as a function of the overpotential of different samples. (C) Spin and charge density of the GN network dual-doped by N and S. C1 has very high spin density, C2 and C3 have high positive charge density, and C4 and C5 have moderately high positive spin densities. (Adapted with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 
2.4.2.2 Nitrogen and phosphorus co-doped NP-mesoporous carbon foams (NP-mesoporous carbon foams). 
In another case, nitrogen and phosphorus co-doped 3D foams have been designed to enhance ORR. 3D NP-mesoporous carbon foams with the large surface area of 1548 m2 g−1 was made by simply pyrolysing polyaniline aerogels obtained from a template-free polymerization of aniline in the presence of phytic acid.135 As shown in Fig. 18A, a reduction potential similar to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) was observed at the optimized NP-mesoporous carbon foams for ORR in alkaline medium, suggesting their high electrocatalytic activity. Furthermore, the onset potential of 0.94 V (vs. RHE), the half-wave potential of 0.85 V (vs. RHE) and the limiting current of NP-mesoporous carbons foams are comparable to those of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading). Theoretical calculations indicate that in alkaline media, the calculated activation energy for the rate-limiting step of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism is ∼0.5 eV for NP-GN, which is lower than those of N-GN (∼0.56–0.62 eV) and Pt(111) surface (0.55 eV) (Fig. 18C and D). Thus, the 3D NP-MC foams possess ORR activities comparable to, or even better than that of Pt in alkaline media. Phosphorus-doped graphitic carbon nitride on 3D carbon fiber papers (P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers). Recently, one interesting 3D nanostructure of P-carbon nitride consisting of thin nanosheets directly grown on carbon fiber papers exhibits high activity and stability in ORR.136 The P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers afford an onset potential of 0.94 V (vs. RHE) and a half-wave potential of 0.67 V (vs. RHE) for ORR in alkaline medium, which are close to those of Pt on carbon fiber papers (the onset potential of 0.99 V vs. RHE and the half-wave potential of 0.80 V vs. RHE), and better than those observed for the phosphorus-free counterpart P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers (the onset potential of 0.90 V vs. RHE and the half-wave potential of 0.63 V vs. RHE). Furthermore, the P-carbon nitride on CFPs exhibits a Tafel slope value of 122.3 mV decade−1 in the ORR region, much lower than that of P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers (135.7 mV decade−1), suggesting its favorable reaction kinetics.
 Fig. 18  (A) LSV curves for NP-mesoporous carbon foams synthesized under different conditions and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotating rate of 1600 rpm. Sample 1: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 1000 °C; sample 2: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 1100 °C; sample 3: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 900 °C; sample 4: NP-carbons heated at 1000 °C; sample 5: N-porous carbon foams heated at 900 °C. (B) ORR volcano plots of overpotential (η) versus adsorption energy of O* and the difference between the adsorption energy of O* and OH*, respectively, for N-doped, P-doped and N,P-co-doped GN. (C) Schematic energy profiles for the ORR pathway on N,P-co-doped GN in alkaline media. (Adapted with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.) 
2.4.2.3 Nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen co-doped 3D ordered mesoporous carbons (NOS-OMCs). 
NOS-OMCs with hexagonal mesostructures were prepared via a nanocasting method using SBA-15 mesoporous silica as a template and glucosamine, p-toluenesulfonic acid, and sucrose as sources of carbon as well as dopants.156 The triple-doped NOS-OMC electrocatalyst displays the best ORR activity compared to the dual-doped (NO-OMCs and OS-OMCs) and monodoped O-OMCs in acidic medium. Interestingly, the work functions of these heteroatom-doped OMCs, measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy, display a strong correlation with the activity and reaction kinetics for the ORR. Nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur co-doped 3D porous carbons (NPS-porous carbons). 3D NPS-porous carbons were synthesized using metal–organic frameworks as a template and dicyandiamide, triarylphosphine and dimethyl sulfoxide as nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur precursors.150 The electron-transfer number per oxygen is 3.5–3.9 from −0.4 to −0.9 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in alkaline medium, suggesting a favorable four-electron pathway for the ORR. The kinetic limiting current density of NPS-porous carbons at −0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) is up to ∼11.6 mA cm2, which is 1.2 times higher than that of the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading). The excellent electrocatalytic activity of NPS-porous carbons should be attributed to three reasons given below. (i) Due to different electronegativities between the doped heteroatoms (e.g., N: 3.04, P: 2.19, S: 2.58) and the carbon atoms (C: 2.55), the electroneutrality of the doped carbon framework is broken to explore a higher number of active sites, facilitating the adsorption of O2 and significantly enhancing the rate of the overall ORR process. (ii) The changed asymmetric spin density of heteroatoms in NPS-porous carbons can effectively weaken the O–O bonding to provide more active sites and enhance the ORR activity of carbon materials. (iii) The pore structures of NPS-porous carbons are changed due to the heteroatom doping. The product with different active sites and increasing percentage of mesopores has remarkable influence on the ORR activity.

3. Engineering noble-metal-free transition metal-based NP/carbon nanomaterial composites for ORR
Besides the heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials, advanced carbon nanomaterials functionalized with transition metal-based NPs is another kind of interesting noble-metal-free electrocatalysts displaying high ORR activities.77,78,81–87,89–92 By introducing carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions into transition metal-based NPs, the functionalization of transition metal-based NPs on carbon nanomaterials exhibits higher ORR activity and stability compared to their unsupported counterparts. The interesting and powerful synergetic effect between the carbon nanomaterials with large surface area/stable structure and the transition metal-based NPs with high ORR electrocatalytic activities can be the main reason, leading to the superior electrocatalytic performance for ORR.77,78,81–87,89–92,174,175
3.1 Transition metal-based NPs on 1D carbon nanomaterials

Cobalt(II) oxide NPs on 1D N-CNTs (CoO/N-CNTs). 
A two-step method combining the direct growth of nanocrystals on CNTs and the gas-phase annealing in a NH3 atmosphere has been used to prepare 5 nm CoO/N-CNT hybrids (Fig. 19A).82 Herein, cobalt oxide was in the form of CoO due to thermal annealing in the reducing NH3 environment, confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The amount of CoO and nitrogen in CoO/N-CNTs is ∼67 wt% by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and ∼2.5 at% by XPS, respectively. The CoO/N-CNT hybrid shows an ORR onset potential of 0.93 V (vs. RHE) and a peak potential of 0.86 V (vs. RHE) in 1 M KOH, much more positive than those of the pure N-CNTs (Fig. 19B). Both the ORR onset and the peak potentials of CoO/N-CNT hybrid are similar to those of the hydrothermally derived Co3O4/N-CNTs and Co3O4/N-GN hybrids (Fig. 19C). Rotating disk electrode measurements indicate that CoO/N-CNTs, Co3O4-N-CNTs and Co3O4-N-GN hybrids exhibit very similar LSV curves with similar half-wave potential, about 35 mV more negative than the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading, Fig. 19D). These indicate that these materials contain similar active sites in nature for ORR. However, the CoO/N-CNT hybrid affords higher peak current density by ∼30% than the other two hybrids in CV curves, suggesting that the CoO/N-CNT hybrid contains a large number of effective or accessible ORR active sites. The average electron transfer number per oxygen molecule is ∼3.9 for CoO/N-CNTs. The hydrothermally synthesized Co3O4/N-CNT hybrid shows an ORR activity similar to that of the CoO/N-CNT hybrid, suggesting both of these hybrids favor a four-electron reduction pathway for ORR. Manganese-cobalt oxide on 1D N-CNTs (MnCo2O4/N-CNTs). A simple and scalable method was used for the synthesis of spinel MnCo2O4 NPs partially embedded in N-CNTs (MnCo2O4/N-CNTs, Fig. 20A) by oxidative thermal scission.81 MnCo2O4/N-CNTs exhibit superior ORR performance to N-CNTs, as indicated by the ORR polarization curves in Fig. 20B, a more positive onset potential and higher disk current, lower H2O2 yield, and higher electron transfer number per oxygen molecule.
 Fig. 19  (A) TEM image of the CoO/N-CNT hybrid. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern of the hybrid. The inside circle corresponds to graphite (002) from CNTs. (B) CVs of CoO/N-CNTs and N-CNTs in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (C) CV curves of different materials in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (D) ORR polarization curves of CoO/N-CNTs, Co3O4/N-CNTs, Co3O4/N-GN and Pt/C in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.) 
 Fig. 20  (A) TEM image of MnCo2O4/N-CNTs. (B) ORR polarization curves of MnCo2O4/N-CNTs and N-CNTs. Inset: Peroxide yield and electron transfer number per oxygen molecule at various potentials. (Adapted with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) 

3.2 Transition metal-based NPs on 2D carbon nanomaterials

Cobalt–cobalt(II) oxide core–shell NPs on 2D GN (Co/CoO-GN). 
In transition metal-based NP-GN catalyst systems, transition metal-based NPs were often deposited directly onto GN surfaces through in situ chemical depositions.88,89,267 Despite the fact that the depositions led to a tight NP-GN contact, NPs prepared from these methods lack the desired size and morphology control, thereby making it difficult to tune the GN-metal oxide NP interaction for better catalyst performance.87,88 Recently, Guo et al. demonstrated a direct solution-phase-based self-assembly approach based on the sonication of the pre-synthesized Co/CoO NP hexane with GN DMF solution to deposit preformed monodisperse Co/CoO core/shell NPs on the surface of GN (Fig. 21A). The obtained Co/CoO-GN showed much enhanced catalysis for ORR in alkaline medium, thus indicating the interaction between Co/CoO and GN can indeed be tuned to enhance NP catalysis.87 Compared to GN and Co/CoO-Ketjen carbons, the Co/CoO-GN shows much enhanced catalytic activity for ORR (Fig. 21B). Their ORR activity depends on the CoO thickness with a 1 nm CoO shell showing the maximum activity. The work demonstrates the importance of Co/CoO dimension and G as a support in tuning electrocatalysis for efficient ORR. The optimized Co/CoO-GN have a comparative activity and better stability than the commercial Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) and may serve as a promising alternative to the Pt/C catalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) for ORR in alkaline solutions (Fig. 21C and D). In addition to transition metal-based NP-GN, such a tuning concept can be also realized between metal oxide and other kinds of carbon nanomaterials, which will be discussed in Section 3.3.
 Fig. 21  (A) TEM image of GN-Co/CoO. (B) ORR polarization curves of GN, Co/Co-Ketjen carbons, and Co/Co-GN in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. ORR polarization curves of the Co-CoO/GN and Pt/C electrocatalyst in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 400 rpm. (D) The chronoamperometric responses of Co-CoO/GN and Pt/C at −0.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the rotation rate of 200 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


Cobalt(II,III) oxide NPs on 2D N-GN (Co3O4/N-GN). 
In 2011, Liang et al. synthesized Co3O4/N-GN in solution by the growth of Co3O4 NPs onto nitrogen doped GN.89 The size of Co3O4 in Co3O4/N-GN is ∼4–8 nm (Fig. 22A). Control experiment verifies that nitrogen-dopants were onto reduced GO sheets not Co3O4 NPs. The half-wave potential of Co3O4/N-GN for ORR in alkaline medium was 0.83 V, similar to that of the commercial Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (0.86 V vs. RHE) and more positive than that of Co3O4-GN (0.79 V vs. RHE). The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule of Co3O4/N-GN is ∼4.0 at 0.60–0.75 V. Excellent ORR activity of the Co3O4/N-GN hybrid electrocatalyst was also gleaned from the much smaller Tafel slope of 42 mV decade−1 at low over-potentials than that measured with a Co3O4/GN hybrid (54 mV decade−1) in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 22B). The bond formation between Co3O4 and N-GN and changes in the chemical bonding environment for C, O and Co atoms in the hybrid material are probably responsible for the synergistic ORR catalytic activity. Manganese-cobalt oxide on 2D N-GN (MnCo2O4/N-GN). In order to further tune and optimize the ORR performance of transition metal/N-GN hybrid system,89 binary MnCo2O4 NPs were also deposited on the surface of N-GN (Fig. 22C) through Mn cation substitution for ORR following the similar chemical synthesis.86 In 1 M KOH, the ORR onset potential and peak potential of MnCo2O4/N-GN were 0.95 and 0.88 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 22D and E), respectively, ∼20 mV more positive than those of Co3O4/N-GN. This suggests that Mn substitution in the cobalt oxide-N-GN hybrid can further enhance the ORR catalytic activity. The XP results reveal that the superior ORR activity of MnCo2O4/N-GN is attributed to the covalent coupling of the MnCo2O4 NPs with N-GN.
 Fig. 22  (A) TEM image of Co3O4/N-GN. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern of the hybrid. (B) Tafel plots of Co3O4/N-GN and Co3O4/GN hybrids for ORR in alkaline medium. (C) TEM image of MnCo2O4/N-GN. (D) CV curves of MnCo2O4/N-GN, MnCo2O4 + N-GN mixture, Co3O4/N-GN, and N-GN in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (E) ORR polarization curves of MnCo2O4/N-GN, MnCo2O4 + N-GN mixture, Co3O4/N-GN, N-GN and Pt/C in O2-saturated 1 M KOH at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Parts A–B, adapted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. Parts C–E, adapted with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
Cobalt–cobalt(II,III) oxide–carbon bishell nanoparticles encapsulated into 3D porous carbon matrix (Co–Co3O4–C/porous carbon matrix). As we discussed above, the ORR activity of transition metal-based NP-GN can be optimized by tuning their interaction between the NPs and GN. In addition to 2D GN, such a tuning concept can also happen between the metal oxide NPs and 3D carbon nanomaterials. For example, Zou, Guo and co-workers tuned the interaction between electrochemical active transition metal-based NPs and carbon supports for further enhancing the ORR activity.90 In order to demonstrate such a concept, herein, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) can be used as a kind of precursor to in situ encapsulate Co–Co3O4–C NPs into a highly ordered porous carbon matrix.90 Previously, Co3O4 has proved to be ORR active but suffers from low electrical conductivity and low stability.85,89 In this work, the organic ligands from MOFs were transformed into porous graphitic carbon, which could in situ wrap the metal oxide NPs, resulting in the fancy Co–Co3O4–C core–bishell nanostructure. The key part of this work is that they create a very strong interaction/contact between the metal oxide and the carbon shell linked to the porous carbon matrix, which is very important for not only enhancing the electron transfer between NPs and the porous carbon matrix (enhancing the ORR activity), but also making the NPs hard to detach from the porous carbon matrix support (enhancing the ORR stability) (Fig. 23A). It is found that in alkaline medium, Co–Co3O4–C/porous carbon matrix shows much higher activity for ORR with an onset potential of 0.93 V (vs. RHE) and a half-wave potential of 0.81 V (vs. RHE), very close to those of the Pt/C catalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 23B).
 Fig. 23  (A) The concept of the design of (a) Co-Co3O4-C and (b) Co-Co3O4-C/porous carbon matrix for promoting ORR. TEM image of Co-Co3O4-C/porous carbon matrix. (B) ORR polarization curves of different materials in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015 Royal Chemical Society.) 

3.3 Transition metal-based NPs on 3D carbon nanomaterials
Co–Mo nitride supported on 3D N-carbon nanocages (CoMoN/N-carbon nanocages). By combining the merits of the high activity of cobalt nitride and the superb stability of molybdenum nitride, the alloyed CoMoN NPs supported on N-carbon nanocages demonstrate high activity and stability for ORR in acidic medium.83 Such CoMoN/N-carbon nanocages were prepared through a two-step process.83 The N-carbon nanocages were first prepared by an in situ MgO template method at high temperature. The CoMoN/N-carbon nanocage hybrid electrocatalysts were further synthesized by a convenient impregnation [mixing the N-carbon nanocage suspension in deionized water with cobalt nitrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O) and ammonium molybdate ((NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O)] and nitridation method (pyrolysis under a NH3 atmosphere). The experimental results show that in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4, the ORR peaks appear at 0.316 V (vs. RHE) for MoN/N-carbon nanocages, 0.621 V for Co0.50Mo0.50Ny/N-carbon nanocages, and 0.626 V for Co5.47N/N-carbon nanocages, respectively (Fig. 24A). The corresponding onset potentials are ∼0.630, ∼0.808, and ∼0.810 V (vs. RHE), respectively. These mean that the reduction and onset potentials of Co0.50Mo0.50Ny/N-carbon nanocages for ORR are both higher than those of Co5.47N/N-carbon nanocages and MoN/N-carbon nanocages, suggesting the synergetic effects between Co and Mo. The onset potential for Co0.50Mo0.50Ny/N-carbon nanocages (∼0.808 mV vs. RHE) is only ∼0.147 V lower than that of the Pt/C catalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 24B). The electron transfer number per oxygen molecule and the corresponding H2O2 yield during the ORR are calculated to be ∼3.75 ± 0.10 and ∼12.6% in the range of 0.05–0.60 V (vs. RHE), indicating a dominant four-electron process. The long-term ORR stability results show the optimized bimetallic CoMoN/N-carbon nanocage electrocatalysts exhibit the best stability with a decrease of ∼16% after 100 h of testing, much smaller than the ∼36% decrease for Co5.47N/N-carbon nanocages and ∼75% for Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 24C).
 Fig. 24  (A) CVs of CoMoN/N-carbon nanocages, Co0.50Mo0.50Ny/N-carbon nanocages and Co5.47N/N-carbon nanocages in a N2-saturated and an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (B) LSV curves of N-carbon nanocages, MoN, Co5.47N, and Co0.50Mo0.50Ny in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. The LSV test of Pt/C was performed in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. (C) Chronoamperometric responses of different materials except Pt/C for 100 h in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under magnetic stirring. The corresponding test for the Pt/C was performed in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Applied potential: 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). (Adapted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 

Nickel–iron incorporated 3D nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbons (FeNi/N-mesoporous carbons). 
The synergetic effects from multiple active sites for ORR also happen on FeNi/N-mesoporous carbons.91 In the synthesis strategy, mesoporous SBA-15 was selected as the support and further decorated by nitrogen-doped nanocarbons that acted as the nanoreactor for the in situ growth of well-dispersed alloy NiFe alloy NPs. Although the FeNi/N-mesoporous carbons showed a slightly higher onset potential than the Pt/C (10 wt% Pt loading), the former manifests several distinct advantages over the Pt/C catalyst such as better tolerance, higher durability and cheaper price. The high ORR activity of FeNi/N-mesoporous carbons should be attributed to the uniformly dispersed FeNi-alloy NPs in the nanochannels of the ordered porous structure, making the catalytic sites readily accessible for electroactive substances. Furthermore, because the FeNi/N-mesoporous carbons were produced by annealing at a high temperature, and the active sites were embedded in nanochannels of the porous structure and further protected by a layer of nanocarbon. Such particular structures make the above materials show long-term stability for ORR.

4. Engineering stable noble-metal-free Fe3C-based NP/carbon nanomaterial composites for ORR
Carbon nanomaterials functionalized with stable Fe3C-based NPs are considered as a kind of more novel catalyst for ORR in both acid and alkaline solution.182,200,202 Those catalysts with little nitrogen or metallic functionality on their surface exhibit very high activity and stability towards the ORR.202 Recent research studies suggest that the inner Fe3C NPs which are protected by outer graphitic layers play a synergetic role in activating the outer graphitic layers towards ORR.202 These make carbon nanomaterials functionalized with Fe3C-based NPs to be the good candidates for future active and stable ORR electrocatalysts.
4.1 Fe3C-based NPs on 1D carbon nanomaterials

4.1.1 Fe-Fe3C modified on nitrogen-enriched 1D carbon nanorods (N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods). 
1D N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods were synthesized by annealing the mixture of NH2CN and FeCl3 at 750 °C (Fig. 25A).198Fig. 25B presents the Fe3C/carbon nanorods with a distinctive core–shell structure. In 0.1 M pH 7.0 phosphate buffered solution, the kinetic current density of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods at 0 V (26.89 mA cm−2) was almost twice higher than that of the commercial Pt/C (10 wt% Pt loading, 14.20 mA cm−2), suggesting the markedly improved dynamics of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods for ORR. H-type microbial fuel cells (MFCs) were further set up to study the possibility of using N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods as an alternative cathode electrocatalyst to Pt/C with 10 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 25C). The N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorod-based MFCs generate an average power output density of 0.18 W m−3, three times higher than the average power output (0.054 W m−3) in the Pt/C (10 wt% Pt loading)-based MFCs (Fig. 25D). Furthermore, the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods-based MFCs display a charge transfer resistance of 8.9 Ω, much lower than that of the Pt/C (10 wt% Pt loading)-based MFCs (25.7 Ω), suggesting that the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorod-based MFCs possess a superior catalytic performance for ORR. Polarization tests show both MFCs present a comparable open circuit voltage of around 0.82 V (Fig. 25E). However, the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorod-based MFCs achieved a maximum power density of 4.20 W m−3 and a short-circuit current density of 25.39 A m−3, higher than those of the Pt/C (10 wt% Pt loading)-based MFCs (3.98 W m−3 and 21.23 A m−3, respectively) (Fig. 25E).
 Fig. 25  (A) XRD patterns of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (B) TEM images of a single N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods with close-end graphite shell (a) and single N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods with open-end graphite shell (b). (C) Schematic diagram of the designed MFC with two testing cathode chambers sharing the same anode. N-Fe/Fe3C@C nanorods in the figure are the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (D) The output power density with Rex loading of 1 Ω in N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorod-based MFCs and Pt/C-based MFCs. (E) MFC polarization and power density curves with N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods and Pt/C cathodes. N-Fe/Fe3C@C nanorods in the figure are the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (Adapted with permission from ref. 198 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


4.1.2 Fe3C on 1D CNTs (Fe3C/CNTs). 
To further explore more active non-noble metal catalysts for ORR, Fe3C/CNT hybrids were prepared by annealing a mixture of Pluronic P123 [i.e., poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol)], melamine, and Fe(NO3)3 at 800 °C in N2.199 The TEM results (Fig. 26A) show that the Fe-based NPs are distributed either at the tip or inside of CNTs with the diameter of 50–110 nm. The lattice distance of 0.21 nm in the HRTEM image (Fig. 26B) corresponds to the (211) crystal planes of the Fe3C phase. The XRD pattern of Fe3C/CNT hybrids shows the peaks located at 37.8°, 43.9°, 45.0°, 46.0°, 49.2, and 54.5°, corresponding to a Fe3C crystal structure (Fig. 26C). Fe3C/CNTs show much higher electrocatalytic activity toward ORR than the commercial Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), as indicated by their 49 mV more positive half-wave potential than that of the commercial Pt/C (Fig. 26D). Rotating ring-disk electrode test results reveal that the H2O2 yield at Fe3C-CNTs is below 7.7% within the potential range between 0.3 and 0.9 V (vs. RHE) in alkaline medium, corresponding to a high electron-transfer number of 3.99. Such negligible H2O2 yield clearly confirms the extremely high ORR electrocatalytic efficiency at the Fe3C/CNT hybrids. The Tafel slope (91.2 mV decade−1) of Fe3C/CNTs is close to that of Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading (84.8 mV decade−1), suggesting a good kinetic process of Fe3C/CNTs for ORR in alkaline medium. They also show very high stability for ORR with no shift in ORR polarization curve after 3000 cycles between 0.364 to 0.964 V (Fig. 26E). While there is a 23 mV loss of half-wave potential for the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) under the same conditions (Fig. 26F). In addition, the Fe3C/CNT electrocatalyst is also active for ORR in acidic solution. The onset potential of Fe3C/CNTs for ORR in acidic solution is closed to that of Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 26G). The H2O2 yield on the Fe3C/CNT electrocatalyst in acidic solution is below 4.1% between 0.25 V and 0.6 V (vs. RHE), revealing a four-electron-pathway dominated ORR process. The kinetic currents show a Tafel slope of 134 mV decade−1 at low overpotentials, close to 108.5 mV decade−1 for the Pt/C. The Fe3C/CNT electrocatalyst also shows superior stability for ORR than the Pt/C electrocatalyst, as revealed by a much lower ORR polarization curve change on Fe3C-CNTs than on the Pt/C electrocatalyst (Fig. 26H and I). The above characteristics make Fe3C/CNTs one of the best non-noble-metal electrocatalysts ever reported for ORR in both alkaline and acidic medium.
 Fig. 26  TEM (A), HRTEM images (B) and XRD pattern (C) of Fe3C/CNTs. (D) Rotating ring-disk electrode voltammograms of Fe3C/CNTs in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) LSV curves of Fe3C/CNTs for ORR in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution before and after 3000 cycles. (F) LSV curves of Pt/C for ORR in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution before and after 3000 cycles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 199 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 

4.2 Fe3C-based NPs on 2D carbon nanomaterials
Based on their previous work for Fe3C-based carbon hollow sphere electrocatalyst,202 Xing, Li and co-workers further reported the direct fabrication of 2D functionalized few-layer GN sheets (i.e., Fe3C/GN sheets) by one-step high-temperature autoclave synthesis (Fig. 27A).200 In alkaline medium, the ORR activity of Fe3C/GN sheets is close to that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) (Fig. 27C). The rotating ring-disk electrode analysis discloses that this peroxide yield on Fe3C/GN sheets corresponds to an electron-transfer number of 3.7. The stability of the Fe3C/GN sheets and Pt/C electrocatalyst is assessed by the chronoamperometric test; the Fe3C/GN sheets exhibit a slow attenuation and high current retention (70%) after 16 h (Fig. 27D). In comparison, the Pt/C electrocatalyst (20 wt% Pt loading) shows a much faster current decrease with only 58% retention after 16 h (Fig. 27D). Considering the similar encapsulation structure and the nitrogen doping level of Fe3C/GN sheets with the hollow sphere electrocatalyst previously reported,202 the Fe3C/GN sheet electrocatalyst should have a similar ORR mechanism, that is, the synergetic effect between protective GN sheets and the encapsulated Fe3C nanoparticles may be responsible for the high ORR activity and stability of the Fe3C/GN sheet electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 27  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM images of Fe3C/GN sheets. (C) ORR polarization plots (bottom) and H2O2 yield plots (top) measured with Fe3C/GN sheets and Pt/C electrocatalysts on a rotating ring-disk electrode at 900 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. The scan rate was 10 mV s−1. (D) Chronoamperometric responses of Fe3C/GN sheets and Pt/C electrocatalysts at 0.8 V (vs. RHE) on a rotating disk electrode at 1000 rpm in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (Adapted with permission from ref. 200 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 
4.3 Fe3C-based NPs on 3D carbon nanomaterials

4.3.1 N-Doped Fe-Fe3C on 3D carbon foams (N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams). 
In 2013, Lee et al. produced N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams starting with the commercially available melamine foams.201 XRD analysis indicates that metallic Fe, Fe3C, and graphitic carbon co-exist (Fig. 28A), and the well-defined crystalline phase has a lattice fringe with a d spacing of 0.184 nm, consistent with the (221) plane of Fe3C (Fig. 28B). Although the onset and the half potentials of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams for ORR are both lower than those at Pt/C electrocatalyst with 20 wt% Pt loading, their current density is even slightly higher than that of the Pt/C electrocatalyst at high overpotentials (Fig. 28C). The number of electrons transferred on N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams is determined to be ∼3.7 to 3.85 (at the potentials between −0.1 V and −0.7 V vs. Hg/HgO) in 0.1 M KOH, suggesting that it is an efficient four-electron transfer pathway. The stability tests reveal that the Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams degrade in a slower rate than the Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 28D).
 Fig. 28  (A) XRD and (B) HRTEM images of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams. (C) LSV curves of pure Ketjen black (1), carbonized melamine foam (2), a physical mixture of Fe/Fe3C melamine and Ketjen black (3), N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams (4), 9.55 mgPt cm−2 (5), and 28.6 mgPt cm−2 (6) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the rotation rate of 2000 rpm. Non-precious-metal electrocatalyst loadings were 0.286 mgcat cm−2. (D) Chronoamperometric responses of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at −0.2 V (vs. Hg/HgO) and 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 201 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


4.3.2 Fe3C on 3D nitrogen and iron co-doped carbonized nanoscale MOFs (Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs). 
Monodisperse nanoscale N-Fe-carbonized MOFs containing Fe3C NPs can be used as an advanced template for making a new kind of Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs with the specific surface area of 326 m2 g−1 and the uniform pore size of ∼3.8 nm for boosting ORR.204 The amorphous carbon matrix, the embedded Fe3C, graphite carbon, and Fe particles are discerned by the HRTEM images (Fig. 29A–C). In alkaline electrolytes, Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs exhibit the ORR onset potential of 1.03 V vs. RHE, which is slightly positive than that of the commercial Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading (1.01 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 29D). The transferred electron number per oxygen molecule for Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs is calculated to be approximately 3.97 over the potential range from 0.55 to 0.73 V (vs. RHE). The rotating ring-disk electrode measurement further proves that there is a negligible ring current, and the transferred electron number per oxygen molecule calculated from the LSV curves is about 3.98 over the potential range from 0.16 to 0.76 V (vs. RHE). These experimental results demonstrate that the four-electron process is the dominating pathway for ORR at the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbonized MOFs. Furthermore, the current density of the Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs shows a much slower decay than that of the Pt/C (Fig. 29E). About 21% loss of the current density occurred at the Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs after 40000 s, whereas the corresponding current loss at the Pt/C under the same conditions is as high as 47%. This result exemplifies that the Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOF electrocatalyst is more stable than the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. Furthermore, alkaline direct methanol fuel cells based on Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) are constructed for the comparative performance evaluation (Fig. 29F) under the identical conditions. The open circuit voltage for the alkaline direct methanol fuel cells equipped with the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbonized MOF cathode (3 mg cm−2 electrocatalyst) is as high as 0.81 V, which is higher than 0.74 V for the cell equipped with the Pt/C cathode (3 mg cm−2 electrocatalyst), indicating better methanol tolerance of the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbonized MOFs for ORR. Furthermore, the peak power density and current density reach 22.7 mW cm−2 and 93.9 mA cm−2 at the cathode with the Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOF electrocatalyst, respectively, which are about 1.7 times and 1.4 times higher than those of the Pt/C cathode.
 Fig. 29  HRTEM images of (A) amorphous carbon, (B) Fe3C and (C) Fe@C in Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs. (D) LSV curves of Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) Chronoamperometric responses of Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C at 0.84 V (vs. RHE) for 40000 s in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (F) Alkaline direct methanol fuel cell single-cell performance constructed with Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C at 60 °C under the same conditions. (Adapted with permission from ref. 204 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) 


4.3.3 Fe3C on 3D carbon microspheres (Fe3C/carbon microspheres). 
Despite Fe3C-based materials showing obvious advantage in enhancing ORR, the role of the Fe3C phase in ORR catalysis is not clearly understood,202 probably because previously reported Fe3C-based materials were a mixture of several phases consisting of carbon-coated Fe3C in different scales, bare Fe3C, and metallic Fe particles, making them difficult to conclude the role of the Fe3C phase in the ORR. More critically, the possible use of the Fe3C-based electrocatalysts in acidic media is apparently out of question as the carbide will dissolve in acid. To mitigate these issues, the novel hollow microspheres comprising uniform Fe3C NPs encased by graphitic layers were prepared through one-step high-pressure pyrolysis using ferrocene and cyanamide as precursors.202 The Fe3C/carbon microspheres are hollow with a diameter of 400–500 nm and a shell thickness of ∼60 nm (Fig. 30A). HRTEM images (Fig. 30B) and the XRD pattern confirm the presence of the Fe3C phase in Fe3C/carbon microspheres. The unique chemical stability provided by Fe3C/carbon microspheres leads to excellent ORR stability in acidic media (Fig. 30D). In 0.1 M HClO4, the ORR polarization curve of Fe3C/carbon microspheres exhibits a half-wave potential of ∼0.73 V vs. RHE, ∼0.1 V lower than that of Pt/C, 20 wt% Pt loading (Fig. 30D). The H2O2 yield is found to be less than 8% at the potential between 0.1 and 0.8 V (vs. RHE) and decreases to ∼6% at potentials below 0.6 V (vs. RHE), indicating a four-electron pathway dominated ORR process. To further investigate the ORR mechanism of Fe3C/carbon microspheres, a destructive test is conducted by ball-milling to destroy the protective carbon shells of Fe3C/carbon microspheres around the carbide nanoparticles. After the milling, the Fe3C NPs are exposed and therefore largely removed in hot acid during the following leaching. As expected, the obtained Fe3C/carbon microsphere-BL loses the ORR catalytic activity (Fig. 30E). Therefore, the very high activity of Fe3C/carbon microspheres in acid solution is resulting from the encased carbide NPs activate the surrounding graphitic layers (Fig. 30C), making the outer surface of the carbon layer much more active for ORR. At the same time, another kind of noble-metal-free Fe3C-based NP/carbon nanomaterial composites (i.e., Fe3C/porous carbons) were fabricated by annealing the Fe(NO3)3 impregnated filter paper.203 The electron-transferred number per oxygen molecule on Fe3C/porous carbons is ∼3.82–3.97, and the H2O2 yield is below 17.3% over the potential range of −0.2 to −0.65 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in alkaline medium, suggesting their superior electrocatalytic ORR activity. Fe3C/porous carbons also show higher stability for ORR than the Pt/C.
 Fig. 30  (A–C) TEM images of Fe3C/carbon microspheres. (D) LSV curves of Fe3C/carbon microspheres, Fe3C/carbon microspheres-L and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 before and after 4500 potential cycles at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotating speed of 900 rpm. Potential cycling was carried out between 0.6 and 1.0 V (vs. RHE) in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (E) LSV curves of Fe3C/carbon microspheres, Fe3C/carbon microspheres-L, and Fe3C/carbon microspheres-BL in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (Adapted with permission from ref. 202 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


4.3.4 Fe-N decorated CNTs grown on hierarchically porous carbon (Fe-N-CNT-OPCs). 
As discussed above, Fe3C-based NPs on 3D carbon nanomaterials with different structures have been recently reported, such as foams,201 MOFs,204 and microspheres.202 However, the ORR performance of these composites still can hardly match that of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) in terms of the ORR onset potential and current density.268 Recently, by exploring a simple, low-cost and eco-friendly bottom-up route, Qiao and co-workers developed a novel 3D porous Fe–N–C hybrid material (i.e., Fe-N-CNT-OPCs), composed of hierarchically ordered porous carbon (OPC) microblocks interlinked via in situ grown CNTs, for effectively catalyzing ORR.268 The SEM image (Fig. 31A) shows that ordered macropores are ∼200 nm in diameter, and large amounts of entangled CNT clusters are observed on OPC microblocks, interlinking them into a network. HRTEM images reveal that the iron NPs are found to be encapsulated either inside each compartment of the bamboo-structure or on the tip of CNTs (inset of Fig. 31A). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping shows the homogeneous distribution of C, N, and O elements on both OPCs and CNTs in Fe-N-CNT-OPCs (Fig. 31E). Apart from the intensive Fe signals from the iron particles, Fe species were also detected on other sections where no Fe particles were observed. Such finely dispersive Fe species could possibly bond with the neighboring C or N atoms, which is believed to be highly active for ORR. In alkaline solution, the Fe-N-CNT-OPCs display a positive ORR onset potential within 18 mV close to that of Pt/C with 20 wt% Pt loading at low over-potential (Fig. 31B). This has rarely been achieved and is even more positive than those of some recently reported carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts.8,42,55–58,168–176,182,194–196,214,267,269–271 Furthermore, the Fe-N-CNT-OPCs exhibit less than 1% of peroxide yield, corresponding to an electron transfer number up to 3.99 (Fig. 31C), which confirms their extremely high ORR efficiency through the highly efficient 4-electron pathway. In contrast, the sample without in situ formed CNTs (i.e., Fe decorated ordered porous carbon with only non-graphitized hollow carbon nanofibers, Fe-N-CNF-OPCs) shows higher peroxide yield and lower efficiency (2-electron ORR pathway) (Fig. 31C). It should be noteworthy that the cost economy of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs is far more economical than the commercial Pt/C (columns with color) by giving out a significantly higher ORR activity per cost unit, due to its much lower price for synthesis (Fig. 31D), suggesting the extremely promising potential for the commercial ORR application in alkaline medium.
 Fig. 31  (A) SEM image of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs. Inset: TEM images of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs (a and b). (B) ORR polarization curves of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), Fe-N-CNT-OPCs and Fe-N-CNF-OPCs in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (C) Peroxide yield (solid) and electron transfer numbers (dash) for Fe-N-CNT-OPCs and Fe-N-CNF-OPCs. (D) ORR current (pattern column) and the corresponding cost-efficiency (color column) of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), Fe-N-CNT-OPCs at different potentials. (E) TEM image and corresponding elemental mappings of the same area of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 268 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.) 


4.3.5 Fe-N doped graphitic carbon bulbs (Fe-N-GCBs). 
To further reduce the cost of the ORR catalysts, Qiao's group fabricated Fe-N-GCBs by critically selecting the cheap and self-made Prussian blue as the only precursor. Importantly, the pyrolysis temperature of PB can be as low as 550 °C, avoiding some severe drawbacks including the loss of doped nitrogen which is essential to ORR and the origin of high cost of the final product during the high temperature synthesis. In alkaline electrolytes, the ORR onset potential of the Fe-N-GCBs is slightly higher than that of Pt/C though the peroxide production of the Fe-N-GCBs is a little bit higher than that of Pt/C. In the acid electrolyte, the performance of the Fe-N-GCBs is to some extent lower than that of Pt, but not too far behind it. The peroxide ratio of the Fe-N-GCBs is also very low (<4%). According to Gasteiger's benchmark, the volumetric current of a non-Pt catalyst should be at least 1/10 of the Pt/C for economic viability in fuel cell applications.40 In the acid electrolyte, the current density of the Fe-N-GCBs at 0.8 V (vs. RHE) is about 1/4 of Pt/C. Assuming that the density of the material is 1/2 of the Pt/C, the volumetric current density of the material is 1/8 of Pt/C, which is above the benchmark. These make Fe-N-GCBs to be one of the promising and economical catalysts for ORR in both alkaline and acid media.

5. Conclusions and perspectives
This review provides a summary of the recent development of advanced carbon nanomaterials with different dimensions as the support of heteroatoms, transition metal-based NPs and especially Fe3C-based NPs for the rational design of high-efficiency carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. Single heteroatom (e.g., N, B, S, I, Cl, Br, Se and P) or multiple heteroatom (e.g., BN, NP, NS, NSi, FNS, NPS and NPS) doping of different carbon nanomaterials shows promising electrocatalytic activity because they exhibit comparable or even higher electrocatalytic activity, long-term stability, and greater tolerance against fuel crossover and carbon monoxide poisoning than the commercially available Pt/C. Transition metal-based NPs (e.g., CoO, MnCo2O4, Co–CoO, Co3O4, CoMoN, Co–Co3O4–C and FeNi) couple with advanced carbon nanomaterials have exhibited remarkable electrocatalytic performance (higher activity and stability) for ORR as compared to their unsupported counterparts. Superior ORR activity is attributed to the synergetic effect between the advanced carbon nanomaterials and transition metal-based NPs; the graphitic shell with little nitrogen and metallic functionality and the inner core of Fe3C-based NPs exhibit high activity and stability towards the ORR. Such synergetic effects in activating the outer graphitic layers towards ORR make carbon nanomaterials functionalized with Fe3C-based NPs a novel class of ORR electrocatalyst operating in both alkaline and acidic media.
Although considerable progress has been made in the development of high-efficiency carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts, the development of ultimate materials for commercial ORR electrocatalysts remains a challenge.
Metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials for ORR. (i) Metallic impurities vs. heteroatom doping for ORR. It was found that the metallic impurities present in CNTs play an important role in enhancing the electrocatalytic activity of CNTs on different analytes,272–282 such as oxygen.283 In particular, recent results have shown that even “impurities of impurities” on the level of tens of atoms have the direct influence on electrochemistry of CNTs.282,284,285 Also, the researchers believe that metal impurities are very often present within GN materials, and such residual impurities result in a significant alteration of the electrochemical behavior of the materials.286–290 Some recent heteroatom-doped GN materials as “metal-free” electrocatalysts, initially prepared by the Hummers method,291 for ORR suffer from contamination of manganese besides other impurities.292 In order to clarify the electroactive sites of heteroatom doped-CNTs, a new method was proposed to synthesize the truly metal-free N-CNTs.104 Due to the metal-free growth, the observed electrocatalytic activity toward ORR of the newly produced N-CNTs can be exclusively attributed to the incorporation of nitrogen in the CNT structure, which is a solid evidence that nitrogen doping dramatically enhances the electrocatalytic activity of CNTs for ORR.104 It is reasonable to believe that the electron-accepting ability of the nitrogen atoms have created net positive charge on adjacent carbon atoms to attract electrons from the anode for facilitating ORR.107 However, regarding that a plenty of metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials are derived from the carbon materials produced on using metal catalysts; therefore, it would be prudent to discuss the ORR mechanisms of these “metal-free” heteroatom-doped carbon materials. (ii) The effect of single type of heteroatom functionality on ORR. In most cases, there are different types of heteroatom functionalities existing in single heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials,89–146,148–163,197 making it hard to determine the effect of single type of heteroatom on ORR. Identified by XPS, a mixture of pyridinic N, pyrrolic N and/or graphitic N was usually found in N-doped carbon nanomaterial.89–146,148–163,197 One point is that graphitic N, which are far from N-GN sheet edges, are active sites for ORR whereas those that are close to the edges are less active.293 Conversely, another viewpoint is that only pyridinic N next to the zigzag edge can facilitate O2 adsorption for enhancing ORR whereas the graphite N inside the GN domain does not contribute to the ORR activity.294 Another study by the combination of theoretical calculations and experiments indicates that O2 can be activated on both graphitic N and pyridinic N species.295 Such controversy indicates that though elaborate experiments and careful theoretical calculations were executed, different groups/researches gave different explanations for the effect of single type heteroatom on ORR, and the exact mechanisms remain unclear.104,107–110 In order to solve this problem, Li et al. prepared several kinds of N-GN quantum dot molecules with the exactly known structures/functional groups by the organic synthesis. They solidly prove that the N-GN quantum dots with the smaller size lead to a more negative onset potential and a lower ORR current,128 considered as a kind of more direct and efficient way to determine the exact effect of single type heteroatom on ORR. We believe in the future the researchers will be able to directly compare the ORR performance between the molecules with and without nitrogen (heteroatom) incorporation or with different nitrogen functional groups. We trust that with the progress of the processing technology, especially the advanced organic synthesis allowing us to prepare nitrogen doped graphenes, the mechanism of the effect of single type of heteroatom functionality on ORR will be finally be realized and such understanding will benefit the development of ORR electrocatalysts with optimized performance. (iii) Surface area vs. surface active sites/defects for ORR. In most cases, larger surface area of the electrocatalysts would result in more active sites/defects, leading to better ORR activity (i.e., larger current density and/or lower overpotential). But meanwhile, large amounts of active sites/defects on surface may also lower material conductivity and reduce the ORR performance, accordingly. Therefore the balance between the surface area (active sites/defects) and material conductivity is another important factor in optimizing the heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials with high ORR activities. (iv) Alkaline medium vs. acidic medium for ORR. To date, a huge amount of heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials have been reported to exhibit high ORR performance. Quite a few of them even show better activities than the commercial Pt/C. The majority of those materials are operated under alkaline conditions, which is probably because most heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials suffer from the low electrocatalytic activity or poor durability in acidic media. However, compared with alkaline media, the acidic media is commonly used in commercial proton exchange membrane fuel cells. Thus, the development of the metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials with superior ORR activities in acidic media is highly desired. And exploring the exact mechanisms of these nanomaterials being operated in both alkaline and acidic media and developing electrocatalyst materials/structure that are robust in acid media is crucial for achieving high-performance, metal-free ORR electrocatalysts for future commercial applications.
Noble-metal-free transition metal-based NP-carbon nanomaterial composites for ORR. Alkaline medium vs. acidic medium for ORR. Introducing noble-metal-free transition metal-based NPs into or onto carbon nanomaterials can lead to further improved ORR performance due to the synergetic effect between the advanced carbon nanomaterials and transition metal-based NPs. However, the current ORR activities of most of these transition metal-based NPs functionalized onto or into carbon nanomaterials are still lower than that of the commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts operated in both alkaline and acidic media. Especially, the inherent drawbacks of the low conductivity of transition metal-based NPs and their poor stability in acid medium may limit the commercial application as the noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for ORR. Therefore, we believe that seeking transition metal NPs incorporated into carbon-based nanomaterials/structures with superior ORR activities (higher activity and stability) than the commercial Pt/C operated in both alkaline and acidic media is within reach. Investigating and understanding the fundamental mechanism of the stability of transition metal-based NPs on carbon nanomaterial surface and the electronic interactions between these NPs and carbon nanomaterials would be very helpful to realize such goals.
Noble-metal-free, Fe3C-based NP/carbon nanomaterial composites for ORR. The working mechanism for ORR. Hu et al. claimed the possible ORR mechanisms by performing control experiments on carbon nanomaterials functionalized with Fe3C NPs as follows:202 (1) the encased carbide NPs activate the surrounding graphitic layers, making the outer surface of the carbon layer much more active for ORR; (2) the surrounding graphitic layers can protect NPs from being etched in alkaline or acidic media, resulting in very stable ORR response. However, the control experiments do not fully support the hypothesis as the nitrogen content of Fe3C/carbon microspheres is 0.5 wt% (as estimated by XPS) and there are still plenty of iron atoms in these electrocatalysts, making it difficult to determine whether FeNx sites play a role in Fe3C/carbon microsphere catalysis.182
Other critical points are: (i) the Pt/C target. To evaluate the ORR performance of new materials, the commercially available Pt/C was often selected as the reference for comparison purpose. To date, the Pt/C with different Pt contents have been used, such as the Pt/C with 10 wt% Pt loading,91,198 12 wt% Pt loading,159 20 wt% Pt loading,82,90,107 40 wt% Pt loading,102 47.6 wt% Pt loading,137 and even unmentioned wt% Pt loading.117,139,149 However, in most cases, different Pt loadings can definitely lead to different performances (e.g., half-wave potentials and diffusion limiting currents) for ORR under the same loading amount of catalysts.102 This means that it is very possible that the ORR activity of the new nanomaterial is better than that of Pt/C with lower wt% Pt loading but worse than that of Pt/C with higher wt% Pt loading. In order to strictly claim whether the ORR performance of one material is better, comparable or worse than Pt/C, it is critical to setup a standard protocol or specifically point out which kind of Pt/C is applied in the conclusive sentences. (ii) Environmental/experimental conditions. The activity of materials for ORR may show obvious differences under different environmental/experimental conditions. For example, the diffusion limiting current at Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading) obtained from Los Alamos National Laboratory (Los Alamos, NM U.S.) is lower than that from Technical University of Denmark (Lyngby, Denmark) or Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (Changchun, China),200 which could be most likely due to the much higher elevation (i.e., lower atmospheric pressure and accordingly lower oxygen concentration in the base solution) of Los Alamos, New Mexico State, U.S. (∼7355 feet = ∼2242 m) compared to Lyngby, Denmark (∼82 feet = ∼25 m) or Changchun, China (∼730 feet = ∼222 m). Therefore, it is almost necessary to give detailed information on the environmental/experimental parameters, especially the elevation, humidity or atmospheric pressure.
This review aims to provide an update on the emerging growth of studies of the carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts in recent years, with special emphasis on the phenomenological knowledge and the topics under debate. And it will also appeal to the scientific communities who are interested in the general areas of physical chemistry, electrochemistry, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, electrochemical energy storage, and electroanalysis. We look forward to the bright future of carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free ORR electrocatalysts and are keen to see breakthroughs in the understanding of the nature of the ORR on these noble-metal-free electrocatalysts. We hope that future groundbreaking advancements will bring forward conceptually different scope to this active area.
Acknowledgements
M. Z. is grateful to financial support from Northeast Normal University startup funds and the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts. H. L. W. would like to acknowledge financial support by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development program under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy. S. G. acknowledges the support by Peking University start up funds and Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts.
Notes and references
J. Liu, H. Mooney, V. Hull, S. J. Davis, J. Gaskell, T. Hertel, J. Lubchenco, K. C. Seto, P. Gleick, C. Kremen and S. Li, Science, 2015, 347, 1258832 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Alm, Science, 1981, 211, 1379–1385 CAS .
P. Norvig, D. A. Relman, D. B. Goldstein, D. M. Kammen, D. R. Weinberger, L. C. Aiello, G. Church, J. L. Hennessey, J. Sachs, A. Burrows, G. P. Pisano, J. R. Goldstein, P. Anastas, R. Klausner, D. Baltimore, D. R. Montgomery, T. M. Baer, N. P. Bigelow, R. D. Holt and J. K. Nicholson, Nature, 2010, 463, 26–32 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ren, G. Ma and N. Cong, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 41, 225–236 CrossRef .
J. Wang, H. L. Xin and D. Wang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 515–539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang and H. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483–3507 CAS .
Q. Li, R. Cao, J. Cho and G. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301415 Search PubMed .
T. M. Guer, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6179–6206 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Nasef, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 12278–12329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Su, Y. Wu, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 8104–8151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. K. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2382–2394 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins, A. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 CAS .
R. Devanathan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 101–119 CAS .
A. Hawkes, I. Staffell, D. Brett and N. Brandon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 729–744 CAS .
W. R. Grove, Philos. Mag. Series 3, 1838, 13, 430–431 CrossRef .
C. F. Schœnbein, Philos. Mag. Series 3, 1839, 14, 43–45 CrossRef .
M. Warshay and P. R. Prokopius, J. Power Sources, 1989, 29, 193–200 CrossRef .

          K. A. Burke, Fuel cells for space science applications, 1st International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, 2003.

          R. Cohen, Gemini fuel cell system, Proc. 20th Power Sources Conf., May 1966.
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou and S. Dong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1232–1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Calabrese Barton, J. Gallaway and P. Atanassov, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4867–4886 CrossRef .
J. A. Cracknell, K. A. Vincent and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2439–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. T. R. Palmore and G. M. Whitesides, Enzymatic conversion of biomass for fuels production,  1994, vol. 566, pp. 271–290 Search PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Du, C. Chen, B. Li, D. Wen, S. Dong and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2172–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 197–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, C. Chen, Y. Du, B. Li, D. Wen, S. Dong and E. Wang, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 2932–2936 RSC .
M. Zhou, N. Zhou, F. Kuralay, J. R. Windmiller, S. Parkhomovsky, G. Valdés-Ramírez, E. Katz and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2686–2689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Cui and S.-H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and E. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 491–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rinaldi, B. Mecheri, V. Garavaglia, S. Licoccia, P. Di Nardo and E. Traversa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 417–429 CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Gu, L. Su and L. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2535–2558 CAS .
C.-J. Zhong, J. Luo, P. N. Njoki, D. Mott, B. Wanjala, R. Loukrakpam, S. Lim, L. Wang, B. Fang and Z. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 454–466 CAS .
H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari, G. Singh and K. S. Kim, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 553–578 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Chen and P. Holt-Hindle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3767–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nie, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2168–2201 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184–2202 RSC .
B. E. Hayden, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1858–1866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Porter, H. Wu, Z. Quan and J. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1867–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1878–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu and H. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen and P. Holt-Hindle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3767–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kakati, J. Maiti, S. H. Lee, S. H. Jee, B. Viswanathan and Y. S. Yoon, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 12397–12429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Wang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7625–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2439–2450 RSC .
H. You, S. Yang, B. Ding and H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2880–2904 RSC .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 514–517 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, Q. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Chin. J. Catal., 2013, 34, 1986–1991 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Song, Z. Ning and W. Xu, Electrocatalysis, 2015, 6, 132–147 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2732–2744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 558–566 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Sasaki, M. Sao and R. Adzic, “Dissolution and Stability of Platinum in Oxygen Cathodes” in Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Durability, Springer Science, New York,  2009 Search PubMed.
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K.-i. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
See the website on Fuel Cell System Cost – 2013: http://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/03/f11/13012_fuel_cell_system_cost_2013.pdf.
See the website on Fuel Cell Technical Team Roadmap: http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/02/f8/fctt_roadmap_june2013.pdf.
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, S. Martin, R. Chenitz, C. Pan, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1752–1760 CAS .
K. Sasaki, H. Naohara, Y. Cai, Y. M. Choi, P. Liu, M. B. Vukmirovic, J. X. Wang and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8602–8607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Bruijn, V. Dam and G. Janssen, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 3–22 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, P. Pei and M. Song, Appl. Energy, 2015, 142, 154–163 CrossRef .
A. Kannan, A. Kabza and J. Scholta, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, H. A. Gasteiger, K. Hayakawa, T. Tada and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A82–A97 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Ferreira, G. J. la O', Y. Shao-Horn, D. Morgan, R. Makharia, S. Kocha and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2256–A2271 CrossRef .
M. K. Debe, A. K. Schmoeckel, G. D. Vernstrom and R. Atanasoski, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1002–1011 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Acres, J. Power Sources, 2001, 100, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Morrill, Apollo fuel cell System, Proceedings of the, 19th, Power Sources Conference, Atlantic City, NJ, 1965.

          E. M. Cortright, Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: The NASA History, Courier Corporation,  2012 Search PubMed .

          G. Hoogers, Fuel cell technology handbook, CRC press,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. Guo, D. Li, H. Zhu, S. Zhang, N. M. Markovic, V. R. Stamenkovic and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3465–3468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, D. Su and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13879–13884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Jiang, H. Zhu, S. Guo, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7734–7739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhao, J. Masa, W. Xia, A. Maljusch, M.-G. Willinger, G. Clavel, K. Xie, R. Schlögl, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7551–7554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, P. Diao, W. Chang, G. Hong, Y. Li, M. Gong, L. Xie, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Z. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15849–15857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, Q. Wu, R. Che, Y. Bu, Y. Jiang, Y. Li, L. Yang, X. Wang and Z. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1857–1862 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11457–11464 CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2013–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, L. Wu and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11770–11773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, R. Zou, L. An, D. Xia and S. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 568–576 CAS .
S. Ci, S. Mao, Y. Hou, S. Cui, H. Kim, R. Ren, Z. Wen and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7986–7993 CAS .
H. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y.-X. Huang, L. Wu and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Wei, H. Fan, L. Li, K. Geng and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 518–526 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, G.-L. Zhao, S. Yang and J. J. Spivey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3315–3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shui, M. Wang, F. Du and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1400129 Search PubMed .
W. Li, D. Yang, H. Chen, Y. Gao and H. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
C. Domínguez, F. J. Pérez-Alonso, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, S. N. Basahel, A. Y. Obaid, A. O. Alyoubi, J. L. Gómez de la Fuente and S. Rojas, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 158–165 CrossRef .
Y. J. Sa, C. Park, H. Y. Jeong, S.-H. Park, Z. Lee, K. T. Kim, G.-G. Park and S. H. Joo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 4186–4190 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, W. Qian and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu and L. Guan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5577–5582 RSC .
D. Yu, Y. Xue and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2863–2870 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. Xue, D. Yu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Zhang and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15127–15129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, F. Du, Y. Liu, A. Perez, M. Supp, T. S. Ramakrishnan, L. Dai and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15839–15841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, B. L. Allen, D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13200–13201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. You, M. S. Ahmed, H. S. Han, J. E. Choe, Z. Üstündağ and S. Jeon, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, S. Dou, A. Shen, L. Tao, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 1908–1912 CrossRef .
Y. Han, D. Tang, Y. Yang, C. Li, W. Kong, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5955–5962 RSC .
M. Favaro, L. Ferrighi, G. Fazio, L. Colazzo, C. Di Valentin, C. Durante, F. Sedona, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 129–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bag, B. Mondal, A. K. Das and C. R. Raj, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhuang, Y. Su, F. Zhang and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7742–7746 CAS .
W. Wei, H. Liang, K. Parvez, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Razmjooei, K. P. Singh, M. Y. Song and J.-S. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 78, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Li, L. Jiang, L. Lin, L. Cui and X. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23196–23205 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, P. Wang, M. Gong and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Cao, X. Zhuang, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, D. Wu and X. Feng, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2057–2064 RSC .
X. Bo, C. Han, Y. Zhang and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3023–3030 CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138–6145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, M. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, M.-J. Kim, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, L. Dai, N. Park and J.-B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1810 Search PubMed .
Z. Yao, H. Nie, Z. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Liu and S. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1027–1029 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, N. H. Mack, W. Gao, S. Ma, R. Zhong, J. Han, J. K. Baldwin and P. Zelenay, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9764–9776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. Dai and L.-S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Sheng, L. Shao, J.-J. Chen, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Y. Dai, G. Ge, Q. Mao, Z. Rong and G. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1070–1077 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, J. Ran, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4646–4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Fu, M. Li, F. Wang, Q. Wang, G. Kang and F. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3289–3293 CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Zhou, W. Zhou, L. Li, S. Huang and S. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6136–6142 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, H. Liu, K. Geng and X. Wei, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 785–793 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, K. Geng, H. Liu, X. Wei, M. Zhang, P. Wang and J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 221–229 CAS .
L. Chen, C. Xu, R. Du, Y. Mao, C. Xue, L. Chen, L. Qu, J. Zhang and T. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5617–5627 CAS .
L. Chen, X. Cui, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Wang, F. Cui, C. Wei, J. Feng, T. Ge, W. Ren and J. Shi, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 623–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, L. Song, L. Wang, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1913–1918 CAS .
Y. Zhang, W.-J. Jiang, X. Zhang, L. Guo, J.-S. Hu, Z. Wei and L.-J. Wan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13605–13609 RSC .
D.-S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, M. Y. Song and J.-S. Yu, Carbon, 2014, 67, 736–743 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, D. Wu, L. Wan, P. Hu and R. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 421, 160–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, X. Zhuang, S. Brüller, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, H. Yang, X. Yao, D. Wang, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3720–3726 CAS .
J.-S. Li, S.-L. Li, Y.-J. Tang, K. Li, L. Zhou, N. Kong, Y.-Q. Lan, J.-C. Bao and Z.-H. Dai, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5130 CAS .
Y. Ito, H. J. Qiu, T. Fujita, Y. Tanabe, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4145–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, M. Ye, Q. Chen, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8002–8009 RSC .
W. He, C. Jiang, J. Wang and L. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9503–9507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Fan, X. Wei, C. Hu, H. Luo and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3317–3324 CAS .
Z. Cui, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Goddeti, J. Y. Park and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8875–8878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, L.-K. Wang, G. Wang, M.-R. Gao, J. Ge, W.-J. Yuan, Y.-H. Shen, A.-J. Xie and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4095–4103 CAS .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .
C. Hu, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao, N. Chen, Z. Zhang, M. Cao and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2726–2733 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11371–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, S. Inamdar, J. Park and J.-S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16127–16130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, H. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Xu and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6455–6460 RSC .
S. Chen, J. Bi, Y. Zhao, L. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5593–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, T.-P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Su, J. Zhang, B. Frank, A. Thomas, X. Wang, J. Paraknowitsch and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 169–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2565–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823–4892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shin, B. Jeong, M. Choun, J. D. Ocon and J. Lee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1571–1580 RSC .
D. Geng, N. Ding, T. S. Andy Hor, Z. Liu, X. Sun and Y. Zong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1795–1810 CAS .
D.-W. Wang and D. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576–591 CAS .
T.-F. Hung, S.-H. Chen, M.-H. Tu, Z.-H. Lu, C. K. Chen, R.-S. Liu, H. F. Greer, W. Zhou and M.-Y. Lo, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2014, 61, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
R. Othman, A. L. Dicks and Z. Zhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 357–372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1250–1269 RSC .
F. Jaouen, E. Proietti, M. Lefevre, R. Chenitz, J.-P. Dodelet, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 114–130 CAS .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
E. H. L. Falcao and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2007, 82, 524–531 CrossRef CAS .

          R. L. McCreery, in Electroanal. Chem., ed. A. J. Bard, Dekker, New York,  1991, vol. 17, pp. 221–374 Search PubMed .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. McCreery, A. Bergren, A. Morteza-Najarian, S. Y. Sayed and H. Yan, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 9–25 RSC .
F. M. Perkin, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1908, 3, 205–219 RSC .
J.-P. Dodelet, R. Chenitz, L. Yang and M. Lefèvre, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1866–1867 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yáñez-Sedeño, J. M. Pingarrón, J. Riu and F. X. Rius, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2010, 29, 939–953 CrossRef .
W. Yang, K. R. Ratinac, S. P. Ringer, P. Thordarson, J. J. Gooding and F. Braet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2114–2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Vashist, D. Zheng, K. Al-Rubeaan, J. H. T. Luong and F.-S. Sheu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2011, 29, 169–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027–1036 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7150–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Walcarius, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2012, 38, 79–97 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4098–4140 RSC .
M. Zhou and S. Guo, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2744–2764 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, N. Mahmood, J. Zhu, Y. Hou and S. Sun, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 668–683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5372–5378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5207–5234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, S. Ci, F. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Cui, S. Mao, S. Luo, Z. He and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, X. Liu, X. Yue, J. Jia and S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, Y. Huang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2099–2103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, G. S. Park, S. T. Kim, M. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1026–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Zhai, X. Yue, Y. Wang and J. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11151–11153 RSC .
S. Zhao, H. Yin, L. Du, L. He, K. Zhao, L. Chang, G. Yin, H. Zhao, S. Liu and Z. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12660–12668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, S. Liu, C. Ouyang, P. Strasser and R. Yang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 920–927 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Higgins, M. A. Hoque, F. Hassan, J.-Y. Choi, B. Kim and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2734–2740 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, G.-L. Zhao and S. Yang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1267–1273 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Yan, Y. Chen and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1892–1899 CAS .
H. Jin, H. Zhang, H. Zhong and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3389–3394 CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Zhang, P. Song, J. Pan, L. Zhuang, W. Xu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1726–1729 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tuci, C. Zafferoni, P. D'Ambrosio, S. Caporali, M. Ceppatelli, A. Rossin, T. Tsoufis, M. Innocenti and G. Giambastiani, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2108–2111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, T. Huang, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 609–616 CAS .
Y. Hu, X. Zhao, Y. Huang, Q. Li, N. J. Bjerrum, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, W. Choi, X. Pu and C. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1799–1807 CAS .
U. I. Kramm, M. Lefèvre, N. Larouche, D. Schmeisser and J.-P. Dodelet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 978–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Sun, P. Song, Y. Zhang, W. Xing and W. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6879–6883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Curl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1997, 36, 1566–1576 CrossRef .
H. Kroto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1997, 36, 1578–1593 CrossRef .
R. E. Smalley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1997, 36, 1594–1601 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chen, S. P. Kelty and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1991, 253, 886–888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. O. S. Bulhoes, Y. S. Obeng and A. J. Bard, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 110–114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori and Y. Sakata, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 537–546 CrossRef CAS .
L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 593–601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1787–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang, D. Ugarte and W. A. de Heer, Science, 1999, 283, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vieira, C. Pham-Huu, N. Keller and M. J. Ledoux, Chem. Commun., 2002, 954–955,  10.1039/B202032G .
S. Fan, M. G. Chapline, N. R. Franklin, T. W. Tombler, A. M. Cassell and H. Dai, Science, 1999, 283, 512–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1999, 286, 2148–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dai, J. H. Hafner, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1996, 384, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, A. Patil, X. Gong, Z. Guo, L. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 1150–1169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, D.-J. Liu, N. N. Kariuki and L. X. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2008, 329–331 RSC .
A. Titov, P. Zapol, P. Král, D.-J. Liu, H. Iddir, K. Baishya and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21629–21634 CAS .
S. Kundu, T. C. Nagaiah, W. Xia, Y. Wang, S. V. Dommele, J. H. Bitter, M. Santa, G. Grundmeier, M. Bron, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14302–14310 CAS .
Q. Shi, F. Peng, S. Liao, H. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Liu, B. Zhang and D. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14853–14857 CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, Z.-G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7195–7200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Lee, N. S. Kim, S. Y. Bae, J. Park, S.-C. Yu, H. Ryu and H. J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12958–12963 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6966–6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6986–7002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Latil and L. Henrard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 036803 CrossRef PubMed .
K. V. Krishna, C. Menard-Moyon, S. Verma and A. Bianco, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 1669–1688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Ma, H. Shen, X. L. Tu and Z. J. Zhang, Nanomedicine, 2014, 9, 1565–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Young, I. A. Kinloch, L. Gong and K. S. Novoselov, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 1459–1476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee and J. H. Ahn, NANO, 2013, 8, 1330001 CrossRef .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Tang, C. M. Hessel, J. Y. Wang, N. L. Yang, R. B. Yu, H. J. Zhao and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4281–4299 RSC .
Q. B. Zheng, Z. G. Li, J. H. Yang and J. K. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 64, 200–247 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Fan, X. Wei, C. Hu, L. Wang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6320–6325 CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-I. Aihara, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 7487–7495 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Niu, L. Dai and Z. Xia, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7542–7550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, Z.-Y. Wu, L.-F. Chen, C. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 366–376 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, R. F. Zhou, X. M. Chen, Y. H. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6074–6079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3110–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Hafner, M. J. Bronikowski, B. R. Azamian, P. Nikolaev, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert, K. A. Smith and R. E. Smalley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 296, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
D. Takagi, Y. Homma, H. Hibino, S. Suzuki and Y. Kobayashi, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2642–2645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, A. Ambrosi and E. L. K. Chng, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3347–3355 RSC .
C. E. Banks, A. Crossley, C. Salter, S. J. Wilkins and R. G. Compton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2533–2537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Šljukić, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1556–1558 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Batchelor-McAuley, G. G. Wildgoose, R. G. Compton, L. Shao and M. L. H. Green, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 132, 356–360 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, G. G. Wildgoose and R. G. Compton, Analyst, 2006, 131, 901–906 RSC .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 10946–10949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. K. Chng and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 781–784 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 804–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. E. Stuart and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 5544–5548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and M. Pumera, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12662–12664 RSC .
M. Pumera, H. Iwai and Y. Miyahara, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1770–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera and H. Iwai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4401–4405 CAS .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, B. Khezri, Z. Sofer, R. D. Webster and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 12899–12904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, S. Y. Chee, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 500–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. A. Wong, Z. Sofer, M. Kubesova, J. Kucera, S. Matejkova and M. Pumera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 13774–13779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 472–476 RSC .
X. Yang, X. Li, X. Ma, L. Jia and L. Zhu, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, F. Šaněk, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12673–12683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Sidik, A. B. Anderson, N. P. Subramanian, S. P. Kumaraguru and B. N. Popov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1787–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-F. Huang, K. Terakura, T. Ozaki, T. Ikeda, M. Boero, M. Oshima, J.-i. Ozaki and S. Miyata, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235410 CrossRef .
D. Deng, X. Pan, L. Yu, Y. Cui, Y. Jiang, J. Qi, W.-X. Li, Q. Fu, X. Ma, Q. Xue, G. Sun and X. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Ming Zhou
	Ming Zhou is currently a Professor at Northeast Normal University (NENU). He received BS (2004) and MS (2007, Prof. Liping Guo's group) from NENU and PhD (2011, Prof. Shaojun Dong's group) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. Then, he did postdoctoral work with Prof. Joseph Wang at the University of California, San Diego (2011), Prof. Liming Dai at Case Western Reserve University (2012), Prof. Bo Zhang at the University of Washington (2013–2014), and Dr Hsing-Lin Wang at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2015). He has published >40 papers with >2800 citations (H-index: 25). His research interests include nanomaterials for analysis and energy applications.

Hsing-Lin Wang
	Hsing-Lin Wang is now a senior scientist, team leader and project leader in Physical Chemistry and Spectroscopy group, Chemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory. He received his PhD in Chemistry in 1992 from the University of South Florida. Then, he moved to the University of Pennsylvania as a Postdoctoral Fellow from 1993–1995. He came to Los Alamos National Laboratory as a Postdoctoral Fellow in 1995 and became a Scientist in 1998. He has published over 160 papers with >6200 citations (H-index: 38) and 19 issued patents. His research interests include the synthesis, processing and applications of organic molecules and nanomaterials.

Shaojun Guo
	Shaojun Guo is currently a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, and Energy & Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University. He received his BSc in chemistry from Jilin University (2005) and PhD from Chinese Academy of Sciences (2011). He did his postdoctoral research at Brown University (2011–2013), worked as an Oppenheimer Distinguished Fellow at Los Alamos National Laboratory (2013–2015). In both 2014 and 2015, he was selected as one of the World's Highly Cited Researchers by Thomson Reuters. He has published over 150 papers with >10000 citations (H-index: 54). His research interests are in engineering nanocrystals for catalysis, renewable energy, optoelectronics and biosensors.

 	Fig. 1  (A) The typical fuel cells with methanol or H2 as fuel. (B) ORR pathways in alkaline and acidic media.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the high-efficiency carbon nanomaterial-based noble-metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalysts, which combine the advantages of carbon nanomaterials with large surface area/stable structure and heteroatom/transition metal-based NP/Fe3C-based NPs with high ORR electrocatalytic activity.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) TEM image of N-carbon shells. (B) Rotating ring-disk electrode tests for N-carbon shells and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with the rotating rate of 1600 rpm and the scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Id: disk current; Ir: ring current. (C) Electron-transfer numbers per oxygen molecule for N-carbon shells and Pt/C. (D) Calculated charge density distribution for N-C60 with the molecular formula of C59N as an example. (E) Schematic representations of three possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule on C59N: HH1 Pauling model (I), HH2 Pauling model (II), and HHV Pauling model (III), respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) SEM image of vertically aligned N-CNTs. (B) Linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the Pt/C (curve 1), vertically aligned CNTs (curve 2), and vertically aligned N-CNT modified glassy carbon electrodes (curve 3). (C) Calculated charge density distribution for the N-CNTs. (D) Schematic representations of possible adsorption modes of an oxygen molecule at the CNTs (top) and N-CNTs (bottom). (Adapted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Metal-free growth of N-CNTs for ORR. (B) LSV curves of the N-CNTs and CNTs in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (C) LSV curves of the N-CNT in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 at different rotating rates of 100, 400, 900, and 1600 rpm at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The inset in Fig. 5C shows the Koutecky–Levich plots of the N-CNTs derived from LSV curves. (Adapted with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) CV curves of CNTs and different B-CNTs in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (B) LSV curves of CNTs, different B-CNTs and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation speed of 2500 rpm. (C) Important molecular orbitals involved in the O2 adsorption on B-CNTs (5,5). (a) Spin-down HOMO−1 of B-CNTs (5,5). (b) LUMO of the triplet O2. (c) Spin-down HOMO−2 of O2-B-CNTs (5,5). (Adapted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) SEM image of vertically aligned BN-CNTs. (B) LSV curves of various catalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1000 rpm. (C) LSV curves of different vertically aligned BN-CNTs and CNTs in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The B/N ratio order: B3-N-CNTs > B2-N-CNTs > B1-N-CNTs. (D) LSV curves of N-CNTs, different BN-CNTs and commercial Pt/C electrocatalysts in an O2-saturated 1 M NaOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation speed of 2500 rpm. The B/N ratio order: B3-CNTs-N > B2-CNTs-N > B1-CNTs-N. (E) Bonded B and N co-doped CNTs (5,5). (F) HOMO plot of the corresponding O2 adsorption configuration (isodensity value of 0.007 a.u.). N, blue; B, pink; C, black; H, gray; O, red. (Parts A and B adapted with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts D–F adapted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) SEM image of SiN-CNTs. (B) LSV curves of CNTs, N-CNTs, SiN-CNTs and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. The net charge distributions of C, Si and N atoms in pure GN (C), Si-doped GN with one silicon (D) or two silicon atoms (E) and Si, N-co-doped GN (F). (Adapted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2015 Royal Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Synthesis of the FNS-CNTs. (B) The performance of MEAs that employ FNS-CNTs, CNTs, or Pt/C as the cathodes in alkaline fuel cells at 50 °C; open and closed circles correspond to the cell voltages and power densities, respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) A digital photo image of a transparent N-GN film floating on water. (B) LSV curves of GN (red line), Pt/C (green line), and N-GN (blue line) in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1. Mass(GN) = Mass(Pt/C) = Mass(N-GN) = 7.5 μg. (C) TEM image of N-GN with mesopores. (D) LSV curves of N-GN with mesopores and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) TEM image of N-GNQDs. (F) LSV curves of N-GN quantum dots in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with different speeds. The inset shows the Koutecky–Levich plots derived from the LSV measurements. (Parts A and B adapted with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. Parts A–D adapted with permission from ref. 114 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts E–F adapted with permission from ref. 205 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) LSV curves of the graphite, S-GN and Pt/C electrodes in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (B) HOMO distribution of S-GN. (C) LUMO distribution of S-GN. (D) The optimized O2 adsorption geometries onto Cl-GN, Br-GN and I-GN, in which halogen is covalently linked to two sp2 carbons. (E) The projected density of electronic states onto O2: (d) Cl-GN; (e) Br-GN; and (f) I-GN for the cases of corresponding (a), (b), and (c), respectively. (Parts A–C adapted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Parts D–E adapted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) LSV curves of BN-GN with different compositions and Pt/C catalysts in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (B) Experiment ORR activities vs. DFT-predicated HOMO–LUMO energy gap for BN-GN. (Adapted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

Single heteroatom-doped	N-doped	N-GN-based nanomaterials	N-GN framework	
160

Nanoporous N-GN	
151

Mesoporous N-GN	
117

N-GN/N-CNTs composite	
145

N-GN foams	
166

Nitrogen-doped porous carbons	N-OMCs	
167

N-mesoporous carbon cubes	
143

N-nanoporous carbons	
157

N-hierarchically porous carbons	
153

Other N-porous carbons based nanomaterials	
138, 141 and 148

Other kinds of nitrogen-doped carbon nanomaterials	N-carbon nanofiber aerogel	
266

N-carbon capsules	
159

N-carbon nanocages	
163

N-carbon nanospheres	
154

N-carbon nanoleaf networks	
142

Other single element-doped	P-OMCs	
161

Se-GN/Se-CNT networks	
162



Multiple heteroatom-co-doped	N and S co-doped	N and S co-doped porous carbon-based nanomaterials	NS-porous carbons	
155

NS-trimodal porous carbons	
149

NS-mesoporous carbons	
140

Mesoporous NS-GN	
127

NS-GN sheets-mesoporous carbon composite	
147

NS-GN nanomesh foams	
144

N and P co-doped	NP-mesoporous carbon foams	
135

P-carbon nitride-carbon fiber papers	
136

N, S and O co-doped	NOS-OMCs	
156

NPS-porous carbons	
150


 	Fig. 13  (A and B) Photographs of the as-prepared superlight N-GN framework, and one with a piece of N-GN framework size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm standing on a dandelion. (C and D) SEM images of the N-GN framework. Scale bars: (C) 10 mm, (D) 100 nm. (E) LSV curves of the N-GN framework and Pt/C in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (F) The curve of peroxide yield on the N-GN framework electrode. (Adapted with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of 3D nanoporous N-GN (a–c); and the ORR catalyzed by 3D nanoporous N-GN. (B) LSV curves of 3D nanoporous N-GN grown at different CVD temperatures and un-doped nanoporous GN. G-1000: 3D un-doped nanoporous GN deposited at 1000 °C; N-1000: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 1000 °C; N-900: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 900 °C; N-800L: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 800 °C for longer time; N-800S: 3D nanoporous N-GN deposited at 800 °C for shorter time. (C) Koutecky–Levich plots at −0.40 V with the electron transport number (n) per oxygen molecule. (Adapted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) LSV curves of various electrocatalysts at 1500 rpm in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (B) (a) Free energy plots of ORR and optimized configurations of adsorbed species on the g-C3N4 surface with zero, two, and four electron participation demonstrated as paths I, II, and III. Energy levels are not drawn to scale. Gray, blue, red, and white small spheres represent C, N, O, and H, respectively. (b–d) Schemes of ORR's pathway on pristine g-C3N4 without electron participation, pristine g-C3N4 with two-electron participation, and g-C3N4/conductive support composite with 4e− participation, respectively (red areas represent the active sites facilitating ORR). (Adapted with permission from ref. 165 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of P-OMCs. (B) LSV curves for OMCs, P-OMCs-1 (P-OMCs with the length of 1.5 μm and the thickness of 0.2 μm), P-OMCs-2 (P-OMCs with the length of 1.0 μm and the thickness of 0.4 μm), P-OMCs-3 (P-OMCs with the length of 0.7 μm and the thickness of 0.6 μm) and Pt/C on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. LSV curve for P-OMCs-3 on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode in a N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (Adapted with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) LSV curves of mesoporous NS-GN, mesoporous S-GN, mesoporous N-GN, mesoporous GN and Pt/C at 1600 rpm. (B) Electron-transfer numbers as a function of the overpotential of different samples. (C) Spin and charge density of the GN network dual-doped by N and S. C1 has very high spin density, C2 and C3 have high positive charge density, and C4 and C5 have moderately high positive spin densities. (Adapted with permission from ref. 127 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) LSV curves for NP-mesoporous carbon foams synthesized under different conditions and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotating rate of 1600 rpm. Sample 1: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 1000 °C; sample 2: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 1100 °C; sample 3: NP-mesoporous carbon foams heated at 900 °C; sample 4: NP-carbons heated at 1000 °C; sample 5: N-porous carbon foams heated at 900 °C. (B) ORR volcano plots of overpotential (η) versus adsorption energy of O* and the difference between the adsorption energy of O* and OH*, respectively, for N-doped, P-doped and N,P-co-doped GN. (C) Schematic energy profiles for the ORR pathway on N,P-co-doped GN in alkaline media. (Adapted with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) TEM image of the CoO/N-CNT hybrid. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern of the hybrid. The inside circle corresponds to graphite (002) from CNTs. (B) CVs of CoO/N-CNTs and N-CNTs in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (C) CV curves of different materials in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (D) ORR polarization curves of CoO/N-CNTs, Co3O4/N-CNTs, Co3O4/N-GN and Pt/C in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) TEM image of MnCo2O4/N-CNTs. (B) ORR polarization curves of MnCo2O4/N-CNTs and N-CNTs. Inset: Peroxide yield and electron transfer number per oxygen molecule at various potentials. (Adapted with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) TEM image of GN-Co/CoO. (B) ORR polarization curves of GN, Co/Co-Ketjen carbons, and Co/Co-GN in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. ORR polarization curves of the Co-CoO/GN and Pt/C electrocatalyst in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 400 rpm. (D) The chronoamperometric responses of Co-CoO/GN and Pt/C at −0.3 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the rotation rate of 200 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) TEM image of Co3O4/N-GN. The inset shows an electron diffraction pattern of the hybrid. (B) Tafel plots of Co3O4/N-GN and Co3O4/GN hybrids for ORR in alkaline medium. (C) TEM image of MnCo2O4/N-GN. (D) CV curves of MnCo2O4/N-GN, MnCo2O4 + N-GN mixture, Co3O4/N-GN, and N-GN in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. (E) ORR polarization curves of MnCo2O4/N-GN, MnCo2O4 + N-GN mixture, Co3O4/N-GN, N-GN and Pt/C in O2-saturated 1 M KOH at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Parts A–B, adapted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. Parts C–E, adapted with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) The concept of the design of (a) Co-Co3O4-C and (b) Co-Co3O4-C/porous carbon matrix for promoting ORR. TEM image of Co-Co3O4-C/porous carbon matrix. (B) ORR polarization curves of different materials in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2015 Royal Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) CVs of CoMoN/N-carbon nanocages, Co0.50Mo0.50Ny/N-carbon nanocages and Co5.47N/N-carbon nanocages in a N2-saturated and an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (B) LSV curves of N-carbon nanocages, MoN, Co5.47N, and Co0.50Mo0.50Ny in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. The LSV test of Pt/C was performed in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm. (C) Chronoamperometric responses of different materials except Pt/C for 100 h in an O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under magnetic stirring. The corresponding test for the Pt/C was performed in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. Applied potential: 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). (Adapted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) XRD patterns of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (B) TEM images of a single N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods with close-end graphite shell (a) and single N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods with open-end graphite shell (b). (C) Schematic diagram of the designed MFC with two testing cathode chambers sharing the same anode. N-Fe/Fe3C@C nanorods in the figure are the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (D) The output power density with Rex loading of 1 Ω in N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorod-based MFCs and Pt/C-based MFCs. (E) MFC polarization and power density curves with N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods and Pt/C cathodes. N-Fe/Fe3C@C nanorods in the figure are the N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon nanorods. (Adapted with permission from ref. 198 Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 26  TEM (A), HRTEM images (B) and XRD pattern (C) of Fe3C/CNTs. (D) Rotating ring-disk electrode voltammograms of Fe3C/CNTs in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) LSV curves of Fe3C/CNTs for ORR in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution before and after 3000 cycles. (F) LSV curves of Pt/C for ORR in an O2-saturated 0.10 M KOH solution before and after 3000 cycles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 199 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM images of Fe3C/GN sheets. (C) ORR polarization plots (bottom) and H2O2 yield plots (top) measured with Fe3C/GN sheets and Pt/C electrocatalysts on a rotating ring-disk electrode at 900 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. The scan rate was 10 mV s−1. (D) Chronoamperometric responses of Fe3C/GN sheets and Pt/C electrocatalysts at 0.8 V (vs. RHE) on a rotating disk electrode at 1000 rpm in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (Adapted with permission from ref. 200 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) XRD and (B) HRTEM images of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams. (C) LSV curves of pure Ketjen black (1), carbonized melamine foam (2), a physical mixture of Fe/Fe3C melamine and Ketjen black (3), N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams (4), 9.55 mgPt cm−2 (5), and 28.6 mgPt cm−2 (6) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the rotation rate of 2000 rpm. Non-precious-metal electrocatalyst loadings were 0.286 mgcat cm−2. (D) Chronoamperometric responses of N-Fe-Fe3C/carbon foams and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at −0.2 V (vs. Hg/HgO) and 1600 rpm. (Adapted with permission from ref. 201 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 29  HRTEM images of (A) amorphous carbon, (B) Fe3C and (C) Fe@C in Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs. (D) LSV curves of Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (E) Chronoamperometric responses of Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C at 0.84 V (vs. RHE) for 40000 s in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (F) Alkaline direct methanol fuel cell single-cell performance constructed with Fe3C/N-Fe-carbonized MOFs and Pt/C at 60 °C under the same conditions. (Adapted with permission from ref. 204 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 30  (A–C) TEM images of Fe3C/carbon microspheres. (D) LSV curves of Fe3C/carbon microspheres, Fe3C/carbon microspheres-L and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 before and after 4500 potential cycles at the scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and the rotating speed of 900 rpm. Potential cycling was carried out between 0.6 and 1.0 V (vs. RHE) in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (E) LSV curves of Fe3C/carbon microspheres, Fe3C/carbon microspheres-L, and Fe3C/carbon microspheres-BL in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (Adapted with permission from ref. 202 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) SEM image of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs. Inset: TEM images of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs (a and b). (B) ORR polarization curves of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), Fe-N-CNT-OPCs and Fe-N-CNF-OPCs in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at the scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and the rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (C) Peroxide yield (solid) and electron transfer numbers (dash) for Fe-N-CNT-OPCs and Fe-N-CNF-OPCs. (D) ORR current (pattern column) and the corresponding cost-efficiency (color column) of Pt/C (20 wt% Pt loading), Fe-N-CNT-OPCs at different potentials. (E) TEM image and corresponding elemental mappings of the same area of Fe-N-CNT-OPCs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 268 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
