Recent advances in stretchable, wearable and bio-compatible triboelectric nanogenerators  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC01931K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC01931K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 11439-11471Recent advances in stretchable, wearable and bio-compatible triboelectric nanogenerators

        
          
            Marjan 
            Haghayegh
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ran 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fatemeh 
            Zabihi
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Roohollah 
            Bagherzadeh
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Shengyuan 
            Yang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Meifang 
            Zhu
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Shanghai Belt & Road Joint Laboratory of Advanced Fibers and Low-dimension Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: fzabihi@texavie.com; bagherzadeh_r@aut.ac.ir; cmseysy@dhu.edu.cn; zmf@dhu.edu.cn
bAdvanced Fibrous Materials LAB, Institute for Advanced Textile Materials and Technologies (ATMT), Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
cTexavie Technologies Inc., 148-970 Burrard St., Vancouver, BC V6Z 2R4, Canada
Received 
      10th May 2022
    , Accepted 11th July 2022First published on 10th August 2022AbstractTriboelectric Nanogenerators (TENGs) can convert mechanical energy into electricity and harvest this energy. It is critical to highlight and study the material selection, structure, and fabrication technique to further improve their shortcomings, such as limited comfortability, stretchability, and low current density. Thus, the recent progress of TENGs was reviewed from the aspects of stretchable materials, and fabrication methods to develop wearable TENGs, bio-based TENGs, and TENG-based hybrid devices. Moreover, for a deep understanding of TENG performance, which is helpful for optimization, the influence of critical parameters such as the contact area, mechanical tension, internal resistance, and conditioning circuit on the performance of TENGs was systematically evaluated. Furthermore, self-powered sensing devices based on TENGs have been developed for wearable and flexible electronics due to their merits over conventional power supplies. Therefore, the latest development of TENGs as smart sensors and the power supply of sensing systems was summarized in three main fields: environmental monitoring, human–machine interface (HMI), and human health monitoring. Finally, based on the challenges and limitations, we presented suggestions and prospects as future research trends for the development of TENGs.
1. Introduction
A mobile energy source has been a great challenge of the digital era with the rapid advancement of widely distributed flexible, stretchable, and portable electronics. Conventional and traditional energy supplies, including chemical batteries and capacitors, have disadvantages such as restricted lifetime, high cost, high weight, and environmental pollution.1–3 Thus, renewable energy sources have been considered as alternative ways to produce self-powered electronic devices. Different types of renewable energy, such as wind and solar, are not appropriate for miniature gadgets employed in mobile usage or indoor environments.3 Electric generators are developed power sources capable of instigating electric charges, separating charges, and after that accelerating a free electron flow due to the permitted potential difference. This technique is based on piezoelectric,4–9 pyroelectric, electromagnetic, and electrostatic phenomena.10–12 Researchers devised advanced fabrication methods to apply the electrostatic effect in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) between 2006 and 2010.10 The electrostatic-induced triboelectric phenomenon has a long history, but triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) were first put forward in 2012 when Fan et al.10 used a simple, scalable, and low-cost fabrication method to develop a polymer-based flexible TENG for mechanical energy harvesting. TENGs, which convert mechanical energy into electricity based on a combination of electrification and electrostatic induction effects, have numerous merits including simple structures and fabrication processes, excellent flexibility, mechanical durability, low cost, high efficiency, and lightweight.13–18 Most relevantly, TENGs generate energy from irregular and low-frequency of mechanical energy. Therefore, in the last few years, researchers have evaluated various concepts for enhancing TENG outputs for a wider application.19
Notably, Parida et al.19 reviewed the properties of skin-based stretchable TENGs, including mechanisms, conductivity, and structural modification for the development of deformable electrodes. In another review paper, Tian et al.2 explained the challenges and future trends of energy harvesting TENGs. They explored the principles, material selection, and structural designs of various TENGs, their applications in wind, raindrop, sound, noise, and ocean energy harvesting, and the combination of the energy harvesters with solar cells (SCs), electromagnetic generators (EMGs), and piezoelectric nanogenerators. Besides, Zhang et al.13 prepared a review focused on the recent usage of TENGs and PENGs for information sensing as self-powered sensors, environmental monitoring, biomedical monitoring, and human-machine interface systems. Gao et al.20 also summarized the principles and physical basis of TENGs for mechanical sensing applications, including monitoring mechanical motion such as linear, rotary, and multi-dimensional motion, vibration motion, mechanical pressure, and tactility. They further explained the stability, measuring range, precision, resolution, sensitivity, appropriate electrode materials, and other aspects of triboelectric mechanical sensors. Moreover, Luo and Wang12 prepared a review to study the fundamentals and merits of TENGs. They also surveyed the recent applications of TENGs as micro/nano power sources, self-powered sensors, blue energy, and high-voltage power sources.
It is required to focus on the strategies such as fabrication methods, design, and materials to solve important challenges of TENGs like the problem of irritation and lack of comfortability and stretchability of wearable TENGs, the danger of synthetic materials, and the issue of low current of TENGs. Therefore, in this study, we have presented a comprehensive summary of the recent triboelectric nanogenerators. We explained suitable stretchable materials and fabrication processes to develop TENGs for wearable gadgets, natural polymers to develop bio-based TENGs, which are less dangerous to the environment, and TENG-based hybrid systems using various multiple types of energy. Furthermore, we have studied the effect of important parameters in TENGs, such as the contact area, mechanical tension, internal resistance, and conditioning circuit, which play an important role in the optimization and development of TENGs. Finally, we have described three main TENG application areas: human health monitoring, human–machine interface (HMI), and environmental monitoring.
2. Fundamentals of TENGs
In 2012, Fan et al.10 fabricated a polymer-based generator including Kapton and polyester (PET) films for the first time. The top and bottom of a triboelectric generator (TEG) include thin layers of Au alloy, which can be considered as electrodes to connect the TEG to an external circuit and generate equal and opposite charges through electrostatic induction. The performance of this TEG is appropriate for harvesting energy from slow motions such as the movement of humans, wind, and water.10
Four working modes of TENGs have been developed based on the device structure and operation mechanisms: (1) vertical contact-separation that constitutes two vertically separated triboelectric materials with two electrodes attached to their back (Fig. 1a). This type is simple and therefore vastly applied. (2) Lateral sliding mode in which triboelectric charge is generated by the periodic sliding displacement of layers using mechanical motions like a planar, disc, and cylindrical rotation (Fig. 1b). (3) Single-electrode mode (Fig. 1c). The potential difference between the upper and lower layers can be caused by contacting and separating the attached layers to generate electrons through the load. (4) Free-standing mode composed of a pair of symmetrical electrodes and free-standing triboelectric materials as dielectrics (Fig. 1d). When the upper material is in the middle of the electrode, a charge balance exists, while a potential difference is caused by its slides.13,19
 Fig. 1  The four working modes of TENGs: (a) vertical contact-separation mode, (b) lateral sliding mode, (c) single-electrode mode, and (d) free-standing triboelectric layer mode. 
2.1. Working principle of TENGs
To further understand the working principle of TENGs, the charge transfer process of a contact-separation mode TENG is explained in detail (Fig. 2). The TENG includes two components with different triboelectric potentials as dielectrics. Fundamentally, there is no contact and consequently no charge flow between TENG components. On contact with the triboelectric dielectric layers under an external mechanical force, electrostatic charges are generated due to the frictional force created on the rough contact surfaces. In this state, one dielectric loses its electrons, and the other becomes negatively charged. An electrostatic balance in the dielectric materials is created during the contact time, as electrodes have no charge. When the force is liquidated, the dielectric materials produce reverse charges on the electrodes because of the opposite electrostatic balance, creating a current flow. With the complete release of the TENGs, a balance between the upper and lower layers befalls and ceases the current flow. The balance is again altered in the pressing condition to cause a current flow between electrodes. Thus, the TENG alternately generates a flow of current in the pressing and releasing steps, with a balance in the pressed and released states. As mentioned above, by an external force, two materials with various roughnesses should touch each other to generate charges. Then the pulling force should be applied to separate the upper and lower layers after the pressing stage. Thus, it is important that the materials can distribute the force during the movement and recover their original structure and shape after eliminating the force. In other words, since TENGs operate with mechanical energy, they should be resistant to tapping, stretching, and bending. Therefore, it is advisable to utilize flexible materials in TENGs.3,10
 Fig. 2  The working principle of the TENG in a contact-separation mode. 
2.2. Theory of TENGs
In 2017, Wang21 proposed a physical TENG model based on Maxwell's displacement current and surface polarization.21

2.2.1. Maxwell's displacement current. 
Maxwell22 proposed the displacement current based on Ampere's law for the magnetic field and the continuity equation for electric charges. Maxwell's equations unifying electromagnetism are expressed as follows: (1) ∇ = 0 (Gauss's law for magnetism)(2) (3) (4) is the electric field,  is the magnetic field,  is the magnetizing field,  is the free electric charge density,  is the free electric current, and  is the displacement.  can be defined as follows:21,22  = ε0 + (5)where  is the polarization field, and ε0 is the permittivity under vacuum. For an isotropic medium, displacement  is explained by  = ε in which ε is the permittivity of the dielectrics. Therefore, Maxwell's displacement current  is defined as follows:21 (6)The displacement current can merge the electric and magnetic fields. In the above equation, the first term explains the influence of electricity on magnetic induction. Hence, it is related to the electromagnetic wave used for radios, radar, TVs, wireless communication, and the theory of light. The second term shows the polarization, which includes contact electrification or the piezoelectric effect contributed by the strain. Therefore, this term is related to the nanogenerators, and these have a variety of applications in sensors, blue energy, etc.21,22
2.2.1.1. Triboelectric nanogenerators. 
Wang21 itemized the relationship between the second term of displacement current and the output from nanogenerators. The polarization density of  can be added to the displacement () to show the contact electrification in triboelectric materials. Therefore, Maxwell's displacement current is represented as follows: (7)The term  shows the displacement current caused by the external strain field as the non-electric one, and it is the base of the invention of nanogenerators.2,12,21
A TENG with four layers including two dielectrics with permittivities of ε1 and ε2, and thicknesses of d1 and d2 is assumed (Fig. 3I). According to the working principle of TENGs, the surface is partially charged with non-mobile static charges after the dielectrics contact each other (Fig. 3II). The surface charge density (σc) is independent of the gap distance (z) and increases with the number of contacts. The triboelectric charges make the electrostatic field and produce a flow of electrons. Therefore, there is an accumulation of free electrons in the electrode  depending on the gap distance (z(t)) (Fig. 3III). According to Fig. 3III, dielectric 1, dielectric 2, and the gap have electric fields of  and , respectively. The relative voltage drop between the two electrodes can be calculated as follows: (8)The voltage is zero for a short-circuit condition, so:21 (9)The displacement current density as the output of a TENG depends on the charge density on the dielectric surface area and the speed of contact and separation, which is indicated as follows:21 (10)
 Fig. 3  The working mechanism of the TENG with the increase of contact cycles. 
2.2.1.2. Capacitive model. 
The displacement current is considered the only conduction phenomenon for electricity transport in TENGs, so TENGs are mentioned as capacitive conductors. Charged surfaces with variable spacing can be considered as a capacitor with different capacitances. The power is produced by electromagnetic waves and induction instead of free charges across electrodes. According to the capacitor model, the current () generated in an external load is represented as follows:10,21,23 (11)where  is the stored charges in the capacitor, C is the capacitance, and  is the voltage of the two electrodes. The first term describes the potential difference across the electrodes due to the electrostatically induced charges. The second term elaborates on the variation of capacitance due to the alternation of the distance between the electrodes caused by mechanical deformation.10 The variation of gap distance is large in TENGs, so both terms in eqn (11) are referred to the output current as follows: (12)Eqn (12) and (10) have the same result, which shows that the capacitive model is based on Maxwell's displacement current.21,24

3. Stretchable TENGs as the next generation of wearable gadgets
Today there is a steady and ever-increasing demand for smart electronic textiles (E-textile) for sensing, medical, and energy storage applications without the need for batteries.25 Furthermore, electronic skins (E-skins) have characteristically poor batteries with limited usage and lifetime and high maintenance and recharging costs.26,27 Therefore, the next-generation wearable gadgets with stretchable energy supply, firm connection to the body or tissues, and motion deformability are mandatory. Stretchable TENGs (S-TENGs) are the appropriate solution owing to their lightweight, simple construction, accurate collection of low-frequency motion, fast responses, and greatly sensitive self-powered sensors.23,27–29
Flexible elastic polymers such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),30–34 silicone rubber,35,36 and ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA),37 which have been used in classic e-skins, irritate human skin since they are hydrophobic with low air permeability.27 Therefore, researchers have put profuse efforts into the simple fabrication of membranes and textiles with breathability, flexibility, and controllable thickness for wearable gadgets.27,38–40 Fibrous mats generated by electrospinning with the properties of large surface area, porosity, and breathability have been applied recently.27 Electrospun membranes can be considered an appropriate choice due to their excellent properties as mentioned above.38,41,42 In comparison to complicated and expensive methods used to disperse nanostructures in polymers and modify the surface, such as micropatterning,43 plasma etching,44 applying block copolymers,45 producing nanocomposites,46,47 and making porous materials,48 electrospinning is a simple, low cost, and flexible process which can produce continuous flexible nanofibers with a wide surface area, high roughness, and flexibility. Electrospinning simply realizes the use of merged materials such as polymers, metals, ceramics, and inorganic nanoparticles to produce multifunctional nanocomposites simply.3,27,49–55 Nevertheless, a stretchable TENG fabricated by a polytetrafluoroethylene–polyurethane (PTFE–PU) bilayer membrane and a PU–Ag nanowire electrode has challenges like the usage of VHB tapes and hot-press and also the dependence of stretchability on PU.56 Moreover, the deformability of some electrospun membranes such as PU/carbon nanotube (CNT)-cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) composites57 and PU-Ag nanowire networks58,59 depends on PU, which causes challenges for keeping the stretchability and also the adhesion between PU and other parts. Therefore, the most important setback of the recent electrospun nanofibers is their irreversible sliding when they are used in wearable applications, which means that they have no acceptable deformability, especially the stretchability.38,60
Methods such as combination with elastomers,61 an extra coating,62 and thermal cross-linking63 have been applied to enhance the elasticity of triboelectric nanofibers. However, these methods faced difficulties such as complicated fabrication, low air permeability, and high temperatures.38 Finally, the first breathable, stretchable, and hydrophobic nanofiber-membrane named poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)/styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene (PVDF-HFP/SEBS) or the PHS membrane was developed in which SEBS is the co-deposited elastomeric binder. SEBS as a triblock copolymer of polystyrene (PS) and poly(ethylene butylene) (PEB) with satisfactory elasticity, electrospinnability, and also biocompatibility, can keep the nanofibers at distributed sites, so fibers have reversible sliding under stretching. Furthermore, SEBS microspheres enhance the hydrophobicity of the PVDF-HFP nanofiber-membrane because of the increase in their surface roughness. On the other hand, PVDF-HFP has been utilized as a triboelectric layer because it is stable, hydrophobic, and electronegative. The electrospraying method with co-solvent, as shown in Fig. 4a, can change the selective solubility property of polymer blocks and fabricate the SEBS membrane. A PHS membrane as a triboelectric material can be fabricated using simultaneous electrospraying to load SEBS. This can well interlock the electrospun PVDF-HFP in the structure, as shown in Fig. 4a. This interlocked construction can moderate the tensile stress and endow the PHS membrane with high deformability and stretchability because SEBS can absorb energy under the strain condition. A pure PVDF-HFP nanofiber membrane can tolerate a tensile strain of 270%, while the PHS membranes with PVDF-HFP:SEBS weight ratios of 1:9, 3:7, and 5:5 can endure tensile strains of 1400%, 490%, and 304%, respectively.38
 Fig. 4  Stretchable TENGs. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the SNF-TENG. (b) Structure of the SNF-TENG and cross-sectional SEM image and surface morphology of the SNF-TENG. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the PNA hydrogel precursor, PNA hydrogel fibers, and PNA/PMA core-sheath fibers. (d) SEM images of a PNA/PMA fiber, a web woven from PNA/PMA fibers, and a fabric knitted from PNA/PMA fibers and wool threads. (e) Schematic illustration of a TENG textile woven from PNA/PMA core-sheath fibers and the output of the TENG textile at an ∼1.25 Hz relative motion to a PTFE film. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of FS-TENG. (g) Photograph of the fabricated p-PDMS film. (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) The preparation process and equipment for fabricating e-skin. (i) The forming process of e-skin with rGO and AgNWs, and the structure of S-TENG based e-skin. (j) (I, II) SEM images of the surface of the e-skin at different magnifications, (III) energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping, (IV) images of rGO/AgNWs, and (V and VI) SEM images of a cross-section of the e-skin at various magnifications. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (k) Structure of the SI-TENG, the SEM image of the PDMS surface and TPU/AgNWs, and cross-section SEM image of the whole device. (l) AFM image of surface change for contact–separation 1000 cycles. (k and l) Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In a stretchable nanofiber-based TENG (SNF-TENG) with a thickness of 175 μm and three layers (Fig. 4b), the conductor ink and toluene as the solvent can dissolve the SEBS in the screen-printing technique. Thus, there is a tight attachment and an embedded interface between them. Hence, the SNF-TENG has mechanical stability at a strain of 125%, which states that the PHS membrane can enable high energy dissipation. It was also concluded that a higher amount of SEBS mitigates the voltage because it has a lower triboelectric affinity than PVDF-HFP. Moreover, the SEBS amount of more than 90% causes aggregation in the PVDF-HFP nanofibers. The PHS membrane with a PVDF-HFP:SEBS ratio of 3:7 was considered the champion device regarding stretchability and triboelectric performance. By using a knitted fabric structure of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or other stretchable textiles instead of SEBS, this integrated technology can be used for textile-TENG fabrication. Moreover, the delamination property, weak adhesion, and poor mechanical stability of the PVDF-HFP nanofiber membrane existing during contact with other materials can be neglected when SEBS microspheres interlock it. Therefore, there is no delamination between nanofibers in the PHS membrane during the contact separation with aluminum or airflow.38
On the other hand, a stretchable electrode is vital in fabricating S-TENGs. Metallic materials such as silver and gold have still been used as electrodes without stretchability. This issue causes restrictions on the development of flexible TENGs because all parts of TENGs should be stretchable for certain applications, such as wearable health monitoring devices.64,65 The use of liquid metals66,67 also brings restrictions of liquid materials.25 Therefore, polymer-based ionic conductors such as hydrogels with outstanding stretchability as well as conductivity are better choices for stretchable electronics.25,30,60,68
The challenge of using stretchable hydrogel electrodes is dehydration, which causes instability and a decreased ionic conductivity.27,30,69 In addition, the thickness of recently developed hydrogel-based TENGs is larger than the thickness of the dielectric layer, and therefore, fabrication of ultrathin TENGs has been considered a serious challenge.30,70,71 Moreover, the fabrication process of these TENGs is complicated due to the hydrogel viscosity and hard control of the hydrogel electrode configuration.71 There have also been difficulties in the continuous generation of stretchable conductive hydrogel fibers as the e-textiles.25 In the drawing method as a common technique, high strength and high damping efficiency can be achieved by drawing hydrogel fibers to mimic spider fibers. However, the conductivity of these fibers has not been mentioned in previous studies.72,73 Moreover, electrospinning can only fabricate non-woven mats,74 and the mold casting method applied to fabricate 1-D hydrogel fibers75,76 is not suitable for continuously fabricating uniform hydrogel fibers on a large scale. Moreover, spinning can rarely produce hydrogel fibers because of the low spinnability of hydrogels and precursor solutions.25 Besides, the mechanical and electrical characteristics of some hydrogels fabricated by wet spinning,77,78 and dynamic-crosslinking–spinning79 were not yet evaluated. However, a continuous and simple dry-wet spinning method fabricated hydrogel fibers with conductive and flexible characteristics, self-healing ability, and water resistance stabilities. As shown in Fig. 4c, the poly(N-acryloylglycinamide (NAGA)-co-acrylamide(AAM)) (PNA) hydrogel precursor is extruded from the spinning head and then coated by elastomeric poly(methyl acrylate) (PMA) to decrease water evaporation and the effect of air humidity. According to Fig. 4d, the PMA coating could completely wrap the core hydrogel fiber. Finally, the core-sheath fibers are woven and knitted into stretchable fabrics (Fig. 4d). This technology offers a multitude of advantages; for example, easy scaling up ability, high porosity, and huge surface area. As along with the higher water content causes compelling conductivity,25 unlike the drawn hydrogel fibers with a dried shell.73 Finally, the fiber diameter can be simply tuned by altering the diameter of the spinning head. To develop PNA hydrogel fibers by the dry-wet spinning method, the content of NAGA and AAm monomers is important for the sol–gel transition of the physically cross-linked PNA hydrogel precursor. Stable dual hydrogen bonds and weak mono-hydrogen bonds can be formed among the NAGA segments and AAm, respectively. The increase of AAm causes weaker cross-linking and a lower temperature of the sol–gel transition due to the decrease of the dual hydrogen bonds. The PNA/PMA fiber as a strain sensor is strongly responsive, around 149 ms against elongation and 158 ms for the release. Additionally, this sensor has a self-healing ability, and it is sensitive to the flexion degree of the human finger, so it is suggested for e-textiles and HMI purposes. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4e, flexible PNA/PMA fibers can be woven to fabricate larger scale and wearable TENG textile. With the TENG textile including conductive core fibers as the electrode, the dielectric PMA sheath as the triboelectrification layer, and PTFE as the counter material, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 36 V, a short-circuit current (ISC) of 0.7 μA and a transferred charge quantity (QSC) of 10 nC were obtained at a frequency of 1.25 Hz (Fig. 4e). Polyester fabric, spandex fabric, and polyimide (Kapton) film, which have more tribo-negative than PMA, are better for the counter layer. They improve the voltage by increasing the static charges at the interfaces due to a larger triboelectric negativity difference. On the other side, the main disadvantage of this TENG is the difficulty of recovery after damage because PMA is not a self-healing material.25
Furthermore, studies have focused on conducting nanofillers such as carbon nanotubes,80,81 graphene,65 graphite spray,82 carbon grease,71,83 silver nanowires (AgNWs),27,84,85 and conductive particle/polymer composites86 dispersed into elastomers to improve the conductivity and stretchability. Nevertheless, there have been problems such as incompatibility of conductive fillers with elastic networks, poor mixing resulting in poor adhesion, a reverse relation between conductivity and stretchability, and high thickness of electrodes to increase conductivity which adversely affect the transparency and adhesion.60,85,87–92 Nevertheless, a fully stretchable TENG (FS-TENG), including a stretchable electrospun electrode, was developed (Fig. 4f). This FS-TENG is composed of a new design of the PDMS film with anti-nickel foam construction (Fig. 4g). According to Fig. 4f, the nickel-PDMS composite film is made by permeating porous PDMS (p-PDMS) into the pore of nickel fixed on polyethylene (PE) tape. Then the nickel foam is removed, and pPMDS with a uniform and rough surface is obtained after the etching process. To make a flexible electrode, polyurethane-graphene (PU-GR film) fabricated by electrospinning is treated with multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) to decrease the resistance (Fig. 4f). This excellent flexible electrode is examined under different tensile strains and bending angles, which indicates that it can be bent to 180° or stretched to over 15% strain. Moreover, it has good conductivity after stretching and bending. Based on the obtained optimal conditions and p-PDMS made by nickel size of 5 μm, the voltage reached 92. A maximum power of 782.8 W m−2 was obtained at an external load resistance of 5 MΩ.65 Furthermore, to fabricate another conductive and stretchable conductor including conductive fillers and polymer matrices, screen printing (Fig. 4a) can be applied to deposit a suspension of liquid (gallium indium tin particles) (GaInSn) and silver flakes (LM-Ag flakes) in SEBS resin onto the SEBS membrane.38
Another appropriate conductive material for S-TENGs is silver nanowires (AgNWs) due to their controllable form, good electrical and mechanical performance, and large aspect proportion.30 However, these S-TENGs face significant output variation due to the slip of AgNWs under large deformation. To solve the instability problem, another conductive nanomaterial should be introduced into the AgNWs to reinforce the connection between AgNWs. For instance, 2-D reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheets with ultrathin shape, high conductivity, and a large surface area can be applied to fabricate an outstanding conductive network.27 A stretchable TENG (S-TENG) was fabricated with 9 layers of thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) fibrous mats as the triboelectric and protection layers and 8 layers of AgNW/rGO as the stretchable electrodes and the conductive fillers. Fig. 4h and i exhibit the equipment required for fabricating this e-skin and the fabrication steps, respectively. This process includes electrospinning and spraying as follows: one layer of the TPU fibrous mat was prepared on the foil, followed by spraying of rGO and AgNW hybrid particles (GAHP) alternately 8 times to obtain an efficient electron transfer. TEM images exhibited pure morphology of the prepared AgNWs with a diameter of 150 nm and a length of 400–500 μm. Based on the morphological evidence shown in Fig. 4j, TPU fibers covered the conductive network, which enhanced stability and durability (Fig. 4j(I)), and the mats could increase the contact area between the two triboelectric materials (Fig. 4j(II)). The AgNWs also expressed a uniform distribution and covered rGO sheets (Fig. 4j(III) and (IV)). Remarkably, AgNWs connected the cracks caused by the strain in the conductive network (Fig. 4j(V) and (VI)).
From a structural point of view, e-skin thickness is crucial, as a large thickness might be cumbersome in covering the conductive layer. This e-skin is utilizable in touchable sensing and energy harvesting because of its high sensitivity to touch and quick response.27 A cost-effective and simple technique was exploited to develop another stretchable and ultrathin skin-inspired TENG (SI-TENG) with excellent optical and electro-mechanical performance due to the use of a TPU/AgNW electrode and excellent mechanical characteristics. The single-electrode SI-TENG (Fig. 4k) includes a PDMS film modified with a top-placed-inductively coupled plasma (ICP) microstructure for producing the triboelectric charges (whose SEM image is shown in Fig. 4k), AgNWs dispersed in TPU nanofibers as the middle electrode layer for stretchability (whose SEM image is shown in Fig. 4k), and VHB tape at the bottom as a protective layer. This TENG expressed super stretchability due to the presence of stretchable and thin materials, as shown in Fig. 4k (89 μm thickness and 230 mg weight). According to the rough surface morphologies shown in Fig. 4l, the SI-TENG undertook a negligible level of damage after 1000 cycles of tapping due to the durability of its microstructures, and it has a stable output after tapping 40000 times at a loading pressure of 5 kPa and a frequency of 1 Hz. Using an 840 MΩ resistance, a maximum power density of 6.1 mW m−2 was obtained, and the output showed zero variation with alternation of frequency from 1 to 4 Hz. More interestingly, the device showed great mechanical properties with a uniaxial stretchability of 200%, an electrode stretchability of 580%, and a stable resistance of 5–732 Ω at a strain of 100%. At a stress of 2.8 MPa, the SI-TENG has a failure strain of 800% due to the compact multilayer composite. Since 100000 cycles cause no variation in the voltage at a tensile strain of 30%, this SI-TENG has an outstanding stretchability.85
4. Developing biomaterial-based TENGs
There has been a high demand for applying appropriate biomaterials in TENG fabrication both for electrodes and triboelectric layers. Synthetic polymers like PTFE, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), Kapton, PDMS, and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as typical TENG materials38,65,93–95 can release dangerous chemicals to the environment due to their incomplete degradation.96 Thus, recently, there has been a great deal of development of bio-based TENGs by employing eco-friendly, simple, low-cost, degradable, and renewable biomaterials such as wood,97–101 silk,102–110 cellulose,101,111–121 starch,96,120,122,123 and chitosan124–126 instead of non-renewable synthetic polymers.
A protein-based strain sensor and a single-electrode bio-TENG, including AgNW electrodes embedded in the cross-linked silk film, which can be extracted from cocoons were fabricated to harvest human energy and monitor the motion (Fig. 5a). To prepare a flexible and water-insoluble free-standing silk film required for wearable electronics, glycerol as a plasticizer was added to silk protein to develop a secondary β-sheet design of silk molecules. According to Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, silk films' stiffness and tensile strength decrease with an increase of glycerol concentration (from 10% to 50%), resulting in more flexible and water-insoluble silk films. Silk films with 50% glycerol concentration were applied in this study as a highly flexible and reliable one. The AgNWs are anchored in the silk film, so the resistance changes insignificantly with the increase of the bending angle after 1000 bending cycles, showing the flexible and firm electrodes. Stretching the membrane up to the 10% strain reduces the intensity of LEDs because the electrode resistance increases, so the AgNW/silk film can be applied as a strain sensor. Furthermore, at a pressure of 10 kPa and a load resistance of 1 MΩ, the bio-TENG pressed using a finger generates a maximum power density of 2 mW m−2, which could light up five LEDs. This TENG has a stable output under a humidity of up to 50% and a low degradation under 60% of relative humidity because of the neutralization of the surface charges caused by water adsorption to silk. To develop a multifunctional bio-device, a strain sensor and a TENG were integrated to harvest energy and monitor human motion at the same time (Fig. 5b). This device attached to the body can monitor the strain and generate a voltage of 10 V and a current of 0.013 μA by bending the hand.103 As shown in Fig. 5c, another stretchable protein TENG (S-TENG), including the silver nanofiber/silk fibroin film (Ag NF/SFF) electrode and PDMS, was developed as an artificial e-skin for energy harvesting and tactile sensing with the ability of touch sensing. Fig. 5d displays the fabrication process of the conductive SFF. The secondary structure of silk fibroin containing an α-helix and the random coil is related to the tensile characteristic of SFF. Another part of the secondary structure is β-sheets which can change to β-crystallites by vaporization to improve the mechanical stability. To increase the conversion of the α-helix and random coil into β-sheets and enhance the mechanical flexibility, PU and glycerol doping can be applied. Then a hollow silver nanofiber is placed on the silk film to develop a friction electrode as a stretchable, degradable, biocompatible, and air-permeable layer. A 1 cm × 1 cm TENG generates a VOC of 13 V, an ISC of 0.4 μA, and a QSC of 1.7 nC at a frequency of 1 Hz. A maximum power density of 0.8 W m−2 was obtained at a load resistance of 600 MΩ, driving small electronics such as a digital watch.104
 Fig. 5  TENGs based on biomaterials. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and the image of the silk protein-based strain sensor and the TENG. (b) Images of the integrated strain sensor and the bio-TENG on a bandage, and its application to measure different human motions. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The structure of the TENG based on conductive SFF, the thickness of the SFF, and SEM image of the AgNFs. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of conductive SFF. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of cellulose II hydrogel and aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (f) The structure of the C-TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Numerous studies have focused on constructing TENGs using cellulose-based films.127–130 Researchers have fabricated cellulose-based aerogels from cellulose nanocrystals (CNC),127,129 bacterial cellulose,130 and cellulose nanofibrils (CNF).126,131 However, these materials have low flexibility, weak strength, and a low specific surface area. Therefore, new techniques, such as dissolution-regeneration, were used to make cellulose II aerogels with high mesopores and surface area (Fig. 5e). Lithium bromide trihydrate as an inorganic molten salt hydrate can be applied to convert the local cellulose named cellulose I to cellulose II. This aerogel has a diameter of 10–25 nm and a surface area of 221.3 m2 g−1, which is greatly larger than the celluloseI aerogel. Moreover, the cellulose aerogel made of cellulose II has a homogenous structure with no cracks versus stress and possesses appropriate thermal stability up to 250 °C. To estimate the triboelectric performance of cellulose II aerogels, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTEF) as a reference triboelectric negative material and cellulose II aerogels as electrodes are connected to the external circuit. During the electricity–generation process, the aerogel's induced charges disperse on the structural network's surface. Moreover, there is a large surface area and accumulation of charges due to the special nanostructure of cellulose II aerogels. This cellulose II aerogel-based TENG is robust because the durability of the TENG tested by 15000 cycles of the contact separation does not affect the voltage.112
A composite cellulose II aerogel was also fabricated with chitosan, free amine groups as strong electron-donating groups, and alginic acid, including carboxylic acid, as an electron-withdrawing group. In the cellulose-chitosan composite aerogel-based TENG, including PTEF as a triboelectric negative material and nylon film (PA) as a triboelectric positive material, the voltage increases with the increase of chitosan. Nonetheless, the cellulose–alginic acid aerogel-based TENG voltage reduces with the increase of alginic acid from 0% to 1.5%. Therefore, the amino group of chitosan and the carboxyl group of alginic acid change the triboelectric properties in the opposite direction. The study of the physical dimensions of the cellulose aerogels also showed that the voltage and charge enhance with the increase of the diameter of cellulose aerogels and thickness of porous aerogels. This TENG can be used for wearable motion monitoring of two states, walking and running, by tapping on a sock. It has great potential for further research of a cellulose II aerogel-based TENG, such as introducing other natural polymers into aerogels, as this type of TENG is in an early stage of development.112
A chitosan-based TENG (C-TENG) including a transparent (90% in the range of visible light), flexible, and biocompatible chitosan–glycerol film as a triboelectric material, an aluminum sheet as the metal layer, and PTFE as another triboelectric layer was designed as an energy harvester and a self-powered sensor to monitor humidity, sweat, and gait phase (Fig. 5f). With the changes in relative humidity (from 20% to 80%), the output of the C-TENG has no variation. By attaching a self-powered humidity sensor consisting of a C-TENG and a humidity resistor on the sock, the C-TENG can collect the energy of the foot during exercise. Furthermore, the chitosan-glycerol film can be considered as the electrode to collect biomechanical energy because its resistance has no variation at various bending angles and body temperature. According to the study of the effect of glycerol content on the C-TENG output, chitosan with 20 wt% glycerol showed the largest voltage. This C-TENG could charge a 3.3 μF capacitor to 10 V in 50 s.124
5. All-in-one hybrid power source for harvesting multi-type energies
The most common environmental energy supplies, such as wind, raindrops, and sunlight, are not reliable due to environmental limitations.132–134 On the other hand, TENGs, which can be the base for the maintenance-free power supply of the Internet of Things (IoTs), have high voltage output but low current.135 Therefore, to use multiple kinds of energy and boost performance, hybrid TENG-based devices have been developed to simultaneously harvest energy from different energy sources such as sunlight and raindrops,136–142 sunlight and wind,143 sunlight, raindrops, and wind,144–146 wind and water waves.147 Nevertheless, the harsh conditions of the environment affect these devices adversely.148–152 Hence, it is a better choice to focus on hybrid energy systems that simultaneously harness the environment's multi-type energies while operating effectively in the harsh states.146 Hybrid devices have been also developed to harvest mechanical and solar energy,153–155 mechanical, solar, and wind energy,156 and human motion and solar energy.148,149,157
Weather conditions such as rainy days adversely affect sunlight as an environmental energy source. The power generation from a solar cell can be integrated with TENGs to harvest solar energy on sunny days and raindrops energy on rainy days.140 The triboelectric materials affect the operation of solar cells insignificantly because their transparency is higher than 95%. Moreover, materials with superhydrophobic surfaces are required to produce a stable performance.137 Therefore, a hybrid energy harvester including a solar cell (containing bi-functional nano-wrinkled PDMS (nw-PDMS), Ag grids and indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes, a silicon (Si) absorption layer, and Al back electrode) and a water-drop TENG (WD-TENG) (containing a nw-PDMS triboelectric layer and Ag-ITO electrodes) was fabricated to collect energy from both sunlight and raindrops. Fig. 6a shows the fabrication process of this hybrid energy harvester. To improve the light absorption of the solar cell and efficiency of the TENG simultaneously, a bi-functional nw-PDMS film (shown in Fig. 6b) was applied as an anti-reflective layer of solar cells and the triboelectric layer of the WD-TENG. Therefore, the efficiency of solar cells increases from 12.55% to 13.57% due to improved transmittance. Furthermore, the high aspect ratio, surface fluorination, and strong hydrophobicity of the nw-PDMS film can also enhance the VOC of WD-TENG to 385.5.%. Fig. 6c displays the working mechanism of the WD-TENG.136 On the other hand, the self-healing property is important for materials used for TENGs working with solar cells because of the high possibility of mechanical damage caused by the environment.158–160 Yang et al.137 developed a solar cell and a transparent self-healing TENG (sh-TENG) with a high hydrophobic surface as a hybrid energy system to harvest solar and raindrop energies (Fig. 6d). This TENG includes an ITO and silicone elastomer layer containing fluorinated nano-silica on the surface of organosilane composite resin (OSCR) and self-healing PDMS (sh-PDMS). SH-PDMS has high optical transmittance and healing efficiency due to the active amino and aldehyde groups produced at the broken interface, which can rejoin to the imine bonds of SH-PDMS. Moreover, by using a household shower as simulating raindrop, this sh-TENG with a contact area of 64 cm2 can illuminate ten green LEDs. To determine the performance of the hybrid energy system, various water droplets including deionized (DI) water, tap water, potassium chloride (0.1 M KCl), and sodium chloride (0.1 M NaCl) were applied. DI water has a higher output (9 V and 0.9 μA), while the others including ions reduce the output (6 V and 0.7 μA) due to ion absorption.137
 Fig. 6  TENG hybrid devices and application in harvesting multi-type energy. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hybrid energy harvester. (b) SEM image of the surface of the nw-PDMS film. (c) The working mechanism of the WD-TENG. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Structure of the hybrid energy system with the SH-TENG and solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Structure of the unified harvesting module (UHM). (f) Green LEDs illuminated by the solar cell, rain-TENG, wind-TENG, and UHM. (g) Schematic of a self-powered weather sensor including UHM in a smart farm. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (h) The structure of the AoPs. (i) Working mechanism of a single TENG. (h–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (j) Structure and image of the TH-TENG. (k) Working mechanism of the TH-TENG. (l) The current output at various heights and frequencies. (j–l) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
To solve the limitation of solar energy at night or on cloudy days, solar cells can also be hybridized with TENGs harvesting raindrops and wind. The ultrathin unified harvesting module (UHM) included a rain-TENG at the top, followed by a solar cell, and then a wind-TENG was fabricated to harvest three kinds of energies on rainy days, windy days, and sunny days (Fig. 6e). The rain-TENG includes an FEP film and two ITO films, and the wind-TENG is composed of a flexible PTFE film, Al electrode plates, and neodymium magnets. The rain-TENG voltage depends on the droplet's rolling velocity on the FEP film and the angle of this TENG. When the angle increases from 20° to 67.5°, the voltage increases from 1 V to 4.4 V. The performance of the wind-TENG is related to the frequency and the effective contact area between PTFE and the electrodes. The outputs of the rain-TENG, wind-TENG, and the TENGs joined with a solar cell are 5 V, 50 V, and 4.2 V, respectively. Fig. 6f compares the ability of the solar cell, rain-TENG, wind-TENG, and UHM to light green LEDs. The UHTM, which could illuminate 62 LEDs and charge a 0.1 μF capacitor, can be applied as a self-powered weather sensor (Fig. 6g), especially in a system with space limitations due to its small, thin, and low-cost properties.144 To simultaneously produce power from raindrop, wind, and solar energies, Zheng et al.145 developed a hybridized power panel consisting of an acrylic backboard as the backbone of the device, a silicon-based solar cell, and a dual-mode TENG (including a water TENG and a contact TENG). The hybrid cell has a power of 8 mW m−2 at a wind speed of 2.7 ms−1 and has a power of 86 mW m−2 at a dripping rate of 13.6 mL s−1. It could light up 50 LEDs by water drops, and the dual-mode TENG can charge a capacitor of 3.3 μF at a dripping rate of 20 mL s−1.145 Another all-in-one hybrid power source with a new structure was proposed to harvest wind, raindrop, and solar energies simultaneously under different weather conditions (Fig. 6h). To gather the fluid energy continuously, this new structure contains four arms with a TENG on each arm of the acrylic frame. Fig. 6i shows the mechanism of a single TENG. This TENG is devised with multilayer construction in a spherical polypropylene shell made by assembling electrode disks, acrylic spacers, and FEP pellets in the middle as triboelectric substrates. Each spherical TENG has a rim of PET with a fixed angle to trap the fluid. The fluid force on each rim causes the rotation of the structure for an improved TENG performance. Solar energy is then collected by fixing four solar cells on the two sides of the acrylic frame. Higher frictions caused by the rotation speed increase from 40 to 140 rpm inhibit the pellet movement. Therefore, the stability of QSC and VOC decreases at higher speeds. ISC initially increases to 3.76 μA at 100 rpm, and then it decreases. A maximum QSC of 0.47 μC, and a peak-to-peak VOC of 5240 V are generated. Working at 100 rpm, this device can charge a 47 μF capacitor up to 3.55 V in 143 s.146
A tumbler-shaped hybrid TENG (TH-TENG), including a single-electrode liquid TENG and a rolling-ball TENG, was developed to harvest wind and water wave energies on land or ocean. As shown in Fig. 6j, this TH-TENG is composed of a conical shape upper three-layer film (including a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film, a copper foil, and a silicon dioxide (SiO2) layer), and a hemispherical shape lower five-layer (including a hemispherical acrylic hollow shell, a paraffin wax, a copper foil, a SiO2 layer, and lightweight hollow polypropylene (pp) balls). Fig. 6k displays the working principle of this TH-TENG. The output current of the TH-TENG increases with the increase of the wind speed. Nevertheless, the voltage has no variation since it is independent of the wind speed and is related to the sliding distance. Fig. 6l displays current at different heights and frequencies. The output current of the TH-TENG decreases (from 0.8 μA to 0.4 μA) with the increase of the frequency of water wave (from 0.7 Hz to 1.2 Hz). With the rise of the wave height (from 6 cm to 18 cm), the voltage increases (from 50 V to 180 V) and the current rises (from 0.2 μA to 0.6 μA) due to the increase in the contact area of the TH-TENG with water.147
6. The key effective parameters in TENGs’ performance
As important factors, the common materials used in TENGs and the surface structure of novel materials with a high contact area created by surface modification or nanocomposite generation have been discussed in Sections 3 to 5. Furthermore, in the following section and Tables 1–5, other critical parameters such as the contact area, force, frequency, tensile strain, resistance, and conditioning circuit have been evaluated.
6.1. Contact area
In TENGs, the effective contact area and also the thickness and pore size of porous triboelectric layers significantly impact their functionality.3,25,27,65,85,161 To describe this issue, a TENG with four layers including two dielectrics with permittivities of ε1 andε2, and thicknesses of d1 and d2 is assumed (Fig. 3). According to Section 2.2.1.1, after initial contact, dielectric surfaces have surface charge density (σc) due to contact electrification. This surface charge density (σc) is independent of the gap distance (z) and increases with the number of contacts. Then an electrostatic field produced by the triboelectric charges generates a flow of free electrons between electrodes. An accumulation of transfer charges on the electrode  depends on the gap distance (z(t)). Therefore, the variation of z induces mechanical energy which is turned into electrical energy. According to eqn (8), the voltage drop also increases with the increase of the gap distance.
On the other hand, based on eqn (8), the voltage drop increases with the increase in the thickness of dielectric layers (and d2). However, it is important to find the optimum thickness to have the best result. Moreover, with the increase in pore size of triboelectric layers, the dielectric constant reduces,162 and also the surface roughness decreases which causes the reduction of contact area (Fig. 7). Thus the surface charge density (σc) reduces, and the free electrons produced by the electrostatic field of triboelectric charges decrease (I), resulting in a reduction of voltage (eqn (8)).
 Fig. 7  The effect of surface roughness on the TENG performance. 
A summary of the effect of the abovementioned parameters on TENGs is shown in Table 1. With the increase of the distance between the skin and the triboelectric layer of the S-TENG (described in Section 3) from 1 to 20 mm, the voltage rises from −38 to −201 V.27 In other research, the effect of PDMS thickness (25, 50, 100, 200, and 300 μm) on the charge transfer of the SI-TENG85 (described in Section 3) was investigated by applying a force of 8 N. The results showed that VOC, ISC, and QSC increase initially and then reduce. They found that the SI-TENG with a PDMS thickness of 50 μm has the best output of VOC of 35 V, QSC of 13 nC, and ISC of 0.08 μA. Thus, it was concluded that the thin PDMS film affects electrification adversely.85 The influence of the width of FEP films, the width of the copper foils as electrodes, and the gap width between the copper foils was also experimentally studied for a bidirectional TENG (BD-TENG). The discharge phenomenon occurs at the width of FEP films of 25 mm and 20 mm. A width of 17 mm of the FEP film was considered an optimum amount in this TENG.161 The effect of the dielectric material sizes, including 2 × 2 cm, 3 × 2 cm, and 3 × 3 cm TENGs, were evaluated.3 Polyvinyl butyral (PVB) was used as the negatively charged layer, and polyacrylonitrile (PAN), PAN/ZnO, and PAN/B(OH)3 were applied as the positively charged ones, separately. When PAN was employed in the TENG, the power density increased upon increasing the area, but the voltage stability was reduced. In the TENG, including PAN/ZnO, the power density decreases when the material area increases. The results of the TENG, including PAN/B(OH)3 showed a peak power of 6 mW (6.6.7 W m−2) for a TENG size of 3 × 3 cm and an equivalent resistance (Req) of 33 MΩ. The Req of the maximum power also depends on the TENG dimension size.3
Table 1 The effect of contact area as an effective key parameter in TENGs




TENG fabricated by
Effective parameter
Results


PAN
PAN/ZnO
PAN/B(OH)3




Yar et al.3
Increasing area (2 × 2 cm, 3 × 2 cm, and 3 × 3 cm)
– Power increase. (2.5 W m−2, 2.85 W m−2, 3.05 W m−2)
– Power decreases. (2.92 W, 2.9 W m−2, 2.8 W m−2)
9 Power increases. (3.02 W m−2, 3.9 W m−2, 4.1 W m−2)


– Voltage stability reduces






li et al.65
Increasing nickel foamed pore size (5–50 μm)
– Surface to volume ratio of p-PDMS decreases


– Surface roughness of p-PDMS decreases


– Voltage and performance decrease


– 5 μm pore size has the largest voltage due to the effective contact surface


Zhou et al.27
Increasing distance between triboelectric layers (1–20 mm)
– Voltage increases from −38 to −201 V


Jiang et al.85
Increasing PDMS thickness (25, 50, 100, 200, and 300 μm) at 8 N
– VOC, ISC, and QSC increase initially and then reduce


– SI-TENG with a PDMS thickness of 50 μm has the best output of VOC of 35 V, of 13 nC, and ISC of 0.08 μA


Increasing thickness of Ti sputter coaters (1, 3, and 5 nm)
– Outputs increase firstly and then decrease


– Output is at the highest amount with a Ti thickness of 3 nm




In addition, Li and coworkers65 studied the influence of the surface-to-volume ratio of the p-PDMS film with an anti-nickel foam on the FS-TENG (mentioned in Section 3) performance. PDMS with various pore sizes of 5 to 50 μm were used here to study the effect of pore size on the nanogenerator's performance. In this TENG, human skin and leaves were applied as the triboelectric positive layer. The surface-to-volume ratio of p-PDMS decreases with the increase of nickel foamed pore size, so the voltage and performance decrease. Furthermore, with the increase of the pore size of the nickel foam, the surface roughness of the p-PDMS decreases, so the charge density on the surface reduces, causing the reduction of voltage. Experiments showed that the FS-TENG, including nickel foam of 5 μm pore size, has the largest voltage due to the appropriate surface-to-volume ratio and the effective contact surface.65 Another important parameter is the thickness of the coating layers used for various purposes in TENGs. To enhance the performance of the SI-TENG85 (described in Section 3), the surface of the PDMS film was altered with ICP after treatment with the Ti mask. The different thicknesses of Ti sputter coaters (1, 3, and 5 nm) were applied to provide the various surface roughnesses of the PDMS film, leading to various microstructures. With the increase of Ti mask thickness, the output increases firstly and then drops, and the SI-TENG achieved the highest amount with a Ti thickness of 3 nm. Thus, appropriate surface roughness can increase the contact area, whereas dense nanowires decrease the contact area.85
6.2. Applied pressure
Increasing the applying force is an effective solution to improve the TENG performance.14,27,38,48,65,82,85,112,163,164 Designing a suitable interface structure is critical because the relation between the pressure and TENG performance is attributed to the interface structure. A strong pressure is required for complete contact to utilize the effect of interface nanostructures. Although low pressure is appropriate to increase the output of a small size array, high pressure is necessary for a large array. Thus, the interface structure should be designed based on the target usage and set to prepare controllable pressure sensitivity.23
Increasing the pressure increases the compression ratio, increasing the deformation of triboelectric layers. Thus, the number of contacts and also effective area increase (Fig. 8). Therefore, according to Section 2.2.1.1, the capacitance and surface charge density (σc) of triboelectric layers increase, increasing the free electrons produced by the electrostatic field of triboelectric charges (I). According to eqn (8), these changes cause voltage enhancement.
 Fig. 8  The effect of pressure on the TENG performance. 

Table 2 shows a summary of the influence of pressure on TENGs. The output of the FS-TENG65 (described in Section 3) was estimated at various vertical forces (0.1–20 N) used to compress and release the p-PDMS. The voltage increases with an applied force from 0.1 to 3 N, reaching a maximum amount of 86 V at 3 N. The compression ratio of p-PDMS increases with the increase of force, so air with a lower dielectric constant can be removed from the pores of p-PDMS and the capacitance of the p-PDMS increases, resulting in the enhancement of output voltage. Nevertheless, applying forces greater than 3 N may not cause any changes in the voltage because the internal pores in the p-PDMS film are compressed completely, leading to a stable voltage.65 To figure out the performance of a cellulose II aerogel-based TENG112 (mentioned in Section 4) for harvesting energy, a linear motor controlling the applied forces ranging from 2.4 to 55 N and a cellulose II aerogel were utilized. With the increase of the force from 2.4 to 55 N, the voltage increases linearly due to the larger contact area caused by the increasing force. The voltage of the cellulose II aerogel/PTFE-based TENG is 8 V at a force of 5 N, which was considered low performance. Nevertheless, at a force of 40 N, its voltage increases to 63 V. It was also observed that the TENGs, including aerogels prepared with the pre-compression step, have lower outputs than those without this step because aerogels prepared without pre-compression face the larger strains by applying external forces, which increases the induced charge transfer and increases the electrical output.112 To study the output of the SI-TENG85 (mentioned in Section 3), a linear motor was applied to provide a controlled motion. When the contact force increases (0–7 kPa), the voltage increases due to the increase of contact area, which can improve charge density, leading to a higher voltage. It was seen that the SI-TENG has a linear response with a pressure sensitivity of 9.973 mV Pa−1 under pressures lower than 1.6 kPa (0–1.6 kPa), whereas the pressure sensitivity is 0.538 mV under pressures more than 1.6 kPa. It was mentioned that the increase of the contact area caused by the increase of the pressure is more effective in the lower pressures.85 To study the sensitivity of the S-TENG27 (described in Section 3) to pressure, silicone as the friction substrate and a frequency of 10 Hz were applied. The increase of pressure (ranging from 1–20 N) can improve the VOC and ISC. In the S-TENG based e-skin, VOC increases quickly (from 19 V to 98 V) with the increase of the applied force from 1 to 5 N and increases gradually (from 158.1 to 198.3 V) in the force range of 10 to 20 N. These results indicate that the e-skin has various response behaviors to different pressures. With the increase of pressure, the flexible TPU fiber deforms, so the triboelectric area between the skin and TPU fiber enhances, resulting in more charge. Furthermore, the touch force versus VOC of the e-skin was evaluated in the two pressure regions of 0–2 kPa and 2–5 kPa, which exhibited high sensitivities of 78.4 kPa−1 (in 0–2 kPa) and 16.1 kPa−1 (in 2–5 kPa). Thus, increasing pressure on this e-skin can improve the performance, and the e-skin is more sensitive at low pressures.27 A stretchable device including two layers of PDMS and a mixed-dimensional design composite film (1-D AgNWs and 2-D metallic molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheets) was fabricated for application as a skin-mountable strain sensor and a S-TENG. The influence of various forces (1–20 N) on the performance of the S-TENG was studied. The VOC increases slightly with the increase of force (from 1 to 20 N) at a fixed frequency of 10 Hz, and its maximum value (58.6 V) was obtained at a force of 15 N.163
Table 2 The effect of applied pressure as an effective key parameter in TENGs




TENG fabricated by
Effective parameter
Results




Li et al.65
Increasing force (0.1 to 3 N)
– Voltage increases up to 86 V at a pressure of 3 N


– Force greater than 3 N cannot cause any changes


Zhou et al.27
Increasing force
– Voltage increases rapidly from 19 V to 98 V with the increase of force from 1 to 5 N


– Voltage increases slowly from 158.1 to 198.3 V with the increase of force from 10 to 20 N


Jiang et al.85
Increasing force
– Output increases


– SI-TENG is more sensitive under pressures lower than 1.6 kPa


Zhang et al.112
Increasing force (2.4–55 N)
– Voltage increases linearly




6.3. Frequency
Many studies15,27,38,65,66,112,161,163,165–170 have investigated the influence of the applied force-frequency on the TENG. According to Fig. 3 and Section 2.2.1.1, more triboelectric charges are produced on the surfaces with the increase of frequency and vibration, so the surface charge density of triboelectric layers (σc) increases. Thus, more charges can accumulate on the electrode, which results in the increase of electrons generated by the electrostatic field (I) and an increase in voltage (eqn (8)).
A summary of the effect of frequency on the TENG performance is displayed in Table 3. Li et al.65 studied the effect of frequency on the output of the FS-TENG described in Section 3. At a fixed force of 3 N, the voltage of the FS-TENG increases when the frequency increases from 0.5 to 6 Hz. A maximum amount of 94 V was obtained at a frequency of 6 Hz. The increase of frequency from 6 to 9 Hz showed a negligible upshot on voltage because of the saturation of the surface charge density. Nevertheless, the voltage decreases at a frequency of 10 Hz, 20 Hz, and 30 Hz because a significant amount of charge accumulated on the surface of the p-PDMS cannot be neutralized totally at higher frequencies. It was observed that the voltage increases with the increase of the bending frequency in the FS-TENG applied for finger bending monitoring. Moreover, in the FS-TENG used on the surface of leaves for wind speed monitoring, the frequency and intensity of the voltage increase with the increase of the vibration and frequency of the leaves caused by the increase of wind speed. According to the effect of wind speed on the voltage of the FS-TENG, an average voltage of 4.5 V was gained at a wind speed of 5 m s−1.65 Silicone was utilized as a friction material to test the sensitivity of the S-TENG 27 (described in Section 3) to the frequency at 10 N. It was seen that both ISC and VOC can be improved within a higher frequency. At a high frequency, there is small neutralization of the charges on the friction surface, so more charges can be accumulated on AgNW/rGO, resulting in the increase of output. In the e-skin attached to human skin for sensing finger touch and harvesting energy, the voltage increases with an increase of finger touch frequency. Furthermore, the response time of this e-skin depends on the frequency, which is 1.4 ms at a frequency of 5 Hz. Thus, humans have adequate time to judge and act with the stimulus.27 The VC, ISC, and Q of the SNF-TENG (described in Section 3) increase with a frequency lower than 8 Hz, while they reduce with a frequency higher than 10 Hz. At 2 Hz and 14 Hz, the voltage outputs are low because of the long separation or transient contact, resulting in poor charge transfer.38 A stretchable wrinkled poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) electrode-based TENG (WP-TENG), including PDMS as the triboelectric layer, was developed to harvest biomechanical energy and monitor human motion. By changing the motion frequency from 0.5 to 2.5 Hz, the VOC and transferred charge quantity (Qtr) of the WP-TENG in contact witha hog skin (as a simulation of human skin) remained at 180.1 V and 75.3 nC, respectively. However, the ISC increases from 11.1 to 22.6 μA when the frequency increases. Furthermore, the maximum average power increases with the frequency increase, and it gained 7.3 μW at a frequency of 2.5 Hz. When the motion frequency increases from 0.5 to 2 Hz, the voltage has no variation.165
Table 3 The effect of frequency as an effective key parameter in TENGs




TENG fabricated by
Effective parameter
Results




Li et al.65
Increasing frequency, at 3 N
– Voltage increase to 94 V at 0.5–6 Hz


– Voltage shows no changes at 6–9 Hz


– Voltage decreases at 10, 20, and 30 Hz


Zhou et al.27
Increasing frequency (0.5–20 Hz) at 10 N
– ISC and VOC increase


Li et al.38
Increasing frequency
– VC, ISC, and Q increase with the contact frequency lower than 8 Hz, while they reduce with the contact frequency higher than 10 Hz


– At 2 Hz and 14 Hz, the voltages are low because of the long separation or transient contact, resulting in poor charge transfer




6.4. Tensile strain
Many studies14,25,27,38,60,65,66,84,85,112,165,171 have been conducted on the effect of tensile strain on the electrode behavior to figure out the stretchability and nanogenerator performance. The increase in tensile strain affects the physicochemical characteristics of the surface and the charge transfer.23,172 According to Fig. 3, the effective area increases with the increase of strain, so the surface charge density of triboelectric layers (σc) increases (Section 2.2.1.1). Thus, the flow of free electrons produced by the electrostatic field (I) increases, resulting in an increase of voltage (eqn (8)). However, increasing the tensile strain to high amounts causes a long distance for transferring electrons, resulting in a low contact area and low voltage. On the other hand, by increasing the strain, the resistance of electrodes increases, their conductivity reduces, and they might face fractures at high tensile strains.

Table 4 shows a summary of the effect of tensile strain on the TENG performance. The resistance of PU-GR@MWCNTs as the electrode of the FS-TENG65 (mentioned in Section 3) shows no significant changes by stretching to over 15%. At a vertical force of 3 N and a frequency of 5 Hz, the voltage of FS-TENG reduces from 58.6 to 46.2 V by increasing the strain from 0% to 50% because the electrode resistance and the compression of the porous PDMS film increase. At a tensile strain above 50%, FS-TENG has no performance due to the fracture of nanofibers in the PU-GR@MWCNT electrode.65 The S-TENG explained in section 5 has a stable output and sensing performance even if it is stretched to a large deformation at 200%. At 75% strain, the AgNW/TPU lost its conductivity, which is accounted as a limitation of this S-TENG.
Table 4 The effect of strain as an effective key parameter in TENGs




TENG fabricated by
Effective parameter
Results




Li et al.65
Increasing strain (0% to 50%), at 3 N and 5 Hz
– Electrode resistance and compression of the p-PDMS film increase


– Voltage of the FS-TENG (1 cm × 3 cm) reduces from 58.6 to 46.2 V


– At a strain above 50%, fracture of nanofibers occurs


Zhou et al.27
Increasing strain
– Resistance of AgNW/rGO/TPU increase


– Conductivity of the electrode reduces


– Voltage decreases


– Stable output generates under 200% strain


Jiang et al.85
Increasing tensile strains (0–150%)
– VOC increases from 80 to 110 V


– QSC increases from 22 to 35 nC


– ISC increases from 0.15 to 0.3 μA


Li et al.38
Increasing tensile strain to 50%, 100%, 150%, and 200%
– PHS membrane has a satisfactory recovery under a tensile strain of 200% for 5 cycles


– With the increase of strain to 150% and 200%, SEBS faces deformation


– Output reaches from 20 V to 45 V with the increase of strain from 0% to 125%


Li et al.38
Amount of SEBS microspheres
– PHS membranes with PVDF-HFP:SEBS weight ratios of 1:9, 3:7, and 5:5 can endure tensile strains of 1400%, 490%, and 304%, respectively


– Higher amount of SEBS decreases the voltage because it has a lower triboelectric affinity than PVDF-HFP


– SEBS amount more than 90% causes aggregation in the PVDF-HFP nanofibers




Moreover, the resistance of AgNW/rGO/TPU increases gradually with the strain, and it is low at a strain of 200%, indicating its outstanding stretchability. By stretching the e-skin, the conductivity of the electrode reduces with the increase of strain. However, the e-skin has good conductivity even by stretching at 200% strain because of the high stretchability of the TPU mats and stability of AgNW/rGO against strain. The study of the strain effect on the VOC of the e-skin indicated that the width of the tested friction area increases with the increase of strain, while its length has a constant value. Thus, the path of electron transfer increases, and the effective triboelectric area of the e-skin reduces, leading to a decrease in the output voltage.27 The electrode of the SI-TENG (explained in Section 5) has 580% stretchability and a stable resistance (5–732 Ω) at a strain of 100%. With the evaluation of the conductivity of the SI-TENG by the uni-axial test, the electrode's resistance increases with the SI-TENG's elongation. Because the impedance of the SI-TENG is high, the increase of resistance from 5 Ω to 732 Ω (at a strain of 100%) has no significant effect on the performance. Moreover, with the increase of the tensile strains from 0 to 150%, the VOC increases from 80 to 110 V, QSC varies from 22 to 35 nC, and the ISC increases from 0.15 to 0.3 μA due to the creation of a larger contact area between the PDMS film and the external objects. At a tensile strain of 30%, the voltage has insignificant variations under the continuous operation of 100000 cycles, showing the high stretchability of the SI-TENG.85
The SNF-TENG38 mentioned in Section 3 has mechanical stability even at a strain of 125% due to the SEBS. The PHS membrane with a weight ratio (PVDF-HFP:SEBS) of 1:9, 3:7, and 5:5 can withstand tensile strains of 1400%, 490%, and 304%, respectively, showing that the elongation at break can be improved with the increase of SEBS. Based on the mechanical test, with the increase of tensile strain to 50%, 100%, 150%, and 200%, the partial displacement occurs between nanofibers, and irrecoverable thermal energy is released as the loss of strain energy by the movement of PVDF-HFP molecule chains aside each other. Thus, the optimal PHS membrane faces increased residual strain, especially during the first loading–unloading cycle. Then at lower tensile stresses, the PHS membrane has a satisfactory resilience and recovery during 5 sequential cycles of a tensile strain of 200%, indicating that the SEBS can assist the displacement of molecule chains to reach a stable condition by restricting their sliding. With the increase of strain to 150% and 200%, SEBS faces deformation due to the increase of the displacement between tightened nanofibers. Therefore, it was concluded that this PHS membrane has an outstanding stretchability compared to previous electrospun nanofibers especially those fabricated by Zhao et al.,173 Sencadas et al.,174 and Cheong et al.175 Moreover, the PHS membrane has a stable hydrophobicity with a tensile strain of up to 150%, which means that there is marginal variation in the surface roughness of the PHS membrane over stretching. However, the hydrophobicity of the optimal PHS membrane decreases with a tensile strain of more than 150% because the capillary influence of nanofibers increases with higher stretching. The effect of tensile strain on the performance of the water driven SNF-TENG was evaluated, showing that the output reaches from 20 V to 45 V when the strain increased from 0% to 125%, owing to an increased effective area.38
6.5. Electrical energy measurement set-ups

6.5.1. Power measurement. 
To estimate electrical materials' voltage and power properties, measurement apparatuses utilize a few amounts of current from the main circuit. Although this current is negligible in high-power applications, it has important effects on the measurement results in low-power applications such as TENGs. Therefore, the inner resistance of the measurement apparatus can be considered based on the electrical design of the circuit joined to the TENGs. According to the connection kinds of adjustable resistance to a power measurement apparatus, if:
(1) Equivalent resistance (Req) > inner-resistance (Rin): a serial resistance (RS) is connected to Rin of the measurement device. Therefore, the power produced by TENGs is estimated using the following equations:3 Req = Rin + Rs(13) (14) P = I2Req(15)Vm is the voltage estimated by the measurement apparatus, and I is the current generated by a TENG.
2. Equivalent resistance (Req) < inner-resistance (Rin): a parallel adjustable resistance (Rp) is connected to Rin of the measurement device. Thus, the power of TENGs can be evaluated as follows:3,176 (16) (17)


6.5.2. The relation between voltage and load. 
According to the theoretical model of a contact mode TENG,177–179 there is a non-linear relation between the TENG voltage and load.3 (18)where σ is the charge density of the dielectric surface, d0 is the effective dielectric thickness, ε0 is the permittivity, xmax is the maximum distance between the two dielectric plates, v is the velocity of pressing/releasing steps, w and l are the width and length of the dielectric surface, respectively, R is the load, and Q0 is the stored electrostatic charges on the plate.3
To enhance the output of PAN as a TENG layer, Yar et al.3 developed different sizes of TENGs including PVB as the negative layer and PAN/ZnO, PAN/B(OH)3 and PAN which were applied as the positive layers, separately. The voltage measurement was performed using an oscilloscope with a short circuit resistance (Rin) of 10 MΩ. The load effect on the TENG performance was studied by connecting an adjustable resistance to the TENG. The adjustable resistance is in the parallel state with Rin (10 MΩ) to register Req < 10 MΩ and in the serial state with Rin to register Req > 10 MΩ. According to the results of power measurement (eqn (13)–(17)), a 3 × 3 cm TENG including PVB and PAN/B(OH)3 has a peak power of 6.67 W m−2 at Req of 33 MΩ, which is higher than those reported in previous studies which were between 2.39 W m−2 and 4.8 W m−2.180,181 The power density of PAN/ZnO was 2.86 mW at Req of 14.6 MΩ, and the power density of PAN was 4.55 mW at Req of 37.6 MΩ. Thus, it was inferred that ZnO inputs a minor effect on the performance of PAN in a TENG with Req < 10 MΩ, and it decreases the performance of PAN in the TENG with Req > 10 MΩ.3
To apply a TENG as a small-scale device, the effect of external loads on the current should be studied to find the best performance.3,11,25,27,38,60,65,112,146,161,164 The effect of this parameter on the TENG performance is shown in Table 5. Yar et al.3 connected resistors from 1–100 MΩ as the external loads to obtain the current of TENGs mentioned above. By increasing the load resistance, the current decreases because of ohmic loss, and the voltage first increases and then reduces slightly. With the increase of load resistance, the voltage increases, and a maximum voltage of 200 V was obtained for PAN/B(OH)3 TENGs. Then the voltage reduces with the increase of external resistance.3 The voltage and short-circuit current of the SNF-TENG38 (described in Section 3) were measured using an oscilloscope with an impedance of 100 MΩ and a low-noise current preamplifier with an impedance of 4 Ω, respectively. The voltage slightly increases from 2.88 V to 73.28 V with the decrease of external load (from 500 KΩ to 150 MΩ). However, the current reduces with the increase of load resistance. At a matched resistance of 20 MΩ, a peak power density of 219.66 mW m−2 was obtained.38 An oscilloscope and an electrometer measured the voltage and current of the S-TENG (mentioned in Section 3). The voltage increases with the increase of the external resistance (from 1 kΩ to 1 GΩ), whereas the current reduces. At a resistance of 400 MΩ, a good energy density of the e-skin (6 mW m−2) was gained. The power density here was calculated by P = V2/RA, where R is the load resistance, A is the contact area, and V is the voltage of e-skin.27 The voltage of the FS-TENG65 (described in Section 3) was evaluated using a digital graphical sampling multimeter with a resistance of 10 MΩ. The output voltage of the FS-TENG increases with the increase of load resistance. The impedance of small load resistance is less than the internal capacitive impedance of the FS-TENG, and the impedance of the large one is greater than the internal capacitive impedance. Hence, all voltages distribute on the load resistance. The power density changes with the various load resistances (power density was estimated by p = V2/RA where V is the voltage across the load resistance, R is the load resistance, and A is the effective size of the FS-TENG). The maximum power of the TENG can be obtained when the load resistance is equal to the internal resistance.65 By increasing the resistance from 1 kΩ to 10 GΩ at 1 Hz, the peak current density of the cellulose II aerogel based-TENG (described in Section 4) decreases, whereas the peak voltage increases. At a load resistance of 660 MΩ, a maximum power density of 127 mW m−2 was gained (power density was estimated by p = RI2/A in which I is the peak current across the external load, R is the load resistance, and A is the contact area of the cellulose aerogel and PTFE (πr2)).112
Table 5 The effect of load resistance as a key effective parameter in TENGs




TENG fabricated by
Effective parameter
Results




Yar et al.3
Increasing load resistance (1–100 MΩ)
– Current decreases


– Voltage first increases and then reduces


Li et al.65
Increasing load resistance
– Voltage increases


– The maximum power density of 782.8 mW m−2 is at an external load resistance of 5 MΩ


Zhou et al.27
Increasing resistance (1 kΩ–1 GΩ)
– Voltage increases


– Current decreases


– Optimum result is 6 mW m−2 at a resistance of 400 MΩ


Zhang et al.112
Increasing resistance (1 kΩ–10 GΩ), at 1 Hz
– Current density decreases


– Voltage increases


– At 660 MΩ, there is a maximum power equal to 127 mW m−2


Li et al.38
Decreasing load resistor (500–150 kΩ)
– Voltage slightly increases from 2.88 V to 73.28 V


– Current increases


– The peak power density of 219.66 mW m−2 is at 20 MΩ





6.6. Conditioning circuit
TENGs have high voltages (hundreds of volts) and low current, i.e., several μA, due to a high internal impedance. When TENGs are utilized directly as power sources, the energy transferred to electronic apparatuses and energy storage with low impedances is inefficient.182 To increase the output of TENGs, conditioning circuits (CC) are an important section of the energy conversion system which amplifies the energy flow. A CC contains a rectifying circuit to generate the TENG's alternating current (AC) produced into direct current (DC) to store in a capacitor as the actual electricity demand.161,183,184 The most common conditioning circuits are half-wave and full-wave rectifiers.183,185–187 The first power-transformed and managed TENG (PTM-TENG) was developed to regulate the high voltage of TENG output before being used for driving electronics. This device has two parts: a contact-separation TENG and self-connection-switching capacitors, which can be charged with a full-wave rectifier. The TENG contains PDMS with the pattern of pyramids, PET with the flat surface, and copper as the electrode.188 The comparison between a half-wave rectifier and a full-wave rectifier was experimentally and theoretically studied for a contact-separation TENG mode, including 50 μm of perfluoroalkoxy (PFA) as a dielectric layer. It was concluded that a half-wave CC with a saturation voltage of 165 V has a higher performance than a full-wave CC with a saturation value of 26 V. This conclusion should be considered accurate for TENGs with changeable capacitance, such as contact-separation and lateral-sliding modes.183 Moreover, a new rotational TENG (R-TENG) design, including PET and Kapton as triboelectric layers and the combination of two modes of contact-separation and the free-standing layer, was developed, which has higher power than a simple mode. This R-TENG which was applied to build a self-powered anemometer station has a maximum power density of 168 mW at a load resistance of 270 kΩ. A full bridge rectifier was used to convert AC output, and an electrolytic capacitor was applied at the diode bridge output to store the energy. The signal produced by the R-TENG goes into the rectifier circuit, then the frequency of one branch is measured and the other branch joins to the power management circuit.189 A BD-TENG (mentioned in Section 6.1), including the mechanical structure component, the triboelectric power-generation unit, and the mechanical rectifier, was developed, which recognizes the flow of current and charge in one direction. The mechanical section considered as a support has a rotor and a stator, and the triboelectric power-generation unit includes the copper electrodes located in the inner wall of the barrel and a micro arch structure of fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) collecting the mechanical energy in both forward and reversed directions and decreasing the friction between the materials. The rectifier contains electric brushes and the commutator whose position depends on the electrodes switching the direction of the current. The role of these brushes placed in the rolling structure is to decrease the friction between the electrode brushes and the commutator and to conduct the current.161
7. Application of TENGs
Today, TENGs are outlined as a powerful tool for energy harvesting and self-powered sensing depending on the chemical and physical signals. These devices can be utilized in a wide variety of fields in real life. Therefore, this section will discuss the application of TENGs in human–machine interface (HMI) systems, environmental monitoring, and human health monitoring, providing appropriate information for future research.
7.1. Human–machine interface systems
A human–machine interface (HMI) system has been applied vastly in life with the advancement of artificial intelligence. Different types of HMI systems based on nanogenerators have been developed such as the electronic skin (e-skin),14,27,30,34,36,38,85,165,170,190–194 smart keyboards,195–202 voice control devices,203–205 body motion sensors,14,112,164,167,206–216 and robotic control.31,217

7.1.1. Electronic skin (e-skin). 
Researchers have developed different shapes of e-skin, which can be attached to the surfaces such as clothing. E-Skin should have the capability of sensing the location and be tactile.13 The SNF-TENG (mentioned in Section 3) includes a stretchable, breathable, and waterproof nanofiber-membrane. The LM-Ag flake-SEBS electrode was screen printed on the SEBS in the shape of the ‘NANO’ letter, as shown in Fig. 9a(I). When the SNF-TENG is tapped by hand at 0% and 50% strain, 200 LED arrays can be lit up (Fig. 9a(II)). The electricity produced by hand tapping can be stored in a 33 μF capacitor (whose voltage is 1.43 V) in 140 s and applied to power a wearable watch with no battery. This device with an area of 1.5 × 4.5 cm2 was also used as a self-powered e-skin under two conditions: straightening and bending. When the SNF-TENG was attached to a finger as the e-skin with the straightening process, the positive and negative outputs were equal (12.5 V), because the skin and finger have a comparable contact-separation amplitude. Nevertheless, the e-skin worn on a finger joint with the bending process has a negative voltage of 6 V and a positive voltage of 3 V, showing a higher deformation degree during the bending process. Based on the results, this e-skin expressed smart usages like self-powered sensors in robots and remote controllers. Another great usage of the SNF-TENG is fabricating a wearable textile-TENG, such as a smart raincoat, owed to the adaptable elastic conductor and stretchability property of the PHS membrane. The knitted polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-based TENG has excellent tensile strain recovery, and there is good adhesion between the elastic conductor, PHS membrane, and PET textile due to the self-interlocked fabrication technique. In the pressure range of 8–89 kPa, the textile-TENG is applicable as a tactile sensor with a sensitivity of 0.68 V kPa−1 and a response time of 3.14 ms. Therefore, the authors made a textile-based tactile interactive interface with a 9-touch sensor unit and an area of 1 × 1 cm2 which can map the finger touch by illuminating LEDs with no power supply, indicating its potential for self-powered security or interactive entertainment system.38 Another flexible and self-powered e-skin based on a STENG (described in Section 3) was fabricated as shown in Fig. 9b(I). This e-skin with a contact area of 2 × 2 cm2 showed high sensitivity to different pressures at a frequency of 10 Hz since the output increases rapidly from 19 to 98 V under a pressure of 1–5 N and increases slowly under a pressure of 10–20 N (Fig. 9b(II)). According to Fig. 9b(III), the e-skin could light up 120 LEDs, showing the ability of the e-skin to drive microelectronic apparatuses. Other properties of this self-powered e-skin are its long-term performance due to its stability during 10000 cycles of compression and relaxation and its humidity and temperature stability, which are vital for human skin contact. This e-skin with an area of 1 × 1 cm2 was applied for tactile sensing and energy harvesting because it has sensitive sensing of touch at the various frequencies and strength of touch. At a frequency of 5 Hz, the response time of the e-skin was 1.4 ms, which is enough for people or robots to act with the stimulus. To map touch in a 2-D area, a 5 × 5 tactile sensing e-skin array was developed by multiple single sensing units (Fig. 9b(IV)). This e-skin can monitor the finger motion trajectory and harvest energy, so it can be applied in IoTs, soft robots, and HMIs.27
 Fig. 9  HMI system based TENG: (a–d) self-powered biosensor electronic skin: (a and b) reproduced with permission from ref. 27 and 38. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e–g) self-powered smart keyboards: (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (h–j) self-powered body motion sensors: (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
The SI-TENG (described in Section 3), which can be applied in a self-powered HMI because of the outstanding pressure sensing performance, was connected to curved objects such as arms or beakers and could light up 97 LEDs in series during tapping. The harvested energy was stored in different capacitors as the power for wearable electronics, showing that the charging speed of the SI-TENG increases with the decrease of capacitance. The washability of the SI-TENG as an effective parameter for long-term application of e-skins was evaluated at washing times between 10 and 40 min, showing no variation in the output voltage. Fig. 9c displays the structure of the self-powered stretchable game controller, including 9 sensing units with the 3 × 3 array, which can be attached to the hand. The SI-TENG as the game controller can be applied in different fields such as automobile control, HMIs, and security systems.85 A self-powered e-skin for robotic tactile sensing fabricated based on a bioinspired TENG with interlocking microstructures in the triboelectric layers is shown in Fig. 9d(I). This TENG e-skin sensor includes four layers: a shielding layer, a triboelectric layer with AgNWs on the microstructured PDMS, PTFE tiny burrs as the other triboelectric layer on the microstructured PDMS, and a back electrode layer. It shows no significant degradation after 5000 cycles of loading tests at 25 kPa and 0.5 Hz. This sensor can attach to a bionic hand to estimate the handshaking pressure from human hands and the bending angle of each finger (Fig. 9d(II)). The voltage signals in response to the conditions of the index finger with various bending angles were evaluated to detect the capability of using this device in the HMI field, like robotic tactile sensing.192


7.1.2. Smart keyboard. 
Keyboards play an essential role in daily life and industries for human–computer interfacing. Self-power keyboards without batteries are required for wearable devices.195 A flexible, stretchable, light, and self-powered keyboard with elastomers of urethane as the bottom dielectric layer, silicone rubbers as the top dielectric layer, and conductive CNT electrodes was fabricated on a TENG with the vertical contact-separation mode (Fig. 9e(I)). The mechanism of one keyboard tapped by a finger was simulated by Finite Element Analysis (FEA) using COMSOL software. According to the results of the keyboard obtained by repetitive finger tapings on one of the keys, a maximum voltage of 6.5 V, a maximum current of 1.5 μA, and a maximum charge of 15 nC were produced during direct typing. It was concluded that a 10 μF capacitor could be charged to 2.5 V with a maximum power of 0.3 μW for 90 seconds by common typing on a key. The keyboard's performance is independent of the condition of the finger surface, such as injury and environmental effects like humidity. This keyboard can be applied as a human–computer interacting system and linked to computers wirelessly. For this purpose, the two electrodes from each key are joined into microcontroller transferring signals. Then the microcontroller is connected to a computer to translate the signals into letters (Fig. 9e(II)). The results of applying different pressures (hard and gentle ones) to a key of the keyboard, which was placed inside water, showed that this device could also operate underwater (Fig. 9e(III)). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 9e(IV), the peak voltages for two materials containing a polymer (lab glove) and human skin (bare fingertip) are similar. Therefore, the various amounts of triboelectric charges of different materials do not affect the voltage. This sensor can also recognize various users’ typing status, showing the ability of the device to provide privacy in computers.198
As shown in Fig. 9f(I), Yin et al.195 developed a self-power-transmission and non-contact-reception keyboard using a novel resonant TENG (R-TENG) including a TENG with the contact-separation mode and materials of nylon, PTFE, and copper foils as the electrodes (Fig. 9f(II)), a coil, and a capacitor (68 pF to 470 pF) to produce an oscillating frequency which is between 173 kHz and 413 kHz for nine keys. The oscillating signal as the non-contact keyboard operation is received by coils, processed by a receiver circuit, collected by the instrument, and finally visualized by Labview based on lighting a LED.195 An elastic-beam TENG with arc-stainless steel foil (EB-TENG), including copper and PTFE pasted on an acrylic (polymethyl methacrylate, PMMA) board was fabricated to use as a smart keyboard because it has outstanding features such as high sensitivity, elasticity, and frequency response. According to the experiments and calculations, the contact area and separation distance between the arc-stainless steel foil (arc-SSF) and dielectric layer affect the performance of the EB-TENG.196 In a wearable glove-based system that was developed for a real-time intuitive multi-dimensional HMI (Fig. 9g(I)) like a 9-digit keyboard with 7 users, signals of finger tapping were converted to the digital domain. According to Fig. 9g(II), this device is based on three bending angle triboelectric nanogenerators (BA-TENGs), including PDMS and silicone rubber as triboelectric layers, and a wireless printed circuit board (PCB) worn on the wrist to detect the signal status, process this signal and transmit it through an integrated circuit. Channels 1 to 3 are related to different fingers, including the thumb, index, and middle finger. According to the results of current and voltage at different bending angles (40°, 60°, 80°, and 100°), the BA-TENG could generate a stable and uniform output signal.200


7.1.3. Body motion sensors. 
In many industries, a robotic arm is important to detect the motion of a human arm.13 Choi et al.209 fabricated a wearable haptic interface based on a TENG including the composite electrode of Au nanosheets and SBS embedded in the PDMS, PTFE/PET/PTFE layer, and PTFE/PET/Al/nylon 6 layer to control a drone by various body movements. The triboelectric sensor can be used as the wake-up and motion detection signals. The image of the sensor with the shielding layer in the sensing mode is shown in Fig. 9h(I). The shielding layer of the sensor can recognize the strain and touch. There is a microcontroller unit (MCU) waking up in response to a mechanical stimulus to reduce energy consumption. The static and dynamic body motions can be estimated by voltage and its slope in the strain sensing mode. To fabricate the haptic interfaces, one strain sensor was placed on the elbow, and two touch sensors were placed on the arm (Fig. 9h(II)).209
A self-powered multifunctional motion sensor (MFMS) consisting of a TENG module, a magnetic regulation module helping the moving section to be ready for the estimation at any time, and an acrylic shell was fabricated to detect the direction, speed, and acceleration of linear and rotary motion simultaneously. The TENG includes a free-standing magnetic disk (MD) placed on a PTFE plate with six copper electrodes. Sliding MD on the PTFE plate results in voltage generation by the electrodes. MFMS, including the two circle electrodes, can be considered a self-powered 2-D acceleration sensor. Moreover, the MFMS with arc electrodes is used as a self-powered rotational sensor and direction sensor. Linear motion can trigger MFMS, and then the arc electrodes can generate various voltages based on the area between the moving section and electrode. Hence, the ratio of open-circuit voltages between arc electrodes can evaluate the direction.208 A porous and flexible TENG, including silicon rubber embedding CNFs, was developed to collect energy such as human walking motion even under harsh conditions like pressing, stretching, twisting, and bending. This TENG can also be applied as a human motion sensor. A facile foaming method using supercritical CO2 (ScCO2) was applied to fabricate the TENG, and its pore size was controlled by changing the saturation temperature. The bonding steps for assembling the system are not required in the fabrication method because CNFs in rubber can prepare a conductive path to gather charges, resulting in a low complexity method. Furthermore, this process is environmentally friendly due to the usage of ScCO2. At a frequency of 2 Hz and a force of 42 N, a maximum current of 2.87 μA and voltage of 91 V were obtained. This device has various results for the samples pasted on the shoes in the different walking types shown in Fig. 9i, so it can interpret gait and motion posture, which play an important role for walkers and runners. Thus, it can help people to alter their posture and walking speed to decrease the hurt body.206Fig. 6j(I) displays a cellulose-based TENG (described in Section 4), which can be applied as a mechanical energy harvester and self-powered sensor. The dissolution–regeneration process as a novel technique is used to fabricate cellulose II aerogels, as shown in Fig. 9j(II). To harvest human motions, an independent cellulose II aerogel-based TENG with a cellulose-to-chitosan mass ratio of 2:1 was fabricated. By connecting this TENG to a finger, 60 green series LEDs and patterned “AG” letter-shaped LEDs could be lit up. According to the study of the influence of capacitance (0.22–22 μF) and frequency (1–8 Hz) of the capacitors as energy storage devices, it was concluded that capacitors with smaller capacitance or higher frequency could be charged faster by this TENG. This stored electrical energy was applied to power a commercial calculator which functioned continuously at a charging voltage of 1.5 V. To use this TENG as a self-powered sensor, it was applied on a sock (Fig. 9j(III)). This device was appropriate for wearable motion monitoring due to the thin thickness, outstanding flexibility of the cellulose II aerogel, and breathability of the porous structure of the aerogel. The current result of the TENG for the running case was 1 μA which is higher than the one for the walking case (0.5 μA) due to the higher motion frequency of running.112

7.2. Environmental monitoring
To detect the effective environmental parameters such as temperature,218,219 humidity,220,221 wind speed,161,222–234 wave energy,166,235–253 light magnitude,254 water quality,255–257 and rain,258 nanogenerators like TENGs can be helpful because they can harvest small-scale energy.

7.2.1. Wind speed. 
Wind energy can be harvested in nature as renewable energy. An omnidirectional wind-based triboelectric generator (OW-TEG), including aluminum electrodes and PTFE as triboelectric layers, was fabricated as a self-sustainable wind speed sensor system (SSWSSS).222 Contrary to previous studies259,260 in which a rectangular-shaped TEG was applied, the OW-TEG has a circular shape with a 2-D co-planar surface harvesting wind energy from all directions. A square-shaped multi-directional wind-based TEG261 cannot gather energy like the OW-TEG. The OW-TEG outputs are uniform for all wind directions (0–360 degrees). The SSWSSS includes a signal counting module detecting the wind speed (11.3–16.8 m s−1) by counting the electrical signal frequency (108–384 Hz) and an energy-storing component powering the SSWSS. This device has a sensitivity of 50.2 Hz m−1 s−1 at a wind speed from 11.3 to 16.8 m s−1.222Fig. 10a(I) shows a BD-TENG (described in Section 6), which converts environmental energy into a direct current. To explain the application of the BD-TENG, it was assumed that the DC is produced under the action of the electric brushes without a bridge rectifier. This device can charge a 1.0 μF capacitor directly to 10 V in 2 s. Moreover, according to Fig. 10a(II), when 7 m s−1 of a blower was applied as the simulated wind, this device illuminated 210 LEDs in series (Fig. 10a(III)) and powered a commercial calculator steadily with the help of a 100 μF capacitor (Fig. 10a(IV)). This device generates a VOC of 480 V and an ISC of 12 μA.161 A miniaturized windmill hybrid nanogenerator (MW-HNG) was fabricated based on a TENG, a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG), and an electromagnetic generator (EMG) to harvest the wind energy in subway tunnels (Fig. 10b(I)). At a wind speed of 6 m s−1, the power of the TENG and PENG reached 1.67 mW and 1.38 mW at resistances of 10 MΩ and 330 KΩ, respectively. At a wind speed of 6 m s−1 and a resistance of 180 Ω, the EMG produced a power of 268.6 mW. To exhibit the MW-HNG ability as a harvester in subway systems, the MW-HNG could light up a train timetable including 225 LEDs at a wind speed of 5 m s−1 (Fig. 10b(II)). In addition, a self-powered wireless environmental monitoring (SWEM) system for subway stations powered by this MW-HNG was fabricated (Fig. 10b(III)).223
 Fig. 10  Environmental monitoring device: (a) wind speed monitoring equipment based TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Equipment of hybridized wind speed monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Spherical TENG integrated with a power management module to harvest wave energy and power a thermometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Device equipment based spherical TENG to harvest wave energy and power a thermometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Equipment based TENG for monitoring ion concentration of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Equipment based TENG for monitoring ion concentration of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 


7.2.2. Wave energy harvester. 
Researchers have been attracted to the use TENGs to harvest wave energy as a promising clean renewable energy source.13,243,262 Recently, TENGs with different structures, including rolling spherical design,244,251 swing design,245,253 spring-based design,248 wavy electrode design,246,249 duck-shaped design,250 and air-driven membrane design,252 have been applied. Liang et al.247 developed a spherical TENG based on the spring-assisted multilayered structure to harvest multidirectional wave energy. According to Fig. 10c(I), this spherical design includes six multilayered TENGs placed in various directions. Each TENG has five contact-separation mode units, and the spherical shell includes 30 basic units. The Kapton film in a zigzag shape and copper were applied as a triboelectric layer and electrode, respectively. The maximum outputs of the TENG, including a voltage of 250 V, a current of 80 μA, and a power of 8.5 mW, were gained at a wave frequency of 1 Hz and an angle of 90°. To show the various applications of the TENG in blue energy, this TENG could power a digital thermometer which was applied to estimate the water temperature. As shown in Fig. 10c(II), the voltage increases fast up to 1.3 V with a charging time of 2 s.247 A novel spherical TENG based on both spring-assisted and swing design was fabricated to harvest wave energy, as shown in Fig. 10d(I). In this TENG, Liang et al.239 optimized the TENG by tuning the spring length and the diameter of the copper ball. Fig. 10d(II) shows the effect of these two important parameters on the current. Then they estimated the output based on the frequency and height of various wave conditions. To boost the performance, the charge excitation circuit (CEC) was integrated with a TENG array including four TENG units (Fig. 10d(III)). Each unit includes a copper foil as an electrode and the FEP film as the dielectric layer. Under the wave conditions of 1.0 Hz and 10 cm, the TENG could reach a maximum output of 56.2 μA and 4.1 mW. To show the application of this TENG, it was applied to power a thermometer (Fig. 10d(IV)), a self-powered wireless signal transmission and reception system.239 In ref. 243, a flexible liquid-solid contact TENG including an external Ū electrode (a bar electrode (B electrode) and a U electrode) was developed. A dielectric electrode TENG (D-TENG) was applied for the fabrication of the Ū-TENG which reduces the effect of shielding from water. Because loose ions can be attracted by the U electrode and B electrode, their screen effect on charges of the dielectric film can be eliminated. The electrical double layer (EDL) is formed at the interface between the dielectric film and water waves. The EDL includes a Stern layer referring to adsorbed ions onto the dielectric surface and a diffuse layer consisting of mobile ions moving with water waves. To expand the IoT at the seashore field, a wave warning system based on the B electrode, a continuous power system based on the Ū electrode, and a wireless transmitter based on a wireless transmitter were built.243 The SNF-TENG fabricated by Li et al.,38 which is described in Section 3, is appropriate for harvesting water energy because of its waterproof characteristics, high output, and excellent robustness. The study of the water flow effect on the performance of the SNF-TENG with an area of 3 × 3 cm2 indicated that the voltage and current increased with the water velocity in the range of 4.03–11.33 mL s−1 and then reduced. Moreover, it was concluded that the optimal angle between the device and the vertical direction is 30°–45°. This angle played a critical role in the TENG performance because lower angles cause inadequate contact between water and the PHS membrane. However, there is no complete charge transfer in higher angles due to the generation of residual water on the surface. This device exhibited excellent robustness because its output voltage remained stable even after 15 h washing. Moreover, by using water flow at a tensile strain of 100%, the SNF-TENG with an area of 1.5 × 4.5 cm2 could power 40 LED arrays with no batteries.38


7.2.3. Water quality monitoring. 
Monitoring the ion concentration of water is critical to detect the water quality. However, providing the power for the sensor network in the pipeline is expensive.13 Therefore, to monitor the water quality, Bai et al.256 proposed a self-powered water quality monitoring system consisting of a water quality sensor with no battery and an expandable tandem disk TENG (TD-TENG) shown in Fig. 10e(I). Each TENG unit was constructed with a stator disk and a rotator disk. The rotator disk as an electropositive triboelectric material includes two Cu layers with equally spaced radial-arrayed parts coated on acrylic. The stator disk as an electrode consists of two Cu layers with complementary-patterned sectors fabricated on epoxy glass fiber. PTFE films as electronegative triboelectric materials were located on the electrodes. The TENG can convert low-frequency water wave agitations into high-frequency electrical output due to the swinging mass blocks and surface modification which cause effective agitation even by slow water waves. Then the sensor can gather the water quality information with the power of the energy harvested by the TENG. The ability of this TD-TENG as an energy harvester and a power source was proved because it could charge various capacitors and light up 600 LEDs (Fig. 10e(II)). To detect the water quality, a total dissolved solid (TDS) test pen with two capacitors was connected to the TD-TENG (Fig. 10e(III)). The test pen could be turned on by a capacitor, and the TDS of the water was estimated (309 ppm). It was concluded that this TD-TENG could be applied to develop self-powered complicated systems such as the ocean.256 A self-powered online system for monitoring ion concentration in the water pipeline was fabricated based on a fixed resistor, a sensor, and a rotary disc-shaped TENG (RD-TENG) which was developed through a print circuit board (PCB) method to convert water energy to electrical energy and power a sensing alarm system. This RD-TENG includes a disk-shaped stator containing arrayed copper segments, a countered rotator as a triboelectric layer, and a PTFE thin film as another triboelectric layer. The open-circuit voltage of the RD-TENG (210 V) is independent of the rotation speed. Nevertheless, the short-circuit current directly depends on the rotation speed (112 μA at 120 rpm). In the sensing system, the RD-TENG was connected to an alarm circuit and a turbo fan which was operated by water in the pipeline, and the sensor was immersed in the water. This alarm has an immediate response to the small variation of ion concentration in the water such as NaCl.255 A whole wireless environmental monitoring system was proposed based on an arc-shaped TENG (AS-TENG) which was developed through a novel recycling technique, a power management circuit, and a wireless sensor node. Fig. 10f(I) displays the AS-TENG fabricated using a waste milk carton. The AS-TENG was constructed by an arc-shaped elastic beam to provide an effective pressure difference and a packaged acrylic housing, including two TENGs. Each TENG includes a copper electrode located on the housing, a milk carton sheet covered with Cu as one friction layer and Al covered with a modified PE as another friction layer. An open-circuit voltage of 600 V and a short-circuit current of 40 μA were obtained, lighting up 248 light LEDs at a wind speed of 15 m s−1 (Fig. 10f(II)). The harvested energy of four AS-TENGs mounted in a river was applied to power wireless environmental monitoring systems for pH estimation (Fig. 10f(III)) and landslide monitoring (Fig. 6g(IV)). A signal processing unit could process the pH information collected by a pH sensor, and this signal was transferred to the computer through the Bluetooth module. Furthermore, hitting stones on the AS-TENG could cause the voltage signals, showing the ability of this device for landslide monitoring.257

7.3. Human-health monitoring
Since conventional health monitoring systems are massive and bulky, a portable, safe, sensitive, low-cost, and self-powered health monitoring system is required to enhance human health.263 For the first time, Zhang et al.264 developed a TENG, including an Al film placed between two PDMS membranes for driving biomedical microsystems. Nanogenerators like TENGs have a wide variety of applications in health monitoring consisting of monitoring physiological parameters such as body sweat,124,265–268 heart rate,263,269–273 pulse,271,274–280 respiration,93,273,281–291 body temperature,292 muscle function restoration,293 body motion,294–297 hearing aid,204 neuromodulation,298,299 sleep190,300–302 and blood pressure277,303,304 to protect health and diagnose diseases.

7.3.1. Body sweat. 
Sweat, including lactate, glucose, and ions such as potassium, sodium, and calcium, can show critical information about human health.13,268 According to Fig. 11a, a self-powered and self-functional sock (S2-sock) was fabricated by a PEDOT:PSS coated TENG with the integration of a lead zirconate titanate (PZT) piezoelectric sensor to collect energy, recognize the walking pattern, track motion, and detect physiological signals such as the sweat level. The inner surface of the shoes includes the PTFE film and an Al electrode attached to the sock, and PZT chips were placed at the inner surface of the sock. This PEDOT:PSS coated sock showed better performance because of the enhancement of conductivity and charge transmission.265 In ref. 266, a TENG, including a PDMS film, Al foil as an electric layer, and Cu film as the electrode, was developed to harvest energy from walking and hand clapping. A lithium-ion battery was paired to this TENG to prepare a stable direct current and decrease the power consumption. The TENG could light up 30 LEDs connected in series, charge a Li-ion battery, and power a glucose sensor fabricated with a CuO nanostructure modified graphite electrode.266 A chitosan-based TENG (C-TENG), including an Al sheet as the metal layer and PTFE and chitosan–glycerol film as the triboelectric layers, was developed to measure humidity, sweat, and gait phase (Fig. 11b). To diagnose the NaCl concentration in human sweat, this TENG was utilized as a self-powered sweat sensor that produces electric signals through the contact-separation of hydrophobic PDMS and sweat. Various NaCl concentrations could change the surface polarity of the fabrics to keep the surface charges generated through the contact-separation process. In other words, a higher concentration of NaCl results in the reduction of sweat sensor outputs. Therefore, this sensor can detect NaCl as a vital parameter that needs to be monitored during exercise, especially for long-term ones such as marathons.124
 Fig. 11  Health monitoring device based TENG: (a) a cotton sock for healthcare monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) A sensor for sweat monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Heart rate monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Heart rate monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Respiratory monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 and 283. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 


7.3.2. Heart rate monitoring. 
Heart rate signals as an indication of the health condition of the cardiovascular system have been applied for monitoring human healthcare.270 Maharjan et al.269 developed a 3D-print-assisted wearable hybridized electromagnetic-TENG (WHEM-TENG) shown in Fig. 11c(I) to collect energy from arm-swing motion during walking and running and power a wristwatch. The working mechanism of this device is based on rolling electrostatic and electromagnetic induction. The TENG includes an acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) tube, a magnetic metal ball as a triboelectric material, and multiple ring-shaped Al electrodes. A heart-rate monitoring system (HRMS), including a heart-rate sensor powered by the WHEM-TENG, a power supply, a microcontroller consisting of an analog-to-digital converter, and a display, was developed to detect the heart pulse from the finger (Fig. 11c(II)). A WHEM-TENG on the wearer's wrist could power the heart-rate sensor for 6 s from 10 minutes of running.269 A self-powered wireless Body Sensor Network (BSN) system including a downy-structure based TENG (D-TENG) shown in Fig. 11d(I), a power management circuit, a heart-rate sensor, a signal processing unit to process the heart rate signal, and a Bluetooth module for wireless data transmission, was developed for monitoring the human rate. Fig. 11d(II) exhibits the integrated system located on a human arm. The D-TENG consists of a multilayer structure including copper back-coated PTFE thin films and copper thin films. During human walking, the maximum output of 2.28 mW with a conversion efficiency of 57.9% could be harvested to drive the BSN system. According to Fig. 11d(III), the TENG-based wireless BSN system measured the real-time heart rate and showed the data on the personal phone.270 A self-powered, flexible, and one-stop implantable triboelectric active sensor (iTEAS) was fabricated to monitor accurately and continuously physiological and pathological signs such as the heart rate. The iTEAS includes a nanostructured PTFE fixed on a Kapton (polyimide) film as one triboelectric layer, an Au layer deposited on the backside of the Kapton film as an electrode, and an Al film as both another triboelectric layer and electrode. To provide the effective contact-separation process of triboelectric layers, spacers combined with an elastic titanium strip were placed on the Kapton film.273


7.3.3. Self-powered respiration monitoring devices. 
Monitoring the respiratory frequency and chemical composition of expired gas is an indicator to show diseases like asthma, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OASA), pulmonary obstruction, and heart disease.13 A three-dimensional printed triboelectric respiration sensor (TRS) consisting of a fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP, Teflon™) film was fabricated to measure human respiration. Polyethylenimine (PEI) was also applied as a triboelectric layer and a CO2-capturing material detecting the variation in CO2 concentrations between expiration and inspiration. Therefore, the novelty of this TRS is its ability to analyze respiration to recognize human expiration and inspiration. The finite element method (FEM) was utilized to estimate the air velocity and optimize the structure, like the length between the two electrodes and the width above the electrode plate. This TRS can act as a self-powered sensor and a respiration sensing system because it could light up 6 LEDs and a simple Arduino-based system.284 Li et al.289 fabricated a TENG with PDMS as the negative friction layer and a multi-scale metal mesh electrode (MME) by the alloying-dealloying method (electro galvanizing, thermal diffusion, and corrosion) which enhanced the output significantly due to the synergistic effect of micro and nanostructures in the MME. This TENG has an output of 175.77 V and 0.85 W m−2 at a frequency of 4 Hz and an external force of 15 N. This result is 4 times higher than the output of the TENG, including the copper film electrode. To test the application of the MME-based TENG, a breather valve of the KN95 respiratory mask was used to record the breathing status by the TENG.289 According to Fig. 11e(I), a single-electrode TENG, including a flexible nanowire-structured PET film and a Cu foil as an electrode, was developed to harvest airflow from human breathing and generate electric signals, which were applied to monitor respiratory frequency. At an airflow of 115 L min−1, average peak values of VOC and ISC are 1000 V and 4.3 μA, respectively. This TENG can be used as a power source since it could illuminate 12 LEDs at a 115 L min−1 airflow rate (Fig. 11e(II)). According to Fig. 11e(III), a smart wireless breath-driven HMI system was fabricated to control electrical appliances like household ones. In this system, a user can wear a mask integrated with the TENG and breath; the TENG generates electric signals with the airflow, and then they can be transferred to the receiver. In this device, conventional methods of physical movements used in current HMI devices are not required. Therefore, this method is appropriate for disabled people who have problems with motions or languages.93
A self-powered and waist-wearable wireless respiration monitoring device based on the TENG was fabricated to control the breathing status by measuring the change in abdominal circumference. This system can monitor respiration in daily life. As shown in Fig. 11f(I), the TENG consists of a nylon film, PTFE film as a dielectric material, and copper foils as the conductive electrodes. The advantages of this device are portability, mobility, and intelligence because the respiration signal transmitted by a wireless transmission chip can be shown on a mobile device (Fig. 11f (II)). Moreover, the sensor has a design of a wearable belt, causing no problems for the user's activities. To show the portability and sensitivity of this device, various respiratory modes (thoracic respiration occurring in daily life and abdominal respiration occurring in breathing in low frequencies such as singing and yoga), various breathing conditions shown in Fig. 11f(III) (lying down, standing, sitting, and walking), various waistlines (72.8 cm and 98.6 cm), and different breathing rates (normal, rapid, and deep) were detected. An analytical model was also proposed to predict the output and optimize this device for respiration monitoring.283

8. A summary of critical issues of TENGs
According to Section 7, the next-generation electronics in the current decade include wearable TENGs and sensors that should be stretchable, flexible, and mechanically stable. In Sections 3–5, choosing suitable materials and fabrication methods to design stretchable and conductive electrodes as one of the important challenges in TENG devices19 have been addressed in detail. Moreover, in Section 6.4, the effect of tensile strain on the resistance of electrodes in some recent TENGs has been studied. It is essential to fabricate stretchable triboelectric materials with large fracture energy, which can tolerate crack propagation.19
Furthermore, according to the target application and using mechanical energy, other characteristics such as transparency, self-healability, and mechanical robustness of TENGs are important.29,305 For instance, graphene as an electrode material has attracted attention due to its high conductivity,29 transparency,306 robustness, flexibility,29 and environmental stability.29 Among the metallic nanomaterials, silver nanowires (AgNWs) can be considered as a material with high conductivity and transparency, which have outstanding robustness against bending.19,307 The cellulose II aerogel-based TENG described in Section 5,112 the SNF-TENG38 described in Sections 3 and 7.2.2, and the swing-structured TENGs245 in Section 7.2.2 are good examples of TENGs with excellent robustness. Moreover, Gu et al.308 fabricated a sound-driven TENG (SD-TENG) with high robustness and stability to use in harsh environments, and it can illuminate 24 LEDs.308 On the other hand, TENGs as mechanical energy harvesters face harsh and serious deformations during outdoor operation, so the property of healability can enhance their stability, durability, and lifetime. Nevertheless, few healable TENGs have been fabricated, which have the property of simultaneous healability of triboelectric materials and the current collector.19
Moreover, biocompatible TENGs with application in skin-inspired implanted electronic devices should have the properties of skin affinity and comfort. There should be an accurate control of the process and degradation phenomenon because it should balance the device's stability and biodegradability.19 For instance, electrospun poly(lactic) acid, nanostructured gelatin films, and transition metals as electrodes were considered to be biodegradable materials in a TENG. This TENG with an output of 900 V is more effective than those fabricated by non-biodegradable materials.309 Moreover, cellulose described in Section 5 is another appropriate biodegradable material with reproducibility.305 To prevent surgical elimination or decrease the unfavorable influence of the long-term use of these TENGs, it is required to have a complete degradation process, so materials with passivation influence or sensitivity to external stimuli should be applied.19,305
9. Conclusions and future prospects
In this paper, we have presented a summary of the current triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) that convert mechanical energy into electricity based on the coupling of electrification and electrostatic induction effects. The fundamentals of TENGs, the appropriate stretchable materials, and their fabrication were discussed to develop TENGs for wearable devices, bio-based TENGs, and TENG-based hybrid devices harvesting multiple energy sources. The effect of critical parameters such as the contact area, mechanical tension, internal resistance, and conditioning circuit was investigated on the performance of recently developed TENGs. Finally, different potential applications and developments of TENGs were studied in three main fields: environmental monitoring, human–machine interface (HMI), and human health monitoring.
For developing TENGs as an alternative technology to replace recent energy harvesters, it is imperative to survey more studies to answer the bottlenecks faced by TENGs, including the materials choice, structure design, long-time stability, sensitivity, scalability, and integrability. Beyond the effects of varying environmental factors such as humidity or vacuum conditions on the output performance of TENGs, intrinsic properties, including the contact area, contact force, and frequency, can be adopted to optimize and amplify the TENG output. In addition, modeling and simulation of TENGs should be considered a supportive tool to predict conditions for the desired performance. Furthermore, TENG studies should focus on developing power management techniques as constant supplies, which energizes devices instead of batteries, including the advancement of a new level of wireless communication and sensors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (20JC1414900), the Shanghai Natural Science Foundation (19ZR1400900 and 20ZR1402000), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52103298).
References
S. Li, J. Wang, W. Peng, L. Lin, Y. Zi, S. Wang, G. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602832 CrossRef .
J. Tian, X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 242001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yar, A. Karabiber, A. Ozen, F. Ozel and S. Coskun, Renewable Energy, 2020, 162, 1428–1437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Azmi, S.-M. Hosseini Varkiani, M. Latifi and R. Bagherzadeh, J. Ind. Text., 2020, 1528083720928822 Search PubMed .
P. Fakhri, B. Amini, R. Bagherzadeh, M. Kashfi, M. Latifi, N. Yavari, S. A. Kani and L. Kong, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 10117–10123 RSC .
S. Kalani, R. Kohandani and R. Bagherzadeh, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 35090–35098 RSC .
M. Kashfi, P. Fakhri, B. Amini, N. Yavari, B. Rashidi, L. Kong and R. Bagherzadeh, J. Ind. Text., 2020, 1528083720926493 Search PubMed .
C. K. Jeong, J. Lee, S. Han, J. Ryu, G. T. Hwang, D. Y. Park, J. H. Park, S. S. Lee, M. Byun and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2866–2875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, T. Huang, M. Lu, M. Mao, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 405401 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, Z.-Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pu, J.-W. Zha, C.-L. Zhao, S.-B. Gong, J.-F. Gao and R. K. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo and Z. L. Wang, EcoMat, 2020, 2, e12059 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Guo, B. Zhang and W. Zhao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 427, 213597 CrossRef CAS .
G.-H. Lim, S. S. Kwak, N. Kwon, T. Kim, H. Kim, S. M. Kim, S.-W. Kim and B. Lim, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Zheng, H. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. L. Wang and C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105359 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, D. Liu, S. Li, Z. Zhao, C. Zhang, X. Yin, L. Liu, S. Cui, Z. L. Wang and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000965 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, X. Wang, L. Lin, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4652–4659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Gao, Z. Zhao, Y. Hu, O. Yang, L. Liu, L. Zhou, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1334–1345 RSC .
K. Parida, J. Xiong, X. Zhou and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 237–257 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2020, 101100 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
J. C. Maxwell, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1861, 21, 161–175 CrossRef .
S. Korkmaz and İ. A. Kariper, Synth. Met., 2021, 273, 116692 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, M. Willatzen and Z. L. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 111101 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shuai, Z. H. Guo, P. Zhang, J. Wan, X. Pu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105389 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Song, X. Cheng and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 252–268 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, Z. Yuan, G. Zheng, K. Dai, L. Mi, C. Pan, C. Liu and C. Shen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104546 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, M. Han, Y. Song and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105627 CrossRef CAS .
I. Aazem, D. T. Mathew, S. Radhakrishnan, K. Vijoy, H. John, D. M. Mulvihill and S. C. Pillai, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 10545–10572 RSC .
X. Pu, M. Liu, X. Chen, J. Sun, C. Du, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700015 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zheng, S. Dong, J. Nie, S. Li, Z. Ren, X. Ma, X. Chen, H. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42504–42511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Cai, X.-N. Zhang, G.-G. Wang, G.-Z. Li, D.-Q. Zhao, N. Sun, F. Li, H.-Y. Zhang, J.-C. Han and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rao, Z. Chen, D. Zhao, R. Ma, W. Yi, C. Zhang, D. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Yang and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 105073 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Hou, J. He, M. Cui, C. Wang, W. Geng, J. Mu, B. Han and X. Chou, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, P. Tan, B. Shi, H. Ouyang, D. Jiang, Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Yu, C. Wang and X. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dong, Z. Wu, J. Deng, A. C. Wang, H. Zou, C. Chen, D. Hu, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804944 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Lai, Y. C. Hsiao, H. M. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801883 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Xiong, J. Lv, J. Chen, D. Gao, X. Zhang and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Deng, R. Ouyang, R. Zheng, Z. Jiang, H. Bai and H. Xue, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105866 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, J. Nie, Z. Ren, T. Jiang, L. Xu, S. Dong, L. Zheng, X. Chen and H. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guan, B. Xu, M. Wu, T. Jing, Y. Yang and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105549 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheon, H. Kang, H. Kim, Y. Son, J. Y. Lee, H. J. Shin, S. W. Kim and J. H. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703778 CrossRef .
X.-S. Zhang, M.-D. Han, R.-X. Wang, B. Meng, F.-Y. Zhu, X.-M. Sun, W. Hu, W. Wang, Z.-H. Li and H.-X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Guo, X. Yue, J. Gao, Y. Xi and C. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1896–1903 RSC .
Y. Dzenis, Science, 2004, 304, 1917–1919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Jeong, K. M. Baek, S. Niu, T. W. Nam, Y. H. Hur, D. Y. Park, G.-T. Hwang, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang and Y. S. Jung, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7031–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Guo, X. He, G. Liu, Y. Xi, H. Shi and C. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 736–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, J. Chun, J. H. Lee, K. N. Kim, N. R. Kang, J. Y. Kim, M. H. Kim, K. S. Shin, M. K. Gupta and J. M. Baik, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5037–5042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. U. Ye, B.-J. Kim, J. Ryu, J. Y. Lee, J. M. Baik and K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16189–16194 RSC .
X. Wang, B. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Yang and Q. He, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jang, H. Kim, Y. Kim, B. J. Kang and J. H. Oh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 143901 CrossRef .
T. Huang, M. Lu, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and M. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. Huang, C. Wang, H. Yu, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and M. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 226–235 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Mi, X. Jing, M. A. B. Meador, H. Guo, L.-S. Turng and S. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30596–30606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liang, X. J. Zhao, H. Y. Li, Y. J. Fan, J. W. Cao, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104414 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, X. Zhou, Y. Liu and Q. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12968–12977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Y. Li, Y. J. Fan, Y. H. Chen, S. Y. Kuang, Z. B. Li, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900755 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Fan, X. Li, S. Y. Kuang, L. Zhang, Y. H. Chen, L. Liu, K. Zhang, S. W. Ma, F. Liang and T. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9326–9332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, A. C. Wang, W. Yang, M. Zhang, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Dong, J. Yu, X. Li and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 5949–5956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, Y. Song, L. Wang, J.-F. Gao, Y. Wang and X. Dong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 15470–15478 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ertas and T. Uyar, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 177, 378–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parida, V. Kumar, W. Jiangxin, V. Bhavanasi, R. Bendi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702181 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, C. Jiang, F. Zhao, L. Lan, Y. Yao, Y. Yu, J. Ping and Y. Ying, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, A. Leber, T. D. Gupta, R. Chandran, M. Volpi, Y. Qu, T. Nguyen-Dang, N. Bartolomei, W. Yan and F. Sorin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. H. So, R. Mays, S. Desai, W. R. Barnes, B. Pourdeyhimi and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2308–2314 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guan, G. Lin, Y. Gong, J. Wang, W. Tan, D. Bao, Y. Liu, Z. You, X. Sun and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13948–13955 RSC .
Y. Tang, H. Zhou, X. Sun, N. Diao, J. Wang, B. Zhang, C. Qin, E. Liang and Y. Mao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907893 CrossRef CAS .
C. Keplinger, J.-Y. Sun, C. C. Foo, P. Rothemund, G. M. Whitesides and Z. Suo, Science, 2013, 341, 984–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Shao, T. Jiang, A. Yu, L. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1702929 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, D. U. Shah, C. Liu, Z. Yu, J. Liu, X. Ren, M. J. Rowland, C. Abell, M. H. Ramage and O. A. Scherman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 8163–8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dou, Z.-P. Wang, W. He, T. Jia, Z. Liu, P. Sun, K. Wen, E. Gao, X. Zhou and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Austero, A. E. Donius, U. G. Wegst and C. L. Schauer, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2012, 9, 2551–2562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Le Floch, X. Yao, Q. Liu, Z. Wang, G. Nian, Y. Sun, L. Jia and Z. Suo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25542–25552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, X. Liu, N. Jiang, A. K. Yetisen, H. Yuk, C. Yang, A. Khademhosseini, X. Zhao and S. H. Yun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10244–10249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Lee, S. R. Shin, S. H. Lee, J. H. Jeon, I. So, T. M. Kang, S. I. Kim, J. Y. Mun, S. S. Han and G. M. Spinks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2470–2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fei, Z. Zhang, L. Zhong and L. Gu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 85, 2423–2430 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hou, H. Wang, Y. Lin, S. Chen, S. Yang, Y. Cheng, B. S. Hsiao and M. Zhu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1795–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Yuan, P. Brochu, G. Gruner and Q. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 161108 CrossRef .
Y. J. Fan, X. S. Meng, H. Y. Li, S. Y. Kuang, L. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. L. Wang and G. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603115 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mu, C. Hou, G. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang and M. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9491–9497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pelrine, R. Kornbluh, Q. Pei and J. Joseph, Science, 2000, 287, 836–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 664–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, K. Dong, X. Li, J. An, D. Wu, X. Peng, J. Yi, C. Ning, R. Cheng and P. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005584 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hyun, M. Park, C. Park, B. Kim, Y. Xia, J. H. Hur, J. M. Kim, J. J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2946–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2004, 306, 1358–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
N. Behabtu, C. C. Young, D. E. Tsentalovich, O. Kleinerman, X. Wang, A. W. Ma, E. A. Bengio, R. F. ter Waarbeek, J. J. de Jong and R. E. Hoogerwerf, Science, 2013, 339, 182–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Miaudet, S. Badaire, M. Maugey, A. Derre, V. Pichot, P. Launois, P. Poulin and C. Zakri, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2212–2215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Kim, S.-N. Kwon and S.-I. Na, Composites, Part B, 2019, 167, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seyedin, J. M. Razal, P. C. Innis, A. Jeiranikhameneh, S. Beirne and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21150–21158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Tang, R. Dai, H. Wang, X. Sun, C. Qin, Z. Pan, E. Liang and Y. Mao, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103953 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Jin, W. Deng, J. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Pan, M. Zhu and W. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1650–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, X. Pu, C. Du, L. Li, C. Jiang, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1780–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ccorahua, J. Huaroto, C. Luyo, M. Quintana and E. A. Vela, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 610–618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bang, I. K. Moon, Y. P. Jeon, B. Ki and J. Oh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 567, 150806 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, J. Mo, Y. Lu, N. Zhang, Z. Wu, S. Wang and S. Nie, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105833 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, J. Jiao, Y. Chen, Z. L. Wang and X. Cao, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104957 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, K. Tu, S. Büchele, S. M. Koch, Y. Ding, S. N. Ramakrishna, S. Stucki, H. Guo, C. Wu and T. Keplinger, Matter, 2021, 4, 3049–3066 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Mo, Q. Fu, Y. Liu, S. Wang and S. Nie, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105637 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dudem, S. A. Graham, R. I. G. Dharmasena, S. R. P. Silva and J. S. Yu, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105819 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gogurla, B. Roy, J.-Y. Park and S. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 674–681 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gong, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, Q. Xu, X. Li, X. Cheng, Y. Huang, F. Zhang, J. Zhao and S. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 169, 112567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. W. Jun, J. H. Kim, W. C. Seung, O. H. Kwon, J. Y. Park, S. W. Kim and I. K. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502329 CrossRef .

          H. Patnam, A. R. Mule, S. R. P. Silva and J. S. Yua.
D.-L. Wen, X. Liu, H.-T. Deng, D.-H. Sun, H.-Y. Qian, J. Brugger and X.-S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Li, L. Che, S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Y. Li, X. Feng, Y. Pei, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. Lu and B. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104974 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, L. Huang, S. Lv, H. Shao, S. Fan and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104837 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Shao, C. Luo, Y. Li, H.-Z. Ma, Y.-H. Zhang, B. Yin, J.-B. Shen and M.-B. Yang, Composites, Part A, 2021, 151, 106646 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Liao, Y. C. Wang, S. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cai, X. Liu, J. Ju, H. Lin, H. Ruan, X. Xu, S. Lu and Y. Li, Mater. Lett., 2022, 306, 130904 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. Jeon, D. Kim, J. You and D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 975–981 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie, Q. Fu, X. Lin, C. Zhang, Y. Lu and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126512 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, W. Cheng, M. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Han, Y. Long and G. Han, Nano Energy, 2021, 106175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qian, L. Li, M. Gao, H. Yang, Z. Cai, B. Chen, Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103885 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vatankhah, M. Tadayon and S. Ramakrishna, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 118120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Hu, Z. Shi, Y. Wang, Y. Lei, J. Han, Y. Xiong, J. Sun, L. Zheng and Q. Sun, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106354 CrossRef CAS .

          A. P. S. Prasanna, V. Vivekananthan, G. Khandelwal, N. R. Alluri, N. P. M. J. Raj, M. Anithkumar and S.-J. Kim, 2022.
Y. Song, Z. Shi, G.-H. Hu, C. Xiong, A. Isogai and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1910–1937 RSC .
P. K. Sarkar, T. Kamilya and S. Acharya, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5507–5514 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ccorahua, A. Cordero, C. Luyo, M. Quintana and E. Vela, MRS Adv., 2019, 4, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Jao, P.-K. Yang, C.-M. Chiu, Y.-J. Lin, S.-W. Chen, D. Choi and Z.-H. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 513–520 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, S. Gao, Z. Yang, Y. Li, W. Chen, B. Wu and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706267 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zheng, L. Fang, H. Guo, K. Yang, Z. Cai, M. A. B. Meador and S. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706365 CrossRef .
A. Chandrasekhar, N. R. Alluri, B. Saravanakumar, S. Selvarajan and S.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1810–1815 RSC .
J. Peng, H. Zhang, Q. Zheng, C. M. Clemons, R. C. Sabo, S. Gong, Z. Ma and L.-S. Turng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1428–1433 RSC .
B. Chen, N. Yang, Q. Jiang, W. Chen and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 468–475 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Kim, E.-C. Yim, J.-H. Kim, S.-J. Kim, J.-Y. Park and I.-K. Oh, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, A. Hernandez, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Schiermeier, J. Tollefson, T. Scully, A. Witze and O. Morton, Nat. News, 2008, 454, 816–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 447–458 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. Zhong, X. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1631–1639 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Liang, F. Gao, F. Yi, M. Ma, Q. Liao, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 151–163 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, K. Cheng, P. Cui, H. Qi, H. Qin, G. Gu, W. Shang, S. Wang, G. Cheng and Z. Du, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104188 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, Y. Ni, H. Su, Y. Shi, Q. Liu, X. Chen and D. He, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105394 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Duan, L. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Duan, L. Vaillant-Roca, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105773 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, Z.-H. Lin, G. Cheng, W. Wu, X. Wen, S. Lee and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Wen, X. Sun, S.-T. Lee and B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2893–2899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-B. Jeon, D. Kim, G.-W. Yoon, J.-B. Yoon and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 636–645 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoo, S.-C. Park, S. Lee, J.-Y. Sim, I. Song, D. Choi, H. Lim and D.
S. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Wang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5696–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Roh, I. Kim and D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104515 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, G. Cheng, J. Chen, L. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501152 CrossRef .
L. Xu, L. Xu, J. Luo, Y. Yan, B. E. Jia, X. Yang, Y. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001669 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L. Xu, F. Gao, B. Zhao, Z. Kang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 104960 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang and C. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pu, W. Song, M. Liu, C. Sun, C. Du, C. Jiang, X. Huang, D. Zou, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601048 CrossRef .
U. T. Jurado, S. H. Pu and N. M. White, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104701 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Lee, T.-C. Hou and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1744–1749 RSC .
D. Jiang, Y. Su, K. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Xu, M. Dong and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang, H. Zou, R. Liu, C. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 CAS .
Y. Cho, S. Lee, J. Hong, S. Pak, B. Hou, Y.-W. Lee, J. E. Jang, H. Im, J. I. Sohn and S. Cha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12440–12446 RSC .
Y. Fang, J. Tong, Q. Zhong, Q. Chen, J. Zhou, Q. Luo, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang and B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dudem, Y. H. Ko, J. W. Leem, J. H. Lim and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30165–30175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, Q. Zheng, H. Wang, H. Guo, L. Miao, J. Wan, C. Xu, S. Cheng and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104243 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, R. Hinchet, S. K. Kim, S. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3605–3613 RSC .
Y. Cao, T. G. Morrissey, E. Acome, S. I. Allec, B. M. Wong, C. Keplinger and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605099 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Pu, M. Liu, S. Kuang, P. Zhang, Q. Hua, Z. Cong, W. Guo, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8936–8945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qiao, J. Wang, X. Yu, R. Jia, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Gan, C. Hu, M. Kiene, P. S. Ho, W. Volksen and R. D. Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4180–4182 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lan, T. Yin, C. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Yao, Z. Wang, S. Qu, Z. Ye, J. Ping and Y. Ying, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 319–328 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. H. Guo, W. Guo, X. Pu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909252 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, Y. Yang, N. Sun, G. Li, Y. Liu, C. Chen, J. Shi, L. Xie, H. Jiang and D. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803684 CrossRef .
Y. Pang, S. Chen, Y. Chu, Z. L. Wang and C. Cao, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, M. Zhou, R. Wu, A. Patil, H. Gong, S. Zhu, T. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Shen and K. Dong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4716–4726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, T. Jiang, Y. Feng, P. Lu, J. An and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002123 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, Y. Zhang, N. Shi, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Wu, C. Pan, H. Liu, L. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, K. Zhou, C. Yan, G. Zheng, J. Huang, K. Dai, C. Liu and C. Shen, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105035 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, H. Guo, L. Li, S. Li, X. Chen, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001770 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sow, D. J. Lacks and R. M. Sankaran, J. Electrost., 2013, 71, 396–399 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, W. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Liu, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Nano, 2019, 14, 1045–1054 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sencadas, C. Garvey, S. Mudie, J. J. Kirkensgaard, G. Gouadec and S. Hauser, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheong, M. Mafi, L. Benker, J. Zhu, M. Mader, C. Liang, H. Hou, S. Agarwal, I.-D. Kim and A. Greiner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18002–18011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, D. Liu, W. Zhao, G. Zheng, Y. Ji, K. Dai, L. Mi, D. Zhang, C. Liu and C. Shen, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104068 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, W. Wu and G. Song, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Niu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Liu, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3576–3583 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Jin, Y. Sun, B. Lu, H. Wang, J. Fang, H. Shao and T. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 588–594 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, Y. Kim, S. Lee and J. H. Oh, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. - Green Technol., 2019, 6, 731–739 CrossRef .
C. Wu, A. C. Wang, W. Ding, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802906 CrossRef .
X. Cheng, W. Tang, Y. Song, H. Chen, H. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 517–532 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghaffarinejad, J. Y. Hasani, D. Galayko and P. Basset, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zi, J. Wang, S. Wang, S. Li, Z. Wen, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, T. Zhang, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Niu, X. Wang, F. Yi, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
F. Xi, Y. Pang, W. Li, T. Jiang, L. Zhang, T. Guo, G. Liu, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, T. Zhou, C. Zhang, F. R. Fan, C. B. Han and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 225402 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ghaderiaram, A. Bazrafshan, K. Firouzi and M. Kolahdouz, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106170 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yue, X. Wang, M. Hou, M. Zheng, Z. Bai, B. Cui, S. Cha and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2021, 106682 Search PubMed .
T. Jing, B. Xu, Y. Yang, M. Li and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105373 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yao, L. Xu, X. Cheng, Y. Li, X. Huang, W. Guo, S. Liu, Z. L. Wang and H. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907312 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Huang, W. Guo, Y. Li and H. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Z.-H. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Q. Jing, Y. Su, J. Yang, J. Chen, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9213–9222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, Y. Xie, J. Long, P. Zhao, J. Chen, J. Luo, X. Wang and S. Dong, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 16–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. C. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zou, Z. Lin, G. Zhang, C. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802159 CrossRef .
S.-B. Jeon, S.-J. Park, W.-G. Kim, I.-W. Tcho, I.-K. Jin, J.-K. Han, D. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 596–603 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmed, S. L. Zhang, I. Hassan, Z. Saadatnia, Y. Zi, J. Zu and Z. L. Wang, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2017, 13, 25–35 CrossRef .
D. Doganay, M. O. Cicek, M. B. Durukan, B. Altuntas, E. Agbahca, S. Coskun and H. E. Unalan, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Z. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xiao, Q. Li, W. Ding and H. Fu, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, G. Zhu, J. Yang, Q. Jing, P. Bai, W. Yang, X. Qi, Y. Su and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 105–116 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Chen, G. Zhu, Z. Jiang, X. Liu, G. Niu, Z. L. Wang and B. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800167 CrossRef .
J. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Yang, Y. Su and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2649–2657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, X. Pu, J. Chen, Y. Meng, M.-H. Yeh, G. Liu, Q. Tang, B. Chen, D. Liu, S. Qi, Ch. Wu, Ch. Hu, J. Wang and Zh. L. Wang, Sci. Robotics, 2018, 3, eaat2516 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yu, M. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, J. Zhai and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 765–773 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, C. Luo, B.-W. Deng, B. Yin and M.-B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Z. Su, M. Shi, L. Miao, Y. Song, H. Chen, M. Han and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704641 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, W. Ding, Y. Dai, K. Dong, C. Wu, L. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5726–5733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, I. Yun, J. Jeung, Y. S. Park, S. Cho, D. W. Kim, I. S. Kang, Y. Chung and U. Jeong, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, X. Kuang, J. Deng, Y. C. Wang, A. C. Wang, W. Ding, Y. C. Lai, J. Chen, P. Wang and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705195 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Guo, X. Jia, L. Liu, X. Cao, N. Wang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3461–3467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, X. Xiao, W. Deng, A. Nashalian, D. He, V. Raveendran, C. Yan, H. Su, X. Chu and T. Yang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6404–6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, P. Zhu, Q. Yang, T. Chen, J. Wang and J. Li, Mater. Lett., 2020, 280, 128568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei, Y. Chen, Z. Gao, Z. Wen and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20100–20130 RSC .
H. Varghese and A. Chandran, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5287–5294 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Song, A. Zhou, Y. Ma and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 18363–18373 RSC .
Q. Shi and C. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900617 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Ren, H. Guo, X. Cheng and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 043902 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, H. Luo, D. Gao, X. Zhou, P. Cui, G. Thangavel, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 584–593 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Z. Xu, Z. Yang and X. Song, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104251 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Y. Ding, J. Nie, F. Wang, L. Xu, S. Lin, X. Chen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6143–6153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Park, S. Lee, M.-L. Seol, S.-B. Jeon, H. Bae, D. Kim, G.-H. Cho and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Rahman, M. Salauddin, P. Maharjan, M. Rasel, H. Cho and J. Y. Park, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 256–268 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, L. Zhang, Y. Zheng, D. Wang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 260–268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, M. He, Q. Jing, W. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Li, N. Li and Y. Ma, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xiao, S. Wang, P. T. Kien, J. Dong, J. Mi, X. Pan, H. Wang and M. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104736 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, B. Chen, J. An, C. Li, G. Liu, J. Shao, W. Tang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104819 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, C. Fu, F. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Wu, L. Chen and H. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, E. Yang, T. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Hu, J. Mi, X. Pan and M. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105279 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Meng, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105851 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ma, H. Zhu, H. Lu, Y. Zeng, N. Zheng, Z. L. Wang and X. Cao, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106032 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Z. Wang, F. Wang, S. Li and Z. L. Wang, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2021, 45, 101285 CrossRef .
W. Sun, N. Wang, J. Li, S. Xu, L. Song, Y. Liu and D. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 391, 138994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Yu, M. Yin, J. Wang, Q. Gao, Y. Yu, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105740 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Zhang, M. Xu, C. Zhang, Y.-C. Wang, H. Zou, X. He, Z. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 421–429 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, Y. Liu, Z. Wen, H. Shao, A. Wei, X. Xie, C. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Peng and Q. Zhuo, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Xu, T. Bu, H. Yang, G. Liu, W. Li, Y. Pang, C. Hu, C. Zhang and T. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 499–507 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, L. Xu, H. Wang, D. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Z. Liu, Y. Feng, J. Han, L. Li, J. An, P. Chen, T. Jiang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105836 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rodrigues, M. Ramos, R. Esteves, J. Correia, D. Clemente, F. Gonçalves, N. Mathias, M. Gomes, J. Silva and C. Duarte, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105890 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. He, L. Zhou, O. Yang, W. Yuan, X. Wei, Y. Liu, L. Lu, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1613–1623 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, M. Xu, X. Xiao, Y. Ma, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 106199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Q. Shi, J. S. Ho and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Niu, Y. Yin, F. Yi, Z. You and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501467 CrossRef .
T. Jiang, H. Pang, J. An, P. Lu, Y. Feng, X. Liang, W. Zhong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000064 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, W. Yang, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7405–7412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, T. Jiang, G. Liu, Y. Feng, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 277–285 RSC .
C. Wu, R. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Zi, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Zhang, C. B. Han, T. Jiang, T. Zhou, X. H. Li, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmed, Z. Saadatnia, I. Hassan, Y. Zi, Y. Xi, X. He, J. Zu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601705 CrossRef .
P. Cheng, H. Guo, Z. Wen, C. Zhang, X. Yin, X. Li, D. Liu, W. Song, X. Sun and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y. Pang, C. Zhang, T. Jiang, X. Chen, J. Luo, W. Tang, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, T. Jiang, X. Liang, J. An and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 021401 CAS .
J. Wang, K. Xia, T. Li, X. Zhao, B. Shu, H. Li, J. Guo, M. Yu, W. Tang and Z. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104461 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Z. Wen, A. Wei, X. Xie, N. Zhai, X. Wei, M. Peng, Y. Liu, X. Sun and J. T. Yeow, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 442–448 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Xu, C. He, L. Zhu, X. Yang, T. Jiang, J. Nie, W. Zhong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104117 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, Z. Lin, K. Meng, Z. Lin, Q. He, C. Sun and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, G. Liu, W. Li, T. Bu, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Pang, S. Xu, H. Yang and C. Zhang, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2019, 35, 25–32 Search PubMed .
M.-L. Seol, J.-H. Woo, S.-B. Jeon, D. Kim, S.-J. Park, J. Hur and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 201–208 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Park, S. Kim, M.-L. Seol, S.-B. Jeon, I.-W. Tcho, D. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, Ext. Mech. Lett., 2018, 19, 46–53 CrossRef .
Z. Wen, J. Chen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, Z. Li, X. Fan, T. Zhang, L. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 38–46 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rodrigues, D. Nunes, D. Clemente, N. Mathias, J. Correia, P. Rosa-Santos, F. Taveira-Pinto, T. Morais, A. Pereira and J. Ventura, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2657–2683 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Cheng, Z. Wang, L. Ji and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 490–511 CrossRef .
X.-S. Zhang, M.-D. Han, R.-X. Wang, F.-Y. Zhu, Z.-H. Li, W. Wang and H.-X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1168–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Q. Shi, T. He, Z. Yi, Y. Ma, B. Yang, T. Chen and C. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1940–1952 CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Yang, T.-C. Hou, Y. Su, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tat, A. Libanori, C. Au, A. Yau and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 171, 112714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Khandelwal, N. P. M. J. Raj and S.-J. Kim, Nano Today, 2020, 33, 100882 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maharjan, R. Toyabur and J. Park, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 383–395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhou, K. Meng, W. Wei, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8830–8837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Z. Zhang, F. Gao, X. Zhao, X. Xun, Z. Kang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105614 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mathew, A. Chandrasekhar and S. Vivekanandan, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Q. Zheng, Y. Liu, B. Shi, X. Xue, W. Ji, Z. Liu, Y. Jin, Y. Zou and Z. An, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6042–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ouyang, J. Tian, G. Sun, Y. Zou, Z. Liu, H. Li, L. Zhao, B. Shi, Y. Fan and Y. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703456 CrossRef .
X. Pu, S. An, Q. Tang, H. Guo and C. Hu, iScience, 2021, 102027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, X. You, H. Gong, Y. Yang, T. Bai, W. Wang, W. Guo, X. Liu and M. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6442–6450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Meng, J. Chen, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Fan, Z. Zhou, Q. He, X. Wang, X. Fan and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806388 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Miao, H. Guo, H. Chen, Y. Song, Z. Su and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 203902 CrossRef .
X. Cui, C. Zhang, W. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Li, L. Geng and X. Wang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 280, 326–331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Zeng, X. Fu and Y. Hu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Tai, B. Liu, Z. Duan, Z. Yuan, H. Pan, Y. Su, G. Xie, X. Du and Y. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 312–321 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Li, B. Zhang, E. Liang, Y. Mao and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6156–6162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Hu, L. Quan, L. Shi, J. Chen, W. Xuan, Z. Zhang, S. Dong and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, H. Roh and D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 103990 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, C. Yan, Z. Liu, X. Fu, L. M. Peng, Y. Hu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10267–10274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, J. Wang, S. Zhao, W. Yang, Z. Yuan, Y. Yin, X. Du, N.-W. Li, X. Zhang and X. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3771–3779 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dai, L. Li, B. Shi and Z. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 113609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, H. Tai, B. Liu, Z. Duan, Z. Yuan, H. Pan, G. Xie, X. Du and Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103829 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Su, R. Li, H. Jiang, Y. Xie, X. Ding, X. Wu and Y. Tang, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106423 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Hu, W. Xuan, S. Dong and J. Luo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lama, A. Yau, G. Chen, A. Sivakumar, X. Zhao and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19149–19178 RSC .
Z. Liu, T. Zhao, H. Guan, T. Zhong, H. He, L. Xing and X. Xue, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 35, 2187–2193 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Wang, T. He, B. He, N. V. Thakor and C. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900149 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yi, L. Lin, S. Niu, P. K. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Zi, J. Wang and Q. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3688–3696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lai, J. Deng, S. L. Zhang, S. Niu, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604462 CrossRef .
X. Pu, H. Guo, Q. Tang, J. Chen, L. Feng, G. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Xi, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, T. Zhao, W. Jiang, X. Yu, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, H. Zheng, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 508–516 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. Wang, W. Y. X. Peh, T. He, S.-C. Yen, N. V. Thakor and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shi, S.-C. Yen, N. V. Thakor and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 148–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kwon, H. Kim and W.-H. Yeo, iScience, 2021, 24, 102461 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Song, B. Gan, T. Jiang, Y. Zhang, A. Yu, H. Yuan, N. Chen, C. Sun and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8097–8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Xiang, W. Guo, H. Zhang, C. Tao, S. Yang and X. Fan, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104664 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rodriguez, K. Swett, S. K. Agarwal, A. R. Folsom, E. R. Fox, L. R. Loehr, H. Ni, W. D. Rosamond and P. P. Chang, JAMA Int. Med., 2014, 174, 1252–1261 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-F. Lin, J. Xiong, J. Wang, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 248–255 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Lone, K. C. Lim, K. Kaswan, S. Chatterjee, K.-P. Fan, D. Choi, S. Lee, H. Zhang, J. Cheng and Z.-H. Lin, Nano Energy, 2022, 107318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 237 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, N. Cui, J. Liu, Y. Zheng, S. Bai and Y. Qin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18049–18053 RSC .
R. Pan, W. Xuan, J. Chen, S. Dong, H. Jin, X. Wang, H. Li and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The four working modes of TENGs: (a) vertical contact-separation mode, (b) lateral sliding mode, (c) single-electrode mode, and (d) free-standing triboelectric layer mode.	 

 	Fig. 2  The working principle of the TENG in a contact-separation mode.	 
	(1)
∇ = 0 (Gauss's law for magnetism)	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
 = ε0 + 	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 3  The working mechanism of the TENG with the increase of contact cycles.	 
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 4  Stretchable TENGs. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the SNF-TENG. (b) Structure of the SNF-TENG and cross-sectional SEM image and surface morphology of the SNF-TENG. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the PNA hydrogel precursor, PNA hydrogel fibers, and PNA/PMA core-sheath fibers. (d) SEM images of a PNA/PMA fiber, a web woven from PNA/PMA fibers, and a fabric knitted from PNA/PMA fibers and wool threads. (e) Schematic illustration of a TENG textile woven from PNA/PMA core-sheath fibers and the output of the TENG textile at an ∼1.25 Hz relative motion to a PTFE film. (c–e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of FS-TENG. (g) Photograph of the fabricated p-PDMS film. (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) The preparation process and equipment for fabricating e-skin. (i) The forming process of e-skin with rGO and AgNWs, and the structure of S-TENG based e-skin. (j) (I, II) SEM images of the surface of the e-skin at different magnifications, (III) energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping, (IV) images of rGO/AgNWs, and (V and VI) SEM images of a cross-section of the e-skin at various magnifications. (h–j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (k) Structure of the SI-TENG, the SEM image of the PDMS surface and TPU/AgNWs, and cross-section SEM image of the whole device. (l) AFM image of surface change for contact–separation 1000 cycles. (k and l) Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  TENGs based on biomaterials. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and the image of the silk protein-based strain sensor and the TENG. (b) Images of the integrated strain sensor and the bio-TENG on a bandage, and its application to measure different human motions. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The structure of the TENG based on conductive SFF, the thickness of the SFF, and SEM image of the AgNFs. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of conductive SFF. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of cellulose II hydrogel and aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (f) The structure of the C-TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  TENG hybrid devices and application in harvesting multi-type energy. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hybrid energy harvester. (b) SEM image of the surface of the nw-PDMS film. (c) The working mechanism of the WD-TENG. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Structure of the hybrid energy system with the SH-TENG and solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Structure of the unified harvesting module (UHM). (f) Green LEDs illuminated by the solar cell, rain-TENG, wind-TENG, and UHM. (g) Schematic of a self-powered weather sensor including UHM in a smart farm. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (h) The structure of the AoPs. (i) Working mechanism of a single TENG. (h–i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (j) Structure and image of the TH-TENG. (k) Working mechanism of the TH-TENG. (l) The current output at various heights and frequencies. (j–l) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  The effect of surface roughness on the TENG performance.	 


Yar et al.3	Increasing area (2 × 2 cm, 3 × 2 cm, and 3 × 3 cm)	– Power increase. (2.5 W m−2, 2.85 W m−2, 3.05 W m−2)	– Power decreases. (2.92 W, 2.9 W m−2, 2.8 W m−2)	9 Power increases. (3.02 W m−2, 3.9 W m−2, 4.1 W m−2)
– Voltage stability reduces	
	

li et al.65	Increasing nickel foamed pore size (5–50 μm)	– Surface to volume ratio of p-PDMS decreases
– Surface roughness of p-PDMS decreases
– Voltage and performance decrease
– 5 μm pore size has the largest voltage due to the effective contact surface
Zhou et al.27	Increasing distance between triboelectric layers (1–20 mm)	– Voltage increases from −38 to −201 V
Jiang et al.85	Increasing PDMS thickness (25, 50, 100, 200, and 300 μm) at 8 N	– VOC, ISC, and QSC increase initially and then reduce
– SI-TENG with a PDMS thickness of 50 μm has the best output of VOC of 35 V, of 13 nC, and ISC of 0.08 μA
Increasing thickness of Ti sputter coaters (1, 3, and 5 nm)	– Outputs increase firstly and then decrease
– Output is at the highest amount with a Ti thickness of 3 nm

 	Fig. 8  The effect of pressure on the TENG performance.	 

Li et al.65	Increasing force (0.1 to 3 N)	– Voltage increases up to 86 V at a pressure of 3 N
– Force greater than 3 N cannot cause any changes
Zhou et al.27	Increasing force	– Voltage increases rapidly from 19 V to 98 V with the increase of force from 1 to 5 N
– Voltage increases slowly from 158.1 to 198.3 V with the increase of force from 10 to 20 N
Jiang et al.85	Increasing force	– Output increases
– SI-TENG is more sensitive under pressures lower than 1.6 kPa
Zhang et al.112	Increasing force (2.4–55 N)	– Voltage increases linearly

Li et al.65	Increasing frequency, at 3 N	– Voltage increase to 94 V at 0.5–6 Hz
– Voltage shows no changes at 6–9 Hz
– Voltage decreases at 10, 20, and 30 Hz
Zhou et al.27	Increasing frequency (0.5–20 Hz) at 10 N	– ISC and VOC increase
Li et al.38	Increasing frequency	– VC, ISC, and Q increase with the contact frequency lower than 8 Hz, while they reduce with the contact frequency higher than 10 Hz
– At 2 Hz and 14 Hz, the voltages are low because of the long separation or transient contact, resulting in poor charge transfer

Li et al.65	Increasing strain (0% to 50%), at 3 N and 5 Hz	– Electrode resistance and compression of the p-PDMS film increase
– Voltage of the FS-TENG (1 cm × 3 cm) reduces from 58.6 to 46.2 V
– At a strain above 50%, fracture of nanofibers occurs
Zhou et al.27	Increasing strain	– Resistance of AgNW/rGO/TPU increase
– Conductivity of the electrode reduces
– Voltage decreases
– Stable output generates under 200% strain
Jiang et al.85	Increasing tensile strains (0–150%)	– VOC increases from 80 to 110 V
– QSC increases from 22 to 35 nC
– ISC increases from 0.15 to 0.3 μA
Li et al.38	Increasing tensile strain to 50%, 100%, 150%, and 200%	– PHS membrane has a satisfactory recovery under a tensile strain of 200% for 5 cycles
– With the increase of strain to 150% and 200%, SEBS faces deformation
– Output reaches from 20 V to 45 V with the increase of strain from 0% to 125%
Li et al.38	Amount of SEBS microspheres	– PHS membranes with PVDF-HFP:SEBS weight ratios of 1:9, 3:7, and 5:5 can endure tensile strains of 1400%, 490%, and 304%, respectively
– Higher amount of SEBS decreases the voltage because it has a lower triboelectric affinity than PVDF-HFP
– SEBS amount more than 90% causes aggregation in the PVDF-HFP nanofibers
Req = Rin + Rs	(13)
	(14)
P = I2Req	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

Yar et al.3	Increasing load resistance (1–100 MΩ)	– Current decreases
– Voltage first increases and then reduces
Li et al.65	Increasing load resistance	– Voltage increases
– The maximum power density of 782.8 mW m−2 is at an external load resistance of 5 MΩ
Zhou et al.27	Increasing resistance (1 kΩ–1 GΩ)	– Voltage increases
– Current decreases
– Optimum result is 6 mW m−2 at a resistance of 400 MΩ
Zhang et al.112	Increasing resistance (1 kΩ–10 GΩ), at 1 Hz	– Current density decreases
– Voltage increases
– At 660 MΩ, there is a maximum power equal to 127 mW m−2
Li et al.38	Decreasing load resistor (500–150 kΩ)	– Voltage slightly increases from 2.88 V to 73.28 V
– Current increases
– The peak power density of 219.66 mW m−2 is at 20 MΩ

 	Fig. 9  HMI system based TENG: (a–d) self-powered biosensor electronic skin: (a and b) reproduced with permission from ref. 27 and 38. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e–g) self-powered smart keyboards: (e) reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (h–j) self-powered body motion sensors: (h) reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (i) Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  Environmental monitoring device: (a) wind speed monitoring equipment based TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Equipment of hybridized wind speed monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Spherical TENG integrated with a power management module to harvest wave energy and power a thermometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Device equipment based spherical TENG to harvest wave energy and power a thermometer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Equipment based TENG for monitoring ion concentration of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Equipment based TENG for monitoring ion concentration of water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Health monitoring device based TENG: (a) a cotton sock for healthcare monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) A sensor for sweat monitoring. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Heart rate monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Heart rate monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Respiratory monitoring equipment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 and 283. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
