Comparative experiments of graphene covalently and physically binding CdSe quantum dots to enhance the electron transport in flexible photovoltaic dev ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR02254H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR02254H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9241-9249Comparative experiments of graphene covalently and physically binding CdSe quantum dots to enhance the electron transport in flexible photovoltaic devices

        
          
            Mi-Hee 
            Jung
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Moo-Jung 
            Chu
          
        
      
Solar Cell Technology Research Section, IT Components and Materials Industry Technology Research Department, IT Materials and Components Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), 218 Gajeong-no, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-700, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mhjung@etri.re.kr
Received 
      26th April 2014
    , Accepted 27th May 2014First published on 29th May 2014AbstractIn this research, we prepared composite films via covalent coupling of CdSe quantum dots (QDs) to graphene through the direct binding of aryl radicals to the graphene surface. To compare the carrier transport with the CdSe aryl binding graphene film, we prepared CdSe pyridine capping graphene films through the pi–pi interactions of noncovalent bonds between the graphene and pyridine molecules. The photovoltaic devices were fabricated from the two hybrid films using the electrophoretic deposition method on flexible substrates. Even though the two hybrid films have the same amount of QDs and graphene, time-resolved fluorescence emission decay results show that the emission lifetime of the CdSe aryl group binding graphene film is significantly shorter than that of the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene. The quantum efficiency and photocurrent density of the device fabricated from CdSe aryl binding graphene were also higher than those of the device fabricated from pyridine capping CdSe–graphene. These results indicated that the carrier transport of the QD–graphene system is not related to the additive effect from the CdSe and graphene components but rather is a result of the unique interactions between the graphene and QDs. We could expect that these results can be useful in designing QD–graphene composite materials, which are applied in photovoltaic devices.
1. Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are regarded as a promising alternative to conventional solid-state semiconductor solar cells. DSSCs are cost effective, easily manufactured, and can be readily shaped with flexible substrates to satisfy the demands of various applications. Since DSSCs have been developed as a promising renewable energy, a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs as high as 12% has been achieved using porphyrin-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 photoanode and cobalt redox electrolyte;1 whereas, recent reports of solid state DSSCs based on a perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 sensitizer family have exceeded the PCE of 15%,2 promising further breakthrough in this field study. To meet the demand of clean energy from solar cells with high efficiency, quantum dot based solar cells will also be expected to play a leading role in this revolution owing to their potential properties. Instead of using organic dyes, researchers have achieved the sensitization of TiO2 nanoporous electrodes by modifying quantum dots (QDs) of low bandgap materials, such as CdS,3 CdSe,4 CdTe,5 PbS,6 and InAs7 which absorb light in the visible region. Semiconductor QDs offer significant advantages over dyes. QDs can match the solar spectrum better than dyes because their absorption spectrum can be tuned to the particle size.8 In addition, QDs have recently been shown to generate multiple excitons, which can improve the device efficiency.9 However, despite the advantages of using QDs as a sensitizer, QD cells are less efficient than dye cells10 due to fast recombination of electron–hole pairs. Fast capture of electrons at the QD interface remains a major challenge for efficient harvesting of light energy. This issue is of great importance in relation to exploiting multiple charge carrier generation for photocurrent generation. The strategy of encapsulating QDs with an electron acceptor shell or decorating them on a semiconductor nanotube assembly can provide new ways to enhance the capture and transport of photogenerated electrons. Fullerenes exhibit rich photochemistry and act as shuttles in photochemical solar cells. C60 and its derivatives are widely used to capture and transport electrons in organic solar cells. In a previous study a CdSe QD and C60 mixture was dropcast on a conducting surface for the purpose of demonstrating photovoltaic performance.11 However, poor interaction between the two components resulted in relatively poor photocurrent generation. In the meanwhile, on the basis of their unique electrical and electronic properties, a wide electrochemical stability window, and high surface area, carbon nanostructures have been employed in many applications, such as the use of single wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) assemblies for energy conversion devices.12,13 However, it is typically very difficult to achieve a uniform QD distribution because SWCNTs always exist in a bundle form in solution as a result of their hydrophilicity and the size of QDs is in a similar range as the diameters of the SWCNT bundles, thus making stacking difficult. Such a better distribution of QDs on graphene appears to be favorable for the performance improvement of photovoltaic devices.14 Graphene, a new class of 2D carbon structures, has demonstrated unique properties, such as high mobility and saturation velocity for both electrons and holes. The most important characteristic of graphene is its work function, 4.7–4.9 eV, which is similar to that of gold and enables possible ohmic hole injection into most organic semiconductors with comparable HOMO energy levels. The efficiency of graphene in capturing and transporting electrons from CdSe QDs is superior to that of other carbon nanostructure based cells reported elsewhere.11,15 This conclusion is in agreement with earlier work on captured electrons from H2P–C60 systems.16 The ability to capture electrons from QDs thus paves the way for their use in photovoltaic applications. Graphene/quantum dot (GQ) hybrid nanostructures are expected to facilitate charge transfer to two-dimensional (2D) structures, as well as efficient carrier transport.17 The chemical formation of carbon–carbon bonds offers an alternative approach to the electronic properties of graphene; the transformation of the carbon centers from sp2 to sp3 introduces a barrier to electron flow by opening a bandgap and allows the generation of insulating and semiconducting regions in graphene sheets. The prototype chemistry when applied to carbon nanotubes allowed both covalent and ionic chemical modification of the electronic structure;18 thus the covalent attachment of dichlorocarbene has been shown to transform the metallic SWCNT into semiconductors.19 The reduction of diazonium salts has been widely utilized for grafting aryl groups to the surfaces of sp2-hybridized carbon materials including glassy carbon,20 HOPG,21 and carbon nanotubes,22 as well as to the sp3-bonded carbon atoms of diamond.23
In this research, GQ hybrid materials were synthesized and assembled as the photoanode of solar cells through the covalently binding ligand. To prepare the GQ hybrid composite, we present a simple, covalent method for anchoring CdSe QDs onto a graphene sheet through a ligand-exchange approach. An innovative approach is presented herein based on modification of prepared trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) capped CdSe QDs with a bifunctional group, 4-aminothiophenol (AmTP), and a subsequent diazotization reaction. The diazotized CdSe–AmTP QDs were reacted with graphene on the flexible substrates. The surface modification of graphene with the CdSe aryl group was achieved through the spontaneous reaction of the diazonium salt with the graphene layer. The reaction is due to spontaneous electron transfer from the graphene layer and its substrate to the diazonium salt. The aryl group functioned as a short, covalent linker between the QDs and graphene and allowed more efficient carrier transfer through the assemblies without deleteriously altering electronic structures, thus providing a simple methodology to design robust GQ films on transparent conducting electrodes. The possibility of CdSe realizing graphene films opens new ways to replace the dye/TiO2 system in DSSCs.
2. Experimental section
Trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO)-capped CdSe QDs were synthesized by a solution-chemical route developed by Peng and co-workers.24 To exchange TOPO capped CdSe QDs with AmTP, the ligand exchange reactions were performed by adding a solution of TOPO capped CdSe nanoparticles in toluene to a boiling solution of 5–10 equivalents of AmTP in the same solvent. For instance, CdSe–AmTP was obtained by adding 4 mg of CdSe nanoparticles dissolved in 2.0 ml of toluene to a boiling solution of 5–10 mol equivalents of AmTP ligand in toluene. After 5 minutes, the product precipitated as a red brown solid, which was isolated by centrifugation, washed with toluene to remove the excess ligand, and dried in vacuo. These nanoparticles can readily be resuspended in THF or DMF.25 AmTP modified CdSe QDs were diazotized in the following way. 0.268 g (1 mmol) of CdS–AmTP was dissolved in 10 ml of ethanol. To the solution, 0.069 g (1 mmol) of NaNO2 in 10 ml water was added drop-wise, and then, a few drops of concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl) were added. After adding NaNO2 solution, reactants were mixed together by stirring. The temperature of the reaction mixture was kept between 0 and 5 °C for 20 minutes. The ethanolic solution of diazotized CdS–AmTP became immediately yellow after adding concentrated HCl. The mixture was kept on ice and used in coupling reaction, quickly.25
To compare with the CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene, the TOPO QDs were surface ligand exchanged with pyridine by stirring overnight with mild heating (90 °C). An excess of pyridine molecules (over 10× the calculated mol% of surface atoms) was used to complete the surface exchange. The pyridine capped CdSe was precipitated using hexane. Pyridine capped CdSe was then mixed with graphene solution and sonicated until an optically clear solution was obtained (bath type sonicator, 40 kHz, 5–10 min).26
The GO was synthesized according to the modification of Hummers' methods and exfoliated and dispersed in DI water.27,28 The graphene was prepared via the chemical reduction using the hydrazine.29 The reduced graphene was washed with ethanol several times and dispersed in ethanol. The graphene solution was mixed with diazonium and pyridine capped CdSe typically consisting of 50 μl of 9.0 × 10−6 M CdSe QDs in toluene and 30 μl of 0.5 mg ml−1 graphene in ethanol, combined in a 0.8:1.0 mixture of toluene–acetonitrile.30 We kept the same amount of the loaded CdSe QDs on graphene in both hybrid films.
The CdSe–graphene films were created by electrophoretic deposition. Briefly, two ITO/PET flexible electrodes were held apart at a constant distance of 4 mm in the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) while a potential of 50 V was applied. EPD cycles consisted of 1 min deposition periods followed by remixing. The obtained film thickness is 200 nm.
To prepare Pt counter-electrodes, we coated the ITO/PET flexible substrate with Pt by the sputtering process. The GQ composite deposited electrode and the Pt counter-electrode were assembled into a sealed sandwich-type cell by heating with a hot melt of a 50 μm thick Surlyn polymer film (Surlyn, Dupont 1702). The electrolyte consisted of Na2S (0.5 M), S (2 M) and KCl (0.2 M) in a methanol–water (7:3 by volume) solution.31 The photocurrent (Jsc) and photovoltage (Voc) of the DSSCs were measured with an active area of 0.15–0.25 cm2 using simulated solar light at AM 1.5 that was produced by a 1000 W xenon lamp (Oriel, 91193). Its irradiation power was adjusted with respect to a Si reference solar cell (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy System: Mono-Si + KG filter) to approximately one-sun light intensity (100 mW cm−2). Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a system designed by PV measurement. A 12 W halogen lamp was applied as a light source for the monochromatic beam. For its calibration, a silicon photodiode (NIST-calibrated photodiode G425) was used. IPCE data were obtained at a low chopping speed of 5 Hz, and the quantum efficiency was detected by a lock-in amplifier. HR-TEM images were obtained with a JEM-2100F (JEOL Ltd., Japan). The optical-absorption spectra of the QD solution were measured with an ultraviolet-visible-near infrared (UV-vis-NIR) spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1601). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were carried out on a Multimode XE-100 instrument (PSIA Inc.) operating in tapping mode with silicon cantilevers (resonance frequency in the range of 204–259 kHz, an integrated Si tip with a typical radius of 10 nm curvature). Photoluminescence (PL) measurements of QDs and GQ were performed using the 325 nm line of a He–Cd laser as the excitation source at room temperature. Time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy was recorded by the time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) using a Micro-Time 200 (PicoQuant GmbH) spectrofluorimeter equipped with a 470 nm diode (full width at half maximum, 96 ps) with a 40 MHz repetition rate. Infrared spectroscopy (IR) was used to determine the functional groups on the surface of dots and also the formation of metal sulphur bonds and linkage between individual objects. IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 5700 FT-IR spectrometer in the wave number region 400–4000 cm−1. Raman spectra were obtained with a high resolution dispersive Raman microscope (Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). The 514.5 nm radiation from a 40 mW air-cooled argon ion laser was used as the exciting source. The laser power at the sample position was 2.0 mW for graphene and QD modified graphene. Data acquisition was the result of five 30 s accumulation of the sample.
The photocurrent response of ON–OFF illumination was measured on a ZAHNER CIMPS system. A stationary DC voltage and a concurrent sinusoidal modulated AC voltage were imposed on a green LED, which gave out a green irradiance with a maximum wavelength at 525 nm and 100 W cm−2. The LED was controlled by a potentiostatic feedback loop. The intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) measurements were performed on a ZAHNER CIMPS system. A stationary DC voltage and a concurrent sinusoidal modulated AC voltage were imposed on a green LED, which gave out a green irradiance with a maximum wavelength at 525 nm. The LED was controlled by a potentiostatic feedback loop. The selected AC amplitude ranged from 5% to 15% of the stationary DC value. The transfer functions of IMPS and IMVS were determined by correlating the system response with the actual stimulation signal. The potential applied to the testing cell was controlled by a potentiostat unit. IMPS measurement was carried out under short-circuit conditions while IMVS measurement was carried out under open-circuit conditions. The measured short circuit photocurrent efficiency (Φext(ω)) of IMPS and the real and imaginary parts of modulated photovoltage ΔVoc of IMVS were fitted by using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm.
3. Results and discussion
We propose a synthetic strategy for the QD and graphene covalent binding process, as shown in Scheme 1. The TOPO ligand is commonly used to cap and passivate the surface of CdSe quantum dots for a variety of reasons: it coordinates the surface cadmium atoms, forms a protective layer against sintering, provides solubility, and maintains good optical properties. In this work, QD surface coatings were modified in order to combine with the graphene under suitable conditions.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of (a) the combination of pyridine capped QDs with graphene using the noncovalent approach (π–π interaction) to fabricate the QD–graphene films. (b) The grafting process of aryl diazonium cation functionalized CdSe to graphene via reduction of the CdSe diazonium salt: the CdSe aryl diazonium cation accepts one electron from the substrate and forms an aryl radical through the release of a nitrogen molecule. The aryl radical can then covalently react with the graphene surface. 
The capping agent from the initial synthesis, TOPO, was substantially replaced by a bifunctional group, AmTP, by a ligand exchange reaction. The reaction was performed by adding a solution of TOPO capped CdSe in toluene to a boiling solution of 0.1 M AmTP in the same solvent. The head of bifunctional molecules (usually sulfur) predominantly attaches to the soft nanoparticles, and the tail possessing a terminal reactive functional group is hence available for further reaction. We can replace more than 90% of TOPO with AmTP. The AmTP functionalized CdSe was confirmed by FT-IR spectroscopy; the spectrum of AmTP functionalized QDs exhibits new bands at 3333 and 3426 cm−1, which fall within the range of the symmetric and asymmetric stretching modes of the NH2 group (Fig. 1).25 Subsequently, diazonium functionalized CdSe was prepared by a diazotization reaction of an aromatic primary amine of AmTP by converting it to a diazonium compound. The diazonium functionalized CdSe was identified with the NN stretching frequency at 2277 cm−1 (Fig. 1).32 Aryl diazonium salts are known to react with olefins.33 In solution-phase reactions, diazonium salt decomposition is typically catalyzed by a metal salt such as copper chloride, giving a reactive aryl radical. This type of chemistry has been successfully applied to the modification of a carbon surface via grafting of an electrochemically reduced aryl diazonium salt. The diazonium capped CdSe QDs have a positive charge due to the diazonium cations. Reduction gives an aryl radical that covalently attaches to the graphene surface, as shown in Scheme 1b. Therefore, the AmTP CdSe was linked to the graphene by covalent attachment of aryl groups to the basal carbon atoms. Aryl diazonium cation functioned QDs can perform multiple roles, simultaneously. First, the benzene diazonium capped CdSe QDs were assembled much more effectively onto the graphene compared to the original TOPO-capped QDs, thereby meeting the requirement to produce the composite of graphene and QDs. Second, the diazonium group is expected to introduce a covalent binding between graphene and QDs; thus the small diazonium molecule causes the favorable charge transfer between two components.34 To form GQ assemblies suitable for light collection and carrier transfer, the linker molecules should be as short as possible to enhance the efficiency of electron tunneling, functionalized to bind the two components and maintain the electronic properties of linked materials. Both graphene and QDs are easily functionalized through both covalent and noncovalent modification. To explore the effect of the non-covalent binding of QDs and graphene on the transport properties, pyridine was chosen as the linker moiety to attach the QDs to graphene. The aromatic pyridine tail allows the nanocrystal to be noncovalently bound to the graphene via π–π stacking interactions (Scheme 1a).26
 Fig. 1  IR spectra of AmTP, AmTP functionalized CdSe nanoparticles and CdSe diazonium salt nanoparticles after diazotization. The spectrum of CdSe diazonium salt nanoparticles shows a diazonium (–NN–) stretching frequency at 2277 cm−1. 
We prepared graphene oxide (GO) by a modified Hummers' method.28 To indicate the acquirement of single-sheet GO, an aqueous solution of GO was dropped into hydrophilic-treated silicon for tapping mode AFM measurements. Fig. 2a and b show an AFM image of GO on the silicon substrate; the thickness of the sheet is equal to or less than 1 nm. Large-area graphene with lateral sizes of more than a few tens of micrometers can be obtained by low-power ultrasonification and centrifugation. For high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) sample preparation, a small quantity of a GQ composite solution was dropped onto a 300 mesh copper grid. TEM images were obtained from samples attached on the edge of the copper grid, avoiding the complicated lithography process of fabricating a micrometer-sized metallic grid. The lattices of CdSe QDs covering the graphene layer are clearly seen in the high-resolution TEM image (Fig. 2c). The individual CdSe nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼2.8 nm are well separated from each other and spread out on the graphene sheet. There is no aggregation of CdSe QDs on the graphene sheet, nor are there large areas of the graphene sheets without CdSe decoration. The good distribution of CdSe QDs on the graphene sheet guarantees efficient optoelectric properties of CdSe QDs. As a result of its efficient electron transport, graphene significantly quenched the fluorescence of the CdSe QDs decorated on it, demonstrating the potential applicability in the field of optoelectronics. The composition of the GQ composites was further confirmed by means of selected area energy dispersive X-ray analysis (SAEDX; see the inset image of Fig. 2c). The results revealed that the composition was mainly Se, Cd, C and O. Strong signals from Cd and Se suggested the identity of the QDs coupled onto the graphene sheets. The C and O peaks observed in the spectrum could be attributed to the graphene surface. Moreover, the molar ratio of Se to Cd was calculated to be 0.91, approximating to the theoretical value of 1.35 The selected area diffraction pattern of CdSe aryl binding graphene composite (Fig. 2d) and high resolution TEM image of lattices of CdSe QDs covering the graphene layer confirmed the presence of CdSe on graphene (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 2  (a) AFM images of single sheet graphene oxide on a silicon substrate, (b) height of single sheet graphene oxide, (c) TEM image of single sheet CdSe aryl binding graphene composite. The inset is the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum confirming the presence of CdSe, (d) the selected area diffraction pattern of CdSe aryl binding graphene composite and (e) the high resolution TEM image of CdSe QDs on graphene. 
We compare the absorbance spectra of graphene, GQ thin films on transparent substrates, and AmTP-capped CdSe QDs in toluene solution. The absorbance peak appearing in the GQ films corresponds to the excitation peak of CdSe QDs, with a small red shift (Fig. 3). Previous investigation reported that no QD absorption band could be observed after QDs were attached to CNTs, because the broad background absorption of the CNTs could strongly screen the absorption of the QDs; the absorption band could only been seen when QDs were densely coated onto the CNTs.36 However, the first excitonic absorption peak of CdSe in our experiment could still be observed, which suggests the formation of a dense coating of QDs on the graphene sheets. Moreover, no obvious change of the absorption peak of the QDs was observed, which indicates that little or no QDs agglomerates were formed on the graphene sheets,37 consistent with HR-TEM observations. The PL emission spectrum of GQ composites (Fig. 3) shows a dramatic decrease in intensity compared with that of pure QDs, indicating partial quenching. This result can be ascribed to the electron transfer from excited CdSe QDs to graphene.38 Similar PL quenching was observed in previous reports on CNT–QD composites.36,39 Furthermore, the nearly constant size distribution of CdSe QDs was verified again by the negligible red shift (1 nm) of the QD bandgap emission after adsorption onto the graphene sheets.40 The photoluminescence of the QDs is due to the irradiative pathway from the excited state to the ground state. Given that the graphene quenched the CdSe QDs, the graphene interaction with the QDs must provide an alternative, nonirradiative decay path. It is believed that the nonirradiative decay path occurs because the electron affinity between the CdSe QDs and the graphene is sufficiently small that it allows electron transfer from the QDs to the graphene. In other words, the formation of GQ conjugates favors electron transfer from the QDs (donor) to the graphene (acceptor) so that the excited electrons enter the graphene rather than being emitted as a photoluminescence peak.
 Fig. 3  The absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) of CdSe and CdSe aryl binding graphene composite on a transparent electrode. 

Fig. 4 shows the Raman spectra of graphene before and after the CdSe aryl radical chemical modification. There are two features in the Raman spectra of graphene, the G mode at ∼1585 cm−1 and the D mode at ∼1350 cm−1. In the CdSe aryl binding graphene, the G mode's position and shape will not change after the chemical modification, implying the reserve of the backbone of the graphene lattice. However, the G mode from the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene was split into two distinct peaks which were fitted with two Lorentzian peaks at ∼1589 and 1620 cm−1, because the 2-fold degeneracy of the TO and LO phonons is lifted by symmetry breaking, as found in carbon nanotubes and the aromatic molecule decorated graphene monolayer.41 But one must have noticed that the most significant change is the appearance of the D mode at ∼1350 cm−1 in the Raman spectra of modified graphene. The D mode arises from the defect-involved double resonant Raman process at the K point in the Brillouin zone. In fact, the presence of the D mode is generally used to monitor the covalent bonds formed in graphene and is widely accepted.42 Since the backbone of graphene in the CdSe aryl binding graphene was preserved herein, we successfully modified graphene via chemical reaction, and these results prove directly that the appearance of the D mode corresponds to the aryl groups attaching to graphene via σ-bonds.
 Fig. 4  Raman G and D spectra of the CdSe aryl group functionalized graphene layer. The Raman spectra for reference sample, pyridine capping CdSe–graphene and graphene are also included. 
Time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy (Fig. 5) was employed to monitor the emission lifetimes of free CdSe, pyridine capping CdSe–graphene and CdSe aryl binding graphene. PL decay measurement was accomplished multiple times of more than five for each sample. The obtained decay curves were fitted by a three exponential decay model; I(t) = A1e−t/τ1 + A2e−t/τ2 + A3e−t/τ3, where I(t) is the time-dependent fluorescence intensity, A is the amplitude, and τ is the lifetime. The excitation wavelength is 470 nm. Intensity weighted average lifetime, 〈τave〉, is defined as . The emission lifetime of pyridine capping CdSe–graphene (〈τave〉 = 1.54 ns) nanocrystals was significantly shorter than that of the corresponding CdSe (〈τave〉 = 8.8 ns) counterpart (Fig. 5a). The difference in the average emission lifetime between GQ and the CdSe counterpart indicates the emergence of a nonradiative pathway from the significant electronic interaction between QDs and graphene. However, as described in Fig. 5b, the emission lifetime of CdSe aryl binding graphene (〈τave〉 = 0.93 ns) is shorter than that of the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene. Aryl diazonium cation underwent nitrogen loss easily by either direct photoexcitation or through electron transfer; aryl radicals are thus generated at the graphene surface, where they can react in competition with diffusion into the bulk liquid phase. In the emission quenching process of the QD–graphene system, both electron and energy transfer processes contributed to deactivation of excited CdSe on the graphene surface.30 The electron transfer from aryl radical functionalized CdSe to the graphene surface was expected to be dominated by the pathway of the covalent bond. The CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene could not only accelerate photoinduced electron transfer through the covalent bond but also result in charging of the graphene surface, causing further electron transfer to become increasingly difficult. With the electron transfer pathway unavailable, PL lifetime was increased as energy transfer became the only available route to conduction band electrons undergoing nonradiative excited state decay.
 Fig. 5  Time-resolved fluorescence spectra of (a) bare CdSe, pyridine capping CdSe–graphene, and (b) CdSe aryl binding graphene films on a transparent electrode. The fitting results (solid curves) were also included for comparison. 
In order to leverage the benefit of electron transfer observed in a GQ composite, the films should contain the balance between the sufficient supply of graphene for ample GQ interfacial contact and also limiting graphene's detrimental filtering of incident light. Film deposition of a solution-based composite by means of a spin coating method typically resulted in a loss of dispersion between the two species, as well as film inhomogeneity.30 The previous study reported that the EPD in composite film preparation is shown to produce high quality films.11,13 By employing an electrophoretic deposition technique, we have cast GQ composite films on a flexible substrate (ITO/PET). When subjected to a DC electric field, they quickly migrate to the electrode and are deposited on the flexible substrates. The deposition of the GQ composite was monitored by UV-vis-NIR absorbance spectroscopy. Absorption spectra show GQ dispersion concentration successively for each cycle until deposition of GQ onto the photoanode is complete. The films obtained by the electrophoretic deposition method are quite robust, flat films and show homogeneity for spectroscopic and photoelectrochemical measurements. The film of GQ is also highly flexible and more resistive to its bending, in contrast to the more fragile dye/TiO2 system in the DSSCs.
Electronic and optoelectronic characteristics of the devices fabricated from the GQ films on flexible substrates were measured by photocurrent response of ON–OFF illumination. The GQ films were created by electrophoretic deposition. The obtained film thickness is 200 nm. The photoanode only consists of QDs and graphene and does not contain the electron transporting layer, such as TiO2.30 The film thickness of the photoanode is very low which can be easily applied to flexible solar cells. We constructed cells consisting of GQ composite films as photoanodes with platinum as a counter electrode and aqueous 0.1 M Na2S as the electrolyte. Upon photoirradiation, we observed reproducible responses to ON–OFF light cycles in GQ systems at 100 mW m−2 and 100 W m−2 light intensities (Fig. 6). The photocurrent response increased with the light intensity. The photocurrent observed for CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene (on–off ratio: 28.5) was an order of magnitude higher than the current generated by the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene (on–off ratio: 7.5) at the light intensity of 100 W m−2. Based on the emission decay result (Fig. 5), we expected that CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene films have longer charge separation (electron–hole pair). This was caused by the charge trap states which are likely to stabilize the photogenerated charge carriers and contribute to the overall photocurrent generation. Therefore, such longer charge separation is crucial for increasing the probability of charge collection at the electrode surface.43
 Fig. 6  The photocurrent response of the CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene films on a flexible electrode to ON–OFF illumination under incident LED light (100 mW cm−2 and 100 W cm−2 at 525 nm). 
The effect of the dependence of IPCE on the excitation wavelength is shown in Fig. 7. The quantum efficiency of CdSe aryl binding graphene was higher than that of the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene even though two hybrid films have the same amount of QDs in the graphene. The enhancement of IPCE in the CdSe aryl binding graphene is attributed to the direct electron transport from the initial excitation of CdSe to the collecting graphene surface. These observations thus confirm that the IPCE response is not only related to the additive effect from the CdSe and graphene components, but is also a result of the unique interactions between the graphene and QDs.13,44
 Fig. 7  Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene films on a flexible electrode: IPCE (%) = IPCE (λ) = (1240 eV nm)Iph/λP0, where Iph is the incident photocurrent density in mA cm−2, λ is the wavelength of the incident radiation in nm, and P0 is the photon flux in mW cm−2. 
The intensity of the IMPS shows (Fig. 8a) that the CdSe aryl binding graphene cells have a larger light response than that of pyridine capping CdSe–graphene cells in the measured frequency range, which agrees with the IPCE measurement shown in Fig. 7. The inverse of the frequency (1/2πfmin) at the minimum of the IMPS arch represents the typical time interval from photoelectron injection to photoelectrical arrival at the ITO/PET electrode. The calculated time interval is 1.97 ms for CdSe aryl binding graphene cells, which is shorter than that for pyridine capping CdSe–graphene cells (3.11 ms). Therefore, the photoelectron collection process in covalent GQ composite devices is faster than that in non-covalent GQ composite devices. While IMPS spectra are measured under short-circuit conditions, IMVS spectra are measured under open circuit conditions. Therefore, there is no carrier extraction and IMVS spectra just show accumulation of charges at the interface. The Bode plots of IMVS (Fig. 8b) show that the photovoltage of covalent GQ composite devices is higher than that of the non-covalent GQ composite devices as the frequency is decreased. This reflects the fact that the electron density of the photoanode in covalent GQ composite devices is higher than that in non-covalent GQ composite devices. It increased the quasi-Fermi level of covalent GQ composite devices, resulting in higher photovoltage.
 Fig. 8  The (a) IMPS and (b) Bode diagram of IMVS of a GQ composite solar cell with CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene. 
To compare the performance of the covalent and non-covalent GQ composite cells, 10 separate devices were fabricated and PV performance was tested. Histograms of the cell-performance characteristics are shown in Fig. 9. As can be seen from the results, the Voc (Fig. 9a) values show not only high reproducibility but also little difference between covalent and non-covalent graphene–quantum dot composite systems. However, the short-circuit current density (Jsc, Fig. 9b) and power conversion efficiency (PCE, Fig. 9d) of the covalent GQ composite cells are higher than those of the non-covalent GQ composite cells. Therefore, we could expect that CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene could accelerate photoinduced electron transfer to the graphene surface in the competition between charge transfer effect and diffusion into the bulk liquid phase. It led to enhancement of the photocurrent density and PCE of the composite films. As a result, when the CdSe is directly bound to graphene, a large valence band offset will form at the graphene–QD interface while the conduction band offset is very small.44 Once the photoinduced electrons and holes are generated in the QDs, they will most likely transfer to the graphene owing to the energy band offsets at the interface.44
 Fig. 9  Histogram of device parameters measured for 10 CdSe pyridine (brown color) and aryl binding (green color) graphene composite cells: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE. 
We would acknowledge that low efficiency of the present device is due to the device structure. The photoanode of the present device only consists of QDs and graphene. The structure of the device was different from previously reported devices which involved the TiO2 to increase the rate of electron transfer.30 Therefore, although these efficiencies are relatively small, the CdSe aryl binding graphene film could give more useful information on the QD and graphene interactions to apply in the photovoltaic devices.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we fabricated composite films via covalent coupling of CdSe QDs to graphene in an aqueous solution. To investigate the carrier transport between CdSe and graphene film, we compared it with the CdSe pyridine capping graphene films which were bound through the π–π interactions between the graphene and pyridine molecules. The Raman spectroscopy result proves that the CdSe aryl groups are bound to the graphene basal plane via σ-bonds. The time-resolved fluorescence studies demonstrated that the emission lifetime of a CdSe aryl group binding graphene film is significantly shorter than that of the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene. The quantum efficiency and photocurrent density of CdSe aryl binding graphene were higher than those of the pyridine capping CdSe–graphene. It indicated that, in the competition between charge transfer effect and diffusion into the bulk liquid phase, CdSe aryl radical functionalized graphene could enable effective transport of electrons to the graphene surface compared to the CdSe pyridine capping graphene films. These results, thus, presented a new route to prepare GQ composite materials, which hold promise as new active or electrode materials in photovoltaic devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Government funded R&D program under the Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Republic of Korea.
Notes and references
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-T. Sun, Y. Yu, H.-Y. Pan, X.-F. Gao, Q. Chen and L.-M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yang, C. H. Huang, J. Zhai, Z. S. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1459 RSC .
P. Yu, K. Zhu, A. G. Norman, S. Ferrere, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25451 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; J. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. U. Hong, H. S. Kwack and D. K. Oh, ETRI J., 2004, 26, 475 CrossRef .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4300 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, J.-H. Yum, H. C. Leventis, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. A. Haque, P. Chen, S. I. Seok, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11600 CAS .
P. Brown and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dang, H. Yi, M. H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 755 CrossRef PubMed ; P. V. Kamat, K. G. Thomas, S. Barazzouk, G. Girishkumar, K. Vinodgopal and D. Meisel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10757 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, H. Murata and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16626 CAS .
X. Geng, L. Niu, Z. Xing, R. Song, G. Liu, M. Sun, G. Cheng, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Xu, L. Lu and L. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, B. Zhao, M. A. Hamon, K. Kamaras, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamaras, M. E. Itkis, H. Hu, B. Zhao and R. C. Haddon, Science, 2003, 301, 1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Delamar, R. Hitmi, J. Pinson and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5883 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liu and R. L. McCreery, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 11254 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bahr, J. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Kuo, R. L. McCreery and G. M. Swain, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 288 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; J. Wang and J. A. Carlisle, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2006, 15, 279 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Aldana, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Maneeprakorn, M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, H. C. Shim, S. Kim and C.-S. Han, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 324 CrossRef PubMed .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva and A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef PubMed .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee and C.-H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Overton and A. A. Mohamed, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 5500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Obushak, M. B. Lyakhovych and M. I. Ganushchak, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 9567 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Sun, I. A. Kinloch, D. Zhi, H. Sirringhaus and A. H. Windle, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Z. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, M. A. Correa-Duarte, V. Salgueiriño-Maceira, M. Giersig, R. Diaz and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 415 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pan, D. Cui, C. S. Ozkan, M. Ozkan, P. Xu, T. Huang, F. Liu, H. Chen, Q. Li, R. He and F. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 939 CAS .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. Chu, M. Wu, Z. Ye, Z. Cai, Y. Chang, S. Wang, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. Sun, I. A. Kinloch, D. Zhi, H. Sirringhaus and A. H. Windle, Chem. Mater., 2005, 18, 164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nethravathi, T. Nisha, N. Ravishankar, C. Shivakumara and M. Rajamathi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, H. Zhu, L. Jing, Y. Zhao and X. Gao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2009, 323, 610 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; R. Sharma, J. H. Baik, C. J. Perera and M. S. Strano, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 398 CrossRef PubMed ; H. Liu, S. Ryu, Z. Chen, M. L. Steigerwald, C. Nuckolls and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17099 CrossRef PubMed ; S. Niyogi, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, H. Zhang, K. Shepperd, J. Hicks, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger, C. N. Lau, W. A. deHeer, E. H. Conrad and R. C. Haddon, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4061 CrossRef PubMed ; K. N. Kudin, B. Ozbas, H. C. Schniepp, R. K. Prud'homme, I. A. Aksay and R. Car, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Barazzouk, S. Hotchandani, K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17015 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, K. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Geng, J. Zeng, N. Pan, L. Yan, X. Wang and J. G. Hou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of (a) the combination of pyridine capped QDs with graphene using the noncovalent approach (π–π interaction) to fabricate the QD–graphene films. (b) The grafting process of aryl diazonium cation functionalized CdSe to graphene via reduction of the CdSe diazonium salt: the CdSe aryl diazonium cation accepts one electron from the substrate and forms an aryl radical through the release of a nitrogen molecule. The aryl radical can then covalently react with the graphene surface.	 

 	Fig. 1  IR spectra of AmTP, AmTP functionalized CdSe nanoparticles and CdSe diazonium salt nanoparticles after diazotization. The spectrum of CdSe diazonium salt nanoparticles shows a diazonium (–NN–) stretching frequency at 2277 cm−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) AFM images of single sheet graphene oxide on a silicon substrate, (b) height of single sheet graphene oxide, (c) TEM image of single sheet CdSe aryl binding graphene composite. The inset is the energy dispersive X-ray spectrum confirming the presence of CdSe, (d) the selected area diffraction pattern of CdSe aryl binding graphene composite and (e) the high resolution TEM image of CdSe QDs on graphene.	 

 	Fig. 3  The absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) of CdSe and CdSe aryl binding graphene composite on a transparent electrode.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman G and D spectra of the CdSe aryl group functionalized graphene layer. The Raman spectra for reference sample, pyridine capping CdSe–graphene and graphene are also included.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-resolved fluorescence spectra of (a) bare CdSe, pyridine capping CdSe–graphene, and (b) CdSe aryl binding graphene films on a transparent electrode. The fitting results (solid curves) were also included for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 6  The photocurrent response of the CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene films on a flexible electrode to ON–OFF illumination under incident LED light (100 mW cm−2 and 100 W cm−2 at 525 nm).	 

 	Fig. 7  Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of the CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene films on a flexible electrode: IPCE (%) = IPCE (λ) = (1240 eV nm)Iph/λP0, where Iph is the incident photocurrent density in mA cm−2, λ is the wavelength of the incident radiation in nm, and P0 is the photon flux in mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 8  The (a) IMPS and (b) Bode diagram of IMVS of a GQ composite solar cell with CdSe pyridine and aryl binding graphene.	 

 	Fig. 9  Histogram of device parameters measured for 10 CdSe pyridine (brown color) and aryl binding (green color) graphene composite cells: (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
