2D single- and few-layered MXenes: synthesis, applications and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01572B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01572B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13651-136722D single- and few-layered MXenes: synthesis, applications and perspectives

        
          
            Longbo 
            Jiang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Ding 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinjuan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shaoyu 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hou 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xingzhong 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yaoning 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hui 
            Li
          
        
      *c
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Key Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Hunan University), Ministry of Education, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: jianglongbo@hnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
cState Key Laboratory of Utilization of Woody Oil Resource, Hunan Academy of Forestry, Changsha, 410004, China. E-mail: huili@hnlky.cn
Received 
      27th February 2022
    , Accepted 15th May 2022First published on 24th May 2022AbstractTransition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), as a promising class of two-dimensional inorganic compounds, are materials composed of a few atomic layers of transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbonitrides. The properties of an MXene can be ingeniously regulated according to the external strain and the number of layers in the crystals and thin films. Single- and few-layered MXenes (SFL-MXenes) show preferable properties, such as a low ion diffusion barrier, low open-circuit voltage, and high specific surface area. In this review, we comprehensively summarize current advances in SFL-MXene research. The fabrication of SFL-MXenes via both top-down and bottom-up strategies is summarized in detail. Top-down strategies involve HF etching, in situ HF etching, molten salt etching, and electrochemical etching methods. Bottom-up strategies involve chemical vapor deposition, self-assembly, and template-assisted growth approaches. Additionally, applications of SFL-MXenes, including energy storage, energy conversion, sensing, optoelectronic, optical device, electromagnetic, and environmental applications, are illustrated. Finally, future challenges faced by SFL-MXenes and their application potential are summarized. With increasing progress in fabrication approaches using controlled synthesis, the unusual properties of SFL-MXenes can be unveiled and exploited for various prospective applications.
1. Introduction
Early in 2004, Novoselov et al. discovered the truly novel transport properties of individual graphene sheets through mechanical exfoliation of graphite.1 For decades, the exfoliation of graphene and other layered materials to ultrathin nanosheets has attracted a tremendous amount of research in two-dimensional (2D) materials, which is attributed to their extraordinary construction, and electrochemical and optoelectronic properties.2–8 The introduction of 2D ultrathin layered materials allowed innovation in the performance of traditional devices, e.g. energy conversion and storage appliances, and gas and chemical sensors.9–16 Since then, studies related to 2D ultrathin layered materials have developed rapidly and researchers have gradually realized that it is possible to obtain unprecedented properties by tuning the number of atomic layers of any layered material.17,18
As a key member of 2D materials, transition metal carbide and nitride (MXene) has attracted extraordinary interest since its first discovery in 2011.19 In the past decade, comprehension of the varied properties of MXene has grown rapidly.20–28 MXene, with a typical layered structure, unlike graphene's single-atom-thick sheet of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, but similar to the construction of transition metal dichalcogenides, consists of a “sandwich” structure of a carbon or nitrogen layer between two transition metal layers (e.g., Ti, Mo, W).29,30 Generally, MXene is derived from hexagonal layered ternary transition metal carbides and nitrides (MAX phase) by etching “A” elements, in which M is an early transition metal, A is an element from group 13 or 14 (such as Al, Zn, Si, etc.), and X represents C or N (Fig. 1a–c). Owing to HF or fluoric salt always being used in the etching process, functional groups “T” are decorated on the surface of MXene and eventually described with the formula Mn+1XnTx (n = 1, 2, 3).31Fig. 1d shows a typical structure of MAX phases and the corresponding MXene.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the exfoliation process for Ti3AlC2. (a) The Ti3AlC2 structure. (b) Al atoms replaced by OH after reaction with HF. (c) The breakage of the hydrogen bonds and the separation of nanosheets after sonication in methanol. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2011, WILEY-VCH. (d) The structure of MAX phases and the corresponding MXenes. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH. 
Compared to the bulk materials, ultrathin 2D MXene expresses many miraculous structural, physical, chemical, electronic, and magnetic properties.13,32,33 More importantly, the attractive properties of ultrathin MXene render it auspicious for large-scale properties, such as energy conversion and storage,34–39 sensors,40–43 optical devices,44–46 and electromagnetic and environmental applications.47–51 With the rapid comprehensive research on ultrathin MXene materials, a growing interest of researchers is a focus on single- and few-layered MXene (SFL-MXene) rather than multilayered MXene materials to avoid the restacking of nanosheets to obtain superior performance and active sites. In comparison with bulk materials or traditional electronic materials, SFL-MXene may be likely to essentially withstand other forces like mechanical strain, making it possible to adjust its superior physicochemical properties.52 Importantly, the number of layers in MXene prominently affects its properties. Lipatov et al. detected that the resistivity of multilayer MXene flakes is slightly lower than that of monolayers. Exactly as Kamysbayev et al. detected, there is a kinetic burden to achieving the complete exchange of surface groups in stacked MXene.53 SFL-MXene shows preferable properties, such as a low ion diffusion barrier, low open circuit voltage and high specific surface area.54 In detail, Borysiuk and his co-workers explored ultrathin 2D titanium carbides by using first principles calculations and found that the mechanical properties and evolution of the atomic structure of 2D Tin+1Cn under tensile loading depend on the number of atomic layers n in MXene, which may indicate different mechanisms of mechanical failure existing in Tin+1Cn with different layer thicknesses.55 In addition, the highest Young's modulus was measured for the thinnest Ti2C carbide which was almost twice as high as that of Mo2S (E = 0.33 ± 0.07 TPa). Moreover, a much wider range of rheological properties of SL-MXene within the narrow scope of solid capacity in comparison with multilayered materials was proposed.20 Single- and multilayer Ti3C2Tx possessed completely different rheological properties at varied concentrations. The results revealed that partial elasticity could be detected in SL-MXene colloidal solution even at the lowest tested concentrations (<0.2 mg mL−1) resulting from the strong surface charge and excellent hydrophilicity of MXene, enabling it to be effortlessly manufactured at dilute concentrations. In another study, a variation from indirect to direct band gap was also observed in single-layer Sc2CO2 materials at a relatively light-critical tensile strain of about 2%.56 Recently, SFL-MXene has been widely used as a good experimental material both in theoretical and experimental research.22,56–61 In addition, many MXene-based composites and appliances have been manufactured making good use of SFL-MXene.62 In view of its above-mentioned advantages and auspicious prospects, SFL-MXene has become one of the hottest projects in a wide range of research fields.
Despite enormous efforts and lots of successful examples of SFL-MXene to date, the vast majority of currently published reviews mostly focus on the development of bulk MXene. Reviews related to SFL-MXene nanosheets are scarce. Considering the burgeoning tendency and importance of this field, we summarize recent advances in SFL-MXene materials. Initially, we introduce typical synthetic strategies, including top-down (such as HF etching, in situ HF etching, molten salt etching and electrochemical etching methods, etc.) and bottom-up (such as chemical vapor deposition, self-assembly and template-assisted growth, etc.) approaches. In addition, the applications of SFL-MXene, including energy storage, energy conversion, sensors, optoelectronics and optical devices are illustrated. Finally, a brief outlook and problems that confront SFL-MXene are summarized.
2. Top-down approaches for the fabrication of SFL-MXenes
The development of a rational synthetic strategy is critical to obtain ultrathin MXene nanosheets of high quality. Deviations in the manufacturing and after-treatment of MXene can result in material properties such as morphologies, lateral dimensions, and terminated groups being drastically dissimilar. Ultrathin MXene can be fabricated in the shape of SFL-MXene nanosheets following after-treatment (intercalation, acid washing, and so on). Furthermore, the surface-terminated groups (quantity and type of surface groups) can be tailored during the etching and after-treatment process. Top-down synthesis is designed to destroy the weak binding forces between the A sheet and MX sheet (metallic bond) in the MAX phase to produce single- or few-layered free-standing ultrathin MXene nanosheets via etching exfoliation and further delamination with ultrasonic or other mechanical methods.63 In these approaches, the chemical structure of the MAX precursor, composition of etchant and the kind of intercalating agent are all critical to obtain products with superior quality and satisfactory yield. Functional groups are formed on the surface of MXene (e.g. –OH, –F, –O). In this section, we will exhibit various synthetic procedures depending on the top-down strategy, including acid etching, ultrasonic exfoliation, mechanical exfoliation and electrochemical etching (Fig. 2a–d).54,64,65
 Fig. 2  (a) Model diagrams of the synthesis of accordion-like m-Nb2CTx and f-Nb2CTx nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti4N3Txvia the molten salt treatment of Ti4AlN3 at 550 °C under Ar, followed by the delamination of multilayered MXene using TBAOH. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The anodic etching of bulk Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte, with a schematic diagram of the etching and delamination processes. (d) The configuration of an electrochemical cell. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
2.1. Acid etching
As the most commonly used method for preparing bulk MXene, acid-assisted etching has also been applied for the synthesis of SFL-MXene.66–68 In particular, HF etching was the most frequently-used method for delamination of the bulky and rigid MAX phase, without the limitation of a precursor containing “Al” layers.19,45,66,69–75 In addition, the structure and property of the finally obtained MXene are affected by various experimental parameters, such as etchant concentration and response time. Recently, few-layered Ti3C2Tx and Nb2CTx have been synthesized by one-step etching of a MAX precursor by controlling the reaction conditions.54 In this study, few-layered Nb2CTx (denoted f-Nb2CTx) nanosheets were synthesized by etching 0.5 g of Nb2AlC powder with HF etchant (40% conc.) at 60 °C for 90 h under continuous stirring, while an accordion-like multilayered Nb2CTx was synthesized at 60 °C for 70 h (Fig. 2a).54 Lack of intermediate treatment by intercalators can obviate contaminating the purity of the sample by the effect of intercalator residuum. Meanwhile, many researchers also demonstrated that the construction of SFL-MXene mainly depended on the ternary ceramic materials just because of its special structure due to MXene generally being produced by selective etching of a particular atomic layer from the layered MAX phase. For instance, Deysher et al. introduced an FL-MXene with five atomic layers of double metal transition metals (Mo4VC4) by synthesizing its precursor Mo4VAlC4 phase with five atomic layers of transition metals.76
However, in HF-etched schemes, the path to SFL-MXene manufacture requires the handling of concentrated HF and a laborious multi-step procedure, which not only endanger the safety of experimenters but also result in a highly toxic and corrosive waste liquid.77 Thus, protocols involving in situ HF etchants have been encouraged, such as the use of a bifluoride etchant like ammonium bifluoride (NH4HF2) salts or by the addition of lithium fluoride (LiF) salt to hydrochloric acid (HCl). In situ HF production could simplify the synthesis process while also improving the performance of SFL-MXene in a variety of applications. For example, Sinha et al. elaborated the preparation of SFL-Ti3C2Tx by using 9 M HCl and 7.5 M molten fluoride salts (LiF).78 Surprisingly, strenuous manual shaking of colloidal Ti3C2Tx solution was enough to obtain isolated 2D SFL-Ti3C2Tx sheets. Additionally, the approach eliminated the use of supplementary intercalation with organic molecules such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or tetraalkylammonium hydroxides (TMAOH), which is often required under situations of HF or NH4HF2 etching. Compared with HF-produced SFL-MXene, this new approach does not lead to material losses and produces large fractions of SFL-MXene flakes with high yields, large lateral sizes, and good quality. Remarkably, acquired flakes with larger lateral dimensions that did not contain nanometer-size defects were frequently observed in HF-etched samples.
Although treatment in aqueous acidic solutions works well for producing carbide and carbonitride SFL-MXene, they fail to etch out A layers from nitride-based MAX phases. In order to enrich the varieties of prepared SFL-MXene, Urbankowski et al. explored a novel route to obtain titanium nitride single- and few-layered Ti4N3 (MXene) via etching Al atoms from Ti4AlN3 powder precursor in molten fluoride at 550 °C under an argon atmosphere (Fig. 2b).64 The molten fluoride salt mixture consists of 59 wt% of potassium fluoride, 29 wt% of LiF, and 12 wt% of sodium fluoride (NaF). In experiments, tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) and further treatment by sonication were employed to delaminate the multilayered Ti4N3Tx MXene into few- and single-layered flakes.79 Moreover, Li and his colleagues proposed redox-controlled A-layer etching in Lewis acidic melts to prepare SFL-MXene from unconventional ternary MAX-phase precursors with A elements Si, Zn, Ga.80 As shown in Fig. 3a–d, the Ti3SiC2 MAX precursor is submerged in molten CuCl2 at 750 °C. The exposed Si atoms were oxidized into Si4+ cations because of feeble Si–Ti binding in the Ti3C2 sublayers (eqn (1)). The excess Cu2+ partially interacts with the exposed Ti atoms to form metallic Cu, whereas charge compensation is accomplished by Cl− anions reacting to form Ti3C2Cl2 (eqn (2)). The reactions that make up the synthesis are as follows: Ti3SiC2 + 2CuCl2 → Ti3C2 + SiCl4(g)↑ + 2Cu(1) Ti3C2 + CuCl2 → Ti3C2Cl2 + Cu(2)
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams of Ti3C2Tx MXene preparation. (a) The Ti3SiC2 MAX phase is immersed in CuCl2 Lewis molten salt at 750 °C. (b and c) The reaction between Ti3SiC2 and CuCl2 results in the formation of Ti3C2Tx MXene. (d) MS-Ti3C2Tx MXene is obtained after further washing in ammonium persulfate (APS) solution. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
This mechanism is similar to that of delamination of TiAlC2 in HF solution: Cu2+ and Cl− act as H+ and F+, respectively. This synthetic methodology makes it possible to acquire SFL-MXene that is difficult or impossible to obtain by using traditional methods like HF etching.
However, high temperature is not conducive to further practical operation and production to some extent.81,82 Soon after, Jawaid et al. introduced halogen-based synthetic protocols (e.g., bromine, chlorine, or iodine) to fabricate SFL-MXene with homogeneous Cl, Br, or I surfaces at room temperature.83 In this newly developed scheme, the MAX phase acts as a catalytic site for halogen homolysis and further drives the etching reaction through the halogen radical mechanism and can be effectively isolated by the addition of stabilizing salts. In addition, the authors speculated that the above-mentioned molten salt preparation is also driven by an analogous halogen radical mechanism, in which thermal decomposition of transition metal halide salts leads to the formation of zero-valent transition metals and halogen substances.53 Meanwhile, Shi and his co-workers also demonstrated an iodine-assisted etching route to prepare 2D SFL-MXene (Ti3C2Tx, T = O, OH).84 In this etching process, the reactive I atoms formed by dissociation were absorbed and bonded with Ti atoms at the edge. Then the corresponding vacancies were filled by Ti atoms, along with successfully extracting Al atoms from the MAX precursor. FL-Ti3C2Tx was ultimately obtained after delamination in HCl solution.85 TEM, AFM, SAED, and HRTEM images further confirmed that most of the nanosheets are less than 5 nm in thickness and have larger lateral dimensions than those prepared by HF etching. More importantly, as demonstrated by the authors, the as-prepared product exhibited enhanced environmental stability due to its abundant oxidative groups as well as crystalline structure.86,87
Above all, several approaches have been developed to produce SFL-MXene, each of which has corresponding limitations and benefits, which cause disparate properties and therefore varied applications. As an example, milder etching methods favor the fabrication of materials with larger lateral size, while HF is better for obtaining SFL-MXene with small flake size and plenty of defects.88
2.2. Electrochemical etching
Nevertheless, conventional synthesis routes always used highly toxic etchants and quite a long etching time, which hinders further exploration of these promising 2D SFL-MXenes, especially restricting their biochemical application. For example, the F-residues on the surface of Nb2CTx are prone to releasing HF during hydrolysis reactions or electrochemical reactions.89 Furthermore, fluoride has an etching effect, which has a negative effect on capacitance and other appliances. Therefore, the development of fluoride-free synthesis procedures that are both innocuous and effective is urgently required. Generally, MAX-phase exfoliation procedures including chemical etching are inherently electrochemical processes which involve electron transfer as part of the surface reaction. Therefore, electrochemical etching could be regarded as a plausible alternative approach.90
In the process of electrochemical delamination, bulk layered materials are always used as working electrodes to achieve individual nanosheets, involving the interaction of ions, expansion of the layered electrodes and schism of the weak interlayer bonding.91–93 In 2017, Sun and his co-workers first reported an electrochemical etching method in low-concentration hydrochloric acid solution for the synthesis of SFL-Ti3C2Tx.94 However, the prepared product is prone to further removal of Ti atoms, leading to carbon-derived carbon on the surface.94 This may be attributed to the choice of electrolyte in accordance with previous studies.95 Subsequently, Yang et al. designed a binary aqueous system (NH4Cl and tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMA·OH)) for the fabrication of ultrathin Ti3C2Tx layers and eventually acquired FL-MXene (Ti3C2Tx, Tx = O, OH) with sizes up to 18.6 μm and high yield (over 90%) of mono- and bilayers (Fig. 2c).65 In this process, chloride ions enable the rapid etching of Al layers and sabotage the Ti–Al bonds. As depicted in Fig. 2d, the etching process was carried out in a two-electrode setup, where two pieces of bulk Ti3AlC2 were employed as anode and cathode. The anode went through the etching process while the cathode served as a counter electrode. Considering the limitation that etching reactions are preferentially performed on the surfaces, the etching performance of chloride-containing electrolytes is generally critical. Therefore, the interposition of ions into the layered structure anode is imperative to extend interlayer spacing and allow subsequent propagation of the electrolyte ions.94,96 Furthermore, since etching is a kinetically controlled process, the concentration of hydroxide is crucial. After 5 hours of reaction under ambient conditions, the exfoliated MXene products were connected and then transferred into 24 wt% TMA·OH. As revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the prepared ultrathin Ti3C2Tx nanosheets showed relatively large lateral dimensions (some large flakes up to 18.6 μm in diameter) and have irregular edges as well as a polydispersed size distribution (Fig. 4a and b). The average flake lateral dimension of about 2.4 μm of the prepared samples is confirmed to be equivalent to that produced by the in situ HF etching procedure according to statistical examination of 187 free-standing nanosheets rather than the extremely fragmental flakes with nanometer scale (100–400 nm) obtained by HF treatment (Fig. 4c).97 The transition electron microscope (TEM) image verified a typical Ti3C2Tx sheet with clear edges (Fig. 4d). Meanwhile, atomic force microscope (AFM) micrographs were employed to confirm that the majority (>90%) of the thickness is approximately 1.2 nm, which is equal to single layers. Additionally, bilayer sheets were also detectable because of the irresistible restacking in dispersion (Fig. 4e and f). In addition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) images demonstrated that the precursor was etched completely due to the Al peak disappearing and the presence of C–O and Ti–O bonds on the surface groups with negligible chloride, probably because chloride atoms prefer to attach to the boundaries (Fig. 4g–i).
 Fig. 4  Characterization of delaminated Ti3C2Tx: (a and b) SEM images, (c) the corresponding statistical size distribution, (d) a TEM image (inset: the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern), and (e and f) an AFM image and the related height profiles. (g) The XPS survey spectrum of Ti3C2Tx powder. (h and i) High-resolution C 1s and Ti 2p XPS spectra, respectively. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Meanwhile, another effective method to directly prepare delaminated SFL-Ti3C2Tx based on a controllable lithiation intercalation–alloying-expansion–microexplosion mechanism has been reported, without a further ultrasonication process.
Specifically, Al–Li alloys were formed by intercalating lithium ions into the Al layers as a result of electric field force. Simultaneously, the Al–Al layers were being expanded. Next, a reaction between Al–Li layers and water occurred to generate hydrogen when the lithiated MAX was immersed in water. Indeed, high-yield SFL-MXene was successfully exfoliated from the MAX ternary precursor on the strength of the microexplosion mechanism (Fig. 5). Additionally, it should be noted that the major reagent was water, avoiding the introduction of pernicious reagents into the synthetic procedures.98 This approach further expanded the variety of ceramic MAX phases, given that A-layer elements could be employed as anode materials in Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 5  A schematic diagram of the lithiation intercalation–expansion–microexplosion process. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Besides, the configuration and characteristics of the prepared SFL-MXene could be simply regulated by altering voltage, electrolyte, and other operating conditions. In that case, the convenience, steerability, and environmental friendliness of the electrochemical etching method are superior to other approaches.99 Nevertheless, few captivating achievements have been made, and many limitations and drawbacks for the electrochemical procedure remain to be figured out. Generally, the conditions of the electrochemical etching procedure for the delamination of bulk MAX precursor are different from those in the conventional electrochemical situation because of electrochemical polarization, which hinders the measurement of MXene growth and investigation of the experimental mechanism.91
2.3. Delamination of multilayered MXenes
After an ordinary and conventional etching procedure, the finally acquired MXene always has an accordion-like stacked multilayered structure rather than single- or few-layered, which would limit its performance. For this point, intercalation and delamination of the new 2D solids is a crucial procedure for enhancing comprehension of their preeminent properties. Advantageously, since the strong M–A bonds have been superseded by weak bonds like hydrogen and van der Waals forces, interlayer forces are weaker than the interplanar forces, which makes modification of the interlayer space and delamination of multilayered MXene possible.
As expounded above, different strengths of valence bonds enable the utilization of intercalating agents (IAs) like ions or molecules, followed by mechanical treatment to destroy the interlayer binding of bulk-layered MXene for the synthesis of SFL-MXene.100,101 On the one hand, the interpolation of IAs could expand the interlayer space and c-lattice parameter and thus accelerate the mechanical exfoliation process.102 On the other hand, ultrasonication treatment could expedite the rate of intercalation of compounds into multilayered MXene. Organic molecules such as DMSO, organic amines, and tetraalkylammonium salts as well as an aqueous solution of ionic compounds, are widely employed for delamination.103 Note that the setting of delamination treatment parameters greatly affects the morphology, quality, stability, and yield of prepared MXene.103 Taking the amplitude of devices as an example, which is of great importance for cavitation during the ultrasonication procedure, higher amplitudes can easily lead to a violent impact due to the bubbles breaking, reducing the stability of MXene. Moreover, excessive or prolonged exposure to ultrasonic conditions may result in the appearance of AlF3 and degradation of MXene, as shown in the work by Rajavel et al.104 In short, sonication-assisted treatment remains the most frequently used tactic. Indeed, apart from treatment by ultrasonication, high-energy mechanical milling methods in organic solvents and flash-freezing-assisted delamination have been developed to prepare SFL-MXene, but still need further research, as shown in Fig. 6.105,106 In the water freezing-and-thawing (FAT) method, multilayered MXene was exfoliated to produce SFL-MXene materials with special wrinkles due to the volume expansion of intercalated water. And the results also demonstrated that the production yield can drastically increase to 81.4% via treatment by a combination of different approaches. This protocol could encourage future studies to boost the production of SFL-MXene with small or large flake sizes and facilitate some size-dependent research into MXene.107
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of few-layered MXene via flash-freezing-assisted delamination. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) A schematic illustration of the scale delamination of few-layered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets via HEMM with DMSO solvent. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In summary, the delamination process always took place in organic molecules or inorganic salts under the assistance of ultrasonication, mechanical milling or flash freezing, which is efficient for the preparation of SFL-MXene. Delamination under sonication treatment settles the problem of a time-consuming reaction. Microexplosion could be a promising approach which needs further investigation in the near future. Afterwards, there was a lack of investigation focused on the systematic mechanism. In other words, more systematic research into condition optimization for the exfoliation of multilayered MXene is urgently needed.104
3. Bottom-up approaches for the fabrication of SFL-MXenes
Although top-down strategies are the most frequently used for acquiring SFL-MXene, bottom-up tactics are also becoming more appealing. Unlike the previously mentioned top-down method, the bottom-up method can directly prepare SFL-MXene without derivation from the ternary MAX precursor. The bottom-up strategy, which always uses construction atom by atom to fabricate innovative materials, can realize the more precise regulation of designable MXene structures.108 This can be appropriate for manufacturing SFL-MXene that is difficult to acquire by the above top-down method. Up to now, several bottom-up approaches have been widely employed for the fabrication of MXene with controlled thickness and morphology.109–111 Normally, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is the most commonly utilized method to produce ultrathin MXene film (Fig. 7a). Other inventive approaches, including self-assembly and template-assisted growth methods are also elaborated in the following section.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagrams showing bottom-up synthetic strategies for the fabrication of ultrathin MXene films. (a) Chemical vapor deposition synthesis: a schematic diagram showing the growth of Mo2C crystals under low and high flow rates of CH4. Thick Mo2C crystals with different shapes are randomly distributed on the Cu surface at low CH4 concentration, whereas at higher CH4 concentrations, the growth of predominantly hexagonal-shaped, thin Mo2C flakes on graphene is seen. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (b) A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of porous Mo2C film via template-assisted growth for 2D TMCs (transition metal carbides). Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Transition metal ions such as Mo5+, W6+, and Co2+ are mixed in a gelatin-mediated hydrogel with rich functional groups as ligands. (d and e) At elevated temperature, the ion–gelatin solution undergoes a lamellar assembly process that results in a layer-by-layer organized matrix. (f) GIWAXS analysis of an Mo–gelatin template as an example to show that gelatin constrains the metal ions laterally between the layers. (g) When carbonized under a CH4/H2 atmosphere above 600 °C, the gelatin templates constrain the conversion of metal ions laterally between the layers, forming nanocrystalline 2D TMCs. CH4 was used here to increase the carbon content and H2 was used to suppress oxidation. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. 
3.1. Chemical vapor deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been the most commonly utilized technology for generating relatively pure materials with a controlled structure at the atom or nanoscale level from the chemical reactions of gaseous reactants in an active (heat, light, plasma) environment over the past 30 years.112 Recently, CVD has been used to synthesize SFL-MXene materials. For instance, Geng and his colleagues developed a large-area synthesis of Mo2C thin film via a one-step direct procedure in in situ grown graphene substrates by a molten-copper-catalysed CVD method (Fig. 8).113 The critical feature of this system is that it avoids the necessity of transfer that frequently occurs during the growth of vertically layered 2D heterostructures. The previous synthesis tactics generally prepared SFL-MXene nanosheets with small crystal sizes and nonuniform thickness.
 Fig. 8  The growth of large-area Mo2C crystals and film. Schematic diagrams showing the nucleation and coalescence of Mo2C crystals grown on graphene. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. 
In 2015, Xu and his co-workers fabricated high-quality ultrathin α-Mo2C crystals with a thickness of a few nanometers and a lateral dimension of over 100 μm by using a CVD approach at a temperature beyond 1085 °C. In detail, methane acted as the carbon source and Cu foil placed on Mo foil worked as the substrate and reactant.116 Specifically, in the process, the Cu was melted and then formed Mo–Cu alloys at the liquid Cu–Mo contact interface under a high growth temperature. Following that, Mo atoms spread from the contact to the surface of the liquid Cu, where they combined with the carbon atoms formed by methane breakdown to create Mo2C crystals. The concentration of methane has great significance for the formation of ultrathin α-Mo2C films instead of graphene. In this study, from the typical optical pattern, the thickness and lateral size of the obtained most crystals were 3–20 nm and ∼10 μm, respectively. Moreover, the uniformity of thickness of the Mo2C crystals was verified, and they ranged from ∼6 nm to ∼11 nm. At the same time, the researchers found that the morphology, like the thickness and lateral dimension of the α-Mo2C ultrathin films, can be simply tailored by adjusting the experimental parameters. The nucleation density was in direct proportion to the growth temperature, and the lateral size increased with growth time. The ultrathin α-Mo2C films with a consistent thickness of ∼3 nm were fabricated for 3 min at 1092 °C, equivalent to single- or bilayer Mo2C nanosheets. At a low growth temperature, no obvious increase in thickness is observed with growth time, whereas there is an increase at a high growth temperature. Following this work, Turker et al. demonstrated the effects of reaction temperature, duration, copper thickness, and CH4 flow rate on the final morphology and thickness of ultrathin Mo2C crystals.77 In the CVD growth of Mo2C, the Cu layer functions as a valve or membrane, regulating the supply of Mo for the fabrication of 2D Mo2C crystals. When 1 layer Cu was used, floral Mo2C crystals were obtained with a thickness reaching 200 nm. In contrast, ultrathin Mo2C crystals (about 20 nm) with well-defined facets were developed in the case of employing 5 Cu layers.
Notably, no single layers of MXene have been generated using the CVD technique thus far, but rather ultrathin films comprised of a few layers. Sang et al. investigated the homoepitaxial Frank–van der Merwe atomic layer growth mechanism of TiC single adlayers synthesized on surfaces of Ti3C2 MXene substrates by in situ aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 9a).117 Specifically, the Ti and C atoms migrated from Ti3C2 flakes to hexagonal Ti (h-Ti) surface planes of single-layer Ti3C2, which worked as the growth substrate, to endorse homoepitaxial growth. At temperatures over 500 °C, hexagonal TiC single adlayers developed on defunctionalized surfaces of Ti3C2 MXene, triggered by thermal exposure and electron-beam irradiation, producing novel 2D materials Ti4C3 and Ti5C4 (Fig. 9b). Heating at 1000 °C significantly accelerates the homoepitaxial growth process and enhances the Ti5C4 and Ti4C3 regions compared with those formed at 500 °C (Fig. 9c–e). The authors elucidated the growth mechanism for a single TiC adlayer and the energies that govern atom migration and dispersion by overall density functional theory and force-bias Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics simulations. This makes the bottom-up synthesis methods using substrates terminated with similar hexagonal-metal surfaces possible, which open the door to synthesis tactics for single- and few-layered transition metal carbides (TMCs) with higher quality and controllable architectures.
 Fig. 9  The homoepitaxial growth of MXene. (a) A schematic diagram of the homoepitaxial growth process to form single-layer h-TiC on a monolayer Ti3C2 substrate through electron-beam irradiation and heating. Ti atoms from different layers are represented using different shades of blue. (b) Experimental (EXP) and simulated (SIM) STEM images of Ti4C3 and Ti5C4, and the corresponding crystal structures projected along the [001] and [100] zone axes. (c) An atomic resolution STEM image acquired from monolayer Ti3C2Tx along the [001] zone axis at room temperature. Areas of Ti vacancies are indicated by white dotted circles. The inset shows a comparison between the atomic resolution STEM image and projected crystal structure of Ti3C2Tx. (d) An STEM image acquired after the heating and electron-beam irradiation of monolayer Ti3C2 flakes inside the microscope at 500 °C. The black areas are pores, while areas framed by green, blue, and black dashed lines are the substrate (Ti3C2), nanoscale areas of a single h-TiC adlayer on one surface (Ti4C3) and nanoscale areas of single h-TiC adlayers on both surfaces (Ti5C4), respectively. (e) An STEM image acquired after heating MXene flakes inside the microscope at 1000 °C. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Nature Research. 
3.2. Other synthetic methods for SFL-MXenes
According to prior reports, SFL-MXene can be prepared by utilization of the CVD method on metal layers or graphene, but chemical and safety hazards exist, with harsh conditions (e.g., an ultrahigh vacuum or high temperature). In that case, other advanced innovative and adaptable approaches for synthesizing SFL-MXene are strongly needed to better accelerate further research and practical applications.
Given previous studies, self-assembly, an old-line strategy since the 1950s, via fitting of metal ions and peptides, is potentially reasonable for the construction of well-regulated SFL-MXene.89 By using carbide-forming metals, a nanostructured hydrogel may be created that can then be converted into TMCs with supramolecular dimensionality. For instance, in work by Zang et al., ultrathin TMCs were prepared via a self-assembly method.115 The thickness and literal dimension of the prepared films were approximately 10 nm and >100 μm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 7c, gelatin hydrogel was used as a framework to combine with metal ions like Mo5+, W6+, and Co2+, forming an ultrathin film architecture of various TMC nanosheets. The corresponding MoCx, WCx, CoCx, and metal-rich hybrids (Mo2−xWxC and W/Mo2C–Co) could be obtained by using a carbonation process at 600 °C, which provided an effortless procedure (Fig. 7g). In detail, the polymeric phases of metal carbide degradation materials accumulated spontaneously at the hydrogel air/liquid interface due to the buoyancy–Marangoni effect, when the complex of hydrogel and metal ions was heated (Fig. 7d–f).118 Therefore, the self-assembly and sorting of gelatin hydrogel could regulate the original materials to configurations that can further convert to dimensionally conserved nanostructures.119,120 Moreover, using this self-assembly scheme, Mo2C decorated by Co nanoparticles has also been synthesized.115 It is worth noting that the hydrogel's supramolecular 2D configuration drastically reduces the formation energy of both Mo2C and W2C, allowing them to be formed at lower temperatures (600 °C) than former studies of the carbonization of MXene (at 1600 °C).121
Moreover, Liu et al. developed a novel method for growing ultrathin β-Mo2C films via in situ growth of the carbide on a self-assembled graphene oxide (GO) material.114 GO was selected as a template for the fabrication of Mo2C films due to the fact that it can be simply constructed into versatile films or polyporous bubbles using various methods, such as vacuum-assisted infiltration, self-assembly approaches and freeze drying (Fig. 7b).122,123 In the fabrication procedure, lightweight flexible Mo2C films were fabricated by annealing treatment of self-assembly derived GO/Mo precursor film. In particular, with the help of ultrasonic treatment as well as a magnetic stirrer, ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate and GO initially formed a conspecific colloform. The green body films were subsequently shucked off and assembled between two graphite papers, followed by annealing in an alumina furnace at 750 °C for 12 hours. During the heating process, the Mo6+ ions reacted in situ with the reduced GO layers, leading to the formation of Mo2C.
However, existing routes have yet to be widely employed for further massive commercialization owing to their complexity, high fabrication cost and low efficiency. In comparison to the widespread utilized top-down approaches, the bottom-up strategies enable better accurate regulation of MXene experimental parameters, leading to higher material quality. So far, other innovative approaches, such as molecular beam epitaxy, pulsed magnetron-sputtering and pulsed laser deposition, have been utilized for the fabrication of other 2D materials or multilayered MXene, but not for SFL-MXene.124–126 Further explorations via bottom-up synthesis routes are required to scale up the preparation of SFL-MXene.
4. Applications of SFL-MXenes
In view of their unique physicochemical properties as well as the abundance of structural varieties, SFL-MXene materials have been utilized in a wide range of fields. In this section, we summarize the applications of ultrathin MXene films, including energy storage, energy conversion, optoelectronics and optical devices, sensors, and electromagnetic and environmental applications.
4.1. Energy storage
With population growth and industrialization, one of the world's most significant concerns is energy scarcity. Thus, studies into clean, renewable energy sources and energy storage devices, including lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and solar cells critically need to be further developed. Due to their excellent electrical conductivity and efficient ion transport, SFL-MXenes have been demonstrated to be favorable electrode materials in electrochemical capacitors or various rechargeable battery applications (such as Li-ion, Na-ion, and Li–S batteries).

4.1.1. Metal-ion batteries. 
Featuring extraordinary physical and chemical properties, 2D-material-based rechargeable batteries have become a focal point of current research fields due to their high reversible capacity, high energy density, and superior cyclability. A major hindrance to the advancement of these devices is the unavailability of appropriate electrode materials with satisfying battery performance.
As a result, developing new electrode materials, particularly those with a large capacity for energy storage, will greatly promote the innovation of battery technology. Owing to the excellent electronic characteristics during intercalation and inherent metallicity, SFL-MXenes have been extensively explored for usage in batteries.127 Tang et al. investigated the electronic properties and Li storage capability of SFL-Ti3C2Tx and its fluorinated and hydroxylated derivatives by using density functional theory (DFT) computations. The results demonstrated the intensive Coulomb connection generated between Li adsorption and Ti3C2-based hosts, yet maintaining their structure as well as the naked Ti3C2 single layer showing a low threshold to Li migration and a large capacity for Li preservation.25 Moreover, Gao et al. developed research on the usage of ultrathin Ti3C2Tx MXene modified with TiO2 quantum dots as sulfur hosts in Li–S batteries by a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide-assisted solvothermal method.128 The ultrathin structure and conductivity enabled fast electron migration, while the superb flexibility ensured high mechanical properties (Fig. 10a and b). Afterwards, Rao et al. prepared an MXene/polypropylene (PP) hybrid membrane by spraying the obtained few-layered MXene on the PP separator interface, which can effectively improve the electrochemical performance of Ni-rich LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (NCM811) (Fig. 11a).129 The loading of few-layered MXene with negative charges could successfully suppress the diffusion of high-valent metal (Ni/Co/Mn) ions in nickel-rich NCM811 to the negative electrode because of a combined influence from configurational restrictions and chemical adsorption. Fig. 11b verifies that the mechanism illustration of the MXene/PP device increased the performance of the NCM811. The result shows that the Li/NCM811 cell with an MXene/PP separator could represent higher specific discharge capacities in comparison to an individual PP cell at different rates and remained at 166.2 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with ∼90.7% retention during 0.5C current density cycling (Fig. 11c–e). The authors analyzed whether the enhancement in NCM811 electrochemical performance may be attributed to the sputtered few-layered MXene, which can be compatibly employed to enhance the cycle stability and reserve/release excess Li ions of NCM811 by adjusting the volume size. Therefore, it was verified that the introduction of SFL-MXene could efficiently enhance the actual specific capacity, reduce the ionic migration interval, and avoid the formation of dendrites in the reaction process. In another study, Rajput et al. explored the properties of single-layer calcium carbide (SL-Ca2C) MXene for Li, Na, and K ion battery applications.127 The ultra-low diffusion barriers are 0.027, 0.059, and 0.028 eV for Li, Na, and K alkali ions, respectively, which demonstrated the superior operability and cycle performance (metal adsorption and desorption) of SL-Ca2C. The electronic characteristics analysis verified that SL-Ca2C can maintain metallicity through a period of metal ion absorption, which is in favour of accelerating charge diffusion.
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of MXene (Ti3C2Tx) nanosheets from Ti3AlC2via LiF/HCl etching, the growth of TiO2 QDs on MXene nanosheets via CTAB-assisted solvothermal synthesis, and the fabrication of a TiO2 QDs@MXene/S cathode via the chemisorption of S8 molecules. (b) A strategy for suppressing the shuttling effects of polysulfides via the growth of TiO2 QDs on MXene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic diagram of the assembly of an MXene/PP diaphragm. (b) A schematic diagram of the mechanism of using MXene/PP to enhance NCM811 performance. (c) The cycling performances of PP and MXene/PP cells. (d) The rate performance and (e) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of PP and MXene/PP cells. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2020, MDPI. 


4.1.2. Supercapacitors. 
In comparison to batteries, supercapacitors provide alternative energy storage with high power density but poor energy density. Thus, one of the most important research issues is the enhancement of the volumetric capacity of supercapacitors. SFL-MXenes, with electronic configuration, enormous specific surface area, and varied active sites, are considerable up-and-coming materials for supercapacitors.
Li et al. conducted research on the usage of FL-MXene in supercapacitor electrode materials. In a typical experiment, an array of as-prepared Fe2O3 growing on carbon cloth were immersed into FL-MXene flakes to completely coat the Fe2O3/carbon cloth (CC) fibers with FL-MXene, which can efficiently enhance the loading amounts of active substances on carbon cloth while simultaneously increasing its area capacitance (Fig. 12).130 The as-synthesized FL-MXene composites supplied excess capacitance to the flexible electrode and accelerated the rapid kinetics for electron diffusion due to shortening transfer pathways. In addition, owing to the emergence of a hollow-core construction between FL-MXene and Fe2O3, considerable surface area and additional Li+ storage were developed. In the case of a power density of 22.55 mW cm−3, the as-built FL-MXene-based ASC appliance exhibited a greater power density of 1.61 mW h cm−3 while maintaining good stability. Besides, Hu et al. synthesized thick MXene film electrodes with no binder/conductive agents by assembling exfoliated FL-MXene nanosheets.131 In comparison to other carbon-related materials based on-chip micro-supercapacitors (MSCs), FL-MXene-based MSCs displayed a sevenfold increase in area capacitance, reaching 71.16 mF cm−2 after laser-cutting pattern treatment.
 Fig. 12  A schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2TxMXene and MXene@Fe2O3/CC. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4.2. Energy conversion
Given the increasingly serious environmental contaminants and energy scarcity resulting from immoderate usage of conventional resources, it is critical that clean and renewable energy is acquired, originating from plentiful resources on earth.132 Thus, the exploration of energy transformation techniques is urgently needed.133 SFL-MXenes with large surface area, electrochemical nature, regulated morphology, and luxuriant active sites are regarded as satisfactory candidates for energy conversion appliances, including the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).

4.2.1. Hydrogen evolution reaction. 
As one part of the water electrolysis reaction, the HER process provides widely extensive clean energy H2. Compared with conventional noble metal catalysts, SFL-MXene-based materials are advantageously fungible by means of relatively low prices. In particular, it should be noted that the hydrogen bonding energy of SFL-Mo2C is analogous to that in a conventional HER Pt catalyst, making its use as a competitive material possible.
William et al. explored the intrinsic activity of single- and multilayered molybdenum carbide (β-Mo2C) nanosheets for HER experiments.134 The β-Mo2C nanosheets were prepared via delamination and centrifugal separation from layered oxide materials. As shown in Fig. 13a and b, the single-layered β-Mo2C exhibited a mass activity of 59.3 ± 6 mA mg−1 Mo2C at a −0.2 V reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is about tenfold that of multilayered β-Mo2C counterparts (5.3 ± 2 mA mg−1 Mo2C). This phenomenon is ascribed to the large surface areas and more active groups on which the binding energy of H is optimized for the reaction. As demonstrated by the authors, the increasing activity of single-layered β-Mo2C was caused by enhanced inherent activity and amounts of exposed active sites. Furthermore, as demonstrated by a cyclic stability test, single-layered β-Mo2C still possessed consistent mass activities at −0.2 V RHE after 10000 cycles. In addition to the individual MXene materials, MXene-based nanocomposites have also been used in energy-related fields. Xie et al. explored the photocatalytic performance of CuS/Ti3C2Tx compounds via a straightforward ligand-exchange technique.70 In detail, they first synthesized multilayered Ti3C2Tx materials with an HF reagent from a ternary MAX precursor. Then, delaminated single-layered Ti3C2Tx was fabricated through intercalation treatment (TMAOH). The CuS/Ti3C2Tx compound was finally achieved via in situ reactive synthesis (Fig. 14a). Compared with other composites by a series of measurements, as-prepared CuS/few-layered Ti3C2Tx (FL-Ti3C2Tx) materials were observed to show top photocatalytic performance. The hydrogen production speed of CuS/FL-Ti3C2Tx may be up to 4.245 μmol g−1 h−1, which is almost 1.42 and 1.49 times higher those of pure CuS and Ti3C2Tx, respectively (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 13  The HER activities of single- and multilayered-Mo2C with catalyst loadings of 30 L g−1 and 40 L g−1, respectively, in Ar-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte at 1600 rpm and 20 °C: (a) polarization curves; and (b) the mass activities of catalysts during the 1st, 3000th, and 10000th cycles. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 14  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthetic process for the deposition of CuS NCs on layered MXene. (b) The photocatalytic activities of pristine CuS, multilayered MXene (denoted multilayered Mx), few-layered MXene (denoted few-layered Mx), and various CuS/MXene nanocomposites for H2 generation. The CuS-deposited multilayered MXenes were obtained with different S:Ti weight ratios, as displayed. The typical CuS-deposited few-layered MXene was denoted S:Tifew = 1:2. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.2. Oxygen reduction reaction. 
Advances in state-of-the-art technologies, such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries, enable the creation of viable substitute options for resolving environmental challenges and rising energy scarcity. Electrocatalysts with enhanced activity and durability for the ORR process are considered necessary for the mainstream utilization of fuel cells. Considering that SFL-MXene has a large hydrophilic surface with prominent conductivity and stability, it should show promise in electrocatalytic applications. For instance, several reports have discussed electrocatalysis related to SFL-MXene-based materials, such as overlapping g-C3N4 and Ti3C2 nanosheet composites as OER catalysts, and MXene–Ag combinations for the ORR process.
Very recently, Lin et al. explored the ORR performance of ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheets and the activity in alkaline media of the obtained Ti3C2 MXene-based catalyst.75 Free-standing ultrathin 2D MXene nanosheets were successfully fabricated from bulky and rigid MAX-phase ceramics by liquid exfoliation and TPAOH disintegration (Fig. 15a). Digital photographs verified their excellent dispersity and hydrophilicity (Fig. 15b). TEM characterization demonstrated the typical planar morphology of exfoliated single-layered Ti3C2 (SL-Ti3C2) and the SAED image confirmed the unchanged hexagonal symmetry structure (Fig. 15c–e). As shown in Fig. 15f and h, the statistical thickness allocation of as-synthesized Ti3C2 observed by AFM displayed sample heights of about 0.5–2.0 nm, consistent with the dimension of single-layer or double-layer Ti3C2 nanosheets in thickness. The TEM images revealed the transverse dimension is about 150 nm (Fig. 15g). Remarkably, SL-Ti3C2 expressed a higher positive ORR onset potential, ∼0.85 V comparative to RHE, and a larger peak current density than Ti3AlC2 or multilayered Ti3C2 (ML-Ti3C2) (Fig. 15i). The lowest Rct of SL-Ti3C2 demonstrated the highest conductibility, which is the key to expediting ORR reactivity. Furthermore, the stabilized current density acquired was 2.3 mA cm−2 for SL-Ti3C2 after 2000 cycles, in spite of a trifling reduction relative to the initial CV cycle (Fig. 15k).
 Fig. 15  (a) A schematic diagram of the ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheet fabrication process, including HF etching (delamination) and TPAOH intercalation (disintegration). (b) Digital photographs, (c and d) SEM images, and (e) a HRTEM image (the inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern) of SL Ti3C2. (f) A typical AFM image of Ti3C2 nanosheets. (g) Lateral size and thickness distribution analysis of Ti3C2 nanosheets. (h) An AFM 3D view of a selected area in (f). (i) CV curves of Ti3AlC2, ML-Ti3C2, and SL Ti3C2 in O2-saturated (solid curves) and N2-saturated (dashed curves) 0.1 mol L−1 KOH at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (j) Nyquist plots of Ti3AlC2, ML-Ti3C2, and SL-Ti3C2 recorded from EIS measurements in O2-saturated 0.1 mol L−1 KOH at a constant potential of 0.82 V (vs. RHE). (k) CV curves of SL-Ti3C2 before and after cycling for 2000 cycles in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH saturated with O2 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 

4.3. Optoelectronics and optical devices
Since the first laser emerged, nonlinear optical (NLO) materials have drawn considerable attention as an essential structural component of laser optics, photonics circuits, and optical communication. Recently, Jiang et al. explored the broadband NLO device response of few-layered Ti3C2Tx flakes in the near-infrared region.135 In their report, in a spectral region varying from 800 nm to 1800 nm, effective saturable absorption of marginal lossy nonlinear absorption compositions is observed, and the therefore the maximum nonlinear absorption coefficient (eff) is approximately 10−21 m2 V−2 (or 10−13 esu), which is directly analogous to or higher than results estimated for other 2D materials. The possibility of an effective broadband optical switch is firmly demonstrated by mode-locking operations at 1066 and 1555 nm utilizing Ti3C2Tx as saturable absorbers. It is relatively easy to generate a highly steady femtosecond laser with pulse durations as short as 159 fs in the telecommunication window. Then, Dong and his co-workers unraveled the optical nonlinearity of MXene and confirmed that the degree of saturation could be easily tunable by changing the film thickness.136 The dielectric coefficient crossing point was found to be closely related to film thickness, with ε1 in thinner films achieving negative data at longer wavelengths. These effects indicated that nonlinear optical characteristics may show thickness dependence analogous to linearity transmission. The saturation fluence for Ti3C2Tx also varies inversely with film thickness. In another report, Song et al. prepared a novel all-optical device by depositing few-layered MXene on a microfiber, to explore the nonlinear optical response at the telecommunication band.45 The as-synthesized MXene-based optical fiber was expected to be utilized as an all-optical wavelength converter on the strength of the four-wave mixing (FWM) effect of nonlinear optical samples. An optical wavelength converter is a key device in an optical communication system. The efficiency of the FWM-based method is comparable for the reported materials, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, topological insulators and black phosphorus. In the experiment, no optical damage to the MXene sample was observed. The authors also verified that the damage threshold of the facility can be enhanced by functionalization treatment with an evanescent field and further employed for the fabrication of fiber-based FWM. Moreover, the device converts the modulating signal reach to 10 GHz with a transform efficiency of 59 dB, disregarding the presence of an erbium-doped fiber amplifier.
4.4. Sensors
Apart from energy storage, energy conversion, and optoelectronic and optical devices, sensor-related applications are another promising field for ultrathin MXene. As-prepared SFL-MXenes have various functional terminations on their surface with strong hydrophilicity and facile functionalization.
Gas sensing is regarded as a significant challenge for the next generation of wearable sensors. The unique surface structure of SFL-MXene is propitious for absorbing various gas molecules. Early in 2015, Yu et al. investigated the adsorption of NH3, H2, CH4, CO, CO2, N2, NO2, and O2 on monolayer Ti2CO2 to explore its potential application in gas sensing or capture by using first-principles simulation.137 They indicated that only NH3 could be chemisorbed on the monolayer Ti2CO2 compared with other gas molecules and the adsorption energy of NH3 on Ti2CO2 is −0.37 eV, which is suitable for the adsorption/desorption of gases on/from a solid surface (Fig. 16). Afterwards, Wu and his co-workers reported Ti3C2-based sensors with high selectivity for NH3 detection at room temperature.138 In detail, the single-layer Ti3C2 was fabricated by etching off Al atoms from Ti3AlC2 and via subsequent intercalation and ultrasonic treatment. Then a colloidal suspension of single-layer Ti3C2 was coated on the surface of ceramic tubes to construct sensors for gas detection. The samples exhibited 4 times higher responsiveness than the second highest response (1.5% to ethanol). According to an examination of theoretical computations, the authors attributed the selectivity for NH3 to the comprehensive effect of adsorption energy, adsorbed geometry, and charge diffusion. Additionally, it was identified that manufactured Ti3C2-based sensors exhibit high reproducibility when exposed to ammonia at ambient temperature, with a minimum detectability of 10 ppm.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustrations giving (a) side and (b) top views of the adsorption of NH3, H2, CH4, CO, CO2, N2, NO2, or O2 molecules on monolayer Ti2CO2. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to gas sensors, ultrathin MXenes can also be utilized as chemical sensors due to their electric properties. This is precisely attributable to the good electrical conductivity and functional group terminations of MXene, which is propitious for forming a stabilized hydrophilic colloid and capable of bonding with a wide variety of species. Sinha et al. reported colloidal SFL-Ti3C2Tx nanosheets as an electrochemical sensor for the prompt electroanalysis filtration of carbamate pesticide.78 The delaminated Ti3C2Tx flakes were utilized to fabricate thin-film electrodes to evaluate the detection sensitivity for pesticides, based on the unitary differential pulse voltammetry respondence to pesticide in 0.5 M H2SO4. The experimental results confirmed that methiocarb and diethofencarb oxidization signals can be simply separated based on a potential difference of 0.35 V, facilitating the selective detection of methiocarb and diethofencarb. Later, You and his co-workers fabricated the Ti3C2Tx/polypyrrole composites and then deposited them across a vitreous carbon electrode to explore the synchronous detection of dopamine and uric acid under the disturbance effect of ascorbic acid (Fig. 17a).139 As-prepared single-layer Ti3C2Tx benefits the in situ growth of polypyrrole nanowires and provides more active electrochemical sites. Further, the experimental findings confirmed that the heterostructures of composites can facilitate the workload of a target contaminant and the efficiency of electron transport. In addition, Desai et al. investigated the luminescence quenching of ultrasmall Ti3C2 nanosheets for the selective detection of metal ions of Ag+ and Mn2+ (Fig. 17b).140 The quenching phenomenon of the Ti3C2 fluorescence emission peaks was observed in the presence of Ag+ and Mn2+ ions. Moreover, the favorable linear relationship between I0/I and concentration should be considered with certain amounts of Ag+ and Mn2+ ions (0.1–40 μM, 0.5–60 μM, respectively).
 Fig. 17  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis of a MXene/PPy nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2021, MDPI. (b) A schematic representation of the preparation of fluorescent ultrasmall Ti3C2 nanosheets and their application in the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of Ag+ and Mn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
4.5. Electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding
According to previous research, the conductivity of SFL-MXene is higher than that of multilayered MXene, and therefore it is certified as a potential candidate for the enhancement of EMI performance.135,141–143 Shahzad et al. found that MXene materials with good electrical conductivity and flexibility can provide EMI shielding with minimal thickness.144 That is especially true when they are processed into thin films, which benefit from the outstanding electrical conductivity of the prepared films and the multiple internal reflections of the Ti3C2Tx sheet in the free-standing film. However, how to transfer these outstanding performances of single MXene sheets to a macroscopic independent film is still a big challenge. Based on this situation, Zhang and his collaborators prepared pure Ti3C2Tx films with high strength and enhanced electrical conductivity, using a large lateral size of monolayered nanosheets.145 Free-standing films were obtained with aligned flakes by controlling the reaction conditions to produce large-sized single-layer Ti3C2Tx flakes, followed by a scalable blade coating technique. The as-prepared films showed a highly oriented structure with great electronic and mechanical properties because of the synthesis of high-aspect-ratio nanosheets as well as the formation of liquid crystalline samples and an appropriate rheological property of dispersion. The synthesized thick Ti3C2Tx films exhibited enhanced EMI shielding effectiveness of 50 dB, which exceeds that of most materials of comparable thickness. Moreover, other research showed analogous results. The contact resistance between the FL-Ti3C2Tx can be regulated with structural deviation and defects, which further impact electrical conductivity and therefore influence total EMI shielding effectiveness.146 Later, Rajavel et al. developed structural-quality-dependent EMI performance of few-layered and lamellar Nb2CTx MXene.147 The delaminated samples with a combination of few and lamellar structures exhibited higher ability to attenuate microwaves and higher absorbing capacity of EMI compared with bulk stacked and defective materials, which could be imputed to the synergism of complexes and multiple electrical conductive paths. Furthermore, as demonstrated by the experimental results, assembled wax composites with the utilization of 80% loading of Nb2CTx showed about 44.09 ± 1.99 dB EMI shielding effectiveness at 12 GHz. However, although the high dielectric loss of FL-MXene is advantageous for microwave adsorption, the inadequacy of magnetic loss capacity imposed restrictions on the further enhancement of microwave absorption performance. In view of the cooperative interactions of dielectric and magnetic loss, regulating the magnetoelectric matching of microwave absorbers by modifying the magnetic property of inserted magnetic nanoparticles can be regarded as a viable strategy.148 Li et al. reported MXene/FeCo film using an electrostatic self-assembly and successive vacuum-assisted filtration technique.149 The interaction of magnetic FoCo particles destroyed the agglomeration of single-layered MXene, which led to depressed conductivity and appropriate impedance matching. The prepared nanoflower-like film testified to better MA performance with an RL value of −43.7 dB at 3.76 GHz. In addition, electron holography was performed to verify the enhanced interfacial polarization and magnetic loss capabilities on a rough surface.
In addition to planar-membrane-structured materials, Li and his co-workers constructed Ti3C2Tx/polyaniline (PANI)/liquid metal multiple microspheres with a 3D nanoflower structure.150 In detail, the Ti3C2Tx/PANI composite was synthesized via in situ polymerization and then deposition on single-layered Ti3C2Tx flakes. Then, a ternary complex was designed by the addition of Galn liquid metal (LM) nanoparticles to enhance conductivity and stability. Eventually, a conductive composite fabric with excellent EMI shielding of 53 dB at 8.2–12.4 GHz was fabricated by using carbon fabrics as the substrate. As demonstrated by the authors, the extra PANI can efficiently prevent restacking of single-layered MXene nanosheets and increased bonding strength to construct “flower-shaped” structures with an enhanced conductive channel. Besides, the incorporation of LM nanoparticles was beneficial for the establishment of interconnected conductive paths, which further increase EMI performance. When the incident electromagnetic wave reached the surface of the fabric, part of the electromagnetic wave was reflected, and the other part entered the nanoflower structure, and was eventually absorbed via multiple reflections. As this composite enables effective EM shielding, this proper stable and ideal mechanical fabricate is expected to be applied in the EMI shielding area.
4.6. Environmental applications
With the continuous development of technology and industry, environmental protection has become an urgent concern of modern society. Thus, the demand for environmental remediation materials is increasing dramatically. SFL-MXene materials are considered to be among the most promising candidates, because of their high specific surface area, negatively charged surface and hydrophilic groups, which lead to excellent absorption performance and abundant active sites. The unprecedented arsenic photo-oxidation behavior and absorption performance of few- and multilayered Ti3C2Tx MXene was reported for the first time by Rosales et al.151 The as-synthesized FL-Ti3C2Tx could effectively oxidize highly dangerous As(III) to less harmful As(V) and had significant absorption capacity for both species (about 44% and 50%, respectively). Detailed quantitative analysis for photocatalytic arsenic removal and reactive oxygen (ROS) production of MXene verified that FL-Ti3C2Tx are capable of generating 4 times the number of hydroxyl radicals than multilayered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. The effects may be ascribed to its higher content of TiO2 active sites, which contributed more redox sites thus enhancing the catalytic performance. More importantly, the authors also demonstrated that the dominant factors regulating the adsorption capacity of As(III) by FL-Ti3C2Tx were derived from the formation of an arsenate bidentate complex between the oxoanion HAsO42− and the –OH groups distributed throughout the surface, rather than electrostatic forces or physical absorption, as previously acknowledged. The extraordinary dual effect detected for FL-Ti3C2Tx let them be suitable candidates for As removal from contaminated water. On the other hand, SFL-MXene nanosheets are utilized for the construction of MXene-based heterojunction materials. Zinc indium sulfide (ZnIn2S4), as a promising catalytic material, has received widespread attention but is still restricted by the rapid recombination of photo-generated electrons and holes, similar to most individual catalysts. Lately, the preparation of hierarchical FL-Ti3C2Tx/ZnIn2S4 was reported by Guo et al. and its photocatalytic performance further explored under visible-light irradiation.152 The composites exhibited good photocatalytic efficiency for potassium dichromate (Cr(VI)) reduction and methyl orange (MO) degradation with removal rates of 93.4% and 96.9% in 45 min. Benefiting from the formation of three-dimensional hierarchical heterostructures together with the lattice and expanded light response range, 5% FL-Ti3C2Tx/ZnIn2S4 showed the highest visible light absorption capacity as well as exceptional charge separation capability and optimal structural stability. A series of experiments revealed that the introduction of FL-MXene indeed enhanced the catalytic performance by increasing the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs due to a synergistic effect. In another study, FL-Ti3C2Tx/WO3 hierarchical composites developed by Pang and co-workers exhibited superior visible-light-driven photoactivity and stability to tetracycline hydrochloride (TC) disintegration.153 In that case, the FL-Ti3C2 nanosheets were employed as substrates in the in situ growth of ultrathin WO3 and thus obtained a composite product. The as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx/WO3 material had a higher photodegradation efficiency than pristine WO3, with the highest reaction of 16.08 × 10−3 min−1 by 3 wt% Ti3C2Tx loading. With the resultant heterostructure and the Schottky junction formation of the obtained composites, the interfacial interaction favors bulk-to-surface and charge transfer, thus facilitating spatial charge separation and transportation.
5. Summary and future opportunities
This review summarizes recent advances in the preparation of SFL-MXenes and their applications in energy storage, energy conversion, sensors, optoelectronics, optical devices, and the electromagnetic and environmental fields. Various preparation methods, including HF etching, in situ HF etching, molten salt etching, electrochemical etching method, CVD, self-assembly and template-assisted growth approaches, have been developed for the production of a variety of SFL-MXenes. Due to SFL-MXenes greatly suppressing the restacking of MXene flakes, more active areas for chemical reactions are exposed. The 2D ultrathin layer structure and high electrical conductivity also offer interpenetrating high-rate charge carrier and ion transport pathways. Due to the favorable effects of the bounteous terminations and active sites of 2D SFL-MXene in accelerating chemical reactions and allowing the loading and connection of other functional composites, 2D SFL-MXenes exhibit enormous potential for a broad variety of applications. In photo-electrochemical energy storage and conversion, SFL-MXenes show great potential in electronic technologies due to the high-rate charge carrier transport routes and intrinsic electrical properties among the few stacked layers. In sensors, the abundant active sites and huge specific surface areas of SFL-MXenes may accelerate the rate of response. Moreover, the inherent attribute of a multiplicity of functional terminations on the surface of SFL-MXenes can be employed to carry a diverse array of hydrophilic macromolecules and functional nanomaterials for sophisticated surface decoration in the fields of biological and medical research. Additionally, the significant biological compatibility of SFL-MXene-based materials has been confirmed by virtue of existing studies. Finally, SFL-MXene-based heterostructure materials can be synthesized via combining a variety of functional species with their structures or surfaces. As a result, SFL-MXenes exhibit enhanced performance in terms of use in energy storage, energy conversion, sensors, optoelectronics, and optical devices compared to bulk 2D MXenes.
While captivating achievements relating to SFL-MXenes have been achieved, some objections and opportunities remain. To further promote the advancement of the research field, it is imperative to surmount numerous obstacles. Surmounting these challenges will develop more chances for research into SFL-MXenes and their applications. Here, we elaborate our subjective assessment of these challenges and future opportunities. The most important challenge faced involves the synthesis of SFL-MXenes. Current universal material synthesis methods are dominated by rigorous and hazardous acid etching. The in situ creation of hydrofluoric acid may, to some extent, mitigate the harmful environmental effects. The pursuit of more environmentally friendly synthesis tactics, like self-assembly growth and CVD, is imperative. Moreover, the control and decoration of surface terminations during the experimental process is unclear. Obtaining non-terminated SFL-MXenes is critical for an awareness of their characteristics, but this is impractical via an aqueous acid etching strategy. CVD appears to be an adequate method which can grow non-terminated SFL-MXene films with a specific number of layers via controlling the experimental conditions. However, the crystal structure of SFL-MXene via CVD growth depends strongly on the scale of the precursor and reaction equipment, limiting the method's potential. Therefore, more synthetic routes should be explored and developed, such as molecular beam epitaxy and salt-templated growth. Besides, regarding the exfoliation of layered systems in the chemical etching process, the intercalation of bulk layered materials, including MXenes, has not yet been carefully explored. The challenge is to achieve intercalation followed by efficient exfoliation and to develop new routes to provide a product with fewer defects. Despite the fact that only minimal residual forces hold and prevent HF-etched multilayered MXene from rapidly splitting into individual layers, a simple sonication approach without preliminary ion intercalation can indeed lead to poor yields of SFL-MXenes.
Then, realizing the high-level regulation and optimization of both the structures and compositions of 2D SFL-MXenes is challenging. Though SFL-MXenes have achieved significant accomplishments in terms of fabrication and applications, the constitutional mechanisms remain ambiguous, especially the roles of defects and termination groups. As a matter of fact, because of the convoluted and arduous synthesis process, few investigations have focused on the reaction process. Even though the distributions and amounts of functional groups and defects have a great impact on the characteristics of SFL-MXenes, they still remain unclear. Therefore, as well as advancing the exploration of different experimental conditions, computational methods deserve more attention to enable the prediction of structure and properties and the superiority of the synthetic schemes. Theoretical calculations can be used to demonstrate the higher tendency to form multilayered Ti2NTx structures rather than monolayer nanosheets during preparation. Finally, it is imperative to increase the stability of SFL-MXene materials, which is crucial for practical applications. According to previous research, SFL-MXene nanosheets are tendentiously degraded either in humid air or in water. Current explorations have mostly confirmed that low temperature and deoxygenation are sufficient to prevent the surface oxidation of SFL-MXenes and have provided guidelines for their storage to preserve the innate characteristics. However, there is still no exhaustive investigation into the lifetimes of SFL-MXene colloidal solutions and metamorphic mechanisms. Thus, advanced studies on the mechanism are urgently needed to better realize and broaden the applications of SFL-MXenes.
Moreover, another concern is to expand the potential practical applications of SFL-MXenes. As elaborated in the main text of this review, despite SFL-MXenes being highly promising for diversified applications, there are still many problems which need urgently to be solved. SFL-MXene nanosheets show significant potential for energy conversion and storage installations due to their 2D ultrathin layer structure and high electrical conductivity. But current data still relate to ideal-scale laboratory tests instead of large-scale industrial equipment. Thus, great efforts are still needed. Furthermore, the applications of SFL-MXenes are mainly confined to energy conversion and storage. Thus, their potential applications should urgently be explored, such as in the fields of the environment and biology. Nowadays, SFL-MXenes have been discovered to be photothermal agents for combating cancer. However, there is still a lack of adequate investigations into the mechanism of action, removal strategies from the body, and the long-term influence on living organisms. Therefore, it is necessary to make full use of theoretical prediction methods to explore properties which have not been comprehensively acknowledged to extend the applications of SFL-MXene nanosheets.
Successfully overcoming the above-mentioned issues will boost the development of SFL-MXene materials. We hope this review article will attract wide-ranging passion from the scientific community and industry for SFL-MXene research, as well as providing an enlightening reference for the investigation of SFL-MXenes in future studies.
Author contributions
Longbo Jiang: conceptualization, writing, original draft preparation, resources. Ding Zhou: investigation, writing, revision, review & editing. Jinjuan Yang: methodology, writing, review & editing. Shaoyu Zhou: validation, writing, review & editing. Hou Wang: validation, writing, review & editing. Xingzhong: Yuan: validation, resources, writing, review & editing. Jie Liang: validation, writing, review & editing. Xiaodong Li: validation, writing, review & editing. Yaoning Chen: review & editing. Hui Li: methodology, validation, resources, review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 72088101, No. 21776066, No. 51739004), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (531118010394), the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province, China (2020JJ5063), the Hong Kong Scholars Programme (XJ2020049), the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Utilization of Woody Oil Resource (GZKF202120), Science and Technology Plan Project of Changsha City (kq2009085, kq2009086), and the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province (2020RC5008).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Zeng, P. Xu, L. Li, G. Zeng, R. Xiao, Z. Tang, D. Huang, L. Tang, C. Lai, D. Jiang, Y. Liu, H. Yi, L. Qin, S. Ye, X. Ren and W. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 488–516 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Wang, L. Jiang, H. Yu, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Yuan, J. Liang, H. Li and Z. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 130991 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Yang, X. Yuan, J. Guo, J. Liang, W. Tang, Y. Chen, X. Li, H. Wang and W. Chu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 296, 102523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, Q. B. Zheng and J. K. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100708 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Yuan, S. Y. Pang and J. H. Hao, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 021304 CAS .
L. B. Jiang, J. J. Yang, S. Y. Zhou, H. B. Yu, J. Liang, W. Chu, H. Li, H. Wang, Z. B. Wu and X. Z. Yuan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 439, 213947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, X. Zhang, L. B. Jiang, X. Z. Yuan, J. Liang, J. Zhang, H. B. Yu, W. Chu, Z. B. Wu, H. Li and Y. F. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 272, 118947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Qian, J. Liu, Y. Zeng, D. Wang, W. Zhou, L. Gu, H. Wu, G. Liu and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4862–4871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wei, N. Tang, L. Jiang, J. Yang, J. Guo, X. Yuan, J. Liang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wu and H. Li, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 462, 214500 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, S. Zhou, J. Yang, H. Wang, H. Yu, H. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Yuan, W. Chu and H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2108977 CrossRef .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Akuzum, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, N. J. Alvarez, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Ji, K. Xu, B. Zhang, L. Miao and J. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 1897–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, X. Zhang, M. Wang, S. Wang and Z. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3504–3513 RSC .
A. Mostafaei and M. Abbasnejad, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 857, 157982 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Sha, N. M. Xiao, Y. J. Guan and X. S. Yi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 33402–33407 RSC .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, L. Lin, Y. Zhang, M. Wu, B. I. Yakobson and S. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9768–9773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Zhao, P. J. Guo, X. Q. Lu, Q. Han, K. Liu and Z. Y. Lu, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 195144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhou, Z. B. Peng, Y. D. Chen, K. Luo, J. Zhang and S. Y. Du, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2019, 168, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, D. Y. Shen, Z. C. Zhang, P. Lu, M. Hossain, J. Li, B. Li and X. D. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Yuan, L. Jiang, H. Wang, H. Yu and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 302, 120823 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, I. Echols, P. Flouda, S. Wang, A. Easley, X. Zhao, Z. Tan, E. Prehn, G. Zi, M. Radovic, M. J. Green and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47929–47938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mohanty, L. Giri and B. K. Jena, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 14304–14324 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jamil, H. M. Ali and M. M. Janjua, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 35, 102322 CrossRef .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, S. K. Nemani, B. Wyatt, H. Y. Jiang, J. Tang, B. Anasori and Z. W. Seh, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10834–10864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, M. Y. Liang, H. Wang, X. H. Wang, Y. S. Huang, J. Coelho, S. Pinilla, Y. L. Zhang, F. W. Qi, V. Nicolosi and Y. X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, J. Zhou, X. Wang and J. W. Chew, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704561 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Gui, L. Han and W. Y. Cao, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2021, 51, 1509–1522 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Tan, X. Ding and W. Li, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Lin, X. Q. Wang, B. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. P. Zhao, X. Q. Qu, Y. Lu, X. W. Jiang and S. W. Lu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 25, 100699 CrossRef .
H. Riazi, G. Taghizadeh and M. Soroush, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 11103–11112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, H. Li, Y. Gan, H. Chen, W. Li, F. Zhang, X. Jiang, Y. Shi, J. Liu, Q. Wen and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2002209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Song, Y. X. Chen, X. T. Jiang, Y. Q. Ge, Y. Z. Wang, K. X. You, K. Wang, J. L. Zheng, J. H. Ji, Y. P. Zhang, J. Q. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801777 CrossRef .
L. M. Wu, X. T. Jiang, J. L. Zhao, W. Y. Liang, Z. J. Li, W. C. Huang, Z. T. Lin, Y. Z. Wang, F. Zhang, S. B. Lu, Y. J. Xiang, S. X. Xu, J. Q. Li and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1800215 CrossRef .
R. P. Pandey, K. Rasool, V. E. Madhavan, B. Aissa, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3522–3533 RSC .
Y. J. Zhang, L. Wang, N. N. Zhang and Z. J. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 19895–19905 RSC .
B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Nano Res., 2018, 12, 471–487 CrossRef .
X. F. Feng, Z. X. Yu, Y. X. Sun, R. X. Long, M. Y. Shan, X. H. Li, Y. C. Liu and J. H. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 7321–7343 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kumar, P. Prakash, T. Krithiga, D. J. Amarnath, J. Premkumar, N. Rajamohan, Y. Vasseghian, P. Saravanan and M. Rajasimman, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. B. Cho and Y. C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14724–14728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kamysbayev, A. S. Filatov, H. Hu, X. Rui, F. Lagunas, D. Wang, R. F. Klie and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2020, 369, 979–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, J. Wen, L. Bai, J. Xiao, R. Zheng, X. Shan, L. Li, H. Gao and X. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14433–14439 RSC .
V. N. Borysiuk, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 265705 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. B. Cho and Y. C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14724–14728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Khaledialidusti, A. K. Mishra and A. Barnoush, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4771–4779 RSC .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Wu, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16020–16025 RSC .
X. M. Zhang, Z. M. Yu, S. S. Wang, S. Guan, H. Y. Yang, Y. G. Yao and S. Y. A. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15224–15231 RSC .
P. Lv, Y. L. Li and J. F. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 11266–11272 RSC .
C. F. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEyoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S. H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov, D. Krishnan, C. Morant, X. H. Liu, G. S. Duesberg, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. Levitt, Y. Zhu, S. Uzun, V. Balitskiy, V. Zahorodna, O. Gogotsi and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, F. Wang, A. G. Ricciardulli, M. R. Lohe, P. W. M. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 15491–15495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Li, J. Lan, B. Yan, L. Shi and R. Ran, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47350–47357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Y. He, L. B. Wang, Q. X. Xia and A. G. Zhou, J. Adv. Ceram., 2020, 9, 749–758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Guo, S. Jin, L. B. Wang, P. G. He, Q. K. Hu, L. Z. Fan and A. G. Zhou, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 19550–19556 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Gao, H. L. Chen, F. Zhang, S. Mei, Y. Zhang, W. L. Bao, C. Y. Ma, P. Yin, J. Guo, X. T. Jiang, S. X. Xu, W. C. Huang, X. B. Feng, F. M. Xu, S. R. Wei and H. Zhang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, M. M. Rahman, S. Kareem, H. Dong, F. Qiao, W. Xiong, X. Q. Liu, N. Li and X. J. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 2060–2066 RSC .
M. Vinoba, R. Navvamani and H. Al-Sheeha, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 12308–12317 RSC .
H. Yan, W. Li, H. Li, X. Q. Fan and M. H. Zhu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 135, 156–167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ghasali, Y. Orooji, A. Azarniya, M. Alizadeh, M. Kazem-zad and T. Ebadzadeh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 542, 148538 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kang, Z. Zhang, L. Guo, J. Cui, Y. Chen, X. Hou, B. Wang, C. T. Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 9135 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lin, L. Chen, X. Lu, H. Yao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 62, 662–670 CrossRef .
G. Deysher, C. E. Shuck, K. Hantanasirisakul, N. C. Frey, A. C. Foucher, K. Maleski, A. Sarycheva, V. B. Shenoy, E. A. Stach, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 204–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Turker, O. R. Caylan, N. Mehmood, T. S. Kasirga, C. Sevik and G. Cambaz Buke, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 103, 5586–5593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinha, K. Ma and H. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 590, 365–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zang, C. Jian, T. Zhu, Z. Fan, W. Wang, M. Wei, B. Li, M. Follmar Diaz, P. Ashby, Z. Lu, Y. Chu, Z. Wang, X. Ding, Y. Xie, J. Chen, J. N. Hohman, M. Sanghadasa, J. C. Grossman and L. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Shao, Z. Lin, J. Lu, L. Liu, B. Duployer, P. O. A. Persson, P. Eklund, L. Hultman, M. Li, K. Chen, X. H. Zha, S. Du, P. Rozier, Z. Chai, E. Raymundo-Pinero, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Q. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 894–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Lu, K. Luo, Y. Li, K. Chang, K. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Rosen, L. Hultman, P. Eklund, P. O. A. Persson, S. Du, Z. Chai, Z. Huang and Q. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4730–4737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, X. Li, G. Qin, K. Luo, J. Lu, Y. Li, G. Liang, Z. Huang, J. Zhou, L. Hultman, P. Eklund, P. O. A. Persson, S. Du, Z. Chai, C. Zhi and Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1077–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jawaid, A. Hassan, G. Neher, D. Nepal, R. Pachter, W. J. Kennedy, S. Ramakrishnan and R. A. Vaia, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2771–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, P. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Park, M. R. Lohe, Y. Wu, A. S. Nia, S. Yang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2021, 60, 8689–8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Becke and K. E. Edgecombe, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 92, 5397–5403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, J. Lao, R. Yu, X. Sang, J. Luo, Y. Li and J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23330–23337 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. J. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, Y. Lim, Y. Chae, B.-J. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, H. Han, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 573–581 RSC .
N. R. Hemanth and B. Kandasubramanian, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123678 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Lehninger, Physiol. Rev., 1950, 30, 393–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Srivastava, A. Mishra, H. Mizuseki, K. R. Lee and A. K. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24256–24264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Hou, G. Zou, W. Shi, H. Shuai, J. Li and X. Ji, Nanoscale, 2018, 11, 16–33 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Ling, F. Li, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 13283–13287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z.-S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, Z. Tan, H. Gao, T. Habib, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21663–21668 RSC .
M. R. Lukatskaya, J. Halim, B. Dyatkin, M. Naguib, Y. S. Buranova, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. D. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25453–25462 RSC .
V. M. Hong Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC .
Z. M. Sun, M. W. Yuan, L. Lin, H. Yang, C. Y. Nan, H. F. Li, G. B. Sun and X. J. Yang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 628–632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shen, W. Jiang, K. Liang, S. Zhao, R. Tang, L. Zhang and J. Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2021, 60, 27013–27018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Overbury, A. I. Kolesnikov, G. M. Brown, Z. Zhang, G. S. Nair, R. L. Sacci, R. Lotfi, A. C. T. van Duin and M. Naguib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10305–10314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1546–1557 RSC .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
M. Malaki, A. Maleki and R. S. Varma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10843–10857 RSC .
K. Rajavel, T. Ke, K. Yang and D. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 095605 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Dong, W. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Pu, J. Wang, F. Kang, J. Li and C. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 233–240 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Wang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39610–39617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Huang and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1171–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1079–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Young, C. Smith, D. Hitchcock and E. Vogel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2021, 39, 012201 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Gedeon, Z. Cheng, C. Xu, Z. Shao, H. Sun, S. Li, Y. Cao, X. Zhang, Q. Bian, L. Liu, Z. Liu, H. M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. Pan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3327–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cheimarios, G. Kokkoris and A. G. Boudouvis, Arch. Comput. Methods Eng., 2020, 28, 637–672 CrossRef .
D. Geng, X. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Sun, W. Fu, J. Chen, W. Liu, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700072 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Liu, H. L. Xu, F. T. Xie, C. Fasel, X. W. Yin and R. Riedel, Carbon, 2020, 163, 254–264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, W. Chen, X. Zou, J. N. Hohman, L. Yang, B. Li, M. Wei, C. Zhu, J. Liang, M. Sanghadasa, J. Gu and L. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805188 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X. L. Ma, H. M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, D. E. Yilmaz, R. Lotfi, M. Alhabeb, A. Ostadhossein, B. Anasori, W. Sun, X. Li, K. Xiao, P. R. C. Kent, A. C. T. van Duin, Y. Gogotsi and R. R. Unocic, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2266 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu and R. G. Larson, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3972–3980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, J. N. Hohman, F. H. Li, C. Jia, D. Solis-Ibarra, B. Wu, J. E. Dahl, R. M. Carlson, B. A. Tkachenko, A. A. Fokin, P. R. Schreiner, A. Vailionis, T. R. Kim, T. P. Devereaux, Z. X. Shen and N. A. Melosh, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 349–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Cumberland, K. M. Hanif, A. Javier, G. A. Khitrov, G. F. Strouse, S. M. Woessner and C. S. Yun, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1576–1584 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Barsoum, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2000, 28, 201–281 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. P. Yu, X. C. Xiao, Z. W. Chen and J. J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564–1596 RSC .
B. Shen, W. T. Zhai and W. G. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4542–4548 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fu, J. Sun, C. Wang, C. Shang, L. Xu, J. Li and H. Zhang, Small, 2021, 17, 2006054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, L. M. Pan, H. Tang, F. Du, Y. H. Guo, T. Qiu and J. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 695, 818–826 CrossRef CAS .
P. Horak, S. Bakardjieva, J. Vacik, X. Rui and R. Klie, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2020, 469, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajput, V. Kumar, S. Thomas, M. A. Zaeem and D. R. Roy, 2D Mater., 2021, 8, 035015 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Gao, Y. Xie, X. D. Zhu, K. N. Sun, X. M. Xie, Y. T. Liu, J. Y. Yu and B. Ding, Small, 2018, 14, 1802443 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. S. Rao, S. Y. Liao, X. W. Huang, Y. Z. Li, Y. D. Liu and Y. G. Min, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. L. Liu, G. G. Wang, H. Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, G. Z. Li, Z. P. Wu, L. Y. Dang and J. C. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22631–22641 RSC .
H. B. Hu, Z. M. Bai, B. Niu, M. Z. Wu and T. Hua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14876–14884 RSC .
J. J. Mao, J. Iocozzia, J. Y. Huang, K. Meng, Y. K. Lai and Z. Q. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 772–799 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
W. P. Mounfield, B. T. Huang, B. Cai, S. H. Yang and Y. Roman-Leshkov, Mater. Lett., 2020, 261, 126987 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, W. Liang, S. Luo, Z. He, Y. Ge, H. Wang, R. Cao, F. Zhang, Q. Wen, J. Li, Q. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700229 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, S. Chertopalov, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, L. Hu, S. Bhattacharya, A. M. Rao, Y. Gogotsi, V. N. Mochalin and R. Podila, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705714 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Yu, Y. C. Li, J. B. Cheng, Z. B. Liu, Q. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13707–13713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, M. He, Q. Hu, Q. Wu, G. Sun, L. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhu and A. Zhou, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2763–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. You, Z. Guo, R. Zhang, Z. Chang, M. Ge, Q. Mei and W. F. Dong, Sensors, 2021, 21, 3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Desai, H. Basu, R. K. Singhal, S. Saha and S. K. Kailasa, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 565, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. Di, L. Fu, Y. Deng, Y. Du and N. Tang, Carbon, 2020, 157, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yin, H. Xu, M. Han, M. Li, S. Liang, L. Cheng and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34524–34533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Yin, X. Li, M. Li, S. Liang, L. Zhang and L. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10198–10207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, N. Kong, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, S. Qin, M. Han, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rajavel, X. Yu, P. Zhu, Y. Hu, R. Sun and C. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49737–49747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rajavel, X. Yu, P. Zhu, Y. Hu, R. Sun and C. Wong, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 877, 160235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qing, W. Zhou, F. Luo and D. Zhu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4074–4080 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Wen, L. Yang, R. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Li and R. Che, Carbon, 2021, 175, 509–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Li, L. Yang and S. Yin, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2102266 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosales, A. Garcia, V. M. Fuenzalida, R. Espinoza-González, G. Song, B. Wang, J. Yu, F. Gracia and A. Rosenkranz, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100769 CrossRef .
S. Guo, H. Luo, Y. Bao, Y. Li, H. Guan and Y. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 575, 151753 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, S. Xue, T. Zhou, M. Qiao, H. Li, X. Liu, Q. Xu, G. Liu and W. Lei, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2022, 2100507 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the exfoliation process for Ti3AlC2. (a) The Ti3AlC2 structure. (b) Al atoms replaced by OH after reaction with HF. (c) The breakage of the hydrogen bonds and the separation of nanosheets after sonication in methanol. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2011, WILEY-VCH. (d) The structure of MAX phases and the corresponding MXenes. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Model diagrams of the synthesis of accordion-like m-Nb2CTx and f-Nb2CTx nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti4N3Txvia the molten salt treatment of Ti4AlN3 at 550 °C under Ar, followed by the delamination of multilayered MXene using TBAOH. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The anodic etching of bulk Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte, with a schematic diagram of the etching and delamination processes. (d) The configuration of an electrochemical cell. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
Ti3SiC2 + 2CuCl2 → Ti3C2 + SiCl4(g)↑ + 2Cu	(1)
Ti3C2 + CuCl2 → Ti3C2Cl2 + Cu	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams of Ti3C2Tx MXene preparation. (a) The Ti3SiC2 MAX phase is immersed in CuCl2 Lewis molten salt at 750 °C. (b and c) The reaction between Ti3SiC2 and CuCl2 results in the formation of Ti3C2Tx MXene. (d) MS-Ti3C2Tx MXene is obtained after further washing in ammonium persulfate (APS) solution. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Characterization of delaminated Ti3C2Tx: (a and b) SEM images, (c) the corresponding statistical size distribution, (d) a TEM image (inset: the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern), and (e and f) an AFM image and the related height profiles. (g) The XPS survey spectrum of Ti3C2Tx powder. (h and i) High-resolution C 1s and Ti 2p XPS spectra, respectively. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  A schematic diagram of the lithiation intercalation–expansion–microexplosion process. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of few-layered MXene via flash-freezing-assisted delamination. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) A schematic illustration of the scale delamination of few-layered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets via HEMM with DMSO solvent. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagrams showing bottom-up synthetic strategies for the fabrication of ultrathin MXene films. (a) Chemical vapor deposition synthesis: a schematic diagram showing the growth of Mo2C crystals under low and high flow rates of CH4. Thick Mo2C crystals with different shapes are randomly distributed on the Cu surface at low CH4 concentration, whereas at higher CH4 concentrations, the growth of predominantly hexagonal-shaped, thin Mo2C flakes on graphene is seen. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (b) A schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure of porous Mo2C film via template-assisted growth for 2D TMCs (transition metal carbides). Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Transition metal ions such as Mo5+, W6+, and Co2+ are mixed in a gelatin-mediated hydrogel with rich functional groups as ligands. (d and e) At elevated temperature, the ion–gelatin solution undergoes a lamellar assembly process that results in a layer-by-layer organized matrix. (f) GIWAXS analysis of an Mo–gelatin template as an example to show that gelatin constrains the metal ions laterally between the layers. (g) When carbonized under a CH4/H2 atmosphere above 600 °C, the gelatin templates constrain the conversion of metal ions laterally between the layers, forming nanocrystalline 2D TMCs. CH4 was used here to increase the carbon content and H2 was used to suppress oxidation. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  The growth of large-area Mo2C crystals and film. Schematic diagrams showing the nucleation and coalescence of Mo2C crystals grown on graphene. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  The homoepitaxial growth of MXene. (a) A schematic diagram of the homoepitaxial growth process to form single-layer h-TiC on a monolayer Ti3C2 substrate through electron-beam irradiation and heating. Ti atoms from different layers are represented using different shades of blue. (b) Experimental (EXP) and simulated (SIM) STEM images of Ti4C3 and Ti5C4, and the corresponding crystal structures projected along the [001] and [100] zone axes. (c) An atomic resolution STEM image acquired from monolayer Ti3C2Tx along the [001] zone axis at room temperature. Areas of Ti vacancies are indicated by white dotted circles. The inset shows a comparison between the atomic resolution STEM image and projected crystal structure of Ti3C2Tx. (d) An STEM image acquired after the heating and electron-beam irradiation of monolayer Ti3C2 flakes inside the microscope at 500 °C. The black areas are pores, while areas framed by green, blue, and black dashed lines are the substrate (Ti3C2), nanoscale areas of a single h-TiC adlayer on one surface (Ti4C3) and nanoscale areas of single h-TiC adlayers on both surfaces (Ti5C4), respectively. (e) An STEM image acquired after heating MXene flakes inside the microscope at 1000 °C. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Nature Research.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of MXene (Ti3C2Tx) nanosheets from Ti3AlC2via LiF/HCl etching, the growth of TiO2 QDs on MXene nanosheets via CTAB-assisted solvothermal synthesis, and the fabrication of a TiO2 QDs@MXene/S cathode via the chemisorption of S8 molecules. (b) A strategy for suppressing the shuttling effects of polysulfides via the growth of TiO2 QDs on MXene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic diagram of the assembly of an MXene/PP diaphragm. (b) A schematic diagram of the mechanism of using MXene/PP to enhance NCM811 performance. (c) The cycling performances of PP and MXene/PP cells. (d) The rate performance and (e) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of PP and MXene/PP cells. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2020, MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 12  A schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2TxMXene and MXene@Fe2O3/CC. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  The HER activities of single- and multilayered-Mo2C with catalyst loadings of 30 L g−1 and 40 L g−1, respectively, in Ar-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte at 1600 rpm and 20 °C: (a) polarization curves; and (b) the mass activities of catalysts during the 1st, 3000th, and 10000th cycles. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthetic process for the deposition of CuS NCs on layered MXene. (b) The photocatalytic activities of pristine CuS, multilayered MXene (denoted multilayered Mx), few-layered MXene (denoted few-layered Mx), and various CuS/MXene nanocomposites for H2 generation. The CuS-deposited multilayered MXenes were obtained with different S:Ti weight ratios, as displayed. The typical CuS-deposited few-layered MXene was denoted S:Tifew = 1:2. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) A schematic diagram of the ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheet fabrication process, including HF etching (delamination) and TPAOH intercalation (disintegration). (b) Digital photographs, (c and d) SEM images, and (e) a HRTEM image (the inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern) of SL Ti3C2. (f) A typical AFM image of Ti3C2 nanosheets. (g) Lateral size and thickness distribution analysis of Ti3C2 nanosheets. (h) An AFM 3D view of a selected area in (f). (i) CV curves of Ti3AlC2, ML-Ti3C2, and SL Ti3C2 in O2-saturated (solid curves) and N2-saturated (dashed curves) 0.1 mol L−1 KOH at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (j) Nyquist plots of Ti3AlC2, ML-Ti3C2, and SL-Ti3C2 recorded from EIS measurements in O2-saturated 0.1 mol L−1 KOH at a constant potential of 0.82 V (vs. RHE). (k) CV curves of SL-Ti3C2 before and after cycling for 2000 cycles in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH saturated with O2 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustrations giving (a) side and (b) top views of the adsorption of NH3, H2, CH4, CO, CO2, N2, NO2, or O2 molecules on monolayer Ti2CO2. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) A schematic illustration of the synthesis of a MXene/PPy nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2021, MDPI. (b) A schematic representation of the preparation of fluorescent ultrasmall Ti3C2 nanosheets and their application in the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of Ag+ and Mn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
