One dimensional CuInS 2 –ZnS heterostructured nanomaterials as low-cost and high-performance counter electrodes of dye -sensitized solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24176A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24176A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 835-840Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOne dimensional CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanomaterials as low-cost and high-performance counter electrodes of dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Luoxin 
            Yi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nailiang 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyong 
            Tang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huijun 
            Zhao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guanghui 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiguo 
            Su
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dan 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: danwang@mail.ipe.ac.cn;  Fax: +86 10 62631141;   Tel: +86 10 62533616
bNational Center for Nanoscience and Technology, 100190, P. R. China
cCentre for Clean Environment and Energy, Gold Coast Campus, Griffith University, Queensland 4222, Australia
Received 
      24th November 2012
    , Accepted 18th January 2013First published on 18th January 2013AbstractWurtzite CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanorods are synthesized via a seed-assisted synthetic route. Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructured nanorods are transformed into CuInS2–ZnS by reacting with indium ions to convert copper sulfide to wurtzite CuInS2. The shapes of the CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanorods can be tuned from burning torch-like to longer rod-like by varying the concentration of added indium. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) using these heterostructured nanocrystals as counter electrodes had a power conversion efficiency (7.5%) superior to DSSCs made with conventional platinum electrode (7.1%) under the same device configuration.

Broader context
Increasing energy demands and environmental issues have prompted researchers to intensively investigate dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) which are promising due to their low cost and relatively high conversion efficiency. In DSSC devices, the counter electrode (CE) is one of the most important parts and platinum (Pt) is most commonly used. For the purpose of further cost-cutting, novel high performance Pt-free CEs are of high demand. In this work, a new route to heterostructured nanocrystals is presented involving the conversion of Cu1.94S–ZnS to CuInS2–ZnS heterostructures. Subsequently, the prepared CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals are exploited as CE materials to replace Pt. A power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.5% is achieved with drop-cast CuInS–ZnS nanocrystals on FTO glass. This efficiency compares favorably to DSSCs constructed with conventional Pt CE (η = 7.1%) under the same device configuration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of heterostructured nanocrystals as the CE in DSSCs. Compared to conventional high-cost sputtering and vapor deposition of inorganic semiconductor thin films, the ability to produce a nanocrystal dispersion (also called the nanocrystal “ink”) benefits manufacturing the low-cost devices.

Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are among the most promising photovoltaic devices for light-to-energy conversion with a relatively high efficiency.1 Among different constitution components, the counter electrode is one of the most important parts in DSSCs, and platinum (Pt) is most commonly used. Unfortunately, Pt is relatively scarce and expensive, which creates a big obstacle for scale-up application of DSSC devices.2 Therefore, lower-cost alternatives for counter electrodes in DSSCs are being sought.
Generally, the counter electrode accomplishes two critical functions: it collects the electrons flowing from the external circuit and regenerates the hole scavenger by catalyzing the reduction of I3− to I−.3 Several previous reports have adopted electrically conductive materials for counter electrodes of DSSCs, including graphite,4 carbon black,2 carbon nanotubes,5 and conducting polymers.6 The efficiencies of these devices have generally been low, below 5%, because these materials have poor catalytic activity toward I3−/I−conversion. Very recently, alternative inorganic compounds, such as metal sulfides,7–9 metal oxides,10 metal nitrides11 and metal carbides,12 have been studied as counter electrodes in DSSCs. In addition to a rather high electrical conductivity, these materials, especially CuZnSnS4,7 have exhibited high catalytic activity toward I3−/I− pairs, and have been used to achieve device efficiencies comparable to DSSCs with Pt counter electrodes. However, current investigation on the counter electrodes is mainly focused on single chemical compounds of the simple structures. It will be extremely interesting if one can integrate multiple catalytic segments in the same nanostructures and use them as the low cost counter electrodes, which will be expected to further improve the performance of DSSC devices.
Herein, we suggest that one-dimensional (1D) CuInS2–ZnS (CIS–ZnS) heteronanostructures can fulfill this role. Both CIS and ZnS exhibit catalytic activity toward I3−/I− pairs.8,9 CuInS2–ZnS nanocrystals also have other potential applications as cadmium-free light-harvesting materials, such as photodetector, quantum dot sensitized cells and heterostructure solar cell.13
It should be pointed out that currently, two successful growth modes have been developed for 1D heterostructures: (1) seeded growth14 and (2) catalyst-assisted growth.15 Until now, 1D heteronanostructures of many semiconductor partners have been made, including Si–SiGe,16 CdSe–CdS,17 ZnO–ZnS,18 Cu2S–In2S3,19 Cu1.94S–ZnS,20 Cu2S–PbS,21 and Cu2S–CIS.22 However, simple adoption of the above two synthesis methods is very hard to obtain 1D CIS–ZnS heteronanostructures. For instance, if one uses the seed growth approach, because the lattice constants of CIS and ZnS are very close, a uniform coating is favored, leading to core–shell CIS@ZnS nanocrystals rather than 1D nanostructures. Meanwhile, the catalyst-assisted growth generally relies on the use of low melting point nanoparticles as the catalysts. I–III–VI2 semiconductor heterostructures are difficult to synthesize by this method because of their complex crystal structures and considerably high melting points.
In this work, a new route to 1D heterostructured nanorods is presented involving the conversion of Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructured nanorods23 to 1D CIS–ZnS heterostructures. Scheme 1 illustrates the approach. Nanorods with Cu1.94S spherical heads are made and then converted to flame-like CIS heads by adding indium precursors (route 1). Multi-injection of indium precursors leads to continuous growth along the axial direction, generating longer CIS segments (route 2). The length of the ZnS tails can also be controlled by the same method as the CIS segments, yielding 1D CIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods of tunable aspect ratios (see experimental details in the ESI†). Subsequently, the prepared CIS–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals are exploited as counter electrode materials in DSSCs to replace Pt. A power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.5% is achieved with drop-cast CIS–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals on FTO glass. This efficiency compares favorably to DSSCs constructed with conventional Pt (η = 7.1%) counter electrodes under the same device configuration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of heterostructured nanocrystals as counter electrodes in DSSCs.
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the formation of wurtzite burning torch-like CuInS2–ZnS (BTCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods (route 1) and long rod-like CuInS2–ZnS (LRCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods (route 2). 
Burning torch-like CuInS2–ZnS (BTCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods were synthesized by dispersing Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds (Fig. S1 in the ESI†) in a mixed solution of dodecanethiol and octadecene containing In(ac)3, and then heated at 200 °C with magnetic stirring for 4 hours (route 1 in Scheme 1). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 1A) reveals that the resultant nanocrystals are hybrid nanorods in the uniform shape of a flame-like “head” (33.4 ± 2.7 nm of axial length, and 23.6 ± 1.8 nm of maximum width) and a slightly thinner “tail” (29.4 ± 4.2 nm of axial length, 15.7 ± 1.7 nm of maximum width, and 9.4 ± 1.5 nm of diameter of the tail tip). Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging (inset of Fig. 1A) and the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping (Fig. 1B) were performed to determine the local composition and stoichiometry of the CIS–ZnS nanorods. The signals of both indium and copper are mostly located at the head, while the sulfur signal is homogeneously distributed throughout the nanorod and the zinc signal is mainly found in the tail of the nanorod. X-ray diffraction (Fig. 1C) indicates that the nanorods have transformed from Cu1.94S–ZnS to CIS–ZnS, in which the “heads” and “tails” are both in the wurtzite phase. Quantitative analysis from large-area EDS mapping in combination with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging shows that ratios of Cu:In:S:Zn in the heterostructured nanorods are 16.62:17.95:48.03:17.41, which are very close to the stoichiometric 1:1:3:1 ratio of BTCIS–ZnS (Fig. S2 in the ESI†). The detailed crystalline arrangement of the junction between the CIS head and the ZnS tail was further examined by high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (Fig. 1D). Analysis of the lattice spacings observed by HRTEM reveals that the CIS head interfaces epitaxially to the (002) plane of the ZnS “tail” through the (002) plane, suggesting that the grain boundary is composed of (002) planes of both CIS and ZnS. HRTEM images also reveal that the (100) planes of both CIS and ZnS run perpendicular to the grain boundary. The interface-orientation relationships between CIS and ZnS domains are (1–20)CIS//(1–20)ZnS and (100)CIS//(100)ZnS. Due to the symmetry of the wurtzite structure on the C axis, the lattice mismatch between the contact (100) planes is calculated as follows: (0.3370 − 0.3310)/0.3370 × 100% = 1.8%. The small lattice mismatches along these two directions enable the growth of CIS along the [001] direction.
 Fig. 1  TEM image (A) of the BTCIS–ZnS nanorods and STEM image (inset) for the EDS mapping observation; EDS mapping images (B) of copper, indium, sulfur, and zinc, respectively; XRD pattern of nanorods (C) together with standard diffraction lines of wurtzite CIS (top lines, reference no. 21) and bulk wurtzite ZnS (bottom lines, JCPDS card 79–2204); HRTEM images (D) of single BTCIS–ZnS nanorod overlaid with identifications of crystal planes for both CIS and ZnS phases; TEM image of a single LRCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorod (E). 
The direct transformation of Cu1.94S to CIS in the head of heterostructures is confirmed by using pure Cu1.94S nanocrystals as the seeds. It is found that the as-synthesized nanocrystals (Fig. S3 in the ESI†) are pure wurtzite CIS similar to those of the heads in the BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods (Fig. 1A). Due to the flame-like shape, the CIS nanocrystals are named as FCIS. Monoclinic Cu1.94S prefers to convert to the hexagonal polymorph (chalcocite) at temperatures above 103 °C. On the basis of the standard crystal data of hexagonal Cu2S and CIS, atomic packing models that depict their {001} and {100} facets are shown in Fig. S4.† Close inspection of the {001} and {100} facets discloses that Cu2S possesses a high density of copper ions sandwiched between every two layers of sulfur anions, giving rise to the large interspaces lacking Cu cations between the two rows of unit cells (top half in Fig. S4†). Therefore, such large interspaces could supply enough space for the indium ions entering along the perpendicular direction to [001] (bottom half in Fig. S4†). Therefore, the preferential conversion from Cu1.94S to WZ–CIS is easily understood that the Cu1.94S has a similar structure and shares nearly identical packing of the sulfur sublattices in respect to wurtzite CIS crystals. Similarly, the size shrinkage of FCIS nanocrystals also follows along the [001] crystal direction.
Why are both spherical Cu1.94S nanocrystals and semi-spherical Cu1.94S heads in the Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructures changed into flame-like CIS nanocrystals terminated by {001} facets after addition of indium precursors? To answer this question, the evolution of FCIS nanocrystals was studied, as shown in the ESI (Fig. S5†). We propose that the reaction experiences the following steps: initially, indium ions incorporate into the layered crystalline structure of copper sulfide nanocrystals to form the Cu2S–CIS alloy. Moreover, because hexagonal Cu2S and CIS have similar S sublattices along the [001] direction, the nanocrystals grow mainly along [001] and gradually transform into the pure CIS via cationic re-distribution within the S sublattices. Accompanied by formation of the CIS phase, the nanocrystals evolve into the flame-like shape along the [001] direction, which can be assigned to the following three steps: (1) the copper ions escape from the {001} facets, which are the terminated facets of the elongated nanocrystals. This process also results in sharpening of the {001} ends of the nanocrystals. (2) The escaped free copper ions combine with the indium and sulfur ions from the corresponding precursors to form CIS. (3) The newly formed CIS diffuses into the quasi-flame-like nanocrystals, while the {001} ends become gradually sharp due to the loss of Cu ions, eventually leading to formation of the flame-like wurtzite CIS nanocrystals.
According to the above analysis, the pyrolysis rate of In(ac)3 precursors, which provide the indium source for generating the CIS nanocrystals, should have a large influence on the morphology of the product. Therefore, a gradual addition of In(ac)3 precursors was performed (route 2 of Scheme 1). A stock octadecene solution containing In(ac)3 was prepared and divided into six equal portions that were intermittently injected into the hot octadecene solution containing longer Cu1.94S–ZnS nanorods and dodecanethiol at 200 °C at a fixed time interval. The resultant heterostructured nanorods (see Fig. 1H) greatly increase in length, leading to 1D nanorods with the average sizes of 94 nm, in which the average lengths of the CIS heads are 42.0 ± 8.9 nm. Due to their long rod-like shape, the heterostructured nanorods are named as LRCIS–ZnS.
DSSC devices constructed with CIS–ZnS counter electrodes were firstly evaluated using BTCIS–ZnS thin films of different thicknesses. The BTCIS–ZnS film with the thickness of 0.8 μm exhibited the maximum power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.2% (see Table S1 in the ESI†). Subsequently, we fabricated different DSSC devices with the counter electrodes based on conventional Pt foils, pure FCIS films of 0.8 μm, LRCIS–ZnS films (Fig. S6 in the ESI†) of 0.8 μm or BTCIS–ZnS films of 0.8 μm, respectively. Fig. 2 shows the difference in the photovoltaic performance. Impressively, compared with pure FCIS nanocrystal films, the films composed of either LRCIS–ZnS or BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals show a considerably large short current (JSC), and thus result in a high η. The enhanced JSC values with CIS–ZnS nanocrystals mainly originate from the high electrocatalytic activity of these heterostructures toward I3−/I− redox pairs. It should be noted that the DSSC devices constructed with the LRCIS–ZnS films show a conversion efficiency of up to 7.5%, which outperforms that of 7.1% by using the conventional Pt foil as the counter electrode under the same device configuration. In the test, the DSSC with the LRCIS–ZnS counter electrode has a noticeable photovolatic performance in an open circuit voltage (VOC, 0.77 V), which is higher than that of the Pt electrode. Moreover, the JSC of 15.3 mA cm−2 is also higher than that of Pt electrode (VOC, 0.72 V). This result reveals that the heterostructured nanocrystals with the large aspect ratio could facilitate the electrocatalytic reaction of I3−/I− redox pairs.
 Fig. 2  
I–V curves (A) of the DSSC devices using BTCIS–ZnS, FCIS, LRCIS–ZnS and Pt electrodes as the counter electrodes, respectively. 
Electrochemical measurements were performed on Pt foil, pure FCIS films, LRCIS–ZnS films and BTCIS–ZnS films to understand the detailed mechanisms on the improved electrocatalytic activity by using the heterostructured nanocrystals as the counter electrodes Fig. 3A shows Nyquist plots obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, which are accomplished on the cells with a structure of counter electrode/electrolyte/counter electrode under dark conditions. The high frequency (corresponding to low Z′) intercept on the real axis (Z′ axis) represents the series resistance Rs (the equivalent circuit is shown in the inset of Fig. 3A), while the semicircle region in the high-frequency range is mainly determined by both the charge-transfer resistance Rct and the in parallel capacitance C at the electrolyte–counter electrode interface. Compared to the Pt counter electrodes, the series resistance Rs of LRCIS–ZnS, BTCIS–ZnS and FCIS counter electrodes is relatively higher, which is reasonable considering the high conductivity of the noble metal in respect to semiconductor. In view of the fact that the Rs of the LRCIS–ZnS counter electrodes is higher than that of the Pt counter electrodes, the increase in the open circuit voltage maybe caused by the relatively high resistance of the LRCIS–ZnS counter electrodes. In general, when the two devices have the same photocurrent, the higher Rs leads to higher photovoltage, therefore the VOC of the DSSC devices is increased when Pt is replaced by LRCIS–ZnS as the counter electrode. Very interestingly, the calculated charge-transfer resistance Rct at the electrolyte–counter electrode interface follows the below order: LRCIS–ZnS (5.6 Ω) < BTCIS–ZnS (6.3 Ω) < Pt foil (7.7 Ω) < FCIS (8.0 Ω). This order is exactly contrary to the order of the power conversion efficiency η: LRCIS–ZnS (7.5%) > BTCIS–ZnS (7.2%) > Pt foil (7.1%) > FCIS (6.5%), suggesting that the decrease of the charge-transfer resistance at the electrolyte–counter electrode interface is the key factor to improve the energy conversion efficiency of the DSSCs when using the heterostructured nanocrystals as the counter electrodes.
 Fig. 3  Nyquist plots (A) of dummy cells with a symmetric sandwich-like structure between two identical electrodes consisting of: Pt foil, FCIS film, LRCIS–ZnS film and BTCIS–ZnS film; cyclic voltammograms (B) of the prepared LRCIS–ZnS film, BTCIS–ZnS film, FCIS film and Pt for I3−/I− pairs. Inset in (A) is an equivalent circuit. 
A decrease in the interface resistance implies the enhanced electrocatalytic activity of the counter electrode towards I3−/I− redox pairs in the electrolyte solution. Fig. 3B demonstrates the typical cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of the I3−/I− pairs on the different electrodes. In the case of Pt electrodes, two pairs of redox peaks, I and II, represent sequential redox reactions of different iodide species, as shown in the below equations. 3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−(I) I3− + 2e− → 3I−(II)
Two very important features can be discerned from CV curves. (1) Compared to Pt electrodes, though the anodic peaks are kept unchanged in potential, the peak positions of reduction reactions are shifted from −0.44 to −0.69, −0.44 to −0.58 and −0.44 to −0.58, respectively, on the FCIS, BTCIS–ZnS and LRCIS–ZnS electrodes. The shift of the reduction peaks toward the negative potentials indicates that the oxidized iodide species, which are formed by scavenging the photoexcited holes of the dye, are easily reduced and regenerated on the electrodes coated with the heterostructured nanocrystals. (2) The peak currents of reduction reactions on different electrodes follow the below order: LRCIS–ZnS > BTCIS–ZnS > Pt > FCIS. This sequence is also consistent with that of the energy conversion efficiency of DSSCs constructed with the corresponding counter electrodes (see Fig. 2). In detail, these heterostructured nanomaterials exhibit higher catalytic activity than Pt, therefore, their JSC values are higher than Pt as the counter electrode. In addition, because these heterostructured materials possess higher resistance, their fill factors are lower than Pt electrodes.24 Compared to BTCIS–ZnS, the LRCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals have both the higher catalytic activity from their heterostructure and higher electron mobility owing to the one-dimensional structure. Therefore, the LRCIS–ZnS shows higher η due to the longer one-dimensional structure which facilitates the charge transfer and delivery. Altogether with the above facts, one can draw the conclusion that with respect to the conventional Pt electrode, the utilization of heterostructured nanocrystals as the counter electrodes would facilitate the reduction of the oxidized iodide species, then give rise to a small charge-transfer resistance at the electrolyte–counter electrode interface, and finally result in a high energy conversion efficiency.
In conclusion, wurtzite CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanorods with a good stoichiometric biphasic structure are successfully synthesized via a seed-assisted synthetic route. The shape of CuInS2–ZnS nanorods can be tuned from burning torch-like to longer rod-like by controlling the added indium precursors into the Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds. When CuInS2–ZnS nanocrystals are used as the counter electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells, a power conversion efficiency of up to 7.5% is achieved, which is even higher than that of conventional Pt counter electrode (7.1%). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example to apply the colloidal heterostructured nanocrystals in the counter electrodes of DSSC devices. Compared to conventional high-cost and low-throughput sputtering and vapor deposition of inorganic semiconductor thin films, the ability to produce a nanocrystal dispersion (also called the nanocrystal “ink”) not only benefits manufacturing the low-cost and scalable DSSC devices that dispose of the need for expensive platinum, but also opens the door towards developing next generation “all plastic” solar cells by using the entire printing techniques.
Methods
Synthesis of burning torch-like CuInS2–ZnS (BTCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods
First, Cu1.94S–ZnS seeds were synthesized as previously described (Fig. S1†).20 150 mg seeds were redispersed in 10 mL octadecene, and then 0.06 g (0.20 mmol) In(ac)3 and 1.0 mL dodecanethiol were introduced. The mixture was heated to 200 °C and kept for 4 hours. The product was stratified when placed quietly in a sample vial at room temperature (see Fig. S7 and S8 in the ESI†), and the black precipitates were collected from the bottom of the vial. After purification, the BTCIS–ZnS products were obtained.
Synthesis of long rod–like CuInS2–ZnS (LRCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods
150 mg Cu1.94S–ZnS nanorods with ZnS rods of about 52 ± 12 nm lengths were redispersed in 10 mL octadecene containing 1 mL dodecanethiol. In the meantime, 15 mL octadecene stock solution containing 0.06 g (0.2 mmol) of In(ac)3 was prepared and divided into six equal portions. The first portion of In(ac)3 solution was injected just after the temperature of the solution reached 200 °C, and the second portion of In(ac)3 solution was added 20 min after the first injection. The remaining four portions were injected after a time interval of 60 min each. After the last injection, the mixture was kept at 200 °C for 4 hours. The products were purified by the same procedures used for the BTCIS–ZnS nanorods.
Construction of DSSCs
100 mg BTCIS–ZnS, LRCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods or FCIS nanocrystals were dispersed in toluene and concentrated to 50 mM. 3 mm thick fluorine-doped transparent conductive oxide (FTO 15 Ω per square, Nippon Sheet Glass) glass was cut into 1 × 2 cm2 pieces. The concentrated nanocrystal ink was coated on FTO glass by drop casting to form a nanocrystal thin film. The film thickness was controlled by the amount of the ink used. The FTO glass was then sintered in a tube furnace in N2 atmosphere at 550 °C for 30 min.12 In the contrasting experiment, Pt metal foil was used as the counter electrode.
For construction of photoanodes, 3 g of poly(vinylalcohol) (PVA, Mw 22000) water solution (30%) was dissolved with the mixed solvent containing 9 mL of H2O and 12.5 mL of ethanol. Then, 1.62 g of 20 nm sized TiO2 (P25, Degussa, Germany) was added to make the suspension of TiO2. A 12 μm thick layer of 20 nm sized TiO2 layer (P25, Degussa, Germany) was loaded on FTO glass by the doctor-blading technique. After sintering at 120 °C, the obtained layer was further coated with a 4 μm thick scattering layer of 160 nm sized TiO2 particles (ST-41, Ishihara, Japan), followed by sintering at 450 °C for 1 h. Then, the TiO2 nanoparticle-coated FTO glass was immersed in 0.02 M TiCl4 aqueous solution and kept at 70 °C for 1 h. It was then annealed again at 450 °C for another 1 h. After cooling to 80 °C, the TiO2 films were immersed in a 5 × 10−4 M solution of N719 dye (Solaronix SA, Switzerland) in ethanol for 24 h. The triiodide/iodide electrolyte contained 0.5 M of LiI, 0.05 M I2, 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine, and 0.6 M 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide in 3-methoxypropionitrile. A DSSC was assembled by a photoanode, with a counter electrode sandwiching the electrolyte. The DSSCs were used for the photocurrent–voltage test with an effective area of 0.2 cm2.
The photocurrent–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the cell were measured by an electrochemical workstation (CHI630A, Chenhua Instruments Co., Shanghai) under solar simulator illumination (CMH-250, Aodite Photoelectronic Technology Ltd., Beijing) at room temperature. The power conversion efficiency (η) of the DSSC devices was measured five times and the middle level value among the above test results was chosen as a reasonable data. In addition, for each type of the counter electrodes, we prepared a number (more than 10) of devices with the same parameters, and chose the average level of them as the typical devices for I–V curve. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted in a three electrode system in an argon-purged electrolyte solution at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 using the electrochemical workstation. Pt served as the counter electrode, and Ag/Ag+ served as the reference electrode. The I3−/I− electrolyte contained 0.1 M LiClO4, 10 mM LiI, and 1 mM I2 in acetonitrile. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were carried out on a Zahner IM6e impedance analyzer (Germany) in the frequency range of 0.02 Hz to 100 kHz under dark conditions.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos 21031005, 91122014, 21203201, 51172235), the Foundation for State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, and State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Complex Systems (no. MPCS-2012-A-08).
Notes and references
B. O'. Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
T. N. Murakami and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. Lin, Y. D. Wang, L. Wang, W. Guo, D. D. Qu, X. J. Peng, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and T. L. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Trancik, S. C. Barton and J. Hone, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 982 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ikeda, K. Teshima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1733 RSC .
X. K. Xin, M. He, W. Han, J. H. Jung and Z. Q. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11739 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Sun, D. Qin, S. Q. Huang, X. Z. Guo, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2630 CAS .
M. K. Wang, A. M. Anghel, B. Marsan, N. L. C. Ha, N. Pootrakuchote and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15976 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. A. Lin, A. Hagfeldt and T. L. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4535 RSC .
G. R. Li, F. Wang, Q. W. Jiang, X. P. Gao and P. W. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3653 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. A. Lin, A. Hagfeldt and T. L. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3520 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Li, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315 CAS .
T. Pellegrino, A. Fiore, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, P. D. Cozzoli, G. Ciccarella, M. Respaud, L. Palmirotta, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jung, D. K. Ko and R. Agarwal, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 264 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Wu, R. Fan and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 83 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. Kornowski, S. Forster and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12984 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, P. Jiang, Y. Ding, W. Cai, S. S. Xie and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2319 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, E. G. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2520 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Han, M. Gong, H. B. Yao, Z. M. Wang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6365 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Zhuang, F. J. Fan, M. Gong and S. H. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9762 RSC .
S. T. Connor, C. M. Hsu, B. D. Weil, S. Aloni and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4962 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yi, A. W. Tang, M. Niu, W. Han, Y. B. Hou and M. Y. Gao, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 4124 RSC .
V. Thavasi, V. Renugopalakrishnan, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 63, 81 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The synthesis and characterization of Cu1.94S nanocrystals, matchstick-like Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructured nanorods and FCIS nanocrystals; EDS spectrum of BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods over an area of approximately 20 μm × 20 μm on silicon; photovoltaic performance of devices constructed with BTCIS–ZnS nanocrystals; photograph of the sample vial for BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods; TEM, SAED, XRD, absorption and fluorescence spectra of nanoparticles obtained from the upper transparent solution in the sample vial; SEM images of the LRCIS–ZnS film drop-cast on FTO-coated glass after sintering at 550 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere for 30 min. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24176aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Increasing energy demands and environmental issues have prompted researchers to intensively investigate dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) which are promising due to their low cost and relatively high conversion efficiency. In DSSC devices, the counter electrode (CE) is one of the most important parts and platinum (Pt) is most commonly used. For the purpose of further cost-cutting, novel high performance Pt-free CEs are of high demand. In this work, a new route to heterostructured nanocrystals is presented involving the conversion of Cu1.94S–ZnS to CuInS2–ZnS heterostructures. Subsequently, the prepared CuInS2–ZnS heterostructured nanocrystals are exploited as CE materials to replace Pt. A power conversion efficiency (η) of 7.5% is achieved with drop-cast CuInS–ZnS nanocrystals on FTO glass. This efficiency compares favorably to DSSCs constructed with conventional Pt CE (η = 7.1%) under the same device configuration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of heterostructured nanocrystals as the CE in DSSCs. Compared to conventional high-cost sputtering and vapor deposition of inorganic semiconductor thin films, the ability to produce a nanocrystal dispersion (also called the nanocrystal “ink”) benefits manufacturing the low-cost devices.


 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the formation of wurtzite burning torch-like CuInS2–ZnS (BTCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods (route 1) and long rod-like CuInS2–ZnS (LRCIS–ZnS) heterostructured nanorods (route 2).	 

 	Fig. 1  TEM image (A) of the BTCIS–ZnS nanorods and STEM image (inset) for the EDS mapping observation; EDS mapping images (B) of copper, indium, sulfur, and zinc, respectively; XRD pattern of nanorods (C) together with standard diffraction lines of wurtzite CIS (top lines, reference no. 21) and bulk wurtzite ZnS (bottom lines, JCPDS card 79–2204); HRTEM images (D) of single BTCIS–ZnS nanorod overlaid with identifications of crystal planes for both CIS and ZnS phases; TEM image of a single LRCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorod (E).	 

 	Fig. 2  
I–V curves (A) of the DSSC devices using BTCIS–ZnS, FCIS, LRCIS–ZnS and Pt electrodes as the counter electrodes, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nyquist plots (A) of dummy cells with a symmetric sandwich-like structure between two identical electrodes consisting of: Pt foil, FCIS film, LRCIS–ZnS film and BTCIS–ZnS film; cyclic voltammograms (B) of the prepared LRCIS–ZnS film, BTCIS–ZnS film, FCIS film and Pt for I3−/I− pairs. Inset in (A) is an equivalent circuit.	 
3I2 + 2e− → 2I3−	(I)
I3− + 2e− → 3I−	(II)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The synthesis and characterization of Cu1.94S nanocrystals, matchstick-like Cu1.94S–ZnS heterostructured nanorods and FCIS nanocrystals; EDS spectrum of BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods over an area of approximately 20 μm × 20 μm on silicon; photovoltaic performance of devices constructed with BTCIS–ZnS nanocrystals; photograph of the sample vial for BTCIS–ZnS heterostructured nanorods; TEM, SAED, XRD, absorption and fluorescence spectra of nanoparticles obtained from the upper transparent solution in the sample vial; SEM images of the LRCIS–ZnS film drop-cast on FTO-coated glass after sintering at 550 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere for 30 min. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24176a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
